{"id": "15443", "revid": "136745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15443", "title": "Western imperialism in Asia", "text": "Imperialization and spread of influence over Asia by Western Europe and associated states\nThe influence and imperialism of the West peaked in Asian territories from the colonial period beginning in the 16th century, and substantially reduced with 20th century decolonization. It originated in the 15th-century search for trade routes to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia, in response to Ottoman control of the Silk Road. This led to the Age of Discovery, and introduction of early modern warfare into what Europeans first called the East Indies, and later the Far East. By the 16th century, the Age of Sail expanded European influence and development of the spice trade under colonialism. European-style colonial empires and imperialism operated in Asia throughout six centuries of colonialism, formally ending with the independence of Portuguese Macau in 1999. The empires introduced Western concepts of nation and the multinational state.\nEuropean political power, commerce, and culture in Asia gave rise to growing trade in commodities\u2014a key development in the rise of the free market economy. In the 16th century, the Portuguese broke the monopoly of the Arabs and Italians in trade between Asia and Europe by its discovery of the sea route to India around the Cape of Good Hope. The ensuing rise of the rival Dutch East India Company gradually eclipsed Portuguese influence in Asia. Dutch forces first established independent bases in the East and between 1640-60 wrested Malacca, Ceylon, some southern Indian ports, and the lucrative Japan trade from the Portuguese. The English and French established settlements in India and trade with China and their acquisitions surpassed the Dutch. After the Seven Years' War in 1763, the British eliminated French influence in India and established the East India Company as the most important political force on the Indian subcontinent.\nBefore the 19th century Industrial Revolution, demand for oriental goods such as porcelain, silk, spices, and tea remained the driving force behind European imperialism. The European stake in Asia was confined largely to trading stations and outposts necessary to protect trade. Industrialization, however, dramatically increased European demand for Asian raw materials. The 1870s Long Depression provoked a scramble for new markets for Western European products and services in Africa, the Americas, Eastern Europe, and especially Asia. This coincided with an era known as \"the New Imperialism\", which saw a shift in focus from trade and indirect rule to colonial control of large overseas territories as political extensions of their mother countries. Between the 1870s and World War I in 1914, the UK, Netherlands and France\u2014the established colonial powers in Asia\u2014added to their empires in the Middle East, Indian Subcontinent, and Southeast Asia. The Empire of Japan following the Meiji Restoration; the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War in 1871; Tsarist Russia; and the US following the Spanish\u2013American War in 1898, emerged as new imperial powers in East Asia and the Pacific Ocean area.\nIn Asia, the World Wars were played out as struggles among imperial powers, with conflicts involving the European powers along with Russia and the rising American and Japanese. None of the colonial powers however, possessed the resources to withstand the strains of both wars and maintain their direct rule in Asia. Although nationalist movements throughout the colonial world led to the political independence of nearly all of Asia's remaining colonies, decolonization was intercepted by the Cold War. Southeast Asia, South Asia, the Middle East, and East Asia remained embedded in a world economic, financial, and military system in which the great powers competed to extend their influence. However, the rapid post-war economic development and rise of the industrialized developed countries of Republic of China on Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, Japan and the developing countries of India, China, along with the collapse of the Soviet Union, have greatly diminished European influence in Asia. The US remains influential with trade and military bases in Asia.\nEarly European exploration of Asia.\nEuropean exploration of Asia started in ancient Roman times along the Silk Road. The Romans had knowledge of lands as distant as China. Trade with India through the Roman Egyptian Red Sea ports was significant in the first centuries of the Common Era.\nMedieval European exploration of Asia.\nIn the 13th and 14th centuries, a number of Europeans, many of them Christian missionaries, had sought to penetrate into China. The most famous of these travelers was Marco Polo. But these journeys had little permanent effect on east\u2013west trade because of a series of political developments in Asia in the last decades of the 14th century, which put an end to further European exploration of Asia. The Yuan dynasty in China, which had been receptive to European missionaries and merchants, was overthrown, and the new Ming rulers were found to be unreceptive of religious proselytism. Meanwhile, the Ottoman Turks consolidated control over the eastern Mediterranean, closing off key overland trade routes. Thus, until the 15th century, only minor trade and cultural exchanges between Europe and Asia continued at certain terminals controlled by Muslim traders.\nOceanic voyages to Asia.\nWestern European rulers determined to find new trade routes of their own. The Portuguese spearheaded the drive to find oceanic routes that would provide cheaper and easier access to South and East Asian goods. This chartering of oceanic routes between East and West began with the unprecedented voyages of Portuguese and Spanish sea captains. Their voyages were influenced by medieval European adventurers, who had journeyed overland to the Far East and contributed to geographical knowledge of parts of Asia upon their return.\nIn 1488, Bartolomeu Dias rounded the southern tip of Africa under the sponsorship of Portugal's John II, from which point he noticed that the coast swung northeast (Cape of Good Hope). While Dias' crew forced him to turn back, by 1497, Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama made the first open voyage from Europe to India. In 1520, Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese navigator in the service of the Crown of Castile ('Spain'), found a sea route into the Pacific Ocean.\nPortuguese and Spanish trade and colonization in Asia.\nPortuguese monopoly over trade in the Indian Ocean and Asia.\nIn 1509, the Portuguese under Francisco de Almeida won the decisive battle of Diu against a joint Mamluk and Arab fleet sent to expel the Portuguese of the Arabian Sea. The victory enabled Portugal to implement its strategy of controlling the Indian Ocean.\nEarly in the 16th century, Afonso de Albuquerque emerged as the Portuguese colonial viceroy most instrumental in consolidating Portugal's holdings in Africa and in Asia. He understood that Portugal could wrest commercial supremacy from the Arabs only by force, and therefore devised a plan to establish forts at strategic sites which would dominate the trade routes and also protect Portuguese interests on land. In 1510, he conquered Goa in India, which enabled him to gradually consolidate control of most of the commercial traffic between Europe and Asia, largely through trade; Europeans started to carry on trade from forts, acting as foreign merchants rather than as settlers. In contrast, early European expansion in the \"West Indies\", (later known to Europeans as a separate continent from Asia that they would call the \"Americas\") following the 1492 voyage of Christopher Columbus, involved heavy settlement in colonies that were treated as political extensions of the mother countries.\nLured by the potential of high profits from another expedition, the Portuguese established a permanent base in Cochin, south of the Indian trade port of Calicut in the early 16th century. In 1510, the Portuguese, led by Afonso de Albuquerque, seized Goa on the coast of India, which Portugal held until 1961, along with Diu and Daman (the remaining territory and enclaves in India from a former network of coastal towns and smaller fortified trading ports added and abandoned or lost centuries before). The Portuguese soon acquired a monopoly over trade in the Indian Ocean.\nPortuguese viceroy Albuquerque (1509\u20131515) resolved to consolidate Portuguese holdings in Africa and Asia, and secure control of trade with the East Indies and China. His first objective was Malacca, which controlled the narrow strait through which most Far Eastern trade moved. Captured in 1511, Malacca became the springboard for further eastward penetration, starting with the voyage of Ant\u00f3nio de Abreu and Francisco Serr\u00e3o in 1512, ordered by Albuquerque, to the Moluccas. Years later the first trading posts were established in the Moluccas, or \"Spice Islands\", which was the source for some of the world's most hotly demanded spices, and from there, in Makassar and some others, but smaller, in the Lesser Sunda Islands. By 1513\u20131516, the first Portuguese ships had reached Canton on the southern coasts of China.\nIn 1513, after the failed attempt to conquer Aden, Albuquerque entered with an armada, for the first time for Europeans by the ocean via, on the Red Sea; and in 1515, Albuquerque consolidated the Portuguese hegemony in the Persian Gulf gates, already begun by him in 1507, with the domain of Muscat and Ormuz. Shortly after, other fortified bases and forts were annexed and built along the Gulf, and in 1521, through a military campaign, the Portuguese annexed Bahrain.\nThe Portuguese conquest of Malacca triggered the Malayan\u2013Portuguese war. In 1521, Ming dynasty China defeated the Portuguese at the Battle of Tunmen and then defeated the Portuguese again at the Battle of Xicaowan. The Portuguese tried to establish trade with China by illegally smuggling with the pirates on the offshore islands off the coast of Zhejiang and Fujian, but they were driven away by the Ming navy in the 1530s-1540s.\nIn 1557, China decided to lease Macau to the Portuguese as a place where they could dry goods they transported on their ships, which they held until 1999. The Portuguese, based at Goa and Malacca, had now established a lucrative maritime empire in the Indian Ocean meant to monopolize the spice trade. The Portuguese also began a channel of trade with the Japanese, becoming the first recorded Westerners to have visited Japan. This contact introduced Christianity and firearms into Japan.\nIn 1505, (also possibly before, in 1501), the Portuguese, through Louren\u00e7o de Almeida, the son of Francisco de Almeida, reached Ceylon. The Portuguese founded a fort at the city of Colombo in 1517 and gradually extended their control over the coastal areas and inland. In a series of military conflicts and political maneuvers, the Portuguese extended their control over the Sinhalese kingdoms, including Jaffna (1591), Raigama (1593), Sitawaka (1593), and Kotte (1594)- However, the aim of unifying the entire island under Portuguese control faced the Kingdom of Kandy`s fierce resistance. The Portuguese, led by Pedro Lopes de Sousa, launched a full-scale military invasion of the kingdom of Kandy in the Campaign of Danture of 1594. The invasion was a disaster for the Portuguese, with their entire army wiped out by Kandyan guerrilla warfare. Constantino de S\u00e1, romantically celebrated in the 17th century Sinhalese Epic (also for its greater humanism and tolerance compared to other governors) led the last military operation that also ended in disaster. He died in the Battle of Randeniwela, refusing to abandon his troops in the face of total annihilation.\nThe energies of Castile (later, the \"unified\" Spain), the other major colonial power of the 16th century, were largely concentrated on the Americas, not South and East Asia, but the Spanish did establish a footing in the Far East in the Philippines. After fighting with the Portuguese by the Spice Islands since 1522 and the agreement between the two powers in 1529 (in the treaty of Zaragoza), the Spanish, led by Miguel L\u00f3pez de Legazpi, settled and conquered gradually the Philippines since 1564. After the discovery of the return voyage to the Americas by Andres de Urdaneta in 1565, cargoes of Chinese goods were transported from the Philippines to Mexico and from there to Spain. By this long route, Spain reaped some of the profits of Far Eastern commerce. Spanish officials converted the islands to Christianity and established some settlements, permanently establishing the Philippines as the area of East Asia most oriented toward the West in terms of culture and commerce. The Moro Muslims fought against the Spanish for over three centuries in the Spanish\u2013Moro conflict.\nDecline of Portugal's Asian empire since the 17th century.\nThe lucrative trade was vastly expanded when the Portuguese began to export slaves from Africa in 1541; however, over time, the rise of the slave trade left Portugal over-extended, and vulnerable to competition from other Western European powers. Envious of Portugal's control of trade routes, other Western European nations\u2014mainly the Netherlands, France, and England\u2014began to send in rival expeditions to Asia. In 1642, the Dutch drove the Portuguese out of the Gold Coast in Africa, the source of the bulk of Portuguese slave laborers, leaving this rich slaving area to other Europeans, especially the Dutch and the English.\nRival European powers began to make inroads in Asia as the Portuguese and Spanish trade in the Indian Ocean declined primarily because they had become hugely over-stretched financially due to the limitations on their investment capacity and contemporary naval technology. Both of these factors worked in tandem, making control over Indian Ocean trade extremely expensive.\nThe existing Portuguese interests in Asia proved sufficient to finance further colonial expansion and entrenchment in areas regarded as of greater strategic importance in Africa and Brazil. Portuguese maritime supremacy was lost to the Dutch in the 17th century, and with this came serious challenges for the Portuguese. However, they still clung to Macau and settled a new colony on the island of Timor. It was as recent as the 1960s and 1970s that the Portuguese began to relinquish their colonies in Asia. Goa was invaded by India in 1961 and became an Indian state in 1987; Portuguese Timor was abandoned in 1975 and was then invaded by Indonesia. It became an independent country in 2002, and Macau was handed back to the Chinese as per a treaty in 1999.\nHoly wars.\nThe arrival of the Portuguese and Spanish and their holy wars against Muslim states in the Malayan\u2013Portuguese war, Spanish\u2013Moro conflict and Castilian War inflamed religious tensions and turned Southeast Asia into an arena of conflict between Muslims and Christians. The Brunei Sultanate's capital at Kota Batu was assaulted by Governor Sande who led the 1578 Spanish attack.\nThe word \"savages\" in Spanish, cafres, was from the word \"infidel\" in Arabic - Kafir, and was used by the Spanish to refer to their own \"Christian savages\" who were arrested in Brunei. It was said \"Castilians are kafir, men who have no souls, who are condemned by fire when they die, and that too because they eat pork\" by the Brunei Sultan after the term \"accursed doctrine\" was used to attack Islam by the Spaniards which fed into hatred between Muslims and Christians sparked by their 1571 war against Brunei. The Sultan's words were in response to insults coming from the Spanish at Manila in 1578, other Muslims from Champa, Java, Borneo, Luzon, Pahang, Demak, Aceh, and the Malays echoed the rhetoric of holy war against the Spanish and Iberian Portuguese, calling them kafir enemies which was a contrast to their earlier nuanced views of the Portuguese in the Hikayat Tanah Hitu and Sejarah Melayu. The war by Spain against Brunei was defended in an apologia written by Doctor De Sande. The British eventually partitioned and took over Brunei while Sulu was attacked by the British, Americans, and Spanish which caused its breakdown and downfall after both of them thrived from 1500 to 1900 for four centuries. Dar al-Islam was seen as under invasion by \"kafirs\" by the Atjehnese led by Zayn al-din and by Muslims in the Philippines as they saw the Spanish invasion, since the Spanish brought the idea of a crusader holy war against Muslim Moros just as the Portuguese did in Indonesia and India against what they called \"Moors\" in their political and commercial conquests which they saw through the lens of religion in the 16th century.\nIn 1578, an attack was launched by the Spanish against Jolo, and in 1875 it was destroyed at their hands, and once again in 1974 it was destroyed by the Philippines. The Spanish first set foot on Borneo in Brunei.\nThe Spanish war against Brunei failed to conquer Brunei but it totally cut off the Philippines from Brunei's influence, the Spanish then started colonizing Mindanao and building fortresses. In response, the Bisayas, where Spanish forces were stationed, were subjected to retaliatory attacks by the Magindanao in 1599-1600 due to the Spanish attacks on Mindanao.\nThe Brunei royal family was related to the Muslim Rajahs who in ruled the principality in 1570 of Manila (Kingdom of Maynila) and this was what the Spaniards came across on their initial arrival to Manila, Spain uprooted Islam out of areas where it was shallow after they began to force Christianity on the Philippines in their conquests after 1521 while Islam was already widespread in the 16th century Philippines. In the Philippines in the Cebu islands the natives killed the Spanish fleet leader Magellan. Borneo's western coastal areas at Landak, Sukadana, and Sambas saw the growth of Muslim states in the sixteenth century, in the 15th century at Nanking, the capital of China, the death and burial of the Borneo Bruneian king Maharaja Kama took place upon his visit to China with Zheng He's fleet.\nThe Spanish were expelled from Brunei in 1579 after they attacked in 1578. There were fifty thousand inhabitants before the 1597 attack by the Spanish in Brunei.\nDuring first contact with China, numerous aggressions and provocations were undertaken by the Portuguese They believed they could mistreat the non-Christians because they themselves were Christians and acted in the name of their religion in committing crimes and atrocities. This resulted in the Battle of Xicaowan where the local Chinese navy defeated and captured a fleet of Portuguese caravels.\nDutch trade and colonization in Asia.\nRise of Dutch control over Asian trade in the 17th century.\nThe Portuguese decline in Asia was accelerated by attacks on their commercial empire by the Dutch and the English, which began a global struggle over the empire in Asia that lasted until the end of the Seven Years' War in 1763. The Netherlands revolt against Spanish rule facilitated Dutch encroachment on the Portuguese monopoly over South and East Asian trade. The Dutch looked on Spain's trade and colonies as potential spoils of war. When the two crowns of the Iberian peninsula were joined in 1581, the Dutch felt free to attack Portuguese territories in Asia.\nBy the 1590s, a number of Dutch companies were formed to finance trading expeditions in Asia. Because competition lowered their profits, and because of the doctrines of mercantilism, in 1602 the companies united into a cartel and formed the Dutch East India Company, and received from the government the right to trade and colonize territory in the area stretching from the Cape of Good Hope eastward to the Strait of Magellan.\nIn 1605, armed Dutch merchants captured the Portuguese fort at Amboyna in the Moluccas, which was developed into the company's first secure base. Over time, the Dutch gradually consolidated control over the great trading ports of the East Indies. This control allowed the company to monopolise the world spice trade for decades. Their monopoly over the spice trade became complete after they drove the Portuguese from Malacca in 1641 and Ceylon in 1658.\nDutch East India Company colonies or outposts were later established in Atjeh (Aceh), 1667; Macassar, 1669; and Bantam, 1682. The company established its headquarters at Batavia (today Jakarta) on the island of Java. Outside the East Indies, the Dutch East India Company colonies or outposts were also established in Persia (Iran), Bengal (now Bangladesh and part of India), Mauritius (1638-1658/1664-1710), Siam (now Thailand), Guangzhou (Canton, China), Taiwan (1624\u20131662), and southern India (1616\u20131795).\nMing dynasty China defeated the Dutch East India Company in the Sino-Dutch conflicts. The Chinese first defeated and drove the Dutch out of the Pescadores in 1624. The Ming navy under Zheng Zhilong defeated the Dutch East India Company's fleet at the 1633 Battle of Liaoluo Bay. In 1662, Zheng Zhilong's son Zheng Chenggong (also known as Koxinga) expelled the Dutch from Taiwan after defeating them in the siege of Fort Zeelandia. (\"see\" History of Taiwan) Further, the Dutch East India Company trade post on Dejima (1641\u20131857), an artificial island off the coast of Nagasaki, was for a long time the only place where Europeans could trade with Japan.\nThe Vietnamese Nguy\u1ec5n lords defeated the Dutch in a naval battle in 1643.\nThe Cambodians defeated the Dutch in the Cambodian\u2013Dutch War in 1644.\nIn 1652, Jan van Riebeeck established an outpost at the Cape of Good Hope (the southwestern tip of Africa, currently in South Africa) to restock company ships on their journey to East Asia. This post later became a fully-fledged colony, the Cape Colony (1652\u20131806). As Cape Colony attracted increasing Dutch and European settlement, the Dutch founded the city of Kaapstad (Cape Town).\nBy 1669, the Dutch East India Company was the richest private company in history, with a huge fleet of merchant ships and warships, tens of thousands of employees, a private army consisting of thousands of soldiers, and a reputation on the part of its stockholders for high dividend payments.\nDutch New Imperialism in Asia.\nThe company was in almost constant conflict with the English; relations were particularly tense following the Amboyna Massacre in 1623. During the 18th century, Dutch East India Company possessions were increasingly focused on the East Indies. After the fourth war between the United Provinces and England (1780\u20131784), the company suffered increasing financial difficulties. In 1799, the company was dissolved, commencing official colonisation of the East Indies. During the era of New Imperialism the territorial claims of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) expanded into a fully fledged colony named the Dutch East Indies. Partly driven by re-newed colonial aspirations of fellow European nation states the Dutch strived to establish unchallenged control of the archipelago now known as Indonesia.\nSix years into formal colonisation of the East Indies, in Europe the Dutch Republic was occupied by the French forces of Napoleon. The Dutch government went into exile in England and formally ceded its colonial possessions to Great Britain. The pro-French Governor General of Java Jan Willem Janssens, resisted a British invasion force in 1811 until forced to surrender. British Governor Raffles, who the later founded the city of Singapore, ruled the colony the following 10 years of the British interregnum (1806\u20131816).\nAfter the defeat of Napoleon and the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 colonial government of the East Indies was ceded back to the Dutch in 1817. The loss of South Africa and the continued scramble for Africa stimulated the Dutch to secure unchallenged dominion over its colony in the East Indies. The Dutch started to consolidate its power base through extensive military campaigns and elaborate diplomatic alliances with indigenous rulers ensuring the Dutch tricolor was firmly planted in all corners of the Archipelago. These military campaigns included: the Padri War (1821\u20131837), the Java War (1825\u20131830) and the Aceh War (1873\u20131904). This raised the need for a considerable military buildup of the colonial army (KNIL). From all over Europe soldiers were recruited to join the KNIL.\nThe Dutch concentrated their colonial enterprise in the Dutch East Indies (Indonesia) throughout the 19th century. The Dutch lost control over the East Indies to the Japanese during much of World War II. Following the war, the Dutch fought Indonesian independence forces after Japan surrendered to the Allies in 1945. In 1949, most of what was known as the Dutch East Indies was ceded to the independent Republic of Indonesia. In 1962, also Dutch New Guinea was annexed by Indonesia de facto ending Dutch imperialism in Asia.\nBritish in India.\nPortuguese, French, and British competition in India (1600\u20131763).\nThe English sought to stake out claims in India at the expense of the Portuguese dating back to the Elizabethan era. In 1600, Queen Elizabeth I incorporated the English East India Company (later the British East India Company), granting it a monopoly of trade from the Cape of Good Hope eastward to the Strait of Magellan. In 1639, it acquired Madras on the east coast of India, where it quickly surpassed Portuguese Goa as the principal European trading Centre on the Indian Subcontinent.\nThrough bribes, diplomacy, and manipulation of weak native rulers, the company prospered in India, where it became the most powerful political force, and outrivaled its Portuguese and French competitors. For more than one hundred years, English and French trading companies had fought one another for supremacy, and, by the middle of the 18th century, competition between the British and the French had heated up. French defeat by the British under the command of Robert Clive during the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763) marked the end of the French stake in India.\nCollapse of Mughal India.\nThe British East India Company, although still in direct competition with French and Dutch interests until 1763, following the subjugation of Bengal at the 1757 Battle of Plassey. The British East India Company made great advances at the expense of the Mughal Empire.\nThe reign of Aurangzeb had marked the height of Mughal power. By 1690 Mughal territorial expansion reached its greatest extent encompassing the entire Indian Subcontinent. But this period of power was followed by one of decline. Fifty years after the death of Aurangzeb, the great Mughal empire had crumbled. Meanwhile, marauding warlords, nobles, and others bent on gaining power left the Subcontinent increasingly anarchic. Although the Mughals kept the imperial title until 1858, the central government had collapsed, creating a power vacuum.\nFrom Company to Crown.\nAside from defeating the French during the Seven Years' War, Robert Clive, the leader of the East India Company in India, defeated Siraj ud-Daulah, a key Indian ruler of Bengal, at the decisive Battle of Plassey (1757), a victory that ushered in the beginning of a new period in Indian history, that of informal British rule. While still nominally the sovereign. The transition to formal imperialism, characterized by Queen Victoria being crowned \"Empress of India\" in the 1870s, was a gradual process. The first step toward cementing formal British control extended back to the late 18th century. The British Parliament, disturbed by the idea that a great business concern, interested primarily in profit, was controlling the destinies of millions of people, passed acts in 1773 and 1784 that gave itself the power to control company policies.\nThe East India then fought a series of Anglo-Mysore wars in Southern India with the Sultanate of Mysore under Hyder Ali and then Tipu Sultan. Defeats in the First Anglo-Mysore war and stalemate in the Second were followed by victories in the Third and the Fourth. Following Tipu Sultan's death in the fourth war in the Siege of Seringapatam (1799), the kingdom would become a protectorate of the company.\nThe East India Company fought three Anglo-Maratha Wars with the Maratha Confederacy. The First Anglo-Maratha War ended in 1782 with a restoration of the pre-war \"status quo\". The Second and Third Anglo-Maratha wars resulted in British victories. After the Surrender of Peshwa Bajirao II on 1818, the East India company acquired control of a large majority of the Indian Subcontinent.\nUntil 1858, however, much of India was still officially the dominion of the Mughal emperor. Anger among some social groups, however, was seething under the governor-generalship of James Dalhousie (1847\u20131856), who annexed the Punjab (1849) after victory in the Second Sikh War, annexed seven princely states using the doctrine of lapse, annexed the key state of Oudh on the basis of misgovernment, and upset cultural sensibilities by banning Hindu practices such as sati\nThe 1857 Indian Rebellion, an uprising initiated by Indian troops, called sepoys, who formed the bulk of the company's armed forces, was the key turning point. Rumour had spread among them that their bullet cartridges were lubricated with pig and cow fat. The cartridges had to be bit open, so this upset the Hindu and Muslim soldiers. The Hindu religion held cows sacred, and for Muslims pork was considered haraam. In one camp, 85 out of 90 sepoys would not accept the cartridges from their garrison officer. The British harshly punished those who would not by jailing them. The Indian people were outraged, and on May 10, 1857, sepoys marched to Delhi, and, with the help of soldiers stationed there, captured it. Fortunately for the British, many areas remained loyal and quiescent, allowing the revolt to be crushed after fierce fighting. One important consequence of the revolt was the final collapse of the Mughal dynasty. The mutiny also ended the system of dual control under which the British government and the British East India Company shared authority. The government relieved the company of its political responsibilities, and in 1858, after 258 years of existence, the company relinquished its role. Trained civil servants were recruited from graduates of British universities, and these men set out to rule India. Lord Canning (created earl in 1859), appointed Governor-General of India in 1856, became known as \"Clemency Canning\" as a term of derision for his efforts to restrain revenge against the Indians during the Indian Mutiny. When the Government of India was transferred from the company to the Crown, Canning became the first viceroy of India.\nThe Company initiated the first of the Anglo-Burmese Wars in 1824, which led to total annexation of Burma by the Crown in 1885. The British ruled Burma as a province of British India until 1937, then administered her separately under the Burma Office except during the Japanese occupation of Burma, 1942\u20131945, until granted independence on 4 January 1948. (Unlike India, Burma opted not to join the Commonwealth of Nations.)\nRise of Indian nationalism.\nThe denial of equal status to Indians was the immediate stimulus for the formation in 1885 of the Indian National Congress, initially loyal to the Empire but committed from 1905 to increased self-government and by 1930 to outright independence. The \"Home charges\", payments transferred from India for administrative costs, were a lasting source of nationalist grievance, though the flow declined in relative importance over the decades to independence in 1947.\nAlthough majority Hindu and minority Muslim political leaders were able to collaborate closely in their criticism of British policy into the 1920s, British support for a distinct Muslim political organisation, the Muslim League from 1906 and insistence from the 1920s on separate electorates for religious minorities, is seen by many in India as having contributed to Hindu-Muslim discord and the country's eventual Partition.\nFrance in Indochina.\nFrance, which had lost its empire to the British by the end of the 18th century, had little geographical or commercial basis for expansion in Southeast Asia. After the 1850s, French imperialism was initially impelled by a nationalistic need to rival the United Kingdom and was supported intellectually by the notion that French culture was superior to that of the people of Annam (Vietnam), and its \"mission civilisatrice\"\u2014or its \"civilizing mission\" of the Annamese through their assimilation to French culture and the Catholic religion. The pretext for French expansionism in Indochina was the protection of French religious missions in the area, coupled with a desire to find a southern route to China through Tonkin, the European name for a region of northern Vietnam.\nFrench religious and commercial interests were established in Indochina as early as the 17th century, but no concerted effort at stabilizing the French position was possible in the face of British strength in the Indian Ocean and French defeat in Europe at the beginning of the 19th century. A mid-19th century religious revival under the Second Empire provided the atmosphere within which interest in Indochina grew. Anti-Christian persecutions in the Far East provided the pretext for the bombardment of Tourane (Danang) in 1847, and invasion and occupation of Danang in 1857 and Saigon in 1858. Under Napoleon III, France decided that French trade with China would be surpassed by the British, and accordingly the French joined the British against China in the Second Opium War from 1857 to 1860, and occupied parts of Vietnam as its gateway to China.\nBy the Treaty of Saigon in 1862, on June 5, the Vietnamese emperor ceded France three provinces of southern Vietnam to form the French colony of Cochinchina; France also secured trade and religious privileges in the rest of Vietnam and a protectorate over Vietnam's foreign relations. Gradually French power spread through exploration, the establishment of protectorates, and outright annexations. Their seizure of Hanoi in 1882 led directly to war with China (1883\u20131885), and the French victory confirmed French supremacy in the region. France governed Cochinchina as a direct colony, and central and northern Vietnam under the protectorates of Annam and Tonkin, and Cambodia as protectorates in one degree or another. Laos too was soon brought under French \"protection\".\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, France had created an empire in Indochina nearly 50 percent larger than the mother country. A Governor-General in Hanoi ruled Cochinchina directly and the other regions through a system of residents. Theoretically, the French maintained the precolonial rulers and administrative structures in Annam, Tonkin, Cochinchina, Cambodia, and Laos, but in fact the governor-generalship was a centralised fiscal and administrative regime ruling the entire region. Although the surviving native institutions were preserved in order to make French rule more acceptable, they were almost completely deprived of any independence of action. The ethnocentric French colonial administrators sought to assimilate the upper classes into France's \"superior culture.\" While the French improved public services and provided commercial stability, the native standard of living declined and precolonial social structures eroded. Indochina, which had a population of over eighteen million in 1914, was important to France for its tin, pepper, coal, cotton, and rice. It is still a matter of debate, however, whether the colony was commercially profitable.\nRussia and the \"Great Game\".\nTsarist Russia is not often regarded as a colonial power alongside the United Kingdom or France because of the manner of Russian expansions: unlike the United Kingdom, which expanded overseas, the Russian Empire grew from a centre outward by a process of accretion, like the United States. In the 19th century, Russian expansion took the form of a struggle of an effectively landlocked country for access to warm-water ports \u2014 for example during efforts of Russian foreign minister Alexander Gorchakov (in office: 1856 to 1882) in obtaining access to the previously demilitarised, restricted Black Sea region; and the establishment of Vladivostok as a naval port on the Pacific in 1860.\nHistorian Michael Khodarkovsky describes Tsarist Russia as a \"hybrid empire\" that combined elements of continental and \"colonial\" empires.\nEven before the British started consolidating their hold on India, Russian expansion had crossed the Urals by the late-16th century and started moving steadily eastward to the Pacific (reached in the mid-17th century), then toward Alaska, the Caucasus and Central Asia. In the early-19th century the Russian Empire succeeded in conquering the South Caucasus and Dagestan from Qajar Iran following the Russo-Persian War (1804\u20131813), the Russo-Persian War (1826\u20131828) and the resultant treaties of Gulistan (1813) and Turkmenchay (1828), giving Russia direct borders with both Persia's as well as Ottoman Turkey's heartlands. Later, the Imperial Russian Army eventually reached the frontiers of Afghanistan as well (which had the largest foreign border adjacent to British holdings in India). In response to Russian expansion, the defense of India's land frontiers and the control of all sea approaches to the subcontinent via the Suez Canal, the Red Sea, and the Persian Gulf became preoccupations of British foreign-policy in the 19th century. Anglo-Russian rivalry in Asia has become known as \"the Great Game\".\nAccording to Kazakh scholar Kereihan Amanzholov, Russian colonialism had \"no essential difference with the colonialist policies of Britain, France, and other European powers\".\nBritish and Russian moves in the Middle East and Central Asia led to a brief confrontation over Afghanistan in the 1870s. In Persia, both nations set up banks to extend their economic influence. \nThe United Kingdom went so far as to invade Tibet, a land subordinate to the Chinese Qing Empire, in 1904, but withdrew when it became clear that Russian influence was insignificant and when Chinese and Tibetan resistance proved tougher than expected.\nQing China defeated Russia in early Sino-Russian border conflicts (1652\u20131689), although the Russian Empire later acquired Outer Manchuria in the Amur Annexation of 1858 to 1860 whilst Britain fought China in the Second Opium War of 1856 to 1860. \nDuring the Boxer Rebellion, the Russian Empire invaded Manchuria in 1900, and the Blagoveshchensk massacre occurred against Chinese residents on the Russian side of the China\u2013Russia border.\nIn 1907, the United Kingdom and Russia (then ruled by Emperor Nicholas II) signed the Anglo-Russian Entente, which, on the surface, ended their rivalry in Central Asia. As part of the Entente, Russia agreed to deal with the sovereign of Afghanistan only through British intermediaries. In turn, the United Kingdom would not annex or occupy Afghanistan. Both Russia and the United Kingdom recognised Chinese suzerainty over Tibet, since nominal control by a weak China was preferable to control by either Great Power. Persia was divided into Russian and British spheres of influence and an intervening \"neutral\" zone. The United Kingdom and Russia chose to reach these uneasy compromises because of growing concern on the part of both powers over German expansion in strategic areas of China and Africa.\nFollowing the Entente, Russia increasingly intervened in Persian domestic politics and suppressed nationalist movements that threatened both Saint Petersburg and London. After the Russian Revolutions of 1917, Russia gave up its claim to a sphere of influence, though Soviet involvement (during the Stalin era) persisted alongside the United Kingdom's \u2014 notably in the Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran in 1941 \u2014 until the 1950s.\nIn 1903 a German company started to construct a railroad from Constantinople to Baghdad in the Ottoman Empire. Plans envisaged extending rails to the Persian Gulf port of Basra. The Trans-Iranian Railway from the north of Persia/Iran to the south, connecting the Caucasus with the Persian Gulf, though planned before World War I, only materialised with Iranian finance and American, German and Danish participation in the period 1927 to 1938. Germany wanted to gain economic influence in the region and then, perhaps, move on to India. This scheme encountered bitter resistance from the United Kingdom, Russia, and France, who divided the region, formally and informally, among themselves.\nWestern European and Russian intrusions into China.\nThe 16th century brought many Jesuit missionaries to China, such as Matteo Ricci, who established missions where Western science was introduced, and where Europeans gathered knowledge of Chinese society, history, culture, and science. During the 18th century, merchants from Western Europe came to China in increasing numbers. However, merchants were confined to Guangzhou and the Portuguese colony of Macau, as they had been since the 16th century. European traders were increasingly irritated by what they saw as the relatively high customs duties they had to pay and by the attempts to curb the growing import trade in opium. By 1800, its importation was forbidden by the imperial government. However, the opium trade continued to boom.\nEarly in the 19th century, serious internal weaknesses developed in the Qing dynasty which left China vulnerable to Western Europeans, Meiji period Japanese, and Russian imperialism. In 1839, China found itself fighting the First Opium War with Britain. China was defeated, and in 1842, signed the provisions of the Treaty of Nanking which were first of the unequal treaties signed during the Qing dynasty. Hong Kong Island was ceded to Britain, and certain ports, including Shanghai and Guangzhou, were opened to British trade and residence. In 1856, the Second Opium War broke out. The Chinese were again defeated, and now forced to the terms of the 1858 Treaty of Tientsin. The treaty opened new ports to trade and allowed foreigners to travel in the interior. In addition, Christians gained the right to propagate their religion. The United States Treaty of Wanghia and Russia later obtained the same prerogatives in separate treaties.\nToward the end of the 19th century, China appeared on the way to territorial dismemberment and economic vassalage\u2014the fate of India's rulers that played out much earlier. Several provisions of these treaties caused long-standing bitterness and humiliation among the Chinese: extraterritoriality (meaning that in a dispute with a Chinese person, a Westerner had the right to be tried in a court under the laws of his own country), customs regulation, and the right to station foreign warships in Chinese waters, including its navigable rivers.\nJane E. Elliott criticized the allegation that China refused to modernize or was unable to defeat Western armies as simplistic, noting that China embarked on a massive military modernization in the late 1800s after several defeats, buying weapons from Western countries and manufacturing their own at arsenals, such as the Hanyang Arsenal during the Boxer Rebellion. In addition, Elliott questioned the claim that Chinese society was traumatized by the Western victories, as many Chinese peasants (90% of the population at that time) living outside the concessions continued about their daily lives, uninterrupted and without any feeling of \"humiliation\".\nHistorians have judged the Qing dynasty's vulnerability and weakness to foreign imperialism in the 19th century to be based mainly on its maritime naval weakness while it achieved military success against westerners on land, the historian Edward L. Dreyer said that \"China\u2019s nineteenth-century humiliations were strongly related to her weakness and failure at sea. At the start of the Opium War, China had no unified navy and no sense of how vulnerable she was to attack from the sea; British forces sailed and steamed wherever they wanted to go...In the Arrow War (1856-1860), the Chinese had no way to prevent the Anglo-French expedition of 1860 from sailing into the Gulf of Zhili and landing as near as possible to Beijing. Meanwhile, new but not exactly modern Chinese armies suppressed the midcentury rebellions, bluffed Russia into a peaceful settlement of disputed frontiers in Central Asia, and defeated the French forces on land in the Sino-French War (1884-1885). But the defeat of the fleet, and the resulting threat to steamship traffic to Taiwan, forced China to conclude peace on unfavorable terms.\"\nDuring the Sino-French War, Vietnamese forces defeated the French at the Battle of C\u1ea7u Gi\u1ea5y (Paper Bridge), B\u1eafc L\u1ec7 ambush, Battle of Phu Lam Tao, Battle of Zhenhai, the Battle of Tamsui in the Keelung Campaign and in the last battle which ended the war, the Battle of Bang Bo (Zhennan Pass), which triggered the French Retreat from L\u1ea1ng S\u01a1n and resulted in the collapse of the French Jules Ferry government in the Tonkin Affair.\nThe Qing dynasty forced Russia to hand over disputed territory in Ili in the Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881), in what was widely seen by the west as a diplomatic victory for the Qing. Russia acknowledged that Qing China potentially posed a serious military threat. Mass media in the west during this era portrayed China as a rising military power due to its modernization programs and as a major threat to the western world, invoking fears that China would successfully conquer western colonies like Australia.\nThe British observer Demetrius Charles de Kavanagh Boulger suggested a British-Chinese alliance to check Russian expansion in Central Asia.\nDuring the Ili crisis when Qing China threatened to go to war against Russia over the Russian occupation of Ili, the British officer Charles George Gordon was sent to China by Britain to advise China on military options against Russia should a potential war break out between China and Russia.\nThe Russians observed the Chinese building up their arsenal of modern weapons during the Ili crisis, the Chinese bought thousands of rifles from Germany. In 1880, massive amounts of military equipment and rifles were shipped via boats to China from Antwerp as China purchased torpedoes, artillery, and 260,260 modern rifles from Europe.\nThe Russian military observer D. V. Putiatia visited China in 1888 and found that in Northeastern China (Manchuria) along the Chinese-Russian border, the Chinese soldiers were potentially able to become adept at \"European tactics\" under certain circumstances, and the Chinese soldiers were armed with modern weapons like Krupp artillery, Winchester carbines, and Mauser rifles.\nCompared to Russian controlled areas, more benefits were given to the Muslim Kirghiz on the Chinese controlled areas. Russian settlers fought against the Muslim nomadic Kirghiz, which led the Russians to believe that the Kirghiz would be a liability in any conflict against China. The Muslim Kirghiz were sure that in an upcoming war, that China would defeat Russia.\nRussian sinologists, the Russian media, threat of internal rebellion, the pariah status inflicted by the Congress of Berlin, the negative state of the Russian economy all led Russia to concede and negotiate with China in St Petersburg, and return most of Ili to China.\nThe rise of Japan since the Meiji Restoration as an imperial power led to further subjugation of China. In a dispute over China's longstanding claim of suzerainty in Korea, war broke out between China and Japan, resulting in humiliating defeat for the Chinese. By the Treaty of Shimonoseki (1895), China was forced to recognize effective Japanese rule of Korea and Taiwan was ceded to Japan until its recovery in 1945 at the end of the WWII by the Republic of China.\nChina's defeat at the hands of Japan was another trigger for future aggressive actions by Western powers. In 1897, Germany demanded and was given a set of exclusive mining and railroad rights in Shandong province. Russia obtained access to Dairen and Port Arthur and the right to build a railroad across Manchuria, thereby achieving complete domination over a large portion of northwestern China. The United Kingdom and France also received a number of concessions. At this time, much of China was divided up into \"spheres of influence\": Germany had influence in Jiaozhou (Kiaochow) Bay, Shandong, and the Yellow River valley; Russia had influence in the Liaodong Peninsula and Manchuria; the United Kingdom had influence in Weihaiwei and the Yangtze Valley; and France had influence in the Guangzhou Bay and the provinces of Yunnan, Guizhou and Guangxi.\nChina continued to be divided up into these spheres until the United States, which had no sphere of influence, grew alarmed at the possibility of its businessmen being excluded from Chinese markets. In 1899, Secretary of State John Hay asked the major powers to agree to a policy of equal trading privileges. In 1900, several powers agreed to the U.S.-backed scheme, giving rise to the \"Open Door\" policy, denoting freedom of commercial access and non-annexation of Chinese territory. In any event, it was in the European powers' interest to have a weak but independent Chinese government. The privileges of the Europeans in China were guaranteed in the form of treaties with the Qing government. In the event that the Qing government totally collapsed, each power risked losing the privileges that it already had negotiated.\nThe erosion of Chinese sovereignty and seizures of land from Chinese by foreigners contributed to a spectacular anti-foreign outbreak in June 1900, when the \"Boxers\" (properly the society of the \"righteous and harmonious fists\") attacked foreigners around Beijing. The Imperial Court was divided into anti-foreign and pro-foreign factions, with the pro-foreign faction led by Ronglu and Prince Qing hampering any military effort by the anti-foreign faction led by Prince Duan and Dong Fuxiang. The Qing Empress Dowager ordered all diplomatic ties to be cut off and all foreigners to leave the legations in Beijing to go to Tianjin. The foreigners refused to leave. Fueled by entirely false reports that the foreigners in the legations were massacred, the Eight-Nation Alliance decided to launch an expedition on Beijing to reach the legations but they underestimated the Qing military. The Qing and Boxers defeated the foreigners at the Seymour Expedition, forcing them to turn back at the Battle of Langfang. In response to the foreign attack on the Taku Forts the Qing responded by declaring war against the foreigners. the Qing forces and foreigners fought a fierce battle at the Battle of Tientsin before the foreigners could launch a second expedition. On their second try Gaselee Expedition, with a much larger force, the foreigners managed to reach Beijing and fight the Battle of Peking. British and French forces looted, plundered and burned the Old Summer Palace to the ground for the second time (the first time being in 1860, following the Second Opium War). German forces were particularly severe in exacting revenge for the killing of their ambassador due to the orders of Kaiser Wilhelm II, who held anti-Asian sentiments, while Russia tightened its hold on Manchuria in the northeast until its crushing defeat by Japan in the war of 1904\u20131905. The Qing court evacuated to Xi'an and threatened to continue the war against foreigners, until the foreigners tempered their demands in the Boxer Protocol, promising that China would not have to give up any land and gave up the demands for the execution of Dong Fuxiang and Prince Duan.\nThe correspondent Douglas Story observed Chinese troops in 1907 and praised their abilities and military skill.\nExtraterritorial jurisdiction was abandoned by the United Kingdom and the United States in 1943. Chiang Kai-shek forced the French to hand over all their concessions back to China control after World War II. Foreign political control over leased parts of China ended with the incorporation of Hong Kong and the small Portuguese territory of Macau into the People's Republic of China in 1997 and 1999 respectively.\nU.S. imperialism in Asia.\nIn 1898 the U.S. annexed the former Hawaiian Kingdom following its overthrow in an 1893 coup d'etat. In 1959, Hawaii was admitted as the 50th U.S. state. Palmyra Atoll, which had been a part of the Territory of Hawaii was not included in the statehood admission and remains a U.S. territory. \nSome Americans in the 19th century advocated for the annexation of Taiwan from China. Taiwanese aborigines often attacked and massacred shipwrecked western sailors. In 1867, during the Rover incident, Taiwanese aborigines attacked shipwrecked American sailors, killing the entire crew. They subsequently defeated a retaliatory expedition by the American military and killed another American during the battle.\nAs the United States emerged as a new imperial power in the Pacific and Asia, one of the two oldest Western imperialist powers in the regions, Spain, was finding it increasingly difficult to maintain control of territories it had held in the regions since the 16th century. In 1896, a widespread revolt against Spanish rule broke out in the Philippines. Meanwhile, the recent string of U.S. territorial gains in the Pacific posed an even greater threat to Spain's remaining colonial holdings.\nIn 1898, the sinking of the USS Maine in Havana harbor led to the Spanish\u2013American War. The U.S. Asiatic Squadron destroyed the Spanish fleet at Manila and U.S. troops captured the Spanish colony of Guam and landed in the Philippines. Spain later agreed by treaty ending the war to cede the Philippines in Asia and Guam in the Pacific, along with the Caribbean island of Puerto Rico. The treaty also marked the end of Spanish rule in Cuba, which was to be granted nominal independence but remained heavily influenced by the U.S. government and U.S. business interests. One year following its treaty with Spain, the U.S. annexed the small Pacific outpost of Wake Island.\nThe Filipinos, who assisted U.S. troops in fighting the Spanish, wished to establish an independent state and, on June 12, 1898, declared independence from Spain. In 1899, fighting between the Filipino nationalists and the U.S. broke out; it took the U.S. almost fifteen years to fully subdue the insurgency. The U.S. sent 70,000 troops and suffered thousands of casualties. The Filipinos insurgents, however, suffered considerably higher casualties than the Americans. Most casualties in the war were civilians dying primarily from disease and famine.\nU.S. counter-insurgency operations in rural areas often included scorched earth tactics which involved burning down villages and concentrating civilians into camps known as \"protected zones\". The execution of U.S. soldiers taken prisoner by the Filipinos led to disproportionate reprisals by American forces.\nThe Moro Muslims fought against the Americans in the Moro Rebellion.\nIn 1914, Dean C. Worcester, U.S. Secretary of the Interior for the Philippines (1901\u20131913) described \"the regime of civilisation and improvement which started with American occupation and resulted in developing naked savages into cultivated and educated men\". Nevertheless, some Americans, such as Mark Twain, deeply opposed American involvement/imperialism in the Philippines, leading to the abandonment of attempts to construct a permanent U.S. naval base and using it as an entry point to the Chinese market. In 1916, Congress guaranteed the independence of the Philippines by 1945.\nWorld War I: changes in imperialism.\nWorld War I brought about the fall of several empires in Europe. This had repercussions around the world. The defeated Central Powers included Germany and the Turkish Ottoman Empire. Germany lost all of its colonies in Asia. German New Guinea, a part of Papua New Guinea, became administered by Australia. German possessions and concessions in China, including Qingdao, became the subject of a controversy during the Paris Peace Conference when the Beiyang government in China agreed to cede these interests to Japan, to the anger of many Chinese people. Although the Chinese diplomats refused to sign the agreement, these interests were ceded to Japan with the support of the United States and the United Kingdom.\nTurkey gave up her provinces; Syria, Palestine, and Mesopotamia (now Iraq) came under French and British control as League of Nations Mandates. The discovery of petroleum first in Iran and then in the Arab lands in the interbellum provided a new focus for activity on the part of the United Kingdom, France, and the United States (see History of the Middle East#World War I).\nJapan.\nIn 1641, all Westerners were thrown out of Japan. For the next two centuries, Japan was free from Western contact, except for at the port of Nagasaki, which Japan allowed Dutch merchant vessels to enter on a limited basis.\nJapan's freedom from Western contact ended on 8 July 1853, when Commodore Matthew Perry of the U.S. Navy sailed a squadron of black-hulled warships into Edo (modern Tokyo) harbor. The Japanese told Perry to sail to Nagasaki but he refused. Perry sought to present a letter from U.S. President Millard Fillmore to the emperor which demanded concessions from Japan. Japanese authorities responded by stating that they could not present the letter directly to the emperor, but scheduled a meeting on 14 July with a representative of the emperor. On 14 July, the squadron sailed towards the shore, giving a demonstration of their cannon's firepower thirteen times. Perry landed with a large detachment of Marines and presented the emperor's representative with Fillmore's letter. Perry said he would return, and did so, this time with even more war ships. The U.S. show of force led to Japan's concession to the Convention of Kanagawa on 31 March 1854. This treaty conferred extraterritoriality on American nationals, as well as, opening up further treaty ports beyond Nagasaki. This treaty was followed up by similar treaties with the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Russia and France. These events made Japanese authorities aware that the country was lacking technologically and needed the strength of industrialism in order to keep their power. This realisation eventually led to a civil war and political reform known the Meiji Restoration.\nThe Meiji Restoration of 1868 led to administrative overhaul, deflation and subsequent rapid economic development. Japan had limited natural resources of her own and sought both overseas markets and sources of raw materials, fuelling a drive for imperial conquest which began with the defeat of China in 1895.\nTaiwan, ceded by Qing dynasty China, became the first Japanese colony. In 1899, Japan won agreements from the great powers' to abandon extraterritoriality for their citizens, and an alliance with the United Kingdom established it in 1902 as an international power. Its spectacular defeat of Russia's navy in 1905 gave it the southern half of the island of Sakhalin; exclusive Japanese influence over Korea (propinquity); the former Russian lease of the Liaodong Peninsula with Port Arthur (L\u00fcshunkou); and extensive rights in Manchuria (see the Russo-Japanese War).\nThe Empire of Japan and the Joseon dynasty in Korea formed bilateral diplomatic relations in 1876. China lost its suzerainty of Korea after defeat in the Sino-Japanese War in 1894. Russia also lost influence on the Korean peninsula with the Treaty of Portsmouth as a result of the Russo-Japanese war in 1904. The Joseon dynasty became increasingly dependent on Japan. Korea became a protectorate of Japan with the Japan\u2013Korea Treaty of 1905. Korea was then \"de jure\" annexed to Japan with the Japan\u2013Korea Treaty of 1910.\nJapan was now one of the most powerful forces in the Far East, and in 1914, it entered World War I on the side of the Allies, seizing German-occupied Kiaochow and subsequently demanding Chinese acceptance of Japanese political influence and territorial acquisitions (Twenty-One Demands, 1915). Mass protests in Peking in 1919 which sparked widespread Chinese nationalism, coupled with Allied (and particularly U.S.) opinion led to Japan's abandonment of most of the demands and Kiaochow's 1922 return to China. Japan received the German territory from the Treaty of Versailles.\nTensions with China increased over the 1920s, and in 1931 Japanese Kwantung Army based in Manchuria seized control of the region without admission from Tokyo. Intermittent conflict with China led to full-scale war in mid-1937, drawing Japan toward an overambitious bid for Asian hegemony (Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere), which ultimately led to defeat and the loss of all its overseas territories after World War II (see Japanese expansionism and Japanese nationalism).\nAfter World War II.\nDecolonization and the rise of nationalism in Asia.\nIn the aftermath of World War II, European colonies, controlling more than one billion people throughout the world, still ruled most of the Middle East, South East Asia, and the Indian Subcontinent. However, the image of European pre-eminence was shattered by the wartime Japanese occupations of large portions of British, French, and Dutch territories in the Pacific. The destabilisation of European rule led to the rapid growth of nationalist movements in Asia\u2014especially in Indonesia, Malaya, Burma, and French Indochina (Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos).\nThe war, however, only accelerated forces already in existence undermining Western imperialism in Asia. Throughout the colonial world, the processes of urbanisation and capitalist investment created professional merchant classes that emerged as new Westernised elites. While imbued with Western political and economic ideas, these classes increasingly grew to resent their unequal status under European rule.\nBritish in India and the Middle East.\nIn India, the westward movement of Japanese forces towards Bengal during World War II had led to major concessions on the part of British authorities to Indian nationalist leaders. In 1947, the United Kingdom, devastated by war and embroiled in an economic crisis at home, granted British India its independence as two nations: India and Pakistan. Myanmar (Burma) and Sri Lanka (Ceylon), which is also part of British India, also gained their independence from the United Kingdom the following year, in 1948. In the Middle East, the United Kingdom granted independence to Jordan in 1946 and two years later, in 1948, ended its mandate of Palestine becoming the independent nation of Israel.\nFollowing the end of the war, nationalists in Indonesia demanded complete independence from the Netherlands. A brutal conflict ensued, and finally, in 1949, through United Nations mediation, the Dutch East Indies achieved independence, becoming the new nation of Indonesia. Dutch imperialism moulded this new multi-ethnic state comprising roughly 3,000 islands of the Indonesian archipelago with a population at the time of over 100 million.\nThe end of Dutch rule opened up latent tensions between the roughly 300 distinct ethnic groups of the islands, with the major ethnic fault line being between the Javanese and the non-Javanese.\nDutch New Guinea was under the Dutch administration until 1962 (see also West New Guinea dispute).\nUnited States in Asia.\nIn the Philippines, the U.S. remained committed to its previous pledges to grant the islands their independence, and the Philippines became the first of the Western-controlled Asian colonies to be granted independence post-World War II. However, the Philippines remained under pressure to adopt a political and economic system similar to the U.S.\nThis aim was greatly complicated by the rise of new political forces. During the war, the \"Hukbalahap\" (People's Army), which had strong ties to the Communist Party of the Philippines (PKP), fought against the Japanese occupation of the Philippines and won strong popularity among many sectors of the Filipino working class and peasantry. In 1946, the PKP participated in elections as part of the Democratic Alliance. However, with the onset of the Cold War, its growing political strength drew a reaction from the ruling government and the United States, resulting in the repression of the PKP and its associated organizations. In 1948, the PKP began organizing an armed struggle against the government and continued U.S. military presence. In 1950, the PKP created the People's Liberation Army (\"Hukbong Mapagpalaya ng Bayan\"), which mobilized thousands of troops throughout the islands. The insurgency lasted until 1956 when the PKP gave up armed struggle.\nIn 1968, the PKP underwent a split, and in 1969 the Maoist faction of the PKP created the New People's Army. Maoist rebels re-launched an armed struggle against the government and the U.S. military presence in the Philippines, which continues to this day.\nFrance in Indochina.\nPost-war resistance to French rule.\nFrance remained determined to retain its control of Indochina. However, in Hanoi, in 1945, a broad front of nationalists and communists led by Ho Chi Minh declared an independent Democratic Republic of Vietnam, commonly referred to as the Viet Minh regime by Western outsiders. France, seeking to regain control of Vietnam, countered with a vague offer of self-government under French rule. France's offers were unacceptable to Vietnamese nationalists; and in December 1946 the Vi\u1ec7t Minh launched a rebellion against the French authority governing the colonies of French Indochina. The first few years of the war involved a low-level rural insurgency against French authority. However, after the Chinese communists reached the Northern border of Vietnam in 1949, the conflict turned into a conventional war between two armies equipped with modern weapons supplied by the United States and the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, the France granted the State of Vietnam based in Saigon independence in 1949 while Laos and Cambodia received independence in 1953. The US recognized the regime in Saigon, and provided the French military effort with military aid.\nMeanwhile, in Vietnam, the French war against the Viet Minh continued for nearly eight years. The French were gradually worn down by guerrilla and jungle fighting. The turning point for France occurred at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, which resulted in the surrender of ten thousand French troops. Paris was forced to accept a political settlement that year at the Geneva Conference, which led to a precarious set of agreements regarding the future political status of Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam.\nList of European colonies in Asia.\nBritish colonies in East Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia:\n Danish India (1696\u20131869)\n Swedish Parangipettai (1733)\n British India (1613\u20131947)\n British East India Company (1757\u20131858)\n British Raj (1858\u20131947)\n Sikkim (1861\u20131947) (British protectorate)\n British Malaya, included:\nStraits Settlements (1826\u20131946)\n Federated Malay States (1895\u20131946)\n Unfederated Malay States (1885\u20131946)\n Federation of Malaya (under British rule, 1948\u20131963)\n British Borneo (now part of Malaysia), including:\n Labuan (1848\u20131946)\n North Borneo (1882\u20131941)\n Crown Colony of North Borneo (1946\u20131963)\n Crown Colony of Sarawak (1946\u20131963)\n Brunei (1888\u20131984) (British protectorate)\n Singapore \u2013 British colony (1819\u20131959)\nFrench colonies in South and Southeast Asia:\n*French Laos (1893\u20131953)\n* French Cambodia (1863\u20131953)\n* Annam (French protectorate), Cochinchina, Tonkin (now Vietnam) (1883\u20131953)\nDutch, Spanish, Portuguese, American colonies and Russian territories in Asia:\n Spanish Philippines (1565\u20131898, 3rd longest European occupation in Asia, 333 years),\n Insular Government of the Philippine Islands and Commonwealth of the Philippines, United States colony (1898\u20131946)\n Spanish Formosa (1626\u20131642)\nDutch Formosa (1624\u20131662)\nBritish protectorates in West Asia:\n* Portuguese Bahrain (1521\u20131602)\n* British Protectorate (1861\u20131971)\n* Mandatory Iraq (1920\u20131932) (British protectorate)\n* Kingdom of Iraq (1932\u20131958)\n* Mandatory Palestine (1920\u20131948) (British Mandate)\n* Emirate of Transjordan (1921\u20131946) (British protectorate)\n* Sheikhdom of Kuwait (1899\u20131961) (British protectorate)\n* French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon (1923\u20131946)\n* Portuguese Oman (1507\u20131650)\n* Muscat and Oman (1892\u20131971) (British protectorate)\n* British protectorate of Qatar (1916\u20131971)\n* Trucial States (1820\u20131971) (British protectorate)\n* Aden Protectorate (1869\u20131963)\n* Colony of Aden (1937\u20131963)\n* Federation of South Arabia (1962\u20131967)\n* Protectorate of South Arabia (1963\u20131967)\n* Foreign concessions in China\n* Shanghai International Settlement (1863 - 1941)\n* Shanghai French Concession (1849 - 1943)\n* Concessions in Tianjin (1860 - 1947)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15445", "revid": "50802907", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15445", "title": "Entropy (information theory)", "text": "Expected amount of information needed to specify the output of a stochastic data source\nIn information theory, the entropy of a random variable quantifies the average level of uncertainty or information associated with the variable's potential states or possible outcomes. This measures the expected amount of information needed to describe the state of the variable, considering the distribution of probabilities across all potential states. Given a discrete random variable formula_1, which may be any member formula_2 within the set formula_3 and is distributed according to formula_4, the entropy is\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 denotes the sum over the variable's possible values. The choice of base for formula_7, the logarithm, varies for different applications. Base 2 gives the unit of bits (or \"shannons\"), while base \"e\" gives \"natural units\" nat, and base 10 gives units of \"dits\", \"bans\", or \"hartleys\". An equivalent definition of entropy is the expected value of the self-information of a variable.\nThe concept of information entropy was introduced by Claude Shannon in his 1948 paper \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\", and is also referred to as Shannon entropy. Shannon's theory defines a data communication system composed of three elements: a source of data, a communication channel, and a receiver. The \"fundamental problem of communication\" \u2013 as expressed by Shannon \u2013 is for the receiver to be able to identify what data was generated by the source, based on the signal it receives through the channel. Shannon considered various ways to encode, compress, and transmit messages from a data source, and proved in his source coding theorem that the entropy represents an absolute mathematical limit on how well data from the source can be losslessly compressed onto a perfectly noiseless channel. Shannon strengthened this result considerably for noisy channels in his noisy-channel coding theorem.\nEntropy in information theory is directly analogous to the entropy in statistical thermodynamics. The analogy results when the values of the random variable designate energies of microstates, so Gibbs's formula for the entropy is formally identical to Shannon's formula. Entropy has relevance to other areas of mathematics such as combinatorics and machine learning. The definition can be derived from a set of axioms establishing that entropy should be a measure of how informative the average outcome of a variable is. For a continuous random variable, differential entropy is analogous to entropy. The definition formula_8 generalizes the above.\nIntroduction.\nThe core idea of information theory is that the \"informational value\" of a communicated message depends on the degree to which the content of the message is surprising. If a highly likely event occurs, the message carries very little information. On the other hand, if a highly unlikely event occurs, the message is much more informative. For instance, the knowledge that some particular number \"will not\" be the winning number of a lottery provides very little information, because any particular chosen number will almost certainly not win. However, knowledge that a particular number \"will\" win a lottery has high informational value because it communicates the occurrence of a very low probability event.\nThe \"information content,\" also called the \"surprisal\" or \"self-information,\" of an event formula_9 is a function that increases as the probability formula_10 of an event decreases. When formula_10 is close to 1, the surprisal of the event is low, but if formula_10 is close to 0, the surprisal of the event is high. This relationship is described by the function\nformula_13\nwhere formula_7 is the logarithm, which gives 0 surprise when the probability of the event is 1. In fact, log is the only function that satisfies \u0430 specific set of conditions defined in section \"\".\nHence, we can define the information, or surprisal, of an event formula_9 by\nformula_16\nor equivalently,\nformula_17\nEntropy measures the expected (i.e., average) amount of information conveyed by identifying the outcome of a random trial.67 This implies that rolling a dice has higher entropy than tossing a coin because each outcome of a dice toss has smaller probability (formula_18) than each outcome of a coin toss (formula_19).\nConsider a coin with probability \"p\" of landing on heads and probability 1 \u2212 \"p\" of landing on tails. The maximum surprise is when \"p\" = 1/2, for which one outcome is not expected over the other. In this case a coin flip has an entropy of one bit (similarly, one trit with equiprobable values contains formula_20 (about 1.58496) bits of information because it can have one of three values). The minimum surprise is when \"p\" = 0 (impossibility) or \"p\" = 1 (certainty) and the entropy is zero bits. When the entropy is zero, there is no uncertainty at all \u2013 no freedom of choice \u2013 no information. Other values of \"p\" give entropies between zero and one bits.\nExample.\nInformation theory is useful to calculate the smallest amount of information required to convey a message, as in data compression. For example, consider the transmission of sequences comprising the 4 characters 'A', 'B', 'C', and 'D' over a binary channel. If all 4 letters are equally likely (25%), one cannot do better than using two bits to encode each letter. 'A' might code as '00', 'B' as '01', 'C' as '10', and 'D' as '11'. However, if the probabilities of each letter are unequal, say 'A' occurs with 70% probability, 'B' with 26%, and 'C' and 'D' with 2% each, one could assign variable length codes. In this case, 'A' would be coded as '0', 'B' as '10', 'C' as '110', and 'D' as '111'. With this representation, 70% of the time only one bit needs to be sent, 26% of the time two bits, and only 4% of the time 3 bits. On average, fewer than 2 bits are required since the entropy is lower (owing to the high prevalence of 'A' followed by 'B' \u2013 together 96% of characters). The calculation of the sum of probability-weighted log probabilities measures and captures this effect.\nEnglish text, treated as a string of characters, has fairly low entropy; i.e. it is fairly predictable. We can be fairly certain that, for example, 'e' will be far more common than 'z', that the combination 'qu' will be much more common than any other combination with a 'q' in it, and that the combination 'th' will be more common than 'z', 'q', or 'qu'. After the first few letters one can often guess the rest of the word. English text has between 0.6 and 1.3 bits of entropy per character of the message.234\nDefinition.\nNamed after Boltzmann's \u0397-theorem, Shannon defined the entropy \u0397 (Greek capital letter eta) of a discrete random variable formula_21, which takes values in the set formula_3 and is distributed according to formula_23 such that formula_24:\nformula_25\nHere formula_26 is the expected value operator, and I is the information content of \"X\".11\nformula_27 is itself a random variable.\nThe entropy can explicitly be written as:\nformula_28\nwhere \"b\" is the base of the logarithm used. Common values of \"b\" are 2, Euler's number \"e\", and 10, and the corresponding units of entropy are the bits for \"b\" \n 2, nats for \"b\" \n \"e\", and bans for \"b\" \n 10.\nIn the case of formula_29 for some formula_30, the value of the corresponding summand 0 log\"b\"(0) is taken to be 0, which is consistent with the limit:13\nformula_31\nOne may also define the conditional entropy of two variables formula_1 and formula_33 taking values from sets formula_3 and formula_35 respectively, as:16\nformula_36\nwhere formula_37 and formula_38. This quantity should be understood as the remaining randomness in the random variable formula_1 given the random variable formula_33.\nMeasure theory.\nEntropy can be formally defined in the language of measure theory as follows: Let formula_41 be a probability space. Let formula_42 be an event. The surprisal of formula_43 is\nformula_44\nThe \"expected\" surprisal of formula_43 is\nformula_46\nA formula_47-almost partition is a set family formula_48 such that formula_49 and formula_50 for all distinct formula_51. (This is a relaxation of the usual conditions for a partition.) The entropy of formula_52 is\nformula_53\nLet formula_54 be a sigma-algebra on formula_1. The entropy of formula_54 is\nformula_57\nFinally, the entropy of the probability space is formula_58, that is, the entropy with respect to formula_47 of the sigma-algebra of \"all\" measurable subsets of formula_1.\nExample.\nConsider tossing a coin with known, not necessarily fair, probabilities of coming up heads or tails; this can be modeled as a Bernoulli process.\nThe entropy of the unknown result of the next toss of the coin is maximized if the coin is fair (that is, if heads and tails both have equal probability 1/2). This is the situation of maximum uncertainty as it is most difficult to predict the outcome of the next toss; the result of each toss of the coin delivers one full bit of information. This is because\nformula_61\nHowever, if we know the coin is not fair, but comes up heads or tails with probabilities \"p\" and \"q\", where \"p\" \u2260 \"q\", then there is less uncertainty. Every time it is tossed, one side is more likely to come up than the other. The reduced uncertainty is quantified in a lower entropy: on average each toss of the coin delivers less than one full bit of information. For example, if \"p\" = 0.7, then\nformula_62\nUniform probability yields maximum uncertainty and therefore maximum entropy. Entropy, then, can only decrease from the value associated with uniform probability. The extreme case is that of a double-headed coin that never comes up tails, or a double-tailed coin that never results in a head. Then there is no uncertainty. The entropy is zero: each toss of the coin delivers no new information as the outcome of each coin toss is always certain.14\u201315\nCharacterization.\nTo understand the meaning of \u2212\u03a3 \"p\"\"i\" log(\"p\"\"i\"), first define an information function I in terms of an event \"i\" with probability \"p\"\"i\". The amount of information acquired due to the observation of event \"i\" follows from Shannon's solution of the fundamental properties of information:\n 0: events that always occur do not communicate information.\n I(\"p\"1) + I(\"p\"2): the information learned from independent events is the sum of the information learned from each event.\nGiven two independent events, if the first event can yield one of \"n\" equiprobable outcomes and another has one of \"m\" equiprobable outcomes then there are \"mn\" equiprobable outcomes of the joint event. This means that if log2(\"n\") bits are needed to encode the first value and log2(\"m\") to encode the second, one needs log2(\"mn\") \n log2(\"m\") + log2(\"n\") to encode both.\nShannon discovered that a suitable choice of formula_63 is given by:\nformula_64\nIn fact, the only possible values of formula_63 are formula_66 for formula_67. Additionally, choosing a value for \"k\" is equivalent to choosing a value formula_68 for formula_69, so that \"x\" corresponds to the base for the logarithm. Thus, entropy is characterized by the above four properties.\nThe different units of information (bits for the binary logarithm log2, nats for the natural logarithm ln, bans for the decimal logarithm log10 and so on) are constant multiples of each other. For instance, in case of a fair coin toss, heads provides log2(2) \n 1 bit of information, which is approximately 0.693\u00a0nats or 0.301\u00a0decimal digits. Because of additivity, \"n\" tosses provide \"n\" bits of information, which is approximately 0.693\"n\" nats or 0.301\"n\" decimal digits.\nThe \"meaning\" of the events observed (the meaning of \"messages\") does not matter in the definition of entropy. Entropy only takes into account the probability of observing a specific event, so the information it encapsulates is information about the underlying probability distribution, not the meaning of the events themselves.\nAlternative characterization.\nAnother characterization of entropy uses the following properties. We denote \"p\"\"i\" \n Pr(\"X\" \n \"x\"\"i\") and \u0397\"n\"(\"p\"1, ..., \"p\"\"n\") \n \u0397(\"X\").\nDiscussion.\nThe rule of additivity has the following consequences: for positive integers \"b\"\"i\" where \"b\"1 + ... + \"b\"\"k\" \n \"n\",\nformula_76\nChoosing \"k\" \n \"n\", \"b\"1 \n \"b\"\"n\" \n 1 this implies that the entropy of a certain outcome is zero: \u03971(1) \n 0. This implies that the efficiency of a source set with \"n\" symbols can be defined simply as being equal to its \"n\"-ary entropy. See also Redundancy (information theory).\nThe characterization here imposes an additive property with respect to a partition of a set. Meanwhile, the conditional probability is defined in terms of a multiplicative property, formula_77. Observe that a logarithm mediates between these two operations. The conditional entropy and related quantities inherit simple relation, in turn. The measure theoretic definition in the previous section defined the entropy as a sum over expected surprisals formula_78 for an extremal partition. Here the logarithm is ad hoc and the entropy is not a measure in itself. At least in the information theory of a binary string, formula_79 lends itself to practical interpretations.\nMotivated by such relations, a plethora of related and competing quantities have been defined. For example, David Ellerman's analysis of a \"logic of partitions\" defines a competing measure in structures dual to that of subsets of a universal set. Information is quantified as \"dits\" (distinctions), a measure on partitions. \"Dits\" can be converted into Shannon's bits, to get the formulas for conditional entropy, and so on.\nAlternative characterization via additivity and subadditivity.\nAnother succinct axiomatic characterization of Shannon entropy was given by Acz\u00e9l, Forte and Ng, via the following properties:\nDiscussion.\nIt was shown that any function formula_88 satisfying the above properties must be a constant multiple of Shannon entropy, with a non-negative constant. Compared to the previously mentioned characterizations of entropy, this characterization focuses on the properties of entropy as a function of random variables (subadditivity and additivity), rather than the properties of entropy as a function of the probability vector formula_89.\nIt is worth noting that if we drop the \"small for small probabilities\" property, then formula_88 must be a non-negative linear combination of the Shannon entropy and the Hartley entropy.\nFurther properties.\nThe Shannon entropy satisfies the following properties, for some of which it is useful to interpret entropy as the expected amount of information learned (or uncertainty eliminated) by revealing the value of a random variable \"X\":\nAspects.\nRelationship to thermodynamic entropy.\nThe inspiration for adopting the word \"entropy\" in information theory came from the close resemblance between Shannon's formula and very similar known formulae from statistical mechanics.\nIn statistical thermodynamics the most general formula for the thermodynamic entropy \"S\" of a thermodynamic system is the Gibbs entropy\nformula_108\nwhere \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant, and \"p\"\"i\" is the probability of a microstate. The Gibbs entropy was defined by J. Willard Gibbs in 1878 after earlier work by Ludwig Boltzmann (1872).\nThe Gibbs entropy translates over almost unchanged into the world of quantum physics to give the von Neumann entropy introduced by John von Neumann in 1927:\nformula_109\nwhere \u03c1 is the density matrix of the quantum mechanical system and Tr is the trace.\nAt an everyday practical level, the links between information entropy and thermodynamic entropy are not evident. Physicists and chemists are apt to be more interested in \"changes\" in entropy as a system spontaneously evolves away from its initial conditions, in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics, rather than an unchanging probability distribution. As the minuteness of the Boltzmann constant \"k\"B indicates, the changes in \"S\" / \"k\"B for even tiny amounts of substances in chemical and physical processes represent amounts of entropy that are extremely large compared to anything in data compression or signal processing. In classical thermodynamics, entropy is defined in terms of macroscopic measurements and makes no reference to any probability distribution, which is central to the definition of information entropy.\nThe connection between thermodynamics and what is now known as information theory was first made by Boltzmann and expressed by his equation:\nformula_110\nwhere formula_111 is the thermodynamic entropy of a particular macrostate (defined by thermodynamic parameters such as temperature, volume, energy, etc.), \"W\" is the number of microstates (various combinations of particles in various energy states) that can yield the given macrostate, and \"k\"B is the Boltzmann constant. It is assumed that each microstate is equally likely, so that the probability of a given microstate is \"p\"\"i\" = 1/\"W\". When these probabilities are substituted into the above expression for the Gibbs entropy (or equivalently \"k\"B times the Shannon entropy), Boltzmann's equation results. In information theoretic terms, the information entropy of a system is the amount of \"missing\" information needed to determine a microstate, given the macrostate.\nIn the view of Jaynes (1957), thermodynamic entropy, as explained by statistical mechanics, should be seen as an \"application\" of Shannon's information theory: the thermodynamic entropy is interpreted as being proportional to the amount of further Shannon information needed to define the detailed microscopic state of the system, that remains uncommunicated by a description solely in terms of the macroscopic variables of classical thermodynamics, with the constant of proportionality being just the Boltzmann constant. Adding heat to a system increases its thermodynamic entropy because it increases the number of possible microscopic states of the system that are consistent with the measurable values of its macroscopic variables, making any complete state description longer. (See article: \"maximum entropy thermodynamics\"). Maxwell's demon can (hypothetically) reduce the thermodynamic entropy of a system by using information about the states of individual molecules; but, as Landauer (from 1961) and co-workers have shown, to function the demon himself must increase thermodynamic entropy in the process, by at least the amount of Shannon information he proposes to first acquire and store; and so the total thermodynamic entropy does not decrease (which resolves the paradox). Landauer's principle imposes a lower bound on the amount of heat a computer must generate to process a given amount of information, though modern computers are far less efficient.\nData compression.\nShannon's definition of entropy, when applied to an information source, can determine the minimum channel capacity required to reliably transmit the source as encoded binary digits. Shannon's entropy measures the information contained in a message as opposed to the portion of the message that is determined (or predictable). Examples of the latter include redundancy in language structure or statistical properties relating to the occurrence frequencies of letter or word pairs, triplets etc. The minimum channel capacity can be realized in theory by using the typical set or in practice using Huffman, Lempel\u2013Ziv or arithmetic coding. (See also Kolmogorov complexity.) In practice, compression algorithms deliberately include some judicious redundancy in the form of checksums to protect against errors. The entropy rate of a data source is the average number of bits per symbol needed to encode it. Shannon's experiments with human predictors show an information rate between 0.6 and 1.3 bits per character in English; the PPM compression algorithm can achieve a compression ratio of 1.5 bits per character in English text.\nIf a compression scheme is lossless \u2013 one in which you can always recover the entire original message by decompression \u2013 then a compressed message has the same quantity of information as the original but is communicated in fewer characters. It has more information (higher entropy) per character. A compressed message has less redundancy. Shannon's source coding theorem states a lossless compression scheme cannot compress messages, on average, to have \"more\" than one bit of information per bit of message, but that any value \"less\" than one bit of information per bit of message can be attained by employing a suitable coding scheme. The entropy of a message per bit multiplied by the length of that message is a measure of how much total information the message contains. Shannon's theorem also implies that no lossless compression scheme can shorten \"all\" messages. If some messages come out shorter, at least one must come out longer due to the pigeonhole principle. In practical use, this is generally not a problem, because one is usually only interested in compressing certain types of messages, such as a document in English, as opposed to gibberish text, or digital photographs rather than noise, and it is unimportant if a compression algorithm makes some unlikely or uninteresting sequences larger.\nA 2011 study in \"Science\" estimates the world's technological capacity to store and communicate optimally compressed information normalized on the most effective compression algorithms available in the year 2007, therefore estimating the entropy of the technologically available sources.\nThe authors estimate humankind technological capacity to store information (fully entropically compressed) in 1986 and again in 2007. They break the information into three categories\u2014to store information on a medium, to receive information through one-way broadcast networks, or to exchange information through two-way telecommunications networks.\nEntropy as a measure of diversity.\nEntropy is one of several ways to measure biodiversity and is applied in the form of the Shannon index. A diversity index is a quantitative statistical measure of how many different types exist in a dataset, such as species in a community, accounting for ecological richness, evenness, and dominance. Specifically, Shannon entropy is the logarithm of 1D, the true diversity index with parameter equal to 1. The Shannon index is related to the proportional abundances of types.\nEntropy of a sequence.\nThere are a number of entropy-related concepts that mathematically quantify information content of a sequence or message:\n(The \"rate of self-information\" can also be defined for a particular sequence of messages or symbols generated by a given stochastic process: this will always be equal to the entropy rate in the case of a stationary process.) Other quantities of information are also used to compare or relate different sources of information.\nIt is important not to confuse the above concepts. Often it is only clear from context which one is meant. For example, when someone says that the \"entropy\" of the English language is about 1 bit per character, they are actually modeling the English language as a stochastic process and talking about its entropy \"rate\". Shannon himself used the term in this way.\nIf very large blocks are used, the estimate of per-character entropy rate may become artificially low because the probability distribution of the sequence is not known exactly; it is only an estimate. If one considers the text of every book ever published as a sequence, with each symbol being the text of a complete book, and if there are \"N\" published books, and each book is only published once, the estimate of the probability of each book is 1/\"N\", and the entropy (in bits) is \u2212log2(1/\"N\") \n log2(\"N\"). As a practical code, this corresponds to assigning each book a unique identifier and using it in place of the text of the book whenever one wants to refer to the book. This is enormously useful for talking about books, but it is not so useful for characterizing the information content of an individual book, or of language in general: it is not possible to reconstruct the book from its identifier without knowing the probability distribution, that is, the complete text of all the books. The key idea is that the complexity of the probabilistic model must be considered. Kolmogorov complexity is a theoretical generalization of this idea that allows the consideration of the information content of a sequence independent of any particular probability model; it considers the shortest program for a universal computer that outputs the sequence. A code that achieves the entropy rate of a sequence for a given model, plus the codebook (i.e. the probabilistic model), is one such program, but it may not be the shortest.\nThe Fibonacci sequence is 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, ... treating the sequence as a message and each number as a symbol, there are almost as many symbols as there are characters in the message, giving an entropy of approximately log2(\"n\"). The first 128 symbols of the Fibonacci sequence has an entropy of approximately 7 bits/symbol, but the sequence can be expressed using a formula [F(\"n\") \n F(\"n\"\u22121) + F(\"n\"\u22122) for \"n\" \n 3, 4, 5, ..., F(1) \n1, F(2) \n 1] and this formula has a much lower entropy and applies to any length of the Fibonacci sequence.\nLimitations of entropy in cryptography.\nIn cryptanalysis, entropy is often roughly used as a measure of the unpredictability of a cryptographic key, though its real uncertainty is unmeasurable. For example, a 128-bit key that is uniformly and randomly generated has 128 bits of entropy. It also takes (on average) formula_112 guesses to break by brute force. Entropy fails to capture the number of guesses required if the possible keys are not chosen uniformly. Instead, a measure called \"guesswork\" can be used to measure the effort required for a brute force attack.\nOther problems may arise from non-uniform distributions used in cryptography. For example, a 1,000,000-digit binary one-time pad using exclusive or. If the pad has 1,000,000 bits of entropy, it is perfect. If the pad has 999,999 bits of entropy, evenly distributed (each individual bit of the pad having 0.999999 bits of entropy) it may provide good security. But if the pad has 999,999 bits of entropy, where the first bit is fixed and the remaining 999,999 bits are perfectly random, the first bit of the ciphertext will not be encrypted at all.\nData as a Markov process.\nA common way to define entropy for text is based on the Markov model of text. For an order-0 source (each character is selected independent of the last characters), the binary entropy is:\nformula_113\nwhere \"p\"\"i\" is the probability of \"i\". For a first-order Markov source (one in which the probability of selecting a character is dependent only on the immediately preceding character), the entropy rate is:\nformula_114 \nwhere \"i\" is a state (certain preceding characters) and formula_115 is the probability of \"j\" given \"i\" as the previous character.\nFor a second order Markov source, the entropy rate is\nformula_116\nEfficiency (normalized entropy).\nA source set formula_3 with a non-uniform distribution will have less entropy than the same set with a uniform distribution (i.e. the \"optimized alphabet\"). This deficiency in entropy can be expressed as a ratio called efficiency:\nformula_118\nApplying the basic properties of the logarithm, this quantity can also be expressed as:\nformula_119\nEfficiency has utility in quantifying the effective use of a communication channel. This formulation is also referred to as the normalized entropy, as the entropy is divided by the maximum entropy formula_120. Furthermore, the efficiency is indifferent to the choice of (positive) base \"b\", as indicated by the insensitivity within the final logarithm above thereto.\nEntropy for continuous random variables.\nDifferential entropy.\nThe Shannon entropy is restricted to random variables taking discrete values. The corresponding formula for a continuous random variable with probability density function \"f\"(\"x\") with finite or infinite support formula_121 on the real line is defined by analogy, using the above form of the entropy as an expectation:224\nformula_122\nThis is the differential entropy (or continuous entropy). A precursor of the continuous entropy \"h\"[\"f\"] is the expression for the functional \"\u0397\" in the H-theorem of Boltzmann.\nAlthough the analogy between both functions is suggestive, the following question must be set: is the differential entropy a valid extension of the Shannon discrete entropy? Differential entropy lacks a number of properties that the Shannon discrete entropy has\u00a0\u2013 it can even be negative\u00a0\u2013 and corrections have been suggested, notably limiting density of discrete points.\nTo answer this question, a connection must be established between the two functions:\nIn order to obtain a generally finite measure as the bin size goes to zero. In the discrete case, the bin size is the (implicit) width of each of the \"n\" (finite or infinite) bins whose probabilities are denoted by \"p\"\"n\". As the continuous domain is generalized, the width must be made explicit.\nTo do this, start with a continuous function \"f\" discretized into bins of size formula_123.\nBy the mean-value theorem there exists a value \"x\"\"i\" in each bin such that\nformula_124\nthe integral of the function \"f\" can be approximated (in the Riemannian sense) by\nformula_125\nwhere this limit and \"bin size goes to zero\" are equivalent.\nWe will denote\nformula_126\nand expanding the logarithm, we have\nformula_127\nAs \u0394 \u2192 0, we have\nformula_128\nNote; log(\u0394) \u2192 \u2212\u221e as \u0394 \u2192 0, requires a special definition of the differential or continuous entropy:\nformula_129\nwhich is, as said before, referred to as the differential entropy. This means that the differential entropy \"is not\" a limit of the Shannon entropy for \"n\" \u2192 \u221e. Rather, it differs from the limit of the Shannon entropy by an infinite offset (see also the article on information dimension).\nLimiting density of discrete points.\nIt turns out as a result that, unlike the Shannon entropy, the differential entropy is \"not\" in general a good measure of uncertainty or information. For example, the differential entropy can be negative; also it is not invariant under continuous co-ordinate transformations. This problem may be illustrated by a change of units when \"x\" is a dimensioned variable. \"f\"(\"x\") will then have the units of 1/\"x\". The argument of the logarithm must be dimensionless, otherwise it is improper, so that the differential entropy as given above will be improper. If \"\u0394\" is some \"standard\" value of \"x\" (i.e. \"bin size\") and therefore has the same units, then a modified differential entropy may be written in proper form as:\nformula_130\nand the result will be the same for any choice of units for \"x\". In fact, the limit of discrete entropy as formula_131 would also include a term of formula_132, which would in general be infinite. This is expected: continuous variables would typically have infinite entropy when discretized. The limiting density of discrete points is really a measure of how much easier a distribution is to describe than a distribution that is uniform over its quantization scheme.\nRelative entropy.\nAnother useful measure of entropy that works equally well in the discrete and the continuous case is the relative entropy of a distribution. It is defined as the Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence from the distribution to a reference measure \"m\" as follows. Assume that a probability distribution \"p\" is absolutely continuous with respect to a measure \"m\", i.e. is of the form \"p\"(\"dx\") \n \"f\"(\"x\")\"m\"(\"dx\") for some non-negative \"m\"-integrable function \"f\" with \"m\"-integral 1, then the relative entropy can be defined as\nformula_133\nIn this form the relative entropy generalizes (up to change in sign) both the discrete entropy, where the measure \"m\" is the counting measure, and the differential entropy, where the measure \"m\" is the Lebesgue measure. If the measure \"m\" is itself a probability distribution, the relative entropy is non-negative, and zero if \"p\" \n \"m\" as measures. It is defined for any measure space, hence coordinate independent and invariant under co-ordinate reparameterizations if one properly takes into account the transformation of the measure \"m\". The relative entropy, and (implicitly) entropy and differential entropy, do depend on the \"reference\" measure \"m\".\nUse in number theory.\nTerence Tao used entropy to make a useful connection trying to solve the Erd\u0151s discrepancy problem.\nIntuitively the idea behind the proof was if there is low information in terms of the Shannon entropy between consecutive random variables (here the random variable is defined using the Liouville function (which is a useful mathematical function for studying distribution of primes) \"X\"\"H\" \n formula_134. And in an interval [n, n+H] the sum over that interval could become arbitrary large. For example, a sequence of +1's (which are values of \"X\"\"H\" could take) have trivially low entropy and their sum would become big. But the key insight was showing a reduction in entropy by non negligible amounts as one expands H leading inturn to unbounded growth of a mathematical object over this random variable is equivalent to showing the unbounded growth per the Erd\u0151s discrepancy problem.\nThe proof is quite involved and it brought together breakthroughs not just in novel use of Shannon entropy, but also it used the Liouville function along with averages of modulated multiplicative functions in short intervals. Proving it also broke the \"parity barrier\" for this specific problem.\nWhile the use of Shannon entropy in the proof is novel it is likely to open new research in this direction.\nUse in combinatorics.\nEntropy has become a useful quantity in combinatorics.\nLoomis\u2013Whitney inequality.\nA simple example of this is an alternative proof of the Loomis\u2013Whitney inequality: for every subset \"A\" \u2286 Z\"d\", we have\nformula_135\nwhere \"P\"\"i\" is the orthogonal projection in the \"i\"th coordinate:\nformula_136\nThe proof follows as a simple corollary of Shearer's inequality: if \"X\"1, ..., \"X\"\"d\" are random variables and \"S\"1, ..., \"S\"\"n\" are subsets of {1, ..., \"d\"} such that every integer between 1 and \"d\" lies in exactly \"r\" of these subsets, then\nformula_137\nwhere formula_138 is the Cartesian product of random variables \"X\"\"j\" with indexes \"j\" in \"S\"\"i\" (so the dimension of this vector is equal to the size of \"S\"\"i\").\nWe sketch how Loomis\u2013Whitney follows from this: Indeed, let \"X\" be a uniformly distributed random variable with values in \"A\" and so that each point in \"A\" occurs with equal probability. Then (by the further properties of entropy mentioned above) \u0397(\"X\") \n log|\"A\"|, where denotes the cardinality of \"A\". Let \"S\"\"i\" \n {1, 2, ..., \"i\"\u22121, \"i\"+1, ..., \"d\"}. The range of formula_139 is contained in \"P\"\"i\"(\"A\") and hence formula_140. Now use this to bound the right side of Shearer's inequality and exponentiate the opposite sides of the resulting inequality you obtain.\nApproximation to binomial coefficient.\nFor integers 0 &lt; \"k\" &lt; \"n\" let \"q\" = \"k\"/\"n\". Then\nformula_141\nwhere 43\nformula_142\nA nice interpretation of this is that the number of binary strings of length \"n\" with exactly \"k\" many 1's is approximately formula_143.\nUse in machine learning.\nMachine learning techniques arise largely from statistics and also information theory. In general, entropy is a measure of uncertainty and the objective of machine learning is to minimize uncertainty.\nDecision tree learning algorithms use relative entropy to determine the decision rules that govern the data at each node. The information gain in decision trees formula_144, which is equal to the difference between the entropy of formula_33 and the conditional entropy of formula_33 given formula_1, quantifies the expected information, or the reduction in entropy, from additionally knowing the value of an attribute formula_1. The information gain is used to identify which attributes of the dataset provide the most information and should be used to split the nodes of the tree optimally.\nBayesian inference models often apply the principle of maximum entropy to obtain prior probability distributions. The idea is that the distribution that best represents the current state of knowledge of a system is the one with the largest entropy, and is therefore suitable to be the prior.\nClassification in machine learning performed by logistic regression or artificial neural networks often employs a standard loss function, called cross-entropy loss, that minimizes the average cross entropy between ground truth and predicted distributions. In general, cross entropy is a measure of the differences between two datasets similar to the KL divergence (also known as relative entropy).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This article incorporates material from Shannon's entropy on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the .\""}
{"id": "15446", "revid": "50750609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15446", "title": "Ithaca College", "text": "Private college in Ithaca, New York, U.S.\nIthaca College is a private college in Ithaca, New York, United States. It was founded by William Egbert in 1892 as a conservatory of music. Ithaca College is known for its media-related programs and entertainment programs within the Roy H. Park School of Communications and the Ithaca College School of Music, Theatre, and Dance. The college has a liberal arts focus, and offers several pre-professional programs, along with several graduate programs, mainly in business, health sciences, and teaching degrees through the School of Humanities and Sciences.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nIthaca College was founded as the \"Ithaca Conservatory of Music\" in 1892 when a local violin teacher, William Grant Egbert, rented four rooms and arranged for the instruction of eight students. For nearly seven decades the institution flourished in the city of Ithaca, adding to its music curriculum the study of elocution, dance, physical education, speech correction, radio, business, and the liberal arts. In 1931 the conservatory was chartered as a private college under its current name, \"Ithaca College\". The college was originally in the Boardman House; that building later became the Ithaca College Museum of Art, and it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1971.\nModern era.\nBy 1960, the college had some 2,000 students. A campus was built on South Hill in the 1960s, and students were shuttled between the old and new locations during the construction. The hillside campus continued to grow in the ensuing 30 years to accommodate more than 6,000 students.\nAs the campus expanded, the college began to expand its curriculum. By the 1990s, some 2,000 courses in more than 100 programs of study were available in the college's five schools. The school attracts a multicultural student body with representatives from almost every state and from 78 other countries. In October 2020 the college announced that 130 of its 547 faculty positions would be cut to reduce the school's budget by $30 million because of declining enrollment. 4,957 undergraduate students enrolled in the fall of 2020, versus 5,852 in 2019 and 6,101 in 2018.\nPresidents.\nIthaca's president is La Jerne Terry Cornish. She was named the school's 10th president, in March 2022, after having served in as interim president since August 30, 2021. She replaced Shirley M. Collado who departed Ithaca College to become the president and CEO of College Track, a comprehensive college completion program. Collado was named the ninth president of Ithaca College on February 22, 2017, and assumed the presidency on July 1, 2017. She was previously executive vice chancellor and chief operating officer at Rutgers University\u2013Newark and vice president of student affairs and dean of the college at Middlebury College. She is the first Dominican American to be named president of a college in the United States. During Collado's time as president she was the center of multiple controversies. She faced backlash when students and faculty discovered she was accused of sexually abusing a female patient while working as a psychologist in Washington, D.C., in 2000 and was convicted of sexual abuse in 2001. \nStudents questioned her transparency when she announced plans to cut 116 full-time faculty members, some of whom had worked at the school for decades, after receiving a $172,769 payment. Collado eventually announced in July 2021 that she was stepping down in January 2022 to become president and CEO of College Track, a college completion program based in Oakland, California.\nCollado succeeded Thomas Rochon, who was named eighth president of Ithaca College on April 11, 2008. Rochon took over as president of the college after Peggy Williams, who announced on July 12, 2007, that she would retire from the presidency post effective May 31, 2009, following a one-year sabbatical. During the fall 2015 semester, multiple protests focusing on campus climate and Rochon's leadership were led by students and faculty. After multiple racially charged events including student house party themes and racially tinged comments at administration led-programs, students, faculty and staff all decided to hold votes of \"no confidence\" in Rochon. Students voted \"no confidence\" by a count of 72% no confidence, 27% confidence, and 1% abstaining. The faculty voted 77.8% no confidence to 22.2% confidence. Rochon retired on July 1, 2017.\nCampus.\nIthaca College's campus was built in the 1960s on South Hill. The college's final academic department moved from downtown to the South Hill campus in 1968, making the move complete.\nSatellite campuses.\nBesides its Ithaca campus, Ithaca College has operated satellite campuses in other cities. The Ithaca College London Center has been in existence since 1972. Ithaca runs the Ithaca College Los Angeles Program at the James B. Pendleton Center. Former programs include the Ithaca College Antigua Program and the Ithaca College Walkabout Down Under Program in Australia.\nIthaca College also operates direct enrollment exchange programs with several universities, including Griffith University, La Trobe University, Murdoch University, and University of Tasmania (Australia); Chengdu Sport University and Beijing Sport University (China); University of Hong Kong (Hong Kong); Masaryk University (Czech Republic); Akita International University and University of Tsukuba (Japan); Hanyang University (Korea); Nanyang Technological University (Singapore); University of Valencia (Spain); and J\u00f6nk\u00f6ping University (Sweden). Ithaca College is also affiliated with study abroad programs such as IES Abroad and offers dozens of exchange or study abroad options to students.\nAcademics.\nThe college offers a curriculum with more than 100 degree programs in its five schools:\nUntil the spring of 2011, several cross-disciplinary degree programs, along with the Center for the Study of Culture, Race, and Ethnicity, were housed in the Division of Interdisciplinary and International Studies; in 2011, the division was eliminated and its programs, centers, and institutes were absorbed into other schools. As of 2017[ [update]], the most popular majors included visual and performing arts, health professions and related programs, business, management, marketing, and related support services and biological and biomedical sciences.\nStudent life.\nGreek life.\nHistorically, various independent and national fraternities and sororities had active chapters at Ithaca College. However, due to a series of highly publicized hazing incidents in the 1980s, including one which was responsible for the death of a student, the college administration reevaluated their Greek life policy and only professional music fraternities were allowed to remain affiliated with the school.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], professional coed music fraternity Mu Phi Epsilon is the only remaining recognized Greek organization on campus. Previously, three other recognized music and performing arts houses also existed on campus:\nIt is highly unlikely any of these houses will ever be reactivated at Ithaca, due to the college's policy on Greek life.\nHowever, there are various Greek letter organizations at Ithaca College that are unaffiliated with the school, and therefore not subject to the same housing privileges or rules that contribute to the safety of their members such as non-hazing and non-drinking policies. Additionally, while not particularly common, Ithaca College students may rush for Greek houses affiliated with nearby Ivy institution Cornell University, subject to the rules of each individual fraternity or sorority. Some Cornell-affiliated Greek organizations actively recruit Ithaca College students.\nThere are a few unaffiliated fraternities which some Ithaca College students may join, \u0394\u039a\u0395 (Delta Kappa Epsilon), \u0391\u0395\u03a0 (Alpha Epsilon Pi), \u03a6\u039a\u03a3 (Phi Kappa Sigma), \u03a6\u0399\u0391 (Phi Iota Alpha), \u039b\u03a5\u039b (Lambda Upsilon Lambda), and \u039a\u03a3 (Kappa Sigma). There are unaffiliated sororities including \u0393\u0394\u03a0 (Gamma Delta Pi), \u03a0\u039b\u03a7 (Pi Lambda Chi), \u03a6\u039c\u0396 (Phi Mu Zeta), .\nMusic.\nIthaca College is well-known for its music school, and offers many diverse opportunities to perform music, whether it be with ensembles within the official School of Music, Theatre, and Dance or student-organized organizations dedicated to performing music outside of the official School of Music.\nThe School of Music offers many audition-based ensembles including symphony orchestra, chamber orchestra, wind ensemble, concert band, multiple choir ensembles, multiple jazz ensembles ranging from instrumental to vocal, as well as several other chamber groups focusing on a multitude of instruments. The School of Music also offers multiple opportunities to perform opera works like the school's Opera Workshop, which offers a variety of focused training in such areas as audition technique, interpretation, and scene study through multiple performance opportunities. The school offers several non-auditioned ensembles, such as the symphony orchestra Sinfonietta. Additionally, several non-auditioned ensembles for band, jazz, and choir opened up to non-music majors. The School of Music, Theatre, and Dance showcases multiple audition-based productions a year, typically featuring multiple musical theater productions and an opera.\nOutside of the School of Music, Theatre, and Dance, there are several student-run a cappella groups on campus including:\nAthletics.\nIthaca competes in athletics at the NCAA Division III level as a members of the Liberty League and the Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC). Ithaca has one of Division III's strongest athletic programs, with the Bombers winning a total of 14 national titles in seven team sports and five individual sports. Ithaca was a member of the Empire 8 prior to being in Division III.\nIntramurals.\nAlong with Intercollegiate athletics, Ithaca College has a large intramural sport program. The extracurricular program serves approximately 25% of the undergraduate population yearly. Among the 14 traditional team activities offered throughout the year are basketball, flag football, kickball, soccer, softball, ultimate (ultimate frisbee), ski racing, and volleyball.\nFor most activities there are divisions with men's, women's, and co-recreational teams. Throughout the year usually two or more activities run concurrently and participants are able to play on a single sex team and co-recreational team for each activity.\nSustainability.\nIthaca's School of Business was the first college or university business school in the world to achieve LEED Platinum Certification alongside Yale University, which had the second. Ithaca's Peggy Ryan Williams Center is also LEED Platinum certified. It makes extensive use of day light in occupied spaces. There are sensors that regulate lighting and ventilation based on occupancy and natural light. Over 50% of the building energy comes from renewable sources such as wind power. The college also has a LEED Gold Certified building, the Athletics &amp; Events Center. The college composts its dining hall waste, runs a \"Take It or Leave It\" Green move-out program, and offers a sustainable living option. It operates an office supply collection and reuse program, as well as a sustainability education program during new student orientation. Ithaca College received a B\u2212 grade on the Sustainable Endowments Institute's 2009 College Sustainability Report Card and an A\u2212 for 2010.\nIn 2017, Ithaca College was listed as one of Princeton Review's top \"green colleges\" for being environmentally responsible.\nCommitments to action on climate change.\nIn the spring of 2007, President Peggy R. Williams signed the American College &amp; University President's Climate Commitment (ACUPCC), pledging Ithaca College to the task of developing a strategy and long-range plan to achieve \"carbon neutrality\" at some point in the future. In 2009 the Ithaca College Board of Trustees approved the Ithaca College Climate Action Plan, which calls for 100% carbon neutrality by 2050. In 2009, the Ithaca College Board of Trustees approved the Ithaca College Climate Action Plan, which calls for 100% carbon neutrality by 2050 and offers a 40-year action plan to work toward that ambitious goal.\nEnergy profile.\nThe college purchases 100 percent of its electricity from renewable sources. Including offsets from a solar farm, the college's overall energy usage is 45 percent carbon neutral.\nEnergy investments.\nThe college aims to optimize investment returns and does not invest the endowment in on-campus sustainability projects, renewable energy funds, or community development loan funds. The college's investment policy reserves the right of the investment committee to restrict investments for any reason, which could include environmental and sustainability factors.\nCommunity impact.\nWhile the Ithaca College Natural Lands released a statement saying that Ithaca College should join efforts calling for a moratorium on horizontal drilling and high volume (\"slick water\") hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, the college as a whole has refused to issue a statement regarding the issue.\nNotable alumni.\nIthaca College has over 70,000 alumni, with clubs in Boston, Chicago, Connecticut, Los Angeles, Metro New York, Washington D.C., North and South Carolina, Philadelphia; Rochester, New York; San Diego, and Southern Florida. Alumni events are hosted in cooperation with city-specific clubs and through a program called \"IC on the Road\".\nNotable faculty.\nNotable current and former Ithaca College faculty include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15447", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15447", "title": "Differential psychology", "text": "Branch of psychology\nDifferential psychology studies the ways in which individuals differ in their behavior and the processes that underlie it. It is a discipline that develops classifications (taxonomies) of psychological individual differences. This is distinguished from other aspects of psychology in that, although psychology is ostensibly a study of individuals, modern psychologists often study groups, or attempt to discover general psychological processes that apply to all individuals. This particular area of psychology was first named and still retains the name of \"differential psychology\" by William Stern in his 1900 book \"\u00dcber Psychologie der individuellen Differenzen\" (On the Psychology of Individual Differences).\nWhile prominent psychologists, including Stern, have been widely credited for the concept of differential psychology, historical records show that it was Charles Darwin (1859) who first spurred the scientific interest in the study of individual differences. The interest was further pursued by half-cousin Francis Galton in his attempt to quantify individual differences among people.\nFor example, in evaluating the effectiveness of a new therapy, the mean performance of the therapy in one treatment group might be compared to the mean effectiveness of a placebo (or a well-known therapy) in a second, control group. In this context, differences between individuals in their reaction to the experimental and control manipulations are actually treated as errors rather than as interesting phenomena to study. This approach is applied because psychological research depends upon statistical controls that are only defined upon groups of people.\nImportance of individual differences.\nImportantly, individuals can also differ not only in their current state, but in the magnitude or even direction of response to a given stimulus. Such phenomena, often explained in terms of inverted-U response curves, place differential psychology at an important location in such endeavours as personalized medicine, in which diagnoses are customised for an individual's response profile.\nAreas of study.\nIndividual differences research typically includes personality, temperament (neuro-chemically based behavioural traits), motivation, intelligence, ability, IQ, interests, values, self-concept, self-efficacy, and self-esteem. Although the United States has seen a decrease in individual differences research since the 1960s, researchers are found in a variety of applied and experimental fields. These fields include clinical psychology, psychophysiology, educational psychology, Industrial and organizational psychology, personality psychology, social psychology, behavioral genetics, and developmental psychology programs, in the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development in particular.\nMethods of research.\nTo study individual differences, psychologists use a variety of methods. The method is to compare and analyze the psychology and behaviour of individuals or groups under different environmental conditions. By correlating observed psychological and behavioral differences with known accompanying environments, the relative roles of different variables in psychological and behavioral development can be probed. Psychophysiological experiments on both humans and other mammals include EEG and ERPs, PET-scans, MRI, functional MRI, neurochemistry experiments with neurotransmitter and hormonal systems, caffeine and controlled drug challenges. These methods can be used for a search of biomarkers of consistent, biologically based behavioural patterns (temperament traits and symptoms of psychiatric disorders). Other sets of methods include behavioural experiments, to see how different people behave in similar settings. Behavioural experiments are often used in personality and social psychology, and include lexical and self-report methods where people are asked to complete paper-based and computer-based forms prepared by psychologists.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15450", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15450", "title": "Industrial and organizational psychology", "text": "Branch of psychology\nIndustrial and organizational psychology (I-O psychology) \"focuses the lens of psychological science on a key aspect of human life, namely, their work lives. In general, the goals of I-O psychology are to better understand and optimize the effectiveness, health, and well-being of both individuals and organizations.\" It is an applied discipline within psychology and is an international profession. I-O psychology is also known as occupational psychology in the United Kingdom, organisational psychology in Australia, South Africa and New Zealand, and work and organizational (WO) psychology throughout Europe and Brazil. Industrial, work, and organizational (IWO) psychology is the broader, more global term for the science and profession.\nI-O psychologists are trained in the scientist\u2013practitioner model. As an applied psychology field, the discipline involves both research and practice and I-O psychologists apply psychological theories and principles to organizations and the individuals within them. They contribute to an organization's success by improving the job performance, wellbeing, motivation, job satisfaction and the health and safety of employees.\nAn I-O psychologist conducts research on employee attitudes, behaviors, emotions, motivation, and stress. The field is concerned with how these things can be improved through recruitment processes, training and development programs, 360-degree feedback, change management, and other management systems and other interventions. I-O psychology research and practice also includes the work\u2013nonwork interface such as selecting and transitioning into a new career, occupational burnout, unemployment, retirement, and work\u2013family conflict and balance.\nI-O psychology is one of the 17 recognized professional specialties by the American Psychological Association (APA). In the United States the profession is represented by Division 14 of the APA and is formally known as the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology (SIOP). Similar I-O psychology societies can be found in many countries. In 2009 the Alliance for Organizational Psychology was formed and is a federation of Work, Industrial, &amp; Organizational Psychology societies and \"network partners\" from around the world.\nInternational.\nI-O psychology is an international science and profession and depending on the region of the world, it is referred to by different titles. In North America, Canada and South Africa the title \"I-O\" psychology is used; in the United Kingdom, the field is known as occupational psychology. Occupational psychology in the UK is one of nine \"protected titles\" within the \"practitioner psychologist\" professions. The profession is regulated by the Health and Care Professions Council. In the UK, graduate programs in psychology, including occupational psychology, are accredited by the British Psychological Society.\nIn Europe, someone with a specialist EuroPsy Certificate in Work and Organisational Psychology is a fully qualified psychologist and a specialist in the work psychology field. Industrial and organizational psychologists reaching the EuroPsy standard are recorded in the Register of European Psychologists. I-O psychology is one of the three main psychology specializations in Europe.\nIn Australia, the title \"organisational psychologist\" is protected by law and regulated by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA). Organizational psychology is one of nine areas of specialist endorsement for psychology practice in Australia.\nIn South Africa, industrial psychology is a registration category for the profession of psychologist as regulated by the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA).\nIn 2009 The Alliance for Organizational psychology was formed and is a federation of Work, Industrial, &amp; Organizational Psychology societies and \"network partners\" from around the world. In 2021 The British Psychological Society (BPS) Division of Occupational Psychology (DOP) and the Australian Psychological Society's (APS) College of Organizational Psychology joined the Alliance. The Alliance currently has member organizations representing Industrial, Work and Organisational psychology and IWO psychologists from Australia, Britain, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Europe, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Singapore, South Africa and the United States.\nHistorical overview.\nThe historical development of I-O psychology was paralleled in the US, the UK, Australia, Germany, the Netherlands, and Eastern European countries such as Romania. The roots of I-O psychology trace back to almost the beginning of psychology as a science, when Wilhelm Wundt founded one of the first psychological laboratories in 1879 in Leipzig, Germany. In the mid\u20131880s, Wundt trained two psychologists, Hugo M\u00fcnsterberg and James McKeen Cattell, who went on to have a major influence on the emergence of I-O psychology. World War I was an impetus for the development of the field simultaneously in the UK and US. Hugo Munsterberg, one of the founders of I-O psychology, wrote, \"Our aim is to sketch the outlines of a new science which is intermediate between the modern laboratory psychology and the problems of economics: the psychological experiment is systematically to be placed at the service of commerce and industry\" (p.\u00a03).\nInstead of viewing performance differences as human \"errors,\" Cattell was one of the first to recognize the importance of differences among individuals as a way of better understanding work behavior. Walter Dill Scott, who was a contemporary of Cattell and was elected President of the American Psychological Association (APA) in 1919, was arguably the most prominent I-O psychologist of his time. Scott, along with Walter Van Dyke Bingham, worked at what was then Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University), developing methods for selecting and training sales personnel.\nThe \"industrial\" side of I-O psychology originated in research on individual differences, assessment, and the prediction of work performance. Industrial psychology crystallized during World War I, in response to the need to rapidly assign new troops to duty. Scott and Bingham volunteered to help with the testing and placement of more than a million U.S. Army recruits. In 1917, together with other prominent psychologists, they adapted the well-known intelligence test the Stanford\u2013Binet, which was designed for testing one individual at a time, to make it suitable for group testing. The new test was called the Army Alpha. After the War, increasing employment in the U.S. created opportunities for I-O psychology practitioners who called themselves \"industrial psychologists\"\nThe \"organizational\" side of the field was focused on employee behavior, feelings, and well-being. During World War I, with the U.K. government's interest in worker productivity in munitions factories, Charles Myers studied worker fatigue and well-being. Following the war, Elton Mayo found that rest periods improved morale and reduced turnover in a Philadelphia textile factory. He later joined the ongoing Hawthorne studies, where he became interested in how workers' emotions and informal relationships affected productivity. The results of these studies ushered in the human relations movement.\nWorld War II brought renewed interest in ability testing. The U.S. military needed to accurately place recruits in new technologically advanced jobs. There was also concern with morale and fatigue in war-industry workers. In the 1960s Arthur Kornhauser examined the impact on productivity of hiring mentally unstable workers. Kornhauser also examined the link between industrial working conditions and worker mental health as well as the spillover into a worker's personal life of having an unsatisfying job. Zickar noted that most of Kornhauser's I-O contemporaries favored management and Kornhauser was largely alone in his interest in protecting workers. Vinchur and Koppes (2010) observed that I-O psychologists' interest in job stress is a relatively recent development (p.\u00a022).\nThe industrial psychology division of the former American Association of Applied Psychology became a division within APA, becoming Division 14 of APA. It was initially called the Industrial and Business Psychology Division. In 1962, the name was changed to the Industrial Psychology Division. In 1973, it was renamed again, this time to the Division of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. In 1982, the unit become more independent of APA, and its name was changed again, this time to the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology.\nThe name change of the division from \"industrial psychology\" to \"industrial and organizational psychology\" reflected the shift in the work of industrial psychologists who had originally addressed work behavior from the individual perspective, examining performance and attitudes of individual workers. Their work became broader. Group behavior in the workplace became a worthy subject of study. The emphasis on the \"organizational\" underlined the fact that when an individual joins an organization (e.g., the organization that hired them), they will be exposed to a common goal and a common set of operating procedures. In the 1970s in the UK, references to occupational psychology became more common than references to I-O psychology.\nAccording to Bryan and Vinchur, \"while organizational psychology increased in popularity through [the 1960s and 1970s], research and practice in the traditional areas of industrial psychology continued, primarily driven by employment legislation and case law\".p.\u00a053 There was a focus on fairness and validity in selection efforts as well as in the job analyses that undergirded selection instruments. For example, I-O psychology showed increased interest in behaviorally anchored rating scales. What critics there were of I-O psychology accused the discipline of being responsive only to the concerns of management.\nFrom the 1980s to 2010s, other developments in I-O psychology took place. Researchers increasingly adopted a multi-level approach, attempting to understand behavioral phenomena from both the level of the organization and the level of the individual worker. There was also an increased interest in the needs and expectations of employees as individuals. For example, an emphasis on organizational justice and the psychological contract took root, as well as the more traditional concerns of selection and training. Methodological innovations (e.g., meta-analyses, structural equation modeling) were adopted. With the passage of the American with Disabilities Act in 1990 and parallel legislation elsewhere in the world, I-O psychology saw an increased emphasis on \"fairness in personnel decisions.\" Training research relied increasingly on advances in educational psychology and cognitive science.\nResearch methods.\nI-O researchers employ both qualitative and quantitative methods, although quantitative methods are far more common. Basic Quantitative methods used in I-O psychology include correlation, multiple regression, and analysis of variance. More advanced statistical methods include logistic regression, structural equation modeling, and hierarchical linear modeling (HLM; also known as multilevel modeling). I-O researchers have also employed meta-analysis. I-O psychologists also employ psychometric methods including methods associated with classical test theory, generalizability theory, and item response theory (IRT).\nI-O psychologists have also employed qualitative methods, which largely involve focus groups, interviews, and case studies. I-O psychologists conducting research on organizational culture have employed ethnographic techniques and participant observation. A qualitative technique associated with I-O psychology is Flanagan's critical incident technique. I-O psychologists have also coordinated the use of quantitative and qualitative methods in the same study,\nTopics.\nI-O psychologists deal with a wide range of topics concerning people in the workplace.\nJob analysis.\nJob analysis encompasses a number of different methods including, but not limited to, interviews, questionnaires, task analysis, and observation. A job analysis primarily involves the systematic collection of information about a job. A task-oriented job analysis involves an assessment of the duties, tasks, and/or competencies a job requires. By contrast, a worker-oriented job analysis involves an examination of the knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics (KSAOs) required to successfully perform the work. Information obtained from job analyses are used for many purposes, including the creation of job-relevant selection procedures, the development of criteria for performance appraisals, the conducting of performance appraisals, and the development and implementation of training programs.\nPersonnel recruitment and selection.\nI-O psychologists design (a) recruitment processes and (b) personnel selection systems. Personnel recruitment is the process of identifying qualified candidates in the workforce and getting them to apply for jobs within an organization. Personnel recruitment processes include developing job announcements, placing ads, defining key qualifications for applicants, and screening out unqualified applicants.\nPersonnel selection is the systematic process of hiring and promoting personnel. Personnel selection systems employing I-O psychology methods use quantitative data to determine the most qualified candidates. This can involve the use of psychological tests, Biographical Information Blanks, interviews, work samples, and assessment centers.\nPersonnel selection procedures are usually validated, i.e., shown to be job relevant to personnel selection, using one or more of the following types of validity: content validity, construct validity, and/or criterion-related validity. I-O psychologists must adhere to professional standards in personnel selection efforts. SIOP (e.g., \"Principles for validation and use of personnel selection procedures\") and APA together with the National Council on Measurement in Education (e.g., \"Standards for educational and psychological testing\" are sources of those standards. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's \"Uniform guidelines\" are also influential in guiding personnel selection decisions.\nA meta-analysis of selection methods found that general mental ability (g factor) was the best overall predictor of job performance and attainment in training.\nPerformance appraisal/management.\nPerformance appraisal or performance evaluation is the process in which an individual's or a group's work behaviors and outcomes are assessed against managers' and others' expectations for the job. Performance appraisal is used for a variety of purposes including alignment with organizational objectives, the basis for employment decisions (promotion, raises and termination), feedback to employees, and training needs assessment. Performance management is the process of providing performance feedback relative to expectations and information relevant to helping a worker improve their performance (e.g., coaching, mentoring). Performance management may also include documenting and tracking performance information for organizational evaluation purposes.\nIndividual assessment and psychometrics.\nIndividual assessment involves the measurement of individual differences. I-O psychologists perform individual assessments in order to evaluate differences among candidates for employment as well as differences among employees. The constructs measured pertain to job performance. With candidates for employment, individual assessment is often part of the personnel selection process. These assessments can include written tests, aptitude tests, physical tests, psycho-motor tests, personality tests, integrity and reliability tests, work samples, simulations, and assessment centres.\nOccupational health, safety and well-being.\nA more recent focus of I-O field is the health, safety, and well-being of employees. Topics include occupational safety, occupational stress, and workplace bullying, aggression and violence.\nOccupational stress.\nThere are many features of work that can be stressful to employees. Research has identified a number of job stressors (environmental conditions at work) that contribute to strains (adverse behavioral, emotional, physical, and psychological reactions). Occupational stress can have implications for organizational performance because of the emotions job stress evokes. For example, a job stressor such as conflict with a supervisor can precipitate anger that in turn motivates counterproductive workplace behaviors. A number of prominent models of job stress have been developed to explain the job stress process, including the person-environment (P-E) fit model, which was developed by University of Michigan social psychologists, and the demand-control(-support) and effort-reward imbalance models, which were developed by sociologists.\nResearch has also examined occupational stress in specific occupations, including police, general practitioners, and dentists. Another concern has been the relation of occupational stress to family life. Other I-O researchers have examined gender differences in leadership style and job stress and strain in the context of male- and female-dominated industries, and unemployment-related distress. Occupational stress has also been linked to lack of fit between people and their jobs.\nOccupational safety.\nAccidents and safety in the workplace are important because of the serious injuries and fatalities that are all too common. Research has linked accidents to psychosocial factors in the workplace including overwork that leads to fatigue, workplace violence, and working night shifts. \"Stress audits\" can help organizations remain compliant with various occupational safety regulations. Psychosocial hazards can affect musculoskeletal disorders. A psychosocial factor related to accident risk is safety climate, which refers to employees' perceptions of the extent to which their work organization prioritizes safety. By contrast, psychosocial safety climate refers to management's \"policies, practices, and procedures\" aimed at protecting workers' psychological health. Research on safety leadership is also relevant to understanding employee safety performance. Research suggests that safety-oriented transformational leadership is associated with a positive safety climate and safe worker practices.\nWorkplace bullying, aggression and violence.\nI-O psychologists are concerned with the related topics of workplace bullying, aggression, and violence. For example, I-O research found that exposure to workplace violence elicited ruminative thinking. Ruminative thinking is associated with poor well-being. Research has found that interpersonal aggressive behaviour is associated with worse team performance.\nRelation to occupational health psychology.\nA new discipline, occupational health psychology (OHP), emerged from both health psychology \"and\" I-O psychology as well as occupational medicine. OHP concerns itself with such topic areas as the impact of occupational stressors on mental and physical health, the health impact of involuntary unemployment, violence and bullying in the workplace, psychosocial factors that influence accident risk and safety, work\u2013family balance, and interventions designed to improve/protect worker health. Spector observed that one of the problems facing I-O psychologists in the late 20th century who were interested in the health of working people was resistance within the field to publishing papers on worker health. In the 21st century, OHP topics have become popular at the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology conference.\nWork design.\nWork design concerns the \"content and organisation of one's work tasks, activities, relationships, and responsibilities.\" Research has demonstrated that work design has important implications for individual employees (e.g., level of engagement, job strain, chance of injury), teams (e.g., how effectively teams co-ordinate their activities), organisations (e.g., productivity, safety, efficiency targets), and society (e.g., whether a nation utilises the skills of its population or promotes effective aging).\nI-O psychologists review job tasks, relationships, and an individual's way of thinking about their work to ensure that their roles are meaningful and motivating, thus creating greater productivity and job satisfaction. Deliberate interventions aimed at altering work design are sometimes referred to as \"work redesign.\" Such interventions can be initiated by the management of an organization (e.g., job rotation, job enlargement, job enrichment) or by individual workers (e.g., job crafting, role innovation, idiosyncratic ideals).\nTraining and training evaluation.\nTraining involves the systematic teaching of skills, concepts, or attitudes that results in improved performance in another environment. Because many people hired for a job are not already versed in all the tasks the job requires, training may be needed to help the individual perform the job effectively. Evidence indicates that training is often effective, and that it succeeds in terms of higher net sales and gross profitability per employee.\nSimilar to performance management (see above), an I-O psychologist would employ a job analysis in concert with the application of the principles of instructional design to create an effective training program. A training program is likely to include a summative evaluation at its conclusion in order to ensure that trainees have met the training objectives and can perform the target work tasks at an acceptable level. Kirkpatrick describes four levels of criteria by which to evaluate training:\n*Reactions are the extent to which trainees enjoyed the training and found it worthwhile.\n*Learning is the knowledge and skill trainees acquired from the training.\n*Behavior is the change in behavior trainees exhibit on the job after training, for example, did they perform trained tasks more quickly?\n*Results are the effect of the change in knowledge or behavior on the job, for example, was overall productivity increased or costs decreased?\nTraining programs often include formative evaluations to assess the effect of the training as the training proceeds. Formative evaluations can be used to locate problems in training procedures and help I-O psychologists make corrective adjustments while training is ongoing.\nThe foundation for training programs is learning. Learning outcomes can be organized into three broad categories: cognitive, skill-based, and affective outcomes. Cognitive training is aimed at instilling declarative knowledge or the knowledge of rules, facts, and principles (e.g., police officer training covers laws and court procedures). Skill-based training aims to impart procedural knowledge (e.g., skills needed to use a special tool) or technical skills (e.g., understanding the workings of software program). Affective training concerns teaching individuals to develop specific attitudes or beliefs that predispose trainees to behave a certain way (e.g., show commitment to the organization, appreciate diversity).\nA needs assessment, an analysis of corporate and individual goals, is often undertaken prior to the development of a training program.164 In addition, a careful training needs analysis is required in order to develop a systematic understanding of where training is needed, what should be taught, and who will be trained. A training needs analysis typically involves a three-step process that includes organizational analysis, task analysis, and person analysis.\nAn organizational analysis is an examination of organizational goals and resources as well as the organizational environment. The results of an organizational analysis help to determine where training should be directed. The analysis identifies the training needs of different departments or subunits. It systematically assesses manager, peer, and technological support for transfer of training. An organizational analysis also takes into account the climate of the organization and its subunits. For example, if a climate for safety is emphasized throughout the organization or in subunits of the organization (e.g., production), then training needs will likely reflect an emphasis on safety. A task analysis uses the results of a job analysis to determine what is needed for successful job performance, contributing to training content. With organizations increasingly trying to identify \"core competencies\" that are required for all jobs, task analysis can also include an assessment of competencies. A person analysis identifies which individuals within an organization should receive training and what kind of instruction they need. Employee needs can be assessed using a variety of methods that identify weaknesses that training can address.\nMotivation in the workplace.\nWork motivation reflects the energy an individual applies \"to initiate work-related behavior, and to determine its form, direction, intensity, and duration\" Understanding what motivates an organization's employees is central to I-O psychology. Motivation is generally thought of as a theoretical construct that fuels behavior. An incentive is an anticipated reward that is thought to incline a person to behave a certain way. Motivation varies among individuals. Studying its influence on behavior, it must be examined together with ability and environmental influences. Because of motivation's role in influencing workplace behavior and performance, many organizations structure the work environment to encourage productive behaviors and discourage unproductive behaviors.\nMotivation involves three psychological processes: arousal, direction, and intensity. Arousal is what initiates action. It is often fueled by a person's need or desire for something that is missing from their life, either totally or partially. Direction refers to the path employees take in accomplishing the goals they set for themselves. Intensity is the amount of energy employees put into goal-directed work performance. The level of intensity often reflects the importance and difficulty of the goal. These psychological processes involve four factors. First, motivation serves to direct attention, focusing on particular issues, people, tasks, etc. Second, it serves to stimulate effort. Third, motivation influences persistence. Finally, motivation influences the choice and application of task-related strategies.\nOrganizational climate.\nOrganizational climate is the perceptions of employees about what is important in an organization, that is, what behaviors are encouraged versus discouraged. It can be assessed in individual employees (climate perceptions) or averaged across groups of employees within a department or organization (organizational climate). Climates are usually focused on specific employee outcomes, or what is called \u201cclimate for something\u201d. There are more than a dozen types of climates that have been assessed and studied. Some of the more popular include:\nClimate concerns organizational policies and practices that encourage or discourage specific behaviors by employees. Shared perceptions of what the organization emphasizes (organizational climate) is part of organizational culture.\nOrganizational culture.\nWhile there is no universal definition for organizational culture, a collective understanding shares the following assumptions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0that they are related to history and tradition, have some depth, are difficult to grasp and account for, and must be interpreted; that they are collective and shared by members of groups and primarily ideational in character, having to do with values, understandings, beliefs, knowledge, and other intangibles; and that they are holistic and subjective rather than strictly rational and analytical.\nOrganizational culture has been shown to affect important organizational outcomes such as performance, attraction, recruitment, retention, employee satisfaction, and employee well-being. There are three levels of organizational culture: artifacts, shared values, and basic beliefs and assumptions. Artifacts comprise the physical components of the organization that relay cultural meaning. Shared values are individuals' preferences regarding certain aspects of the organization's culture (e.g., loyalty, customer service). Basic beliefs and assumptions include individuals' impressions about the trustworthiness and supportiveness of an organization, and are often deeply ingrained within the organization's culture.\nIn addition to an overall culture, organizations also have subcultures. Subcultures can be departmental (e.g. different work units) or defined by geographical distinction. While there is no single \"type\" of organizational culture, some researchers have developed models to describe different organizational cultures.\nGroup behavior.\nGroup behavior involves the interactions among individuals in a collective. Most I-O group research is about teams, which are groups in which people work together to achieve the same task goals. The individuals' opinions, attitudes, and adaptations affect group behavior, with group behavior in turn affecting those opinions, etc. The interactions are thought to fulfill some need satisfaction in an individual who is part of the collective.\nTeam effectiveness.\nOrganizations often organize teams because teams can accomplish a much greater amount of work in a short period of time than an individual can accomplish. I-O research has examined the harm workplace aggression does to team performance.\nTeam composition.\nTeam composition, or the configuration of team member knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics, fundamentally influences teamwork. Team composition can be considered in the selection and management of teams to increase the likelihood of team success. To achieve high-quality results, teams built with members having higher skill levels are more likely to be effective than teams built around members having lesser skills; teams that include members with a diversity of skills are also likely to show improved team performance. Team members should also be compatible in terms of personality traits, values, and work styles. There is substantial evidence that personality traits and values can shape the nature of teamwork, and influence team performance.\nTeam task design.\nA fundamental question in team task design is whether or not a task is even appropriate for a team. Those tasks that require predominantly independent work are best left to individuals, and team tasks should include those tasks that consist primarily of interdependent work. When a given task is appropriate for a team, task design can play a key role in team effectiveness.\nJob characteristic theory identifies core job dimensions that affect motivation, satisfaction, performance, etc. These dimensions include skill variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy and feedback. The dimensions map well to the team environment. Individual contributors who perform team tasks that are challenging, interesting, and engaging are more likely to be motivated to exert greater effort and perform better than team members who are working on tasks that lack those characteristics.\nOrganizational resources.\nOrganizational support systems affect the team effectiveness and provide resources for teams operating in the multi-team environment. During the chartering of new teams, organizational enabling resources are first identified. Examples of enabling resources include facilities, equipment, information, training, and leadership. Team-specific resources (e.g., budgetary resources, human resources) are typically made available. Team-specific human resources represent the individual contributors who are selected to be team members. Intra-team processes (e.g., task design, task assignment) involve these team-specific resources. Teams also function in dynamic multi-team environments. Teams often must respond to shifting organizational contingencies.\nTeam rewards.\nOrganizational reward systems drive the strengthening and enhancing of individual team member efforts; such efforts contribute towards reaching team goals. In other words, rewards that are given to individual team members should be contingent upon the performance of the entire team.\nSeveral design elements are needed to enable organizational reward systems to operate successfully. First, for a collective assessment to be appropriate for individual team members, the group's tasks must be highly interdependent. If this is not the case, individual assessment is more appropriate than team assessment. Second, individual-level reward systems and team-level reward systems must be compatible. For example, it would be unfair to reward the entire team for a job well done if only one team member did most of the work. That team member would most likely view teams and teamwork negatively, and would not want to work on a team in the future. Third, an organizational culture must be created such that it supports and rewards employees who believe in the value of teamwork and who maintain a positive attitude towards team-based rewards.\nTeam goals.\nGoals potentially motivate team members when goals contain three elements: difficulty, acceptance, and specificity. Under difficult goal conditions, teams with more committed members tend to outperform teams with less committed members. When team members commit to team goals, team effectiveness is a function of how supportive members are with each other. The goals of individual team members and team goals interact. Team and individual goals must be coordinated. Individual goals must be consistent with team goals in order for a team to be effective.\nJob satisfaction and commitment.\nJob satisfaction is often thought to reflect the extent to which a worker likes their job, or individual aspects or facets of jobs. It is one of the most heavily researched topics in I-O psychology. Job satisfaction has theoretical and practical utility for the field. It has been linked to important job outcomes including absenteeism, accidents, counterproductive work behavior, customer service, cyberloafing, job performance, organizational citizenship behavior, physical and psychological health, and turnover. A meta-analyses found job satisfaction to be related to life satisfaction, happiness, positive affect, and the absence of negative affect.\nProductive behavior.\nProductive behavior is defined as employee behavior that contributes positively to the goals and objectives of an organization. When an employee begins a new job, there is a transition period during which they may not contribute significantly. To assist with this transition an employee typically requires job-related training. In financial terms, productive behavior represents the point at which an organization begins to achieve some return on the investment it has made in a new employee. I-O psychologists are ordinarily more focused on productive behavior than job or task performance, including in-role \"and\" extra-role performance. In-role performance tells managers how well an employee performs the required aspects of the job; extra-role performance includes behaviors that are not necessarily required by job but nonetheless contribute to organizational effectiveness. By taking both in-role and extra-role performance into account, an I-O psychologist is able to assess employees' effectiveness (how well they do what they were hired to do), efficiency (outputs to relative inputs), and productivity (how much they help the organization reach its goals). Three forms of productive behavior that I-O psychologists often evaluate include job performance, organizational citizenship behavior (see below), and innovation.\nJob performance.\nJob performance represents behaviors employees engage in while at work which contribute to organizational goals. These behaviors are formally evaluated by an organization as part of an employee's responsibilities. In order to understand and ultimately predict job performance, it is important to be precise when defining the term. Job performance is about behaviors that are within the control of the employee and not about results (effectiveness), the costs involved in achieving results (productivity), the results that can be achieved in a period of time (efficiency), or the value an organization places on a given level of performance, effectiveness, productivity or efficiency (utility).\nTo model job performance, researchers have attempted to define a set of dimensions that are common to all jobs. Using a common set of dimensions provides a consistent basis for assessing performance and enables the comparison of performance across jobs. Performance is commonly broken into two major categories: in-role (technical aspects of a job) and extra-role (non-technical abilities such as communication skills and being a good team member). While this distinction in behavior has been challenged it is commonly made by both employees and management. A model of performance by Campbell breaks performance into in-role and extra-role categories. Campbell labeled job-specific task proficiency and non-job-specific task proficiency as in-role dimensions, while written and oral communication, demonstrating effort, maintaining personal discipline, facilitating peer and team performance, supervision and leadership and management and administration are labeled as extra-role dimensions. Murphy's model of job performance also broke job performance into in-role and extra-role categories. However, task-orientated behaviors composed the in-role category and the extra-role category included interpersonally-oriented behaviors, down-time behaviors and destructive and hazardous behaviors. However, it has been challenged as to whether the measurement of job performance is usually done through pencil/paper tests, job skills tests, on-site hands-on tests, off-site hands-on tests, high-fidelity simulations, symbolic simulations, task ratings and global ratings. These various tools are often used to evaluate performance on specific tasks and overall job performance. Van Dyne and LePine developed a measurement model in which overall job performance was evaluated using Campbell's in-role and extra-role categories. Here, in-role performance was reflected through how well \"employees met their performance expectations and performed well at the tasks that made up the employees' job.\" Dimensions regarding how well the employee assists others with their work for the benefit of the group, if the employee voices new ideas for projects or changes to procedure and whether the employee attends functions that help the group composed the extra-role category.\nTo assess job performance, reliable and valid measures must be established. While there are many sources of error with performance ratings, error can be reduced through rater training and through the use of behaviorally-anchored rating scales. Such scales can be used to clearly define the behaviors that constitute poor, average, and superior performance. Additional factors that complicate the measurement of job performance include the instability of job performance over time due to forces such as changing performance criteria, the structure of the job itself and the restriction of variation in individual performance by organizational forces. These factors include errors in job measurement techniques, acceptance and the justification of poor performance, and lack of importance of individual performance.\nThe determinants of job performance consist of factors having to do with the individual worker as well as environmental factors in the workplace. According to Campbell's Model of The Determinants of Job Performance, job performance is a result of the interaction between declarative knowledge (knowledge of facts or things), procedural knowledge (knowledge of what needs to be done and how to do it), and motivation (reflective of an employee's choices regarding whether to expend effort, the level of effort to expend, and whether to persist with the level of effort chosen). The interplay between these factors show that an employee may, for example, have a low level of declarative knowledge, but may still have a high level of performance if the employee has high levels of procedural knowledge and motivation.\nRegardless of the job, three determinants stand out as predictors of performance: (1) general mental ability (especially for jobs higher in complexity); (2) job experience (although there is a law of diminishing returns); and (3) the personality trait of conscientiousness (people who are dependable and achievement-oriented, who plan well). These determinants appear to influence performance largely through the acquisition and usage of job knowledge and the motivation to do well. Further, an expanding area of research in job performance determinants includes emotional intelligence.\nOrganizational citizenship behavior.\nOrganizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs) are another form of workplace behavior that I-O psychologists are involved with. OCBs tend to be beneficial to both the organization and other workers. Dennis Organ (1988) defines OCBs as \"individual behavior that is discretionary, not directly or explicitly recognized by the formal reward system, and that in the aggregate promotes the effective functioning of the organization.\" Behaviors that qualify as OCBs can fall into one of the following five categories: altruism, courtesy, sportsmanship, conscientiousness, and civic virtue. OCBs have also been categorized in other ways too, for example, by their intended targets individuals, supervisors, and the organization as a whole. Other alternative ways of categorizing OCBs include \"compulsory OCBs\", which are engaged in owing to coercive persuasion or peer pressure rather than out of good will. The extent to which OCBs are voluntary has been the subject of some debate.\nOther research suggests that some employees perform OCBs to influence how they are viewed within the organization. While these behaviors are not formally part of the job description, performing them can influence performance appraisals. Researchers have advanced the view that employees engage in OCBs as a form of \"impression management,\" a term coined by Erving Goffman. Goffman defined impression management as \"the way in which the individual\u00a0... presents himself and his activity to others, the ways in which he guides and controls the impression they form of him, and the kinds of things he may and may not do while sustaining his performance before them. Some researchers have hypothesized that OCBs are not performed out of good will, positive affect, etc., but instead as a way of being noticed by others, including supervisors.\nInnovation.\nFour qualities are generally linked to creative and innovative behaviour by individuals: \nAt the organizational level, a study by Damanpour identified four specific characteristics that may predict innovation:\nCounterproductive work behavior.\nCounterproductive work behavior (CWB) can be defined as employee behavior that goes against the goals of an organization. These behaviors can be intentional or unintentional and result from a wide range of underlying causes and motivations. Some CWBs have instrumental motivations (e.g., theft). It has been proposed that a person-by-environment interaction can be utilized to explain a variety of counterproductive behaviors. For instance, an employee who sabotages another employee's work may do so because of lax supervision (environment) and underlying psychopathology (person) that work in concert to result in the counterproductive behavior. There is evidence that an emotional response (e.g., anger) to job stress (e.g., unfair treatment) can motivate CWBs.\nThe forms of counterproductive behavior with the most empirical examination are ineffective job performance, absenteeism, job turnover, and accidents. Less common but potentially more detrimental forms of counterproductive behavior have also been investigated including violence and sexual harassment.\nLeadership.\nLeadership can be defined as a process of influencing others to agree on a shared purpose, and to work towards shared objectives. A distinction should be made between leadership and management. Managers process administrative tasks and organize work environments. Although leaders may be required to undertake managerial duties as well, leaders typically focus on inspiring followers and creating a shared organizational culture and values. Managers deal with complexity, while leaders deal with initiating and adapting to change. Managers undertake the tasks of planning, budgeting, organizing, staffing, controlling, and problem solving. In contrast, leaders undertake the tasks of setting a direction or vision, aligning people to shared goals, communicating, and motivating.\nApproaches to studying leadership can be broadly classified into three categories: Leader-focused approaches, contingency-focused approaches, and follower-focused approaches.\nLeader-focused approaches.\nLeader-focused approaches look to organizational leaders to determine the characteristics of effective leadership. According to the trait approach, more effective leaders possess certain traits that less effective leaders lack. More recently, this approach is being used to predict leader emergence. The following traits have been identified as those that predict leader emergence when there is no formal leader: high intelligence, high needs for dominance, high self-motivation, and socially perceptive. Another leader-focused approached is the \"behavioral approach\", which focuses on the behaviors that distinguish effective from ineffective leaders. There are two categories of leadership behaviors: \"consideration and initiating structure\". Behaviors associated with the category of consideration include showing subordinates they are valued and that the leader cares about them. An example of a consideration behavior is showing compassion when problems arise in or out of the office. Behaviors associated with the category of initiating structure include facilitating the task performance of groups. One example of an initiating structure behavior is meeting one-on-one with subordinates to explain expectations and goals. The final leader-focused approach is \"power and influence\". To be most effective, a leader should be able to influence others to behave in ways that are in line with the organization's mission and goals. How influential a leader can be depends on their social power \u2013 their potential to influence their subordinates. There are six bases of power: French and Raven's classic five bases of coercive, reward, legitimate, expert, and referent power, plus informational power. A leader can use several different tactics to influence others within an organization. These include: rational persuasion, inspirational appeal, consultation, ingratiation, exchange, personal appeal, coalition, legitimating, and pressure.\nContingency-focused approaches.\nOf the 3 approaches to leadership, contingency-focused approaches have been the most prevalent over the past 30 years. Contingency-focused theories base a leader's effectiveness on their ability to assess a situation and adapt their behavior accordingly. These theories assume that an effective leader can accurately \"read\" a situation and skillfully employ a leadership style that meets the needs of the individuals involved and the task at hand. A brief introduction to the most prominent contingency-focused theories will follow.\nThe Fiedler contingency model holds that a leader's effectiveness depends on the interaction between their characteristics and the characteristics of the situation. Path\u2013goal theory asserts that the role of the leader is to help their subordinates achieve their goals. To effectively do this, leaders must skillfully select from four different leadership styles to meet the situational factors. The situational factors are a product of the characteristics of subordinates and the characteristics of the environment. The leader\u2013member exchange theory (LMX) focuses on how leader\u2013subordinate relationships develop. Generally speaking, when a subordinate performs well or when there are positive exchanges between a leader and a subordinate, their relationship is strengthened, performance and job satisfaction are enhanced, and the subordinate will feel more commitment to the leader and the organization as a whole. Vroom-Yetton-Jago model focuses on decision-making with respect to a \"feasibility set.\"\nOrganizational development.\nI-O psychologists may also become involved with organizational change, a process which some call organizational development (OD). Tools used to advance organization development include the survey-feedback technique. The technique involves the periodic assessment (via surveys) of employee attitudes and feelings. The results are conveyed to organizational stakeholders, who may want to take the organization in a particular direction. Another tool is the team-building technique. \"Team building is probably the No. 1 human resources intervention in the world. Yet the results of such programs are mixed.\" \nWork\u2013nonwork interface.\nAn important topic in I-O is the connection between people\u2019s working and nonworking lives. Two concepts are particularly relevant. Work\u2013family conflict is the incompatibility between the job and family life. Conflict can occur when stressful experiences in one domain spillover into the other, such as someone coming home in a bad mood after having a difficult day at work. It can also occur when there are time conflicts, such as having a work meeting at the same time as a child\u2019s doctor\u2019s appointment.\nWork\u2013family enrichment (also called work\u2013family facilitation) occurs when one domain provides benefits to the other. For example, a spouse might assist with a work task or a supervisor might offer assistance with a family problem.\nRelation to organizational behavior and human resource management.\nI-O psychology and organizational behavior researchers have sometimes investigated similar topics. The overlap has led to some confusion regarding how the two disciplines differ. Sometimes there has been confusion within organizations regarding the practical duties of I-O psychologists and human resource management specialists.\nAs an occupation.\nTraining.\nThe minimum requirement for working as an I-O psychologist is a master's degree. Normally, this degree requires about two to three years of postgraduate work to complete. Of all the degrees granted in I-O psychology each year, approximately two-thirds are at the master's level.18\nA comprehensive list of US and Canadian master's and doctoral programs can be found at the web site of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology (SIOP). Admission into I-O psychology PhD programs is highly competitive; many programs accept only a small number of applicants each year.\nThere are graduate degree programs in I-O psychology outside of the US and Canada. The SIOP web site lists some of them.\nIn Australia, organisational psychologists must be accredited by the Australian Psychological Society (APS). To become an organisational psychologist, one must meet the criteria for a general psychologist's licence: three years studying bachelor's degree in psychology, 4th-year honours degree or postgraduate diploma in psychology, and two-year full-time supervised practice plus 80 hours of professional development. There are other avenues available, such as a two-year supervised training program after honours (i.e. 4+2 pathway), or one year of postgraduate coursework and practical placements followed by a one-year supervised training program (i.e. 5+1 pathway). After this, psychologists can elect to specialise as Organisational Psychologists in Australia.\nCompetencies.\nThere are many different sets of competencies for different specializations within I-O psychology and I-O psychologists are versatile behavioral scientists. For example, an I-O psychologist specializing in selection and recruiting should have expertise in finding the best talent for the organization and getting everyone on board while they might not need to know much about executive coaching. Some I-O psychologists specialize in specific areas of consulting whereas others tend to generalize their areas of expertise. There are basic skills and knowledge an individual needs in order to be an effective I-O psychologist, which include being an independent learner, interpersonal skills (e.g., listening skills), and general consultation skills (e.g., skills and knowledge in the problem area).\nJob outlook.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" lists I-O Psychology as the third best science job, with a strong job market in the U.S. \nIn the 2020 SIOP salary survey, the median annual salary for a PhD in I-O psychology was $125,000; for a master's level I-O psychologist was $88,900. The highest paid PhD I-O psychologists were self-employed consultants who had a median annual income of $167,000. The highest paid in private industry worked in IT ($153,000), retail ($151,000) and healthcare ($147,000). The lowest earners were found in state and local government positions, averaging approximately $100,000, and in academic positions in colleges and universities that do not award doctoral degrees, with median salaries between $80,000 and $94,000.\nEthical principles.\nAn I-O psychologist, whether an academic, consultant or an employee of an organization, is expected to maintain high ethical standards. SIOP encourages its members to follow the APA Ethics Code. With more organizations becoming global, it is important that when an I-O psychologist works outside their home country, the psychologist is aware of rules, regulations, and cultures of the organizations and countries in which the psychologist works, while also adhering to the ethical standards set at home.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15451", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15451", "title": "International Council of Unitarians and Universalists", "text": "Unitarian and Universalist umbrella organization\nThe International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (ICUU) was an umbrella organization founded in 1995 comprising many Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist organizations. It was dissolved in 2021 along with the Unitarian Universalist Partner Church Council to make way for a new merged entity, the U/U Global Network, founded in 2024. Some groups represented only a few hundred people; while the largest, the Unitarian Universalist Association, had more than 160,000 members as of \u00a02011[ [update]]\u2014including over 150,000 in the United States.\nHistory.\nThe original initiative for its establishment was contained in a resolution of the General Assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches (British Unitarians) in 1987. This led to the establishment of the Advocates for the Establishment of an International Organization of Unitarians (AEIOU), which worked towards creating the council. However, the General Assembly resolution provided no funding.\nThe Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) became particularly interested in the establishment of a council when it had to deal with an increasing number of applications for membership from congregations outside North America. It had already granted membership to congregations in Adelaide, Auckland, the Philippines and Pakistan, and congregations in Sydney, Russia and Spain had applied for membership. Rather than admit congregations from all over the world, the UUA hoped that they would join a world council instead. The UUA thus became willing to provide funding for the council's establishment.\nAs a result, the council was finally established at a meeting in Essex, Massachusetts, United States on 23\u201326 March 1995.\nPrinciples and purposes.\nThe Preamble to the Constitution of the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists reads:\nWe, the member groups of the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists, affirming our belief in religious community based on:\ndeclare our purposes to be:\nMembers.\nReorganizing.\nPolish Unitarians have reported a need for a period of reorganization, and that at this time they are unable to maintain the level of activity needed to be full Council members, be it moved that membership of these groups be suspended. This action is taken with regret and the ICUU looks forward to welcoming Poland back into membership at the earliest possible date.\nProvisional members.\nChurches and religious associations which have expressed their will to become members of the Council may be admitted as \"Provisional Members\" for a period of time (generally two or four years), until the Council decides that they have shown their organizational stability, affinity with the ICUU principles and commitment to deserve becoming Full Members of the Council. Provisional Members are invited to Council meetings through a delegate but cannot vote.\nEmerging groups.\nAccording to the Bylaws of the ICUU, Emerging Groups are \"applicants that are deemed to be reasonable prospects for membership, but do not fulfil the conditions of either Provisional membership or Full Membership\". These groups may be designated as Emerging Groups by the Executive Committee upon its sole discretion. Emerging Groups may be invited as observers to General Meetings.\nThe current list of Emerging Groups after the last meeting of the Executive Committee (London, 22\u201325 November 2008) is as follows:\nAssociates.\nOrganizations with beliefs and purposes closely akin to those of ICUU but which by nature of their constitution are not eligible for full membership or which do not wish to become full members now or in the foreseeable future, may become Associates of the ICUU. The application must be approved by the ICUU Council Meeting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15453", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15453", "title": "Intersexualism", "text": ""}
{"id": "15454", "revid": "50675740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15454", "title": "Itanium", "text": "Family of 64-bit Intel microprocessors\nItanium (; ) is a discontinued family of 64-bit Intel microprocessors that implement the Intel Itanium architecture (formerly called IA-64). The Itanium architecture originated at Hewlett-Packard (HP), and was later jointly developed by HP and Intel. Launching in June 2001, Intel initially marketed the processors for enterprise servers and high-performance computing systems. In the concept phase, engineers said \"we could run circles around PowerPC...we could kill the x86\". Early predictions were that IA-64 would expand to the lower-end servers, supplanting Xeon, and eventually penetrate into the personal computers, eventually to supplant reduced instruction set computing (RISC) and complex instruction set computing (CISC) architectures for all general-purpose applications.\nWhen first released in 2001 after a decade of development, Itanium's performance was disappointing compared to better-established RISC and CISC processors. Emulation to run existing x86 applications and operating systems was particularly poor. Itanium-based systems were produced by HP and its successor Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) as the Integrity Servers line, and by several other manufacturers. In 2008, Itanium was the fourth-most deployed microprocessor architecture for enterprise-class systems, behind x86-64, Power ISA, and SPARC.\nIn February 2017, Intel released the final generation, Kittson, to test customers, and in May began shipping in volume. It was only used in mission-critical servers from HPE.\nIn 2019, Intel announced that new orders for Itanium would be accepted until January 30, 2020, and shipments would cease by July 29, 2021. This took place on schedule.\nItanium never sold well outside enterprise servers and high-performance computing systems, and the architecture was ultimately supplanted by competitor AMD's x86-64 (also called AMD64) architecture. x86-64 is a compatible extension to the 32-bit x86 architecture, implemented by, for example, Intel's own Xeon line and AMD's Opteron line. By 2009, most servers were being shipped with x86-64 processors, and they dominate the low cost desktop and laptop markets which were not initially targeted by Itanium. In an article titled \"Intel's Itanium is finally dead: The Itanic sunken by the x86 juggernaut\" Techspot declared \"Itanium's promise ended up sunken by a lack of legacy 32-bit support and difficulties in working with the architecture for writing and maintaining software\", while the dream of a single dominant ISA would be realized by the AMD64 extensions.\nHistory.\nDevelopment: 1989\u20132001.\nInception: 1989\u20131994.\nIn 1989, HP started to research an architecture that would exceed the expected limits of the reduced instruction set computer (RISC) architectures caused by the great increase in complexity needed for executing multiple instructions per cycle due to the need for dynamic dependency checking and precise exception handling. HP hired Bob Rau of Cydrome and Josh Fisher of Multiflow, the pioneers of very long instruction word (VLIW) computing. One VLIW instruction word can contain several independent instructions, which can be executed in parallel without having to evaluate them for independence. A compiler must attempt to find valid combinations of instructions that can be executed at the same time, effectively performing the instruction scheduling that conventional superscalar processors must do in hardware at runtime.\nHP researchers modified the classic VLIW into a new type of architecture, later named Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computing (EPIC), which differs by: having template bits which show which instructions are independent inside and between the bundles of three instructions, which enables the explicitly parallel execution of multiple bundles and increasing the processors' issue width without the need to recompile; by predication of instructions to reduce the need for branches; and by full interlocking to eliminate the delay slots. In EPIC the assignment of execution units to instructions and the timing of their issuing can be decided by hardware, unlike in the classic VLIW. HP intended to use these features in PA-WideWord, the planned successor to their PA-RISC ISA. EPIC was intended to provide the best balance between the efficient use of silicon area and electricity, and general-purpose flexibility. In 1993 HP held an internal competition to design the best (simulated) microarchitectures of a RISC and an EPIC type, led by Jerry Huck and Rajiv Gupta respectively. The EPIC team won, with over double the simulated performance of the RISC competitor.\nAt the same time Intel was also looking for ways to make better ISAs. In 1989 Intel had launched the i860, which it marketed for workstations, servers, and iPSC and Paragon supercomputers. It differed from other RISCs by being able to switch between the normal single instruction per cycle mode, and a mode where pairs of instructions are explicitly defined as parallel so as to execute them in the same cycle without having to do dependency checking. Another distinguishing feature were the instructions for an exposed floating-point pipeline, that enabled the tripling of throughput compared to the conventional floating-point instructions. Both of these features were left largely unused because compilers didn't support them, a problem that later challenged Itanium too. Without them, i860's parallelism (and thus performance) was no better than other RISCs, so it failed in the market. Itanium would adopt a more flexible form of explicit parallelism than i860 had.\nIn November 1993 HP approached Intel, seeking collaboration on an innovative future architecture. At the time Intel was looking to extend x86 to 64 bits in a processor codenamed P7, which they found challenging. Later Intel claimed that four different design teams had explored 64-bit extensions, but each of them concluded that it was not economically feasible. At the meeting with HP, Intel's engineers were impressed when Jerry Huck and Rajiv Gupta presented the PA-WideWord architecture they had designed to replace PA-RISC. \"When we saw WideWord, we saw a lot of things we had only been looking at doing, already in their full glory\", said Intel's John Crawford, who in 1994 became the chief architect of Merced, and who had earlier argued against extending the x86 with P7. HP's Gupta recalled: \"I looked Albert Yu [Intel's general manager for microprocessors] in the eyes and showed him we could run circles around PowerPC, that we could kill PowerPC, that we could kill the x86.\" Soon Intel and HP started conducting in-depth technical discussions at an HP office, where each side had six engineers who exchanged and discussed both companies' confidential architectural research. They then decided to use not only PA-WideWord, but also the more experimental HP Labs PlayDoh as the source of their joint future architecture. Convinced of the superiority of the new project, in 1994 Intel canceled their existing plans for P7.\nIn June 1994 Intel and HP announced their joint effort to make a new ISA that would adopt ideas of Wide Word and VLIW. Yu declared: \"If I were competitors, I'd be really worried. If you think you have a future, you don't.\" On P7's future, Intel said the alliance would impact it, but \"it is not clear\" whether it would \"fully encompass the new architecture\".\nLater the same month, Intel said that some of the first features of the new architecture would start appearing on Intel chips as early as the P7, but the full version would appear sometime later.\nIn August 1994 EE Times reported that Intel told investors that P7 was being re-evaluated and possibly canceled in favor of the HP processor. Intel immediately issued a clarification, saying that P7 is still being defined, and that HP may contribute to its architecture. Later it was confirmed that the P7 codename had indeed passed to the HP-Intel processor. By early 1996 Intel revealed its new codename, \"Merced\".\nHP believed that it was no longer cost-effective for individual enterprise systems companies such as itself to develop proprietary microprocessors, so it partnered with Intel in 1994 to develop the IA-64 architecture, derived from EPIC. Intel was willing to undertake the very large development effort on IA-64 in the expectation that the resulting microprocessor would be used by the majority of enterprise systems manufacturers. HP and Intel initiated a large joint development effort with a goal of delivering the first product, Merced, in 1998.\nDesign and delays: 1994\u20132001.\nMerced was designed by a team of 500, which Intel later admitted was too inexperienced, with many recent college graduates. Crawford (Intel) was the chief architect, while Huck (HP) held the second position. Early in the development HP and Intel had a disagreement where Intel wanted more dedicated hardware for more floating-point instructions. HP prevailed upon the discovery of a floating-point hardware bug in Intel's Pentium. When Merced was floorplanned for the first time in mid-1996, it turned out to be far too large, \"this was a lot worse than anything I'd seen before\", said Crawford. The designers had to reduce the complexity (and thus performance) of subsystems, including the x86 unit and cutting the L2 cache to 96 KB. Eventually it was agreed that the size target could only be reached by using the 180 nm process instead of the intended 250 nm. Later problems emerged with attempts to speed up the critical paths without disturbing the other circuits' speed. Merced was taped out on 4 July 1999, and in August Intel produced the first complete test chip.\nThe expectations for Merced waned over time as delays and performance deficiencies emerged, shifting the focus and onus for success onto the HP-led second Itanium design, codenamed \"McKinley\". In July 1997 the switch to the 180 nm process delayed Merced into the second half of 1999. Shortly before the reveal of EPIC at the Microprocessor Forum in October 1997, an analyst of the Microprocessor Report said that Itanium would \"not show the competitive performance until 2001. It will take the second version of the chip for the performance to get shown\". At the Forum, Intel's Fred Pollack originated the \"wait for McKinley\" mantra when he said that it would double the Merced's performance and would \"knock your socks off\", while using the same 180 nm process as Merced. Pollack also said that Merced's x86 performance would be lower than the fastest x86 processors, and that x86 would \"continue to grow at its historical rates\". Intel said that IA-64 won't have much presence in the consumer market for 5 to 10 years.\nLater it was reported that HP's motivation when starting to design McKinley in 1996 was to have more control over the project so as to avoid the issues affecting Merced's performance and schedule. The design team finalized McKinley's project goals in 1997. In late May 1998 Merced was delayed to mid-2000, and by August 1998 analysts were questioning its commercial viability, given that McKinley would arrive shortly after with double the performance, as delays were causing Merced to turn into simply a development vehicle for the Itanium ecosystem. The \"wait for McKinley\" narrative was becoming prevalent. The same day it was reported that due to the delays, HP would extend its line of PA-RISC PA-8000 series processors from PA-8500 to as far as PA-8900. In October 1998 HP announced its plans for four more generations of PA-RISC processors, with PA-8900 set to reach 1.2 GHz in 2003.\nBy March 1999 some analysts expected Merced to ship in volume only in 2001, but the volume was widely expected to be low as most customers would wait for McKinley. In May 1999, two months before Merced's tape-out, an analyst said that failure to tape-out before July would result in another delay. In July 1999, upon reports that the first silicon would be made in late August, analysts predicted a delay to late 2000, and came into agreement that Merced would be used chiefly for debugging and testing the IA-64 software. Linley Gwennap of MPR said of Merced that \"at this point, everyone is expecting it's going to be late and slow, and the real advance is going to come from McKinley. What this does is puts a lot more pressure on McKinley and for that team to deliver\". By then, Intel had revealed that Merced would be initially priced at $5000. In August 1999 HP advised some of their customers to skip Merced and wait for McKinley. By July 2000 HP told the press that the first Itanium systems would be for niche uses, and that \"You're not going to put this stuff near your data center for several years.\"; HP expected its Itanium systems to outsell the PA-RISC systems only in 2005. The same July Intel told of another delay, due to a stepping change to fix bugs. Now only \"pilot systems\" would ship that year, while the general availability was pushed to the \"first half of 2001\". Server makers had largely forgone spending on the R&amp;D for the Merced-based systems, instead using motherboards or whole servers of Intel's design. To foster a wide ecosystem, by mid-2000 Intel had provided 15,000 Itaniums in 5,000 systems to software developers and hardware designers. In March 2001 Intel said Itanium systems would begin shipping to customers in the second quarter, followed by a broader deployment in the second half of the year. By then even Intel publicly acknowledged that many customers would wait for McKinley.\nExpectations.\nDuring development, Intel, HP, and industry analysts predicted that IA-64 would dominate first in 64-bit servers and workstations, then expand to the lower-end servers, supplanting Xeon, and finally penetrate into the personal computers, eventually to supplant RISC and complex instruction set computing (CISC) architectures for all general-purpose applications, though not replacing x86 \"for the foreseeable future\" according to Intel. In 1997-1998, Intel CEO Andy Grove predicted that Itanium would not come to the desktop computers for four of five years after launch, and said \"I don't see Merced appearing on a mainstream desktop inside of a decade\". In contrast, Itanium was expected to capture 70% of the 64-bit server market in 2002. Already in 1998 Itanium's focus on the high end of the computer market was criticized for making it vulnerable to challengers expanding from the lower-end market segments, but many people in the computer industry feared voicing doubts about Itanium in the fear of Intel's retaliation.\nCompaq and Silicon Graphics decided to abandon further development of the Alpha and MIPS architectures respectively in favor of migrating to IA-64.\nSeveral groups ported operating systems for the architecture, including Microsoft Windows, OpenVMS, Linux, HP-UX, Solaris,\nTru64 UNIX, and Monterey/64.\nThe latter three were canceled before reaching the market. By 1997, it was apparent that the IA-64 architecture and the compiler were much more difficult to implement than originally thought, and the delivery timeframe of Merced began slipping.\nIntel announced the official name of the processor, \"Itanium\", on October 4, 1999.\nWithin hours, the name Itanic had been coined on a Usenet newsgroup, a reference to the RMS \"Titanic\", the \"unsinkable\" ocean liner that sank on her maiden voyage in 1912. \"Itanic\" was then used often by \"The Register\", and others, to imply that the multibillion-dollar investment in Itanium\u2014and the early hype associated with it\u2014would be followed by its relatively quick demise.\nItanium (Merced): 2001.\nAfter having sampled 40,000 chips to the partners, Intel launched Itanium on May 29, 2001, with first OEM systems from HP, IBM and Dell shipping to customers in June. By then Itanium's performance was not superior to competing RISC and CISC processors.\nItanium competed at the low-end (primarily four-CPU and smaller systems) with servers based on x86 processors, and at the high-end with IBM POWER and Sun Microsystems SPARC processors. Intel repositioned Itanium to focus on the high-end business and HPC computing markets, attempting to duplicate the x86's successful \"horizontal\" market (i.e., single architecture, multiple systems vendors). The success of this initial processor version was limited to replacing the PA-RISC in HP systems, Alpha in Compaq systems and MIPS in SGI systems, though IBM also delivered a supercomputer based on this processor.\nPOWER and SPARC remained strong, while the 32-bit x86 architecture continued to grow into the enterprise space, building on the economies of scale fueled by its enormous installed base.\nOnly a few thousand systems using the original \"Merced\" Itanium processor were sold, due to relatively poor performance, high cost and limited software availability. Recognizing that the lack of software could be a serious problem for the future, Intel made thousands of these early systems available to independent software vendors (ISVs) to stimulate development. HP and Intel brought the next-generation Itanium\u00a02 processor to the market a year later. Few of the microarchitectural features of Merced would be carried over to all the subsequent Itanium designs, including the 16+16 KB L1 cache size and the 6-wide (two-bundle) instruction decoding.\nItanium 2 (McKinley and Madison): 2002\u20132006.\nThe Itanium 2 processor was released in July 2002, and was marketed for enterprise servers rather than for the whole gamut of high-end computing. The first Itanium\u00a02, code-named \"McKinley\", was jointly developed by HP and Intel, led by the HP team at Fort Collins, Colorado, taping out in December 2000. It relieved many of the performance problems of the original Itanium processor, which were mostly caused by an inefficient memory subsystem by approximately halving the latency and doubling the fill bandwidth of each of the three levels of cache, while expanding the L2 cache from 96 to 256 KB. Floating-point data is excluded from the L1 cache, because the L2 cache's higher bandwidth is more beneficial to typical floating-point applications than low latency. The L3 cache is now integrated on-chip rather than on a separate die, tripling in associativity and doubling in bus width. McKinley also greatly increases the number of possible instruction combinations in a VLIW-bundle and reaches 25% higher frequency, despite having only eight pipeline stages versus Merced's ten.\n\"McKinley\" contains 221 million transistors (of which 25 million are for logic and 181 million for L3 cache), measured 19.5\u00a0mm by 21.6\u00a0mm (421\u00a0mm2) and was fabricated in a 180\u00a0nm, bulk CMOS process with six layers of aluminium metallization. In May 2003 it was disclosed that some McKinley processors can suffer from a critical-path erratum leading to a system's crashing. It can be avoided by lowering the processor frequency to 800\u00a0MHz.\nIn 2003, AMD released the Opteron CPU, which implements its own 64-bit architecture called AMD64. The Opteron gained rapid acceptance in the enterprise server space because it provided an easy upgrade from x86. Under the influence of Microsoft, Intel responded by implementing AMD's x86-64 instruction set architecture instead of IA-64 in its Xeon microprocessors in 2004, resulting in a new industry-wide \"de facto\" standard.\nIn 2003, Intel released a new Itanium\u00a02 family member, codenamed \"Madison\", initially with up to 1.5\u00a0GHz frequency and 6 MB of L3 cache. The \"Madison 9M\" chip released in November 2004 had 9 MB of L3 cache and frequency up to 1.6\u00a0GHz, reaching 1.67\u00a0GHz in July 2005. Both chips used a 130\u00a0nm process and were the basis of all new Itanium processors until Montecito was released in July 2006, specifically \"Deerfield\" being a low wattage \"Madison\", and \"Fanwood\" being a version of \"Madison 9M\" for lower-end servers with one or two CPU sockets.\nIn November 2005, the major Itanium server manufacturers joined with Intel and a number of software vendors to form the Itanium Solutions Alliance to promote the architecture and accelerate the software porting effort.\nThe Alliance announced that its members would invest $10 billion in the Itanium Solutions Alliance by the end of the decade.\nItanium 2 9000 and Itanium 9100: 2006 and 2007.\nIn early 2003, due to the success of IBM's dual-core POWER4, Intel announced that the first 90 nm Itanium processor, codenamed \"Montecito\", would be delayed to 2005 so as to change it into a dual-core, thus merging it with the \"Chivano\" project. In September 2004 Intel demonstrated a working Montecito system, and claimed that the inclusion of hyper-threading increases Montecito's performance by 10-20% and that its frequency could reach 2\u00a0GHz. After a delay to \"mid-2006\" and reduction of the frequency to 1.6\u00a0GHz, on July 18 Intel delivered \"Montecito\" (marketed as the Itanium\u00a02 9000 series), a dual-core processor with a switch-on-event multithreading and split 256 KB + 1 MB L2 caches that roughly doubled the performance and decreased the energy consumption by about 20 percent. At 596\u00a0mm\u00b2 die size and 1.72 billion transistors it was the largest microprocessor at the time. It was supposed to feature Foxton Technology, a very sophisticated frequency regulator, which failed to pass validation and was thus not enabled for customers.\nIntel released the Itanium 9100 series, codenamed \"Montvale\", in November 2007, retiring the \"Itanium 2\" brand. Originally intended to use the 65 nm process, it was changed into a fix of Montecito, enabling the demand-based switching (like EIST) and up to 667 MT/s front-side bus, which were intended for Montecito, plus a core-level lockstep. Montecito and Montvale were the last Itanium processors in which design Hewlett-Packard's engineering team at Fort Collins had a key role, as the team was subsequently transferred to Intel's ownership.\nItanium 9300 (Tukwila): 2010.\nThe original code name for the first Itanium with more than two cores was Tanglewood, but it was changed to Tukwila in late 2003 due to trademark issues. Intel discussed a \"middle-of-the-decade Itanium\" to succeed Montecito, achieving ten times the performance of Madison. It was being designed by the famed DEC Alpha team and was expected have eight new multithreading-focused cores. Intel claimed \"a lot more than two\" cores and more than seven times the performance of Madison. In early 2004 Intel told of \"plans to achieve up to double the performance over the Intel Xeon processor family at platform cost parity by 2007\". By early 2005 Tukwila was redefined, now having fewer cores but focusing on single-threaded performance and multiprocessor scalability.\nIn March 2005, Intel disclosed some details of Tukwila, the next Itanium processor after Montvale, to be released in 2007. Tukwila would have four processor cores and would replace the Itanium bus with a new Common System Interface, which would also be used by a new Xeon processor. Tukwila was to have a \"common platform architecture\" with a Xeon codenamed \"Whitefield\", which was canceled in October 2005, when Intel revised Tukwila's delivery date to late 2008. In May 2009, the schedule for Tukwila, was revised again, with the release to OEMs planned for the first quarter of 2010.\nThe Itanium 9300 series processor, codenamed \"Tukwila\", was released on February 8, 2010, with greater performance and memory capacity.\nThe device uses a 65\u00a0nm process, includes two to four cores, up to 24\u00a0MB on-die caches, Hyper-Threading technology and integrated memory controllers. It implements double-device data correction, which helps to fix memory errors. Tukwila also implements Intel QuickPath Interconnect (QPI) to replace the Itanium bus-based architecture. It has a peak interprocessor bandwidth of 96\u00a0GB/s and a peak memory bandwidth of 34\u00a0GB/s. With QuickPath, the processor has integrated memory controllers and interfaces the memory directly, using QPI interfaces to directly connect to other processors and I/O hubs. QuickPath is also used on Intel x86-64 processors using the \"Nehalem\" microarchitecture, which possibly enabled Tukwila and Nehalem to use the same chipsets.\nTukwila incorporates two memory controllers, each of which has two links to Scalable Memory Buffers, which in turn support multiple DDR3 DIMMs,\nmuch like the Nehalem-based Xeon processor code-named \"Beckton\".\n\"HP vs. Oracle\".\nDuring the 2012 \"Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Oracle Corp.\" support lawsuit, court documents unsealed by a Santa Clara County Court judge revealed that in 2008, Hewlett-Packard had paid Intel around $440 million to keep producing and updating Itanium microprocessors from 2009 to 2014. In 2010, the two companies signed another $250 million deal, which obliged Intel to continue making Itanium CPUs for HP's machines until 2017. Under the terms of the agreements, HP had to pay for chips it gets from Intel, while Intel launches Tukwila, Poulson, Kittson, and Kittson+ chips in a bid to gradually boost performance of the platform.\nItanium 9500 (Poulson): 2012.\nIntel first mentioned Poulson on March 1, 2005, at the Spring IDF. In June 2007 Intel said that Poulson would use a 32\u00a0nm process technology, skipping the 45\u00a0nm process. This was necessary for catching up after Itanium's delays left it at 90 nm competing against 65 nm and 45 nm processors.\nAt ISSCC 2011, Intel presented a paper called \"A 32nm 3.1 Billion Transistor 12-Wide-Issue Itanium Processor for Mission Critical Servers.\"\nAnalyst David Kanter speculated that Poulson would use a new microarchitecture, with a more advanced form of multithreading that uses up to two threads, to improve performance for single threaded and multithreaded workloads.\nSome information was also released at the Hot Chips conference.\nInformation presented improvements in multithreading, resiliency improvements (Intel Instruction Replay RAS) and few new instructions (thread priority, integer instruction, cache prefetching, and data access hints).\nPoulson was released on November 8, 2012, as the Itanium 9500 series processor. It is the follow-on processor to Tukwila. It features eight cores and has a 12-wide issue architecture, multithreading enhancements, and new instructions to take advantage of parallelism, especially in virtualization.\nThe Poulson L3 cache size is 32\u00a0MB and common for all cores, not divided like previously. L2 cache size is 6\u00a0MB, 512\u00a0I\u00a0KB, 256\u00a0D\u00a0KB per core. Die size is 544\u00a0mm\u00b2, less than its predecessor Tukwila (698.75\u00a0mm\u00b2).\nIntel's Product Change Notification (PCN) 111456-01 lists four models of Itanium 9500 series CPU, which was later removed in a revised document. The parts were later listed in Intel's Material Declaration Data Sheets (MDDS) database. Intel later posted Itanium 9500 reference manual.\nThe models are the following:\nItanium 9700 (Kittson): 2017.\nIntel had committed to at least one more generation after Poulson, first mentioning Kittson on 14 June 2007. Kittson was supposed to be on a 22\u00a0nm process and use the same LGA2011 socket and platform as Xeons. On 31 January 2013 Intel issued an update to their plans for Kittson: it would have the same LGA1248 socket and 32\u00a0nm process as Poulson, thus effectively halting any further development of Itanium processors.\nIn April 2015, Intel, although it had not yet confirmed formal specifications, did confirm that it continued to work on the project. Meanwhile, the aggressively multicore Xeon E7 platform displaced Itanium-based solutions in the Intel roadmap. Even Hewlett-Packard, the main proponent and customer for Itanium, began selling x86-based Superdome and NonStop servers, and started to treat the Itanium-based versions as legacy products.\nIntel officially launched the Itanium 9700 series processor family on May 11, 2017. Kittson has no microarchitecture improvements over Poulson; despite nominally having a different stepping, it is functionally identical with the 9500 series, even having exactly the same bugs, the only difference being the 133\u00a0MHz higher frequency of 9760 and 9750 over 9560 and 9550 respectively.\nIntel announced that the 9700 series would be the last Itanium chips produced.\nThe models are:\nMarket share.\nCompared to its Xeon family of server processors, Itanium was never a high-volume product for Intel. Intel does not release production numbers, but one industry analyst estimated that the production rate was 200,000 processors per year in 2007.\nAccording to Gartner Inc., the total number of Itanium servers (not processors) sold by all vendors in 2007, was about 55,000 (It is unclear whether clustered servers counted as a single server or not.). This compares with 417,000 RISC servers (spread across all RISC vendors) and 8.4 million x86 servers. IDC reports that a total of 184,000 Itanium-based systems were sold from 2001 through 2007. For the combined POWER/SPARC/Itanium systems market, IDC reports that POWER captured 42% of revenue and SPARC captured 32%, while Itanium-based system revenue reached 26% in the second quarter of 2008.\nAccording to an IDC analyst, in 2007, HP accounted for perhaps 80% of Itanium systems revenue.\nAccording to Gartner, in 2008, HP accounted for 95% of Itanium sales. HP's Itanium system sales were at an annual rate of $4.4Bn at the end of 2008, and declined to $3.5Bn by the end of 2009,\ncompared to a 35% decline in UNIX system revenue for Sun and an 11% drop for IBM, with an x86-64 server revenue increase of 14% during this period.\nIn December 2012, IDC released a research report stating that Itanium server shipments would remain flat through 2016, with annual shipment of 26,000 systems (a decline of over 50% compared to shipments in 2008).\nHardware support.\nSystems.\nBy 2006, HP manufactured at least 80% of all Itanium systems, and sold 7,200 in the first quarter of 2006.\nThe bulk of systems sold were enterprise servers and machines for large-scale technical computing, with an average selling price per system in excess of US$200,000. A typical system used eight or more Itanium processors.\nBy 2012, only a few manufacturers offered Itanium systems, including HP, Bull, NEC, Inspur and Huawei. In addition, Intel offered a chassis that could be used by system integrators to build Itanium systems.\nBy 2015, only HP supplied Itanium-based systems. When HP split in late 2015, Itanium systems (branded as Integrity) were handled by Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE), with a major update in 2017 (Integrity i6, and HP-UX 11i v3 Update 16). HPE also supports a few other operating systems, including Windows up to Server 2008 R2, Linux, OpenVMS and NonStop. Itanium is not affected by Spectre or Meltdown.\nChipsets.\nPrior to the 9300-series (Tukwila), chipsets were needed to connect to the main memory and I/O devices, as the front-side bus to the chipset was the sole operational connection to the processor. Two generations of buses existed: the original \"Itanium processor system bus\" (a.k.a. \"Merced bus\") had a 64 bit data width and 133\u00a0MHz clock with DDR (266 MT/s), being soon superseded by the 128-bit 200\u00a0MHz DDR (400 MT/s) \"Itanium 2 processor system bus\" (a.k.a. \"McKinley bus\"), which later reached 533 and 667 MT/s. Up to four CPUs per single bus could be used, but prior to the 9000-series the bus speeds of over 400 MT/s were limited to up to two processors per bus. As no Itanium chipset could connect to more than four sockets, high-end servers needed multiple interconnected chipsets.\nThe \"Tukwila\" Itanium processor model had been designed to share a common chipset with the Intel Xeon processor EX (Intel's Xeon processor designed for four processor and larger servers). The goal was to streamline system development and reduce costs for server OEMs, many of which develop both Itanium- and Xeon-based servers. However, in 2013, this goal was pushed back to be \"evaluated for future implementation opportunities\".\nIn the times before on-chip memory controllers and QPI, enterprise server manufacturers differentiated their systems by designing and developing chipsets that interface the processor to memory, interconnections, and peripheral controllers. \"Enterprise server\" referred to the then-lucrative market segment of high-end servers with high reliability, availability and serviceability and typically 16+ processor sockets, justifying their pricing by having a custom system-level architecture with their own chipsets at its heart, with capabilities far beyond what two-socket \"commodity servers\" could offer. Development of a chipset costs tens of millions of dollars and so represented a major commitment to the use of Itanium.\nNeither Intel nor IBM would develop Itanium 2 chipsets to support newer technologies such as DDR2 or PCI Express.\nBefore \"Tukwila\" moved away from the FSB, chipsets supporting such technologies were manufactured by all Itanium server vendors, such as HP, Fujitsu, SGI, NEC, and Hitachi.\nIntel.\nThe first generation of Itanium received no vendor-specific chipsets, only Intel's 460GX consisting of ten distinct chips. It supported up to four CPUs and 64 GB of memory at 4.2 GB/s, which is twice the system bus's bandwidth. Addresses and data were handled by two different chips. 460GX had an AGP X4 graphics bus, two 64-bit 66\u00a0MHz PCI buses and configurable 33\u00a0MHz dual 32-bit or single 64-bit PCI bus(es).\nThere were many custom chipset designs for Itanium 2, but many smaller vendors chose to use Intel's E8870 chipset. It supports 128 GB of DDR SDRAM at 6.4 GB/s. It was originally designed for Rambus RDRAM serial memory, but when RDRAM failed, Intel added four DDR SDRAM-to-RDRAM converter chips to the chipset. When Intel had previously made such a converter for Pentium III chipsets 820 and 840, it drastically cut performance. E8870 provides eight 133\u00a0MHz PCI-X buses (4.2 GB/s total because of bottlenecks) and a ICH4 hub with six USB 2.0 ports.\nTwo E8870 can be linked together by two E8870SP Scalability Port Switches, each containing a 1MB (~200,000 cache lines) snoop filter, to create an 8-socket system with double the memory and PCI-X capacity, but still only one ICH4. Further expansion to 16 sockets was planned. In 2004 Intel revealed plans for its next Itanium chipset, codenamed \"Bayshore\", to support PCI-e and DDR2 memory, but canceled it the same year.\nHewlett-Packard.\nHP has designed four different chipsets for Itanium 2: zx1, sx1000, zx2 and sx2000. All support 4 sockets per chipset, but sx1000 and sx2000 support interconnection of up to 16 chipsets to create up to a 64 socket system. As it was developed in collaboration with Itanium 2's development, booting the first Itanium 2 in February 2001, zx1 became the first Itanium 2 chipset available and later in 2004 also the first to support 533 MT/s FSB. In its basic two-chip version it directly provides four channels of DDR-266 memory, giving 8.5 GB/s of bandwidth and 32 GB of capacity (though 12 DIMM slots). In versions with memory expander boards memory bandwidth reaches 12.8 GB/s, while the maximum capacity for the initial two-board 48 DIMM expanders was 96 GB, and the later single-board 32 DIMM expander up to 128 GB. The memory latency increases by 25 nanoseconds from 80 ns due to the expanders. Eight independent links went to the PCI-X and other peripheral devices (e.g. AGP in workstations), totaling 4 GB/s.\nHP's first high-end Itanium chipset was sx1000, launched in mid-2003 with the Integrity Superdome flagship server.\nIt has two independent front-side buses, each bus supporting two sockets, giving 12.8 GB/s of combined bandwidth from the processors to the chipset. It has four links to data-only memory buffers and supports 64 GB of HP-designed 125\u00a0MHz memory at 16 GB/s. The above components form a system board called a \"cell\". Two cells can be directly connected together to create an 8-socket glueless system. To connect four cells together, a pair of 8-ported crossbar switches is needed (adding 64 ns to inter-cell memory accesses), while four such pairs of crossbar switches are needed for the top-end system of 16 cells (64 sockets), giving 32 GB/s of bisection bandwidth. Cells maintain cache coherence through in-memory directories, which causes the minimum memory latency to be 241 ns. The latency to the most remote (NUMA) memory is 463 ns. The per-cell bandwidth to the I/O subsystems is 2 GB/s, despite the presence of 8 GB/s worth of PCI-X buses in each I/O subsystem.\nHP launched sx2000 in March 2006 to succeed sx1000. Its two FSBs operate at 533 MT/s. It supports up to 128 GB of memory at 17 GB/s. The memory is of HP's custom design, using the DDR2 protocol, but twice as tall as the standard modules and with redundant address and control signal contacts. For the inter-chipset communication, 25.5 GB/s is available on each sx2000 through its three serial links that can connect to a set of three independent crossbars, which connect to other cells or up to 3 other sets of 3 crossbars. The multi-cell configurations are the same as with sx1000, except the parallelism of the sets of crossbars has been increased from 2 to 3. The maximum configuration of 64 sockets has 72 GB/s of sustainable bisection bandwidth. The chipset's connection to its I/O module is now serial with an 8.5 GB/s peak and 5.5 GB/s sustained bandwidth, the I/O module having either 12 PCI-X buses at up to 266\u00a0MHz, or 6 PCI-X buses and 6 PCIe 1.1 \u00d78 slots. It is the last chipset to support HP's PA-RISC processors (PA-8900).\nHP launched the first zx2-based servers in September 2006. zx2 can operate the FSB at 667 MT/s with two CPUs or 533 MT/s with four CPUs. It connects to the DDR2 memory either directly, supporting 32 GB at up to 14.2 GB/s, or through expander boards, supporting up to 384 GB at 17 GB/s. The minimum open-page latency is 60 to 78 ns. 9.8 GB/s are available through eight independent links to the I/O adapters, which can include PCIe \u00d78 or 266\u00a0MHz PCI-X.\nOthers.\nIn May 2003, IBM launched the XA-64 chipset for Itanium 2. It used many of the same technologies as the first two generations of XA-32 chipsets for Xeon, but by the time of the third gen XA-32 IBM had decided to discontinue its Itanium products. XA-64 supported 56 GB of DDR SDRAM in 28 slots at 6.4 GB/s, though due to bottlenecks only 3.2 GB/s could go to the CPU and other 2 GB/s to devices for a 5.2 GB/s total. The CPU's memory bottleneck was mitigated by an off-chip 64 MB DRAM L4 cache, which also worked as a snoop filter in multi-chipset systems. The combined bandwidth of the four PCI-X buses and other I/O is bottlenecked to 2 GB/s per chipset. Two or four chipsets can be connected to make an 8 or 16 socket system.\nSGI's Altix supercomputers and servers used the SHUB (Super-Hub) chipset, which supports two Itanium 2 sockets. The initial version used DDR memory through four buses for up to 12.8 GB/s bandwidth, and up to 32 GB of capacity across 16 slots. A 2.4 GB/s XIO channel connected to a module with up to six 64-bit 133\u00a0MHz PCI-X buses. SHUBs can be interconnected by the dual 6.4 GB/s NUMAlink4 link planes to create a 512-socket cache-coherent single-image system. A cache for the in-memory coherence directory saves memory bandwidth and reduces latency. The latency to the local memory is 132 ns, and each crossing of a NUMAlink4 router adds 50 ns. I/O modules with four 133\u00a0MHz PCI-X buses can connect directly to the NUMAlink4 network. SGI's second-generation SHUB 2.0 chipset supported up to 48 GB of DDR2 memory, 667 MT/s FSB, and could connect to I/O modules providing PCI Express. It supports only four local threads, so when having two dual-core CPUs per chipset, Hyper-Threading must be disabled.\nSoftware support.\nLinux.\nThe Trillian Project was an effort by an industry consortium to port the Linux kernel to the Itanium processor. The project started in May 1999 with the goal of releasing the distribution in time for the initial release of Itanium, then scheduled for early 2000. By the end of 1999, the project included Caldera Systems, CERN, Cygnus Solutions, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Intel, Red Hat, SGI, SuSE, TurboLinux and VA Linux Systems. The project released the resulting code in February 2000. The code then became part of the mainline Linux kernel more than a year before the release of the first Itanium processor. The Trillian project was able to do this for two reasons:\nAfter the successful completion of Project Trillian, the resulting Linux kernel was used by all of the manufacturers of Itanium systems (HP, IBM, Dell, SGI, Fujitsu, Unisys, Hitachi, and Groupe Bull). With the notable exception of HP, Linux is either the primary OS or the only OS the manufacturer supports for Itanium. Ongoing free and open source software support for Linux on Itanium subsequently coalesced at Gelato.\nDistribution support.\nIn 2005, Fedora Linux started adding support for Itanium and Novell added support for SUSE Linux. In 2007, CentOS added support for Itanium in a new release.\nDeprecation.\nIn 2009, Red Hat dropped Itanium support in Enterprise Linux 6. Ubuntu 10.10 dropped support for Itanium. In 2021, Linus Torvalds marked the Itanium code as orphaned. Torvalds said: \"HPE no longer accepts orders for new Itanium hardware, and Intel stopped accepting orders a year ago. While intel [\"sic\"] is still officially shipping chips until July 29, 2021, it's unlikely that any such orders actually exist. It's dead, Jim.\"\nSupport for Itanium was removed in Linux 6.7 and is since then maintained out-of-tree.\nOpenVMS.\nIn 2001, Compaq announced that OpenVMS would be ported to the Itanium architecture. This led to the creation of the V8.x releases of OpenVMS, which support both Itanium-based HPE Integrity Servers and DEC Alpha hardware. Since the Itanium porting effort began, ownership of OpenVMS transferred from Compaq to HP in 2001, and then to VMS Software Inc. (VSI) in 2014. Noteworthy releases include:\nSupport for Itanium has been dropped in the V9.x releases of OpenVMS, which run on x86-64 only.\nNonStop OS.\nNonStop OS was ported from MIPS-based hardware to Itanium in 2005. NonStop OS was later ported to x86-64 in 2015. Sales of Itanium-based NonStop hardware ended in 2020, with support ending in 2025.\nCompiler.\nGNU Compiler Collection deprecated support for IA-64 in GCC 10, after Intel announced the planned phase-out of this ISA. LLVM (Clang) dropped Itanium support in version 2.6.\nHowever, Itanium's C++ ABI continues to be the ABI used for both GCC and LLVM on most CPU architectures.\nVirtualization and emulation.\nHP sells a virtualization technology for Itanium called Integrity Virtual Machines.\nEmulation is a technique that allows a computer to execute binary code that was compiled for a different type of computer. Before IBM's acquisition of QuickTransit in 2009, application binary software for IRIX/MIPS and Solaris/SPARC could run via type of emulation called \"dynamic binary translation\" on Linux/Itanium. Similarly, HP implemented a method to execute PA-RISC/HP-UX on the Itanium/HP-UX via emulation, to simplify migration of its PA-RISC customers to the radically different Itanium instruction set. Itanium processors can also run the mainframe environment GCOS from Groupe Bull and several x86 operating systems via instruction set simulators.\nCompetition.\nItanium was aimed at the enterprise server and high-performance computing (HPC) markets. Other enterprise- and HPC-focused processor lines include Oracle's and Fujitsu's SPARC processors and IBM's Power microprocessors. Measured by quantity sold, Itanium's most serious competition came from x86-64 processors including Intel's own Xeon line and AMD's Opteron line. Since 2009, most servers were being shipped with x86-64 processors.\nIn 2005, Itanium systems accounted for about 14% of HPC systems revenue, but the percentage declined as the industry shifted to x86-64 clusters for this application.\nAn October 2008 Gartner report on the Tukwila processor stated that \"...the future roadmap for Itanium looks as strong as that of any RISC peer like Power or SPARC.\"\nSupercomputers and high-performance computing.\nAn Itanium-based computer first appeared on the list of the TOP500 supercomputers in November 2001. The best position ever achieved by an \"Itanium\u00a02\" based system in the list was No. 2, achieved in June 2004, when Thunder (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory) entered the list with an Rmax of 19.94 Teraflops. In November 2004, Columbia entered the list at No. 2 with 51.8 Teraflops, and there was at least one Itanium-based computer in the top 10 from then until June 2007. The peak number of Itanium-based machines on the list occurred in the November 2004 list, at 84 systems (16.8%); by June 2012, this had dropped to one system (0.2%), and no Itanium system remained on the list in November 2012.\nProcessors.\nReleased processors.\nThe Itanium processors show a progression in capability. Merced was a proof of concept. McKinley dramatically improved the memory hierarchy and allowed Itanium to become reasonably competitive. Madison, with the shift to a 130\u00a0nm process, allowed for enough cache space to overcome the major performance bottlenecks. Montecito, with a 90\u00a0nm process, allowed for a dual-core implementation and a major improvement in performance per watt. Montvale added three new features: core-level lockstep, demand-based switching and front-side bus frequency of up to 667\u00a0MHz.\nMarket reception.\nHigh-end server market.\nWhen first released in 2001, Itanium's performance was disappointing compared to better-established RISC and CISC processors. Emulation to run existing x86 applications and operating systems was particularly poor, with one benchmark in 2001 reporting that it was equivalent at best to a 100\u00a0MHz Pentium in this mode (1.1\u00a0GHz Pentiums were on the market at that time).\nItanium failed to make significant inroads against IA-32 or RISC, and suffered further following the arrival of x86-64 systems which offered greater compatibility with older x86 applications.\nIn a 2009 article on the history of the processor \u2014 \"How the Itanium Killed the Computer Industry\" \u2014 journalist John C. Dvorak reported \"This continues to be one of the great fiascos of the last 50 years\". Tech columnist Ashlee Vance commented that the delays and underperformance \"turned the product into a joke in the chip industry\". In an interview, Donald Knuth said \"The Itanium approach...was supposed to be so terrific\u2014until it turned out that the wished-for compilers were basically impossible to write.\"\nBoth Red Hat and Microsoft announced plans to drop Itanium support in their operating systems due to lack of market interest; however, other Linux distributions such as Gentoo and Debian remain available for Itanium. On March 22, 2011, Oracle Corporation announced that it would no longer develop new products for HP-UX on Itanium, although it would continue to provide support for existing products. Following this announcement, HP sued Oracle for breach of contract, arguing that Oracle had violated conditions imposed during settlement over Oracle's hiring of former HP CEO Mark Hurd as its co-CEO, requiring the vendor to support Itanium on its software \"until such time as HP discontinues the sales of its Itanium-based servers\", and that the breach had harmed its business. In 2012, a court ruled in favor of HP, and ordered Oracle to resume its support for Itanium. In June 2016, Hewlett Packard Enterprise (the corporate successor to HP's server business) was awarded $3 billion in damages from the lawsuit. Oracle unsuccessfully appealed the decision to the California Court of Appeal in 2021.\nA former Intel official reported that the Itanium business had become profitable for Intel in late 2009. By 2009, the chip was almost entirely deployed on servers made by HP, which had over 95% of the Itanium server market share, making the main operating system for Itanium HP-UX. On March 22, 2011, Intel reaffirmed its commitment to Itanium with multiple generations of chips in development and on schedule.\nOther markets.\nAlthough Itanium did attain limited success in the niche market of high-end computing, Intel had originally hoped it would find broader acceptance as a replacement for the original x86 architecture.\nAMD chose a different direction, designing the less radical x86-64, a 64-bit extension to the existing x86 architecture, which Microsoft then supported, forcing Intel to introduce the same extensions in its own x86-based processors. These designs can run existing 32-bit applications at native hardware speed, while offering support for 64-bit memory addressing and other enhancements to new applications. This architecture has now become the predominant 64-bit architecture in the desktop and portable market. Although some Itanium-based workstations were initially introduced by companies such as SGI, they are no longer available.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15456", "revid": "200330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15456", "title": "Indo-Germanic languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "15457", "revid": "200330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15457", "title": "Indo-germanic languages", "text": ""}
{"id": "15458", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15458", "title": "Indo-germanic", "text": ""}
{"id": "15459", "revid": "33408448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15459", "title": "International Classification of Diseases", "text": "International standard diagnostic tool\nThe International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is a globally used medical classification that is used in epidemiology, health management and clinical diagnosis. The ICD is maintained by the World Health Organization (WHO), which is the directing and coordinating authority for health within the United Nations System. The ICD was originally designed as a health care classification system, providing a system of diagnostic codes for classifying diseases, including nuanced classifications of a wide variety of signs, symptoms, abnormal findings, complaints, social circumstances, and external causes of injury or disease. This system is designed to map health conditions to corresponding generic categories together with specific variations; for these designated codes are assigned, each up to six characters long. Thus each major category is designed to include a set of similar diseases.\nThe ICD is published by the WHO and used worldwide for morbidity and mortality statistics, reimbursement systems, and automated decision support in health care. This system is designed to promote international comparability in the collection, processing, classification, and presentation of these statistics. The ICD is a major project to statistically classify all health disorders and to provide diagnostic assistance. The ICD is a core system for healthcare-related issues of the WHO Family of International Classifications (WHO-FIC).\nThe ICD is revised periodically and is currently in its 11th revision. The ICD-11, as it is known, was accepted by WHO's World Health Assembly (WHA) on 25 May 2019 and officially came into effect on 1 January 2022. On 11 February 2022, the WHO stated that 35 countries were using the ICD-11.\nThe ICD is part of a \"family\" of international classifications (WHOFIC) that complement each other, including the following classifications:\nThe title of the ICD is formally the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems; the original title, the International Classification of Diseases, is still the informal name by which the ICD is usually known.\nIn the United States and some other countries, the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders\" (DSM) is preferred when classifying mental disorders for certain purposes.\nThe ICD is currently the most widely used statistical classification system for diseases in the world. In addition, some countries\u2014including Australia, Canada, and the United States\u2014have developed their own adaptations of ICD, with more procedure codes for classification of operative or diagnostic procedures.\nEarly history.\nIn 1860, during the international statistical congress held in London, Florence Nightingale made a proposal that was to result in the development of the first model of systematic collection of hospital data. In 1893, a French physician, Jacques Bertillon, introduced the \"Bertillon Classification of Causes of Death\" at a congress of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) in Chicago.\nA number of countries adopted Bertillon's system, which was based on the principle of distinguishing between general diseases and those localized to a particular organ or anatomical site, as used by the City of Paris for classifying deaths. Subsequent revisions represented a synthesis of English, German, and Swiss classifications, expanding from the original 44 titles to 161 titles. \nIn 1898, the American Public Health Association (APHA) recommended that the registrars of Canada, Mexico, and the United States also adopt it. The APHA also recommended revising the system every 10 years to ensure the system remained current with medical practice advances. As a result, the first international conference to revise the \"International Classification of Causes of Death\" (ICD) took place in 1900, with revisions occurring every ten years thereafter. At that time, the classification system was contained in one book, which included an Alphabetic Index as well as a Tabular List. The book was small compared with current coding texts.\nThe revisions that followed contained minor changes. Responsibility for ICD revisions fell to the Mixed Commission, a group composed of representatives from the ISI and the Health Organization of the League of Nations. \nVersions.\nICD-6.\nIn 1948, the WHO assumed responsibility for preparing and publishing the revisions to the ICD every ten years. (It later became clear that the established ten year interval between revisions was too short.)\nThe ICD-6, published in 1949, was the first to be shaped to become suitable for morbidity reporting. Accordingly, the name changed from \"International List of Causes of Death\" to the \"International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries and Causes of Death\" (ICD). The combined code section for injuries and their associated accidents was split into two, a chapter for injuries, and a chapter for their external causes. With use for morbidity there was a need for coding mental conditions, and for the first time a section on mental disorders was added.\nICD-7.\nThe International Conference for the Seventh Revision of the International Classification of Diseases was held in Paris under the auspices of WHO in February 1955. In accordance with a recommendation of the WHO Expert Committee on Health Statistics, this revision was limited to essential changes and amendments of errors and inconsistencies.\nICD-8.\nThe 8th Revision Conference convened by WHO met in Geneva, from 6 to 12 July 1965. This revision was more radical than the Seventh but left unchanged the basic structure of the Classification and the general philosophy of classifying diseases, whenever possible, according to their etiology rather than a particular manifestation.\nDuring the years that the Seventh and Eighth Revisions of the ICD were in force, the use of the ICD for indexing hospital medical records increased rapidly and some countries prepared national adaptations which provided the additional detail needed for this application of the ICD.\nICDA-8 (United States).\nIn the US, a group of consultants was asked to study the ICD-8 for its applicability to various users in the United States. This group recommended that further detail be provided for coding hospital and morbidity data. The American Hospital Association's \"Advisory Committee to the Central Office on ICDA\" developed the needed adaptation proposals, resulting in the publication of the International Classification of Diseases, Adapted (ICDA). In 1968, the United States Public Health Service published the International Classification of Diseases, Adapted, 8th Revision for use in the United States (ICDA-8). Beginning in 1968, ICDA-8 served as the basis for coding diagnostic data for both official morbidity and mortality statistics in the United States.\nICD-9.\nThe International Conference for the Ninth Revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death, convened by WHO, met in Geneva from 30 September to 6 October 1975. In the discussions leading up to the conference, it had originally been intended that there should be little change other than updating of the classification. This was mainly because of the expense of adapting data processing systems each time the classification was revised.\nThere had been an enormous growth of interest in the ICD and ways had to be found of responding to this, partly by modifying the classification itself and partly by introducing special coding provisions. A number of representations were made by specialist bodies which had become interested in using the ICD for their own statistics. Some subject areas in the classification were regarded as inappropriately arranged and there was considerable pressure for more detail and for adaptation of the classification to make it more relevant for the evaluation of medical care, by classifying conditions to the chapters concerned with the part of the body affected rather than to those dealing with the underlying generalized disease.\nAt the other end of the scale, there were representations from countries and areas where a detailed and sophisticated classification was irrelevant, but which nevertheless needed a classification based on the ICD in order to assess their progress in health care and in the control of disease. A field test with a bi-axial classification approach\u2014one axis (criterion) for anatomy, with another for etiology\u2014showed the impracticability of such approach for routine use.\nThe final proposals presented to and accepted by the Conference in 1978 retained the basic structure of the ICD, although with much additional detail at the level of the four digit subcategories, and some optional five digit subdivisions. For the benefit of users not requiring such detail, care was taken to ensure that the categories at the three digit level were appropriate.\nAs the World Health Organization explains: \"For the benefit of users wishing to produce statistics and indexes oriented towards medical care, the 9th Revision included an optional alternative method of classifying diagnostic statements, including information about both an underlying general disease and a manifestation in a particular organ or site. This system became known as the 'dagger and asterisk system' and is retained in the Tenth Revision. A number of other technical innovations were included in the Ninth Revision, aimed at increasing its flexibility for use in a variety of situations.\"\nIt was eventually replaced by ICD-10, the version currently in use by the WHO and most countries. Given the widespread expansion in the tenth revision, it is not possible to convert ICD-9 data sets directly into ICD-10 data sets, although some tools are available to help guide users.\nPublication of ICD-9 without IP restrictions in a world with evolving electronic data systems led to a range of products based on ICD-9, such as MeDRA or the Read directory.\nInternational Classification of Procedures in Medicine (ICPM).\nWhen ICD-9 was published by the World Health Organization (WHO), the International Classification of Procedures in Medicine (ICPM) was also developed (1975) and published (1978). The ICPM surgical procedures fascicle was originally created by the United States, based on its adaptations of ICD (called ICDA), which had contained a procedure classification since 1962. ICPM is published separately from the ICD disease classification as a series of supplementary documents called fascicles (bundles or groups of items). Each fascicle contains a classification of modes of laboratory, radiology, surgery, therapy, and other diagnostic procedures. Many countries have adapted and translated the ICPM in parts or as a whole and are using it with amendments since then.\nICD-9-CM (United States).\nThe \"International Classification of Diseases, Clinical Modification\" (ICD-9-CM) was an adaptation created by the US National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) and used in assigning diagnostic and procedure codes associated with inpatient, outpatient, and physician office utilization in the United States. The ICD-9-CM is based on the ICD-9 but provides for additional morbidity detail. It was updated annually on October 1.\nIt consists three volumes:\nThe NCHS and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services are the US governmental agencies responsible for overseeing all changes and modifications to the ICD-9-CM.\nICD-10.\nWork on ICD-10 began in 1983, and the new revision was endorsed by the Forty-third World Health Assembly in May 1990. The latest version came into effect in WHO Member States starting on 1 January 1993. The classification system allows more than 55,000 different codes and permits tracking of many new diagnoses and procedures, a significant expansion on the 17,000 codes available in ICD-9.\nAdoption was relatively swift in most of the world. Several materials are made available online by WHO to facilitate its use, including manuals for both general use (\"ICD-10 Volume 2\") and Chapter V specifically (\"The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders\"), training guidelines, a browser, and files for download. Some countries have adapted the international standard, such as the \"ICD-10-AM\" published in Australia in 1998 (also used in New Zealand), and the \"ICD-10-CA\" introduced in Canada in 2000.\nICD-10-CM (United States).\nAdoption of ICD-10-CM was slow in the United States. Since 1979, the US had required ICD-9-CM codes for Medicare and Medicaid claims, and most of the rest of the American medical industry followed suit. On 1 January 1999 the ICD-10 (without clinical extensions) was adopted for reporting mortality, but ICD-9-CM was still used for morbidity. Meanwhile, NCHS received permission from the WHO to create a clinical modification of the ICD-10, and has production of all these systems:\nOn 21 August 2008, the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) proposed new code sets to be used for reporting diagnoses and procedures on health care transactions. Under the proposal, the ICD-9-CM code sets would be replaced with the ICD-10-CM code sets, effective 1 October 2013. On 17 April 2012 the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) published a proposed rule that would delay, from 1 October 2013 to 1 October 2014, the compliance date for the ICD-10-CM and PCS. Once again, Congress delayed implementation date to 1 October 2015, after it was inserted into \"Doc Fix\" Bill without debate over objections of many.\nRevisions to ICD-10-CM Include:\nICD-10-CA (Canada).\nICD-10-CA is a clinical modification of ICD-10 developed by the Canadian Institute for Health Information for morbidity classification in Canada. ICD-10-CA applies beyond acute hospital care, and includes conditions and situations that are not diseases but represent risk factors to health, such as occupational and environmental factors, lifestyle and psycho-social circumstances.\nICD-11.\nThe eleventh revision of the International Classification of Diseases, or the ICD-11, is almost five times as big as the ICD-10. It was created following a decade of development involving over 300 specialists from 55 countries. Following an alpha version in May 2011 and a beta draft in May 2012, a stable version of the ICD-11 was released on 18 June 2018, and officially endorsed by all WHO members during the 72nd World Health Assembly on 25 May 2019.\nFor the ICD-11, the WHO decided to differentiate between the core of the system and its derived specialty versions, such as the ICD-O for oncology. As such, the collection of all ICD entities is called the Foundation Component. From this common core, subsets can be derived. The primary derivative of the Foundation is called the ICD-11 MMS, and it is this system that is commonly referred to and recognized as \"the ICD-11\". MMS stands for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics.\nICD-11 comes with an implementation package that includes transition tables from and to ICD-10, a translation tool, a coding tool, web-services, the ICD-11 CDDR (a DSM-like manual for Chapter 06), training material, and more. All tools are accessible after self-registration from the https://.\nThe ICD-11 \"officially\" came into effect on 1 January 2022, although the WHO admitted that \"not many countries are likely to adapt that quickly\". In the United States, the advisory body of the Secretary of Health and Human Services in 2019 gave an expected release year of 2025. However by April 2024, with little progress towards ICD-11 adoption having been made, the advisory body was recommending that the Secretary urgently appoint a central office or agency to take responsibility for co-ordinating the adoption of ICD-11 in the United States.\nUsage in the United States.\nIn the United States, the US Public Health Service published \"The International Classification of Diseases, Adapted for Indexing of Hospital Records and Operation Classification\" (ICDA), completed in 1962 and expanding the ICD-7 in a number of areas to more completely meet the indexing needs of hospitals. The US Public Health Service later published the \"Eighth Revision, International Classification of Diseases, Adapted for Use in the United States\", commonly referred to as ICDA-8, for official national morbidity and mortality statistics. This was followed by the \"ICD, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification\", known as ICD-9-CM, published by the US Department of Health and Human Services and used by hospitals and other healthcare facilities to better describe the clinical picture of the patient. The diagnosis component of ICD-9-CM is completely consistent with ICD-9 codes, and remains the data standard for reporting morbidity. National adaptations of the ICD-10 progressed to incorporate both clinical code (ICD-10-CM) and procedure code (ICD-10-PCS) with the revisions completed in 2003. In 2009, the US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced that it would begin using ICD-10 on April 1, 2010, with full compliance by all involved parties by 2013.\nHowever, the US extended the deadline twice and did not formally require transitioning to ICD-10-CM (for most clinical encounters) until October 1, 2015.\nThe years for which causes of death in the United States have been classified by each revision as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCause of death on United States death certificates, statistically compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), are coded in the ICD, which does not include codes for human and system factors commonly called medical errors.\nUsage in the European Union.\nSome EU countries use the ICD to compute the maximum Abbreviated Injury Scale for traffic statistics.\nMental health conditions.\nThe various ICD editions include sections that classify mental and behavioural disorders. The \"ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders: Clinical Descriptions and Diagnostic Guidelines\" \u2013 also known as the \"blue book\" \u2013 is derived from Chapter V of ICD-10 and gives the diagnostic criteria for the conditions listed at each category therein. The blue book was developed separately to, but coexists with, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) of the American Psychiatric Association\u2014though both seek to use the same diagnostic classifications. A survey of psychiatrists in 66 countries comparing use of the ICD-10 and DSM-IV found that the former was more often used for clinical diagnosis while the latter was more valued for research. \nAs part of the development of the ICD-11, WHO established an \"International Advisory Group\" to guide what would become the chapter on \"Mental, behavioural or neurodevelopmental disorders\". The working group proposed that ICD-11 should declassify the categories within ICD-10 at \"F66 Psychological and behavioural disorders that are associated with sexual development and orientation\". The group reported to WHO that there was \"no evidence\" these classifications were clinically useful, as they do not \"contribute to health service delivery or treatment selection nor provide essential information for public health surveillance.\" Adding that; despite ICD-10 explicitly stating \"sexual orientation by itself is not to be considered a disorder\", the inclusion of such categories \"suggest that mental disorders exist that are uniquely linked to sexual orientation and gender expression.\" A position already recognised by the DSM, as well as other classification systems. \nThe ICD is actually the official system for the US, although many mental health professionals do not realize this due to the dominance of the DSM. \nA psychologist has stated: \"Serious problems with the clinical utility of both the ICD and the DSM are widely acknowledged.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nNote: Since adoption of ICD-10 CM in the US, several online tools have been mushrooming. They all refer to that particular modification and thus are not linked here."}
{"id": "15461", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15461", "title": "ICD-9", "text": ""}
{"id": "15462", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15462", "title": "Integral domain", "text": "Commutative ring with no zero divisors other than zero\nIn mathematics, an integral domain is a nonzero commutative ring in which the product of any two nonzero elements is nonzero. In an integral domain, every nonzero element \"a\" has the cancellation property, that is, if \"a\" \u2260 0, \"ab\" \n \"ac\" implies \"b\" \n \"c\". Integral domains are generalizations of the ring of integers and provide a setting that is useful for studying divisibility.\n\"Integral domain\" is defined almost universally as above, but there is some variation. This article follows the convention that rings have a multiplicative identity, generally denoted 1, but some authors do not follow this, by not requiring integral domains to have a multiplicative identity. Noncommutative integral domains are sometimes admitted. This article, however, follows the much more usual convention of reserving the term \"integral domain\" for the commutative case and using \"domain\" for the general case including noncommutative rings.\nSome sources, notably Lang, use the term entire ring for integral domain.\nSome specific kinds of integral domains are given with the following chain of class inclusions:\n rngs \u2283 rings \u2283 commutative\u00a0rings \u2283 integral\u00a0domains \u2283 integrally\u00a0closed\u00a0domains \u2283 GCD\u00a0domains \u2283 unique\u00a0factorization\u00a0domains \u2283 principal\u00a0ideal\u00a0domains \u2283 Euclidean\u00a0domains \u2283 fields \u2283 algebraically\u00a0closed fields\nDefinition.\nAn \"integral domain\" is a nonzero commutative ring in which the product of any two nonzero elements is nonzero. Equivalently:\nNon-examples.\nThe following rings are \"not\" integral domains.\n Neither formula_45 nor formula_46 is everywhere zero, but formula_47 is.\nDivisibility, prime elements, and irreducible elements.\nIn this section, \"R\" is an integral domain.\nGiven elements \"a\" and \"b\" of \"R\", one says that \"a\" \"divides\" \"b\", or that \"a\" is a \"divisor\" of \"b\", or that \"b\" is a \"multiple\" of \"a\", if there exists an element \"x\" in \"R\" such that \"ax\" = \"b\".\nThe \"units\" of \"R\" are the elements that divide 1; these are precisely the invertible elements in \"R\". Units divide all other elements.\nIf \"a\" divides \"b\" and \"b\" divides \"a\", then \"a\" and \"b\" are associated elements or associates. Equivalently, \"a\" and \"b\" are associates if \"a\" = \"ub\" for some unit \"u\".\nAn \"irreducible element\" is a nonzero non-unit that cannot be written as a product of two non-units.\nA nonzero non-unit \"p\" is a \"prime element\" if, whenever \"p\" divides a product \"ab\", then \"p\" divides \"a\" or \"p\" divides \"b\". Equivalently, an element \"p\" is prime if and only if the principal ideal (\"p\") is a nonzero prime ideal. \nBoth notions of irreducible elements and prime elements generalize the ordinary definition of prime numbers in the ring formula_56 if one considers as prime the negative primes.\nEvery prime element is irreducible. The converse is not true in general: for example, in the quadratic integer ring formula_57 the element 3 is irreducible (if it factored nontrivially, the factors would each have to have norm 3, but there are no norm 3 elements since formula_58 has no integer solutions), but not prime (since 3 divides formula_59 without dividing either factor). In a unique factorization domain (or more generally, a GCD domain), an irreducible element is a prime element.\nWhile unique factorization does not hold in formula_57, there is unique factorization of ideals. See Lasker\u2013Noether theorem.\nField of fractions.\nThe field of fractions \"K\" of an integral domain \"R\" is the set of fractions \"a\"/\"b\" with \"a\" and \"b\" in \"R\" and \"b\" \u2260 0 modulo an appropriate equivalence relation, equipped with the usual addition and multiplication operations. It is \"the smallest field containing \"R\"\" in the sense that there is an injective ring homomorphism \"R\" \u2192 \"K\" such that any injective ring homomorphism from \"R\" to a field factors through \"K\". The field of fractions of the ring of integers formula_1 is the field of rational numbers formula_62 The field of fractions of a field is isomorphic to the field itself.\nAlgebraic geometry.\nIntegral domains are characterized by the condition that they are reduced (that is \"x\"2 = 0 implies \"x\" = 0) and irreducible (that is there is only one minimal prime ideal). The former condition ensures that the nilradical of the ring is zero, so that the intersection of all the ring's minimal primes is zero. The latter condition is that the ring have only one minimal prime. It follows that the unique minimal prime ideal of a reduced and irreducible ring is the zero ideal, so such rings are integral domains. The converse is clear: an integral domain has no nonzero nilpotent elements, and the zero ideal is the unique minimal prime ideal.\nThis translates, in algebraic geometry, into the fact that the coordinate ring of an affine algebraic set is an integral domain if and only if the algebraic set is an algebraic variety.\nMore generally, a commutative ring is an integral domain if and only if its spectrum is an integral affine scheme.\nCharacteristic and homomorphisms.\nThe characteristic of an integral domain is either 0 or a prime number.\nIf \"R\" is an integral domain of prime characteristic \"p\", then the Frobenius endomorphism \"x\" \u21a6 \"x\"\"p\" is injective.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15464", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15464", "title": "Indus river", "text": ""}
{"id": "15466", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15466", "title": "Infundibulum", "text": "An infundibulum (Latin for \"funnel\"; plural, \"infundibula\") is a funnel-shaped cavity or organ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15467", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15467", "title": "Interrupt latency", "text": "In computing, interrupt latency refers to the delay between the start of an Interrupt Request (IRQ) and the start of the respective Interrupt Service Routine (ISR). For many operating systems, devices are serviced as soon as the device's interrupt handler is executed. Interrupt latency may be affected by microprocessor design, interrupt controllers, interrupt masking, and the operating system's (OS) interrupt handling methods.\nBackground.\nThere is usually a trade-off between interrupt latency, throughput, and processor utilization. Many of the techniques of CPU and OS design that improve interrupt latency will decrease throughput and increase processor utilization. Techniques that increase throughput may increase interrupt latency and increase processor utilization. Lastly, trying to reduce processor utilization may increase interrupt latency and decrease throughput.\nMinimum interrupt latency is largely determined by the interrupt controller circuit and its configuration. They can also affect the jitter in the interrupt latency, which can drastically affect the real-time schedulability of the system. The Intel APIC architecture is well known for producing a huge amount of interrupt latency jitter.\nMaximum interrupt latency is largely determined by the methods an OS uses for interrupt handling. For example, most processors allow programs to disable interrupts, putting off the execution of interrupt handlers, in order to protect critical sections of code. During the execution of such a critical section, all interrupt handlers that cannot execute safely within a critical section are blocked (they save the minimum amount of information required to restart the interrupt handler after all critical sections have exited). So the interrupt latency for a blocked interrupt is extended to the end of the critical section, plus any interrupts with equal and higher priority that arrived while the block was in place.\nMany computer systems require low interrupt latencies, especially embedded systems that need to control machinery in real-time. Sometimes these systems use a real-time operating system (RTOS). An RTOS makes the promise that no more than a specified maximum amount of time will pass between executions of subroutines. In order to do this, the RTOS must also guarantee that interrupt latency will never exceed a predefined maximum.\nConsiderations.\nAdvanced interrupt controllers implement a multitude of hardware features in order to minimize the overhead during context switches and the effective interrupt latency. These include features like:\nAlso, there are many other methods hardware may use to help lower the requirements for shorter interrupt latency in order to make a given interrupt latency tolerable in a situation. These include buffers, and flow control. For example, most network cards implement transmit and receive ring buffers, interrupt rate limiting, and hardware flow control. Buffers allow data to be stored until it can be transferred, and flow control allows the network card to pause communications without having to discard data if the buffer is full.\nModern hardware also implements interrupt rate limiting. This helps prevent interrupt storms or live-locks by having the hardware wait a programmable minimum amount of time between each interrupt it generates. Interrupt rate limiting reduces the amount of time spent servicing interrupts, allowing the processor to spend more time doing useful work. Exceeding this time results in a soft (recoverable) or hard (non-recoverable) error.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15468", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15468", "title": "\u0130skender kebap", "text": "Turkish meat dish (variety of \"d\u00f6ner\")\n\u0130skender kebap is a Turkish dish that consists of sliced meat topped with hot tomato sauce over pieces of pita bread, and generously slathered with melted special sheep's milk butter and yogurt. It can be prepared from thinly cut grilled lamb or chicken. The prepared kebab is placed at a distance of from the previously lit fire and is cooked slowly, then it is cut thinly with a knife from top to bottom and is then served. Tomato sauce and melted butter are generally poured over the dish at the table, for the customer's amusement.\nIt is one of the most popular dishes of Turkey. It takes its name from its inventor, \u0130skender, who lived in Bursa in the late 19th century Ottoman Empire.\n\"Kebap\u00e7\u0131 \u0130skender\" is trademarked by the \u0130skendero\u011flu family, who still run the restaurant in Bursa. This dish is available in many restaurants throughout the country mostly under the name \"\u0130skender kebap\", \"Bursa kebab\u0131\", or at times with an alternative one made up by the serving restaurant such as \"Uluda\u011f kebab\u0131\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15471", "revid": "48302818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15471", "title": "LGBTQ people and Islam", "text": "Within the Muslim world, sentiment towards LGBTQ people varies and has varied between societies and individual Muslims. While colloquial and often \"de facto\" official acceptance of at least some homosexual and gender variant behaviors were commonplace in pre-modern periods, later developments, starting from the 19th century, have created a predominantly hostile environment for LGBTQ people.\nThere are differences in how the Qur'an and later \"hadith\" traditions (orally transmitted collections of Muhammad's teachings) treat homosexuality, with the latter being far more explicitly negative. This has caused rifts in legalistic opinion, as while all major schools of jurisprudence broadly agreed that \"liwat\" (anal sex between men) was \"haram\", opinions varied in terms of the legality, nature, and severity of punishment, as well as the legal situation of women's same-sex relations. Furthermore, these formulations largely remained theoretical, as historical evidence from the pre-modern period shows \"de facto\" tolerance of homosexual relationships. Historical records also suggest that in the rare event that laws against homosexuality were invoked in the pre-modern period, they were done so mainly in cases of rape or other \"exceptionally blatant infringement on public morals\" as defined by Islamic law. These factors allowed themes of homoeroticism and pederasty to be cultivated in Islamic poetry and other Islamic literary genres, despite the stances of religious scholars, from the 8th century CE into the modern era. The conceptions of homosexuality found in these texts resembled the traditions of ancient Greece and ancient Rome as opposed to the modern understanding of sexual orientation.\nIn the modern era, Muslim public attitudes towards homosexuality underwent a marked change beginning in the 19th century, largely due to the global spread of Islamic fundamentalist movements, namely Salafism and Wahhabism. The Muslim world was also influenced by the sexual notions and restrictive norms that were prevalent in the Christian world at the time, particularly with regard to anti-homosexual legislation prevalent throughout European societies; a number of Muslim-majority countries that were once colonies of European empires retain the criminal penalties against homosexuality that were originally implemented by European colonial authorities.\nAs Western culture eventually moved towards secularism and thus enabled a platform for the flourishing of many LGBTQ movements, many Muslim fundamentalists came to associate the Western world with \"ravaging moral decay\" and rampant homosexuality. In contemporary society, prejudice, anti-LGBTQ discrimination and anti-LGBTQ violence\u2014including violence which is practiced within legal systems\u2014persist in much of the Muslim world, exacerbated by socially conservative attitudes and the rise of Islamist ideologies in some countries; there are laws in place against homosexual activities in a larger number of Muslim-majority countries, with a number of them prescribing the death penalty for convicted offenders. In surveys of public opinion, the vast majority of Muslims across various countries currently reject the notion that homosexuality should be acceptable in society. Most Muslim-majority countries have also opposed moves to advance LGBTQ rights and recognition at the United Nations (UN), including within the UN General Assembly and the UN Human Rights Council.\nDespite these developments, contemporary Islamic jurisprudence generally accepts the possibility for transgender people (\"mukhannith\"/\"mutarajjilah\") to change their gender status, but only after surgery, linking one's gender to biological markers. Trans people are nonetheless confronted with stigma, discrimination, intimidation, and harassment in many ways in Muslim-majority societies. Transgender identities are often considered under the gender binary, although some pre-modern scholars had recognized \"effeminate men\" as a form of third gender, as long as their behaviour was natural and not a performance.\nHistory.\nMuslim attitudes to LGBTQ practices has varied throughout Islamic history; legal scholars condemned and often formulated punishments for homosexual acts, yet lenient (or often non-existent) enforcement allowed for toleration, and sometimes celebration of such acts. \nHomoeroticism was idealized in the form of poetry or artistic declarations of love, often from an older man to a younger man or adolescent boy. This was accepted in courtly settings as a system of pederasty, though egalitarian same-sex relations also occurred (with the threat of the social censure of the passive partner, if revealed). Accordingly, the Arabic language had an appreciable vocabulary of homoerotic terms, with multiple words to describe types of male prostitutes, including those pre-dating Islam. Schmitt identifies some twenty words in Arabic, Persian, and Turkish to identify those who are penetrated. Other related Arabic words includes \"mukhannathun\" (effeminate men), \"ma'b\u00fbn\", \"halaq\u012b\", and \"baghgh\u0101\".\nPre-modern era.\nThere is little evidence for homosexual practice in Islamic societies for the first century and a half of the Islamic era. Homoerotic poetry appears suddenly at the end of the 8th century CE, particularly in Baghdad in the work of Abu Nuwas (756\u2013814), who became a master of all the contemporary genres of Arabic poetry. The famous author Jahiz tried to explain the abrupt change in attitudes toward homosexuality after the Abbasid Revolution by the arrival of the Abbasid army from Khurasan, who are said to have consoled themselves with male pages when they were forbidden to take their wives with them. According to numerous contemporaneous authors, the increased prosperity following the early conquests was accompanied by a supposed \"corruption of morals\" in the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina; Bosworth and others infer that homosexual practice became more widespread during this time as a result of acculturation to foreign customs, such as the music and dance practiced by \"mukhannathun\", who were mostly foreign in origin, while other authors claim this process was related to interfaith dialogue, especially in and around Transoxiana. \nThe following centuries witnessed a continuation of this trend. The Abbasid caliphate Al-Amin (r. 809\u2013813) was said to have required slave women to be dressed in masculine clothing so he could be persuaded to have sex with them, and a broader fashion for \"ghulamiyyat\" (boy-like girls) is reflected in literature of the period. Religious scholars were also influenced by this environment, but to a lesser extent; Chief Judge of the Abbasid Caliphate Yahya ibn Aktham permitted homosexual acts, despite being harsh on other sexual acts such as fornication. This had proved controversial with a writer, Abi Salma, who wrote \"we had hoped to see justice apparent, but our implorations ended in despair, for, can the world and its people come to any good when the Grand Judge of Muslims sodomizes (\"yalu\u1e6fu\")?\"52 Later on, in an eleventh-century discussion among the scholars of Baghdad, some scholars who showed traits of bisexuality argued that it is natural for a man to desire anal intercourse with a fellow man, but this would be only allowed in the afterlife.152 Similarly, El-Rouayheb suggests that as Islamic orthodoxy stabilized and religious scholars considered sodomy as an abhorrent sin more or less without exception, most of them did not believe that this prohibition covered falling in love or writing poetry.\nThe conceptions of homosexuality found in classical Islamic texts resembled the traditions of classical Greece and those of ancient Rome, rather than the modern understanding of sexual orientation. In earlier texts, it was expected that many mature men would be sexually attracted to both women and adolescent boys (with a supposed 'ideal' beginning at the age of fourteen and lasting until the growth of a full beard), and such men were expected to wish to play only an active role in homosexual intercourse once they reached adulthood. These norms were not static, however; while the growth of a beard was considered to be the conventional age when an adolescent lost his homoerotic appeal in earlier periods, the age of the stereotypical beloved became less restricted during later periods. This prototype was often represented in Persian poetry by Turkic slave-soldiers in most cases considerably older than the supposed 'ideal age', and was also illustrated by the story of Mahmud of Ghazni (971\u20131030), the ruler of the Ghaznavid Empire, and his cupbearer Malik Ayaz. While classical texts and poetry covered homoeroticism in a restricted fashion, many authors argue that in many periods, the permissiveness and egalitarianism in the discourse of same-sex relations varied from one context to another. Murray argues that despite the normative nature of a restrictive pederastic discourse in courtly settings, egalitarian same-sex relations did happen; and furthermore, Rowson points out that male authors writing about sex seem to have been relatively ambivalent about female same-sex relations, which were far more egalitarian. Speaking for the lands of the Ottoman Empire specifically, Ze'evi claims that the stigma attached to adult passive partners common in the Golden Age seems to be suspiciously absent from Ottoman medical treatises; and further argues that, with the exception of a far more male-centered, patriarchal voice, colloquial Ottoman sexual discourse would \"to us (...) be more akin to latter-day television series such as \"Sex and the City\" or \"Will and Grace\" than to most nineteenth-and twentieth-century sexual discourse.\" In turn, more open discussions of sexuality during these times can be found in numerous contexts. The compendiums of both folk and classical poetry and song compiled by Ali Ufk\u00ee, contains numerous songs and poems related to male and female same-sex love, at least in one case in an egalitarian context. The works of Enderunlu Faz\u0131l similarly covers both male and female same-sex love in a much less age-segragated fashion. Ned\u00eem, the famed Ottoman poet, seems to have freely talked about love with older men, as he made frequent mention of beards in his Turkish and Persian poetry. Similarly, shadow play often represented female same-sex love as well as one of the main characters, \"Karag\u00f6z\", switching between acitve and passive roles. \nDespite these exceptions in certain settings and periods however, homosexual practices present in courtly and 'respectable' settings in the Islamic world remained largely age-segregated. In the medical tradition, seeking to play a passive role was considered both unnatural and shameful for a mature man, and following Greek precedents, the Islamic world regarded this as pathological. Therefore, the medical term \"ubnah\" was used for the desire of a man to exclusively be on the receiving end of anal intercourse. Physicians that theorized on \"ubnah\" includes Rhazes, who thought that it was correlated with small genitals and that a treatment was possible provided that the subject was deemed to be not too effeminate and the behavior not \"prolonged\". Dawud al-Antaki, in contrast, advanced that it could have been caused by an acidic substance embedded in the veins of the anus, causing itchiness and thus the need to seek relief.\nModern era.\nThe 18th and 19th centuries saw the rise of Islamic fundamentalism such as Wahhabism, which came to call for stricter adherence to the Hadith. In 1744, Muhammad bin Saud, the tribal ruler of the town of Diriyah, endorsed ibn Abd al-Wahhab's mission and the two swore an oath to establish a state together run according to what they considered to be true Islamic principles. For the next seventy years, until the dismantlement of the first state in 1818, the Wahhabis dominated from Damascus to Baghdad. Homosexuality, which had been largely tolerated in the Ottoman Empire, became criminalized under the Wahhabis, and those found guilty were thrown to their deaths from the top of the minarets.\nA few decades later, in 1858, the Tanzimat reforms took effect in the Ottoman Empire. These reforms, in total, nullified much of the earlier legal systems' rulings. As a ruling on homosexuality was not included in the new sets of laws, the Ottomans had effectively annulled any prohibition of homosexuality, theoretical or otherwise. However, many authors claim that the effects of this reformist period were the repression, not further acceptance, of same-sex relations: \u00d6zsoy writes that before the 19th-century, Ottoman society had not effectively criminalized homosexuality to begin with, and Lapidus and Salaymeh claim that by the 1850s, via European influence, they began censoring same-sex relations that they had once seen as relatively normative.\nAccording to Dror Ze'evi, these repressive processes shaped the nineteenth century in the Ottoman Empire, resulting in the reinterpretation of local cultural material and traditions. Ze'evi traces these processes to European travelers denouncing the Ottomans for their ostensibly 'corrupt' sexual proclivities, and Ze'evi argues that the literate classes of the empire responded by 'reinventing' their own sexual norms. A new discourse of an idealized, heteronormative Ottoman world that surpassed Europe in its ostensible sexual 'morality' was the product of this process, with local practices and discourses were actively suppressed to align with this invented tradition. In terms of same-sex relations specifically, Ahmed Cevdet Pasha stated, at the time:\"Woman-lovers (\"zendost\") have increased in number, while boy-beloveds (\"mahbub\") have decreased. It is as if the People of Lot have been swallowed by the earth. The love and affinity that were, in Istanbul, notoriously and customarily directed towards young men have now been redirected towards girls, in accordance with the state of nature.\"\nWith reference to the Muslim world more broadly, Tilo Beckers claims that while \"endogenous changes\" that sought to reinterpret religious and cultural texts were influential in the shift of attitudes seen in the 19th century Muslim world, \"exogenous changes\" from European countries also defined new social attitudes in the Muslim world. Bauer similarly writes that \"although contemporary Islamist movements decry homosexuality as a form of Western decadence, the current prejudice against it among Muslim publics stems from an amalgamation of traditional Islamic legal theory with popular notions that were imported from Europe during the colonial era. In some Muslim-majority countries, current anti-LGBTQ laws were directly enacted by United Kingdom or Soviet organs and retained following independence. The 1860 Indian Penal Code, which included an anti-sodomy statute, was used as a basis of penal laws in other parts of the empire. \nContemporary developments.\nMore recently, persecution of LGBTQ+ people have also been exacerbated by a rise in Islamic fundamentalism and the emergence of the gay-rights movement in the West, which allowed Islamists to paint homosexuality as a noxious Western import. Dynes and Donaldson point out that North African countries under French colonial tutelage lacked anti-sodomy statutes in their colonial laws, and that their anti-LGBTQ laws were only born afterwards, with the full weight of modern Muslim public opinion descending on those who, on the model of the gay liberationists of the West, would seek to make \"homosexuality\" (above all, adult men taking passive roles) publicly respectable.\nRecent developments in many countries mirror this trend. In some countries like Iran and Iraq, the dominant discourse is that Western imperialism has spread homosexuality. In Iran, several hundred political opponents were executed in the aftermath of the 1979 Islamic Revolution and justified it by accusing them of homosexuality. Homosexual intercourse became a capital offense in Iran's \"Islamic Penal Code\" in 1991. Though the grounds for execution in Iran are difficult to track, there is evidence that several people were hanged for homosexual behavior in 2005\u20132006 and in 2016, mostly in cases of dubious charges of rape. In Iraq, where homosexuality is legal, the breakdown of law and order following the Second Gulf War allowed Islamist militias and vigilantes to act on their prejudice against gays, with ISIS gaining particular notoriety for the gruesome acts of anti-LGBTQ violence committed under its rule of parts of Syria and Iraq. In Egypt, though, again, homosexuality is not explicitly criminalized, it has been widely prosecuted under vaguely formulated \"morality\" laws. Under the current rule of Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, arrests of LGBTQ individuals have risen fivefold, apparently reflecting an effort to appeal to conservatives. In Uzbekistan, an anti-sodomy law, passed after World War II with the goal of increasing the birth rate, was invoked in 2004 against a gay rights activist, who was imprisoned and subjected to extreme abuse.\nScripture and Islamic jurisprudence.\nSame-sex relations.\nIn the Quran.\nThe Quran contains several ostensible allusions to homosexual activity, which has prompted considerable exegetical and legal commentaries over the centuries. The subject is most clearly addressed in the story of Sodom and Gomorrah (seven verses) after the men of the city demand to have sex with the male messengers sent by God to Lot (or Lut). The Quranic narrative largely conforms to that found in Genesis. In one passage the Quran says that the men \"solicited his guests of him\" (), using an expression that parallels phrasing used to describe the attempted seduction of Joseph, and in multiple passages they are accused of \"coming with lust\" to men instead of women (or their wives). The Quran terms this lewdness or fahisha () unprecedented in the history of the world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And \u02f9remember\u02fa when Lot scolded \u02f9the men of\u02fa his people, \u02f9saying,\u02fa \"Do you commit a shameful deed that no man has ever done before? You lust after men instead of women! You are certainly transgressors.\" But his people\u2019s only response was to say, \"Expel them from your land! They are a people who wish to remain chaste!\" So We saved him and his family except his wife, who was one of the doomed. We poured upon them a rain \u02f9of brimstone\u02fa. See what was the end of the wicked!\u2014\u200a\nThe destruction of the \"people of Lut\" is generally thought to be explicitly associated with their sexual practices. Later exegetical literature built on these verses as writers attempted to give their own views as to what went on; and there was general agreement among exegetes that the \"lewdness\" alluded to by the Quranic passages was attempted sodomy, specifically anal intercourse.\nSome Muslim scholars, however, such as the \"\u1e92\u0101hir\u012b scholar\" (literalist) ibn \u1e24azm, argued that the \"people of Lut\" were destroyed not because of participation in homosexuality \"per se\", but because of disregarding prophets and messengers and attempting to rape one of them.\nNevertheless, the sins of the \"people of Lut\" () subsequently became proverbial and the Arabic words for the act of anal sex between men such as \"liwat\" () and for a person who performs such acts () both derive from his name, although Lut was not the one demanding sex.\n\"Zina\" verse.\nOnly one passage in the Quran prescribes a strictly legal position. It is not restricted to homosexual behaviour, however, and deals more generally with \"zina\" (illicit sexual intercourse):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u02f9As for\u02fa those of your women who commit illegal intercourse\u2014call four witnesses from among yourselves. If they testify, confine the offenders to their homes until they die or Allah ordains a \u02f9different\u02fa way for them. And the two among you who commit this sin\u2014discipline them. If they repent and mend their ways, relieve them. Surely Allah is ever Accepting of Repentance, Most Merciful.\u2014\u200a\nIn the exegetical Islamic literature, this verse has provided the basis for the view that Muhammad took a lenient approach towards male homosexual practices. The Orientalist scholar Pinhas Ben Nahum has argued that \"it is obvious that the Prophet viewed the vice with philosophic indifference. Not only is the punishment not indicated\u2014it was probably some public reproach or insult of a slight nature\u2014but mere penitence sufficed to escape the punishment\". Most exegetes hold that these verses refer to illicit heterosexual relationships, although a minority view attributed to the Mu'tazilite scholar Abu Muslim al-Isfahani interpreted them as referring to homosexual relations. This view was widely rejected by medieval scholars, but has found some acceptance in modern times.\nCupbearers in paradise.\nSome Quranic verses describing the Islamic paradise refer to perpetually youthful attendants which inhabit it, and they are described as both male and female servants: the females are referred to as \"\u1e25\u016br\", whereas the males are referred to as \"ghilm\u0101n\", \"wild\u0101n\", and \"suq\u0101h\". The slave boys are referred to in the Quran as \"immortal boys\" ( https://, https://) or \"young men\" ( https://) who serve wine and meals to the blessed. Although the \"tafsir\" literature does not interpret this as a homoerotic allusion, the connection was made in other literary genres, mostly humorously. For example, the Abbasid-era poet Abu Nuwas wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A beautiful lad came carrying the wine \nWith smooth hands and fingers dyed with henna \nAnd with long hair of golden curls around his cheeks ... \nI have a lad who is like the beautiful lads of paradise \nAnd his eyes are big and beautiful\nJurists of the Hanafi school took up the question seriously, considering, but ultimately rejecting the suggestion that homosexual pleasures were, like wine, forbidden in this world but enjoyed in the afterlife. Ibn '\u00c2bid\u00een's H\u00e2shiya refers to a debate among the scholars of Baghdad in the eleventh century, that some scholars argued in favor of that analogy.\nIn the hadith.\nThe hadith (sayings and actions attributed to Muhammad) show that homosexual behaviour was not unknown in seventh-century Arabia. However, given that the Quran did not specify the punishment of homosexual practices, Islamic jurists increasingly turned to several \"more explicit\" hadiths in an attempt to find guidance on appropriate punishment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, the Prophet states that: \"If a woman comes upon a woman, they are both adulteresses, if a man comes upon a man, then they are both adulterers.\"\u2014\u200a\nWhile there are no reports relating to homosexuality in the best known and authentic hadith collections of \"Sahih al-Bukhari\" and \"Sahih Muslim\", other canonical collections record a number of condemnations of the \"act of the people of Lut\" (male-to-male anal intercourse).\nAccording to Oliver Leaman, hadiths seem to permit homoerotic feelings as long as they are not translated into action. However, in one hadith attributed to Muhammad himself, which exists in multiple variants, the Islamic prophet acknowledged homoerotic temptation towards young boys and warned his Companions against it: \"Do not gaze at the beardless youths, for verily they have eyes more tempting than the \"houris\"\" or \"... for verily they resemble the \"houris\"\". These beardless youths are also described as wearing sumptuous robes and having perfumed hair. Consequently, Islamic religious leaders, skeptical of Muslim men's capacity of self-control over their sexual urges, have forbidden looking and yearning both at males and females.\nIn addition, there is a number of \"purported (but mutually inconsistent) reports\" (\"athar\") of punishments of sodomy ordered by some of the early caliphs. Abu Bakr apparently recommended toppling a wall on the culprit, or else burning him alive, while Ali ibn Abi Talib is said to have ordered death by stoning for one sodomite and had another thrown head-first from the top of the highest building in the town; according to Ibn Abbas, the latter punishment must be followed by stoning.\nThere are, however, fewer hadith mentioning homosexual behaviour in women; and punishment (if any) for lesbianism was not clarified.\nIn traditional jurisprudence.\nThe scarcity of concrete prescriptions from \"hadith\" and the contradictory nature of information about the actions of early authorities resulted in the lack of agreement among classical jurists as to how homosexual activity should be treated. Classical Islamic jurists did not deal with homosexuality as a sexual orientation, since the latter concept is modern and has no equivalent in traditional law, which dealt with it under the technical terms of \"liwat\" and \"zina\".\nBroadly, traditional Islamic law took the view that homosexual activity could not be legally sanctioned because it takes place outside religiously recognised marriages. All major schools of Islamic law considered \"liwat\" (anal sex) as a punishable offence, and most legal schools treated homosexual intercourse with penetration similarly to unlawful heterosexual intercourse under the rubric of \"zina.\" From a practical standpoint, however, as a \"hadd\" punishment for \"zina\" requires testimony from four witnesses of the actual act of penetration or a confession from the accused repeated four times, the legal criteria for the prescribed punishments for homosexual acts were very difficult to fulfill in the pre-modern period. The debates of classical jurists were, therefore, \"to a large extent theoretical, since homosexual relations have always been tolerated\" in pre-modern Islamic societies. While it is difficult to determine to what extent the legal sanctions were enforced in different times and places, historical record suggests that the laws were invoked mainly in cases of rape or other \"exceptionally blatant infringement on public morals\".\nBeyond these practical caveats, there were differences of opinion with respect to methods of punishment, if and when legal action was taken. Some legal schools \"prescribed capital punishment for sodomy, but others opted only for a relatively mild discretionary punishment.\" The Hanbalites are the most severe among Sunni schools, insisting on capital punishment for anal sex in all cases, while the other schools generally restrict punishment to flagellation with or without banishment, unless the culprit is \"muhsan\" (Muslim free married adult), and Hanafis often suggest no physical punishment at all, leaving the choice to the judge's discretion. The founder of the Hanafi school Abu Hanifa refused to recognize the analogy between sodomy and \"zina\", although his two principal students disagreed with him on this point. For unclear reasons, the treatment of homosexuality in Twelver Shi'ism jurisprudence is generally harsher than in Sunni fiqh, while Zaydi and Isma'ili Shia jurists took positions similar to the Sunnis. \nWhere capital punishment is prescribed and a particular method is recommended, the methods range from stoning (Hanbali, Maliki), to the sword (some Hanbalites and Shafi'ites), or leaving it to the court to choose between several methods, including throwing the culprit off a high building (Shi'ite). Where flogging is prescribed, there is a tendency for indulgence and some recommend that the prescribed penalty should not be applied in full, with Ibn Hazm reducing the number of strokes to 10. There was debate as to whether the active and passive partners in anal sex should be punished equally.\nBeyond penetrative anal sex, there was \"general agreement\" that \"other homosexual acts (including any between females) were lesser offenses, subject only to discretionary punishment.\" Some jurists viewed sexual intercourse as possible only for an individual who possesses a phallus; hence those definitions of sexual intercourse that rely on the entry of as little of the corona of the phallus into a partner's orifice. Since women do not possess a phallus and cannot have intercourse with one another, they are, in this interpretation, physically incapable of committing zin\u0101.\nGender-variant people.\nIn Classical Arabic and Islamic literature, the plural term \"mukhannathun\" (singular: \"mukhannath\") was a term used to describe gender-variant people, and it has typically referred to effeminate men or people with ambiguous sexual characteristics, who appeared feminine and functioned sexually or socially in roles typically carried out by women. According to the Iranian scholar Mehrdad Alipour, \"in the premodern period, Muslim societies were aware of five manifestations of gender ambiguity: This can be seen through figures such as the \"khasi\" (eunuch), the \"hijra\", the \"mukhannath\", the \"mamsuh\" and the \"khuntha\" (hermaphrodite/intersex).\" Gender specialists Aisya Aymanee M. Zaharin and Maria Pallotta-Chiarolli give the following explanation of the meaning of the term \"mukhannath\" and its derivate Arabic forms in the hadith literature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Various academics such as Alipour (2017) and Rowson (1991) point to references in the \"Hadith\" to the existence of \"mukhannath\": a man who carries femininity in his movements, in his appearance, and in the softness of his voice. The Arabic term for a trans woman is \"mukhannith\" as they want to change their sex characteristics, while \"mukhannath\" presumably do not/have not. The \"mukhannath\" or effeminate man is obviously male, but naturally behaves like a female, unlike the \"khuntha\", an intersex person, who could be either male or female. Ironically, while there is no obvious mention of \"mukhannath\", \"mukhannith\", or \"khuntha\" in the Qur\u2019\u0101n, this holy book clearly recognizes that there are some people, who are neither male nor female, or are in between, and/or could also be \"non-procreative\" [\u0639\u064e\u0642\u0650\u064a\u0645] (Surah 42 Ash-Shuraa, verse 49\u201350).\nMoreover, within Islam, there is a tradition of the elaboration and refinement of extended religious doctrines through scholarship. This doctrine contains a passage by the scholar and hadith collector An-Nawawi:A mukhannath is the one (\"male\") who carries in his movements, in his appearance and in his language the characteristics of a woman. There are two types; the first is the one in whom these characteristics are innate, he did not put them on by himself, and therein is no guilt, no blame and no shame, as long as he does not perform any (illicit) act or exploit it for money (prostitution etc.). The second type acts like a woman out of immoral purposes and he is the sinner and blameworthy.The hadith collection of Bukhari (compiled in the 9th century from earlier oral traditions) includes a report regarding \"mukhannathun\", effeminate men who were granted access to secluded women's quarters and engaged in other non-normative gender behavior.\nAnother hadith also mention the punishment of banishment, both in connection with Umm Salama's servant and a man who worked as a musician. Muhammad described the musician as a \"mukhannath\" and threatened to banish him if he did not end his unacceptable career.\nAccording to Everett K. Rowson, professor of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies at New York University, none of the sources state that Muhammad banished more than two \"mukhannathun\", and it is not clear to what extent the action was taken because of their breaking of gender rules in itself or because of the \"perceived damage to social institutions from their activities as matchmakers and their corresponding access to women\".\nModern laws in Muslim-majority countries.\nCriminalization.\nAccording to the International Lesbian and Gay Association (ILGA) seven countries retain capital punishment for homosexual behavior: Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Iran, Afghanistan, Mauritania, northern Nigeria, southern Somalia, and the United Arab Emirates. Afghanistan also has the death penalty for homosexuality since the 2021 Taliban takeover. In Qatar, Algeria, Uzbekistan, and the Maldives, homosexuality is punished with time in prison or a fine. This has led to controversy regarding Qatar, which hosted the 2022 FIFA World Cup. In 2010, human rights groups questioned the awarding of hosting rights to Qatar, due to concerns that gay football fans may be jailed. In response, Sepp Blatter, head of FIFA, joked that they would have to \"refrain from sexual activity\" while in Qatar. He later withdrew the remarks after condemnation from rights groups.\nWhile Egypt does not have a de jure law explicitly criminalizing homosexual behavior, gay men (or people suspected of being gay) have been prosecuted under general public morality laws. (See Cairo 52.) \"Sexual relations between consenting adult persons of the same sex in private are not prohibited as such. However, the Law on the Combating of Prostitution, and the law against debauchery have been used to imprison gay men in recent years.\" In 2019, an Egyptian TV host was sentenced to one year in prison on charges of promoting debauchery after interviewing a gay man.\nThe Sunni Islamist militant group and Salafi-jihadist terrorist organization ISIL/ISIS/IS/Daesh, which invaded and claimed parts of Iraq and Syria between 2014 and 2017, enacted the political and religious persecution of LGBT people and decreed capital punishment for them. ISIL/ISIS/IS/Daesh terrorists have executed more than two dozen men and women for suspected homosexual activity, including several thrown off the top of buildings in highly publicized executions.\nIn India, which has the third-largest Muslim population in the world, and where Islam is the largest minority religion, the largest Islamic seminary (Darul Uloom Deoband) has vehemently opposed recent government moves to abrogate and liberalize laws from the colonial era that banned homosexuality. As of September 2018, homosexuality is no longer a criminal act in India, and most of the religious groups withdrew their opposing claims against it in the Supreme Court.\nIn Iraq, homosexuality is allowed by the government, but terrorist groups often carry out illegal executions of gay people. Saddam Hussein was \"unbothered by sexual mores\". Ali Hili reports that \"since the 2003 invasion more than 700 people have been killed because of their sexuality.\" He calls Iraq the \"most dangerous place in the world for sexual minorities.\"\nIn Jordan, where homosexuality is legal, \"gay hangouts have been raided or closed on bogus charges, such as serving alcohol illegally.\" Despite this legality, social attitudes towards homosexuality are still hostile and hateful.\nIn Pakistan, its law is a mixture of both British colonial law as well as Islamic law, both which prescribe criminal penalties for same-sex sexual acts. The Pakistan Penal Code of 1860, originally developed under colonial rule, punishes sodomy with a possible prison sentence. Yet, the more likely situation for gay and bisexual men is sporadic police fines, and jail sentences.\nIn Bangladesh, homosexual acts are illegal and punishable according to section 377. In 2009 and 2013, the Bangladeshi Parliament refused to overturn Section 377.\nIn Saudi Arabia, the maximum punishment for homosexual acts is public execution by beheading.\nIn Malaysia, homosexual acts are illegal and punishable with jail, fine, deportation, whipping or chemical castration. In October 2018, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad stated that Malaysia would not \"copy\" Western nations' approach towards LGBTQ rights, indicating that these countries were exhibiting a disregard for the institutions of the traditional family and marriage, as the value system in Malaysia is good. In May 2019, in response to the warning of George Clooney about intending to impose death penalty for homosexuals like Brunei, the Deputy Foreign Minister Marzuki Yahya pointed out that Malaysia does not kill gay people, and will not resort to killing sexual minorities. He also said, although such lifestyles deviate from Islam, the government would not impose such a punishment on the group.\nIndonesia does not have a sodomy law and does not currently criminalize private, non-commercial homosexual acts among consenting adults, except in Aceh province where homosexuality is illegal for Muslims under Islamic Sharia law, and punishable by flogging. While it does not criminalise homosexuality, the country does not recognise same-sex marriage. In July 2015, the Minister of Religious Affairs stated that it is difficult in Indonesia to legalize Gay Marriage, because strongly held religious norms speak strongly against it. People's Representative Council (DPR) has dismissed the suggestion that the death penalty would be introduced for same-sex acts, citing that it is quite impossible to implement that policy by the government of Indonesia.\nAs the latest addition in the list of criminalizing Muslim countries, Brunei's has implemented penalty for homosexuals within \"Sharia Penal Code\" in stages since 2014. It prescribes death by stoning as punishment for sex between men, and sex between women is punishable by caning or imprisonment. The sultanate currently has a moratorium in effect on death penalty.\nAs of 2025, homosexuality is criminalized in 34 Muslim-majority countries, they are Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Brunei, Burkina Faso, Chad, Comoros, Egypt, Gambia, Guinea, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon (de facto), Libya, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, and Yemen. In Indonesia, homosexuality isn't criminalized, although there are severe prosecutions of homosexuals, especially in Aceh and South Sumatra. There is also an upcoming law in Indonesia that criminalizes sex outside of marriage that will be in effect in December 2025, and same-sex marriage is banned, which will de facto criminalize homosexuality. In Gaza, the legality of male homosexuality is unclear. In Western Sahara, a disputed territory claimed by Morocco, homosexuality is criminalized. In recent years, the number of Muslim-majority countries that criminalize homosexuality has been increasing, with the most recent ones being Chad in 2017, Iraq and Mali in 2024, and Burkina Faso in 2025.\nDeath penalty.\nAll nations currently having capital punishment as a potential penalty for homosexual activity are Muslim-majority countries and base those laws on interpretations of Islamic teachings, with the exception of Uganda. In 2020, the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) released its most recent \"State Sponsored Homophobia Report\". The report found that eleven countries or regions impose the death penalty for \"same-sex sexual acts\" with reference to sharia-based laws. In Iran, according to article 129 and 131 there are up to 100 lashes of whip first three times and fourth time death penalty for lesbians. The death penalty is implemented nationwide in Brunei, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan, Yemen, northern Nigeria, Mauritania, the United Arab Emirates, and southern Somalia. This punishment is also allowed by the law but not implemented in Qatar and Pakistan; and was back then implemented through non-state courts by ISIS in parts of Iraq and Syria (now no longer existing).37\nDue to Brunei's law dictating that gay sex be punishable by stoning, many of its targeted citizens fled to Canada in hopes of finding refuge. The law is also set to impose the same punishment for adultery among heterosexual couples. Despite pushback from citizens in the LGBTQ+ community, Brunei prime minister's office produced a statement explaining Brunei's intention for carrying through with the law. It has been suggested that this is part of a plan to separate Brunei from the western world and towards a Muslim one.\nIn the Chechen Republic, a part of the Russian Federation, Ramzan Kadyrov has actively discriminated against homosexual individuals and presided over a campaign of arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killing.\nIt has been suggested that \"to counteract popular support for an Islamist insurgency that erupted after the Soviet breakup, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has granted wide latitude to Kadyrov to co-opt elements of the Islamist agenda, including an intolerance of gays.\" Reports of the discrimination in Chechnya have in turn been used to stoke Islamophobic, racist, and anti-Russia rhetoric. Jessica Stern, executive director of OutRight Action International, has criticized this bigotry, noting: \"Using a violent attack on men accused of being gay to legitimize Islamophobia is dangerous and misleading. It negates the experiences of queer Muslims and essentializes all Muslims as homophobic. We cannot permit this tragedy to be co-opted by ethno-nationalists to perpetuate anti-Muslim or anti-Russian sentiment. The people and their government are never the same.\"\nMinor penalty.\nIn Algeria, Bangladesh, Chad, Morocco, Aceh, Maldives, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Syria, and Tunisia, it is illegal, and penalties may be imposed. In Kuwait, Sierra Leone, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, homosexual acts between males are illegal, but homosexual relations between females are legal.\nLegalization.\nSame-sex sexual intercourse is legal in Albania, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bosnia and Herzegovina, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Guinea-Bissau, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyzstan, Niger, Tajikistan, Turkey, West Bank (State of Palestine), Indonesia (de jure; except Aceh), and in Northern Cyprus. In Albania and Turkey, there have been discussions about legalizing same-sex marriage.\nIn Lebanon, courts have ruled that the country's penal code must not be used to target homosexuals, but the law has yet to be changed by parliament.\nDiscrimination protections.\nUnder the UN administration, Kosovo became the first Muslim-majority country to enact anti-discriminatory protections based on sexual identity. In 2009, similar protections were introduced in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The next year, a law adopted by Albania prohibited discrimination for sexual orientation and gender identity.\nSince early 2000s, thanks to the EU accession bid, LGBTQ+ rights reforms were brought into consideration in Turkey. In 2013, in the course of the legislative efforts for a constitutional amendment, the main opposition CHP proposed a draft to provide employment protections, which was subsequently approved by all major parties in the Turkish Parliament, including the ruling AKP. It, however, was never enacted following conflict in other clauses, and the subsequent democratic backsliding of Turkey shut the door to further improvements. Even though legal protections are absent, the local governments held by the Kemalist opposition are signatories to a variety of international agreements, and they pledge to indiscriminate in employment. Some municipalities even have dedicated bodies to ensure equity for LGBTQ+ individuals.\nIn 2014, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, albeit a non-recognized entity, made history by introducing employment protections based on sexual identity, in addition to gender, on the Penal Law.\nSame-sex marriage.\nIn 2007, there was a gay party in the Moroccan town of al-Qasr al-Kabir. Rumours spread that this was a gay marriage and more than 600 people took to the streets, condemning the alleged event and protesting against leniency towards homosexuals. Several persons who attended the party were detained and eventually six Moroccan men were sentenced to between four and ten months in prison for \"homosexuality\".\nIn France, there was an Islamic same-sex marriage on 18 February 2012. In Paris in November 2012 a room in a Buddhist prayer hall was used by gay Muslims and called a \"gay-friendly mosque\". The French overseas department of Mayotte, which has a majority-Muslim population, legalized same-sex marriage in 2013, along with the rest of France.\nThe first American Muslim in the United States Congress, Keith Ellison (D-MN) said in 2010 that all discrimination against LGBTQ people is wrong. He further expressed support for gay marriage stating:\nI believe that the right to marry someone who you please is so fundamental it should not be subject to popular approval any more than we should vote on whether blacks should be allowed to sit in the front of the bus.\nIn 2014, eight men were jailed for three years by a Cairo court after the circulation of a video of them allegedly taking part in a private wedding ceremony between two men on a boat on the Nile.\nTransgender rights.\nIn the late 1980s, Mufti Muhammad Sayyid Tantawy of Egypt issued a \"fatwa\" supporting the right for those who fit the description of \"mukhannathun\" and \"mukhannathin\" to have sex reassignment surgery; Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran issued similar \"fatwas\" around the same time. Khomeini's initial \"fatwa\" concerned intersex individuals as well, but he later specified that sex reassignment surgery was also permissible in the case of transgender individuals. Because homosexuality is illegal in Iran but gender transition is legal, some gay individuals have been forced to undergo sex reassignment surgery and transition into the opposite sex, regardless of their actual gender identity.\nWhile Iran has outlawed homosexuality, Iranian thinkers such as Ayatollah Khomeini have allowed for transgender people to change their sex so that they can enter heterosexual relationships. Despite this, those who do not commit to reassignment surgery are not accepted to be trans. The government even provides up to half the cost for those needing financial assistance and a sex change is recognized on the birth certificate.\nThe secular yet Muslim majority country, Turkey, generally accepts gender adjustment surgery. Nonetheless, there is no financial support for transgender people and many transgender people are faced with prejudice.\nOn 26 June 2016, clerics affiliated to the Pakistan-based organization Tanzeem Ittehad-i-Ummat issued a fatwa on transgender people where a trans woman (born male) with \"visible signs of being a woman\" is allowed to marry a man, and a trans man (born female) with \"visible signs of being a man\" is allowed to marry a woman. Pakistani transgender persons can also change their (legal) sex. Muslim ritual funerals also apply. Depriving transgender people of their inheritance, humiliating, insulting or teasing them were declared haraam. In May 2018, the Pakistani parliament passed a bill giving transgender individuals the right to choose their legal sex and correct their official documents, such as ID cards, driver licenses, and passports. Today, transgender people in Pakistan have the right to vote and to search for a job free from discrimination. As of 2018, one transgender woman became a news anchor, and two others were appointed as Supreme Court clerks.\nPublic opinion among Muslims.\nOpinion polls.\nIn 2013, the Pew Research Center conducted a study on the global acceptance of homosexuality and found a widespread rejection of homosexuality in many nations that are predominantly Muslim. In some countries, views were becoming more conservative among younger people.\n2013 Pew Poll\n2019 Arab Barometer Survey\nLGBTQ-related movements within Islam.\nLGBTQ acceptance.\nThe coming together of \"human rights discourses and sexual orientation struggles\" has resulted in an abundance of \"social movements and organizations concerned with gender and sexual minority oppression and discrimination.\" Today, most LGBTQ-affirming Islamic organizations and individual congregations are primarily based in the Western world and South Asian countries; they usually identify themselves with the liberal and progressive movements within Islam.\nIn France there was an Islamic same-sex marriage on February 18, 2012. In Paris in November 2012 a room in a Buddhist prayer hall was used by gay Muslims and called a \"gay-friendly mosque\". The Ibn Ruschd-Goethe mosque in Berlin is a liberal mosque open to all types of Muslims, where men and women pray together and LGBTQ worshippers are welcomed and supported. Other significant LGBTQ-inclusive mosques or prayer groups include the El-Tawhid Juma Circle Unity Mosque in Toronto, Masjid an-Nur al-Isslaah (Light of Reform Mosque) in Washington, D.C., Masjid Al-Rabia in Chicago, Unity Mosque in Atlanta, People's Mosque in Cape Town South Africa, Masjid Ul-Umam mosque in Cape Town, Al Ghurbaah mosque in South Africa, Qal'bu Maryamin in California, and the Nur Ashki Jerrahi Sufi Community in New York City.\nMuslims for Progressive Values, based in the United States and Malaysia, is \"a faith-based, grassroots, human rights organization that embodies and advocates for the traditional Qur'anic values of social justice and equality for all, for the 21st Century.\" The Mecca Institute is an LGBTQ-inclusive and progressive online Islamic seminary, and serves as an online center of Islamic learning and research.\nDefunct movements.\nThe Al-Fatiha Foundation was an organization which tried to advance the cause of gay, lesbian, and transgender Muslims. It was founded in 1998 by Faisal Alam, a Pakistani American, and was registered as a nonprofit organization in the United States. The organization was an offshoot of an internet listserve that brought together many gay, lesbian and questioning Muslims from various countries.\nAnti-LGBTQ.\nEx-gay organizations.\nThere are a number of Islamic ex-gay organizations, that is, those composed of people claiming to have experienced a basic change in sexual orientation from exclusive homosexuality to exclusive heterosexuality. These groups, like those based in socially conservative Christianity, are aimed at attempting to guide homosexuals towards heterosexuality.\nOne of the leading LGBTQ reformatory Muslim organization is StraightWay Foundation, which was established in the United Kingdom in 2004 as an organization that provides information and advice for Muslims who struggle with homosexual attraction. They teach that the male-female pair is the \"basis for humanity's growth\" and that homosexual acts \"are forbidden by God\". NARTH has written favourably of the group. In 2004, Straightway entered into a controversy with the contemporary Mayor of London, Ken Livingstone, and the controversial Islamic cleric Yusuf al-Qaradawi. It was suggested that Livingstone was giving a platform to Islamic fundamentalists, and not liberal and progressive Muslims. Straightway responded to this by sending Livingstone a letter thanking him for his support of al-Qaradawi. Livingstone then ignited controversy when he thanked Straightway for the letter.\nActions against LGBTQ people.\nSeveral anti-LGBTQ incidents have occurred:\nMuslim LGBTQ rights activists.\nThere are numbers of Muslim LGBTQ activists from different parts of the world. Some of them are listed below:\nIn popular culture.\nBooks.\n\"Islam and Homosexuality\".\nIn 2010, an anthology \"Islam and Homosexuality\" was published. In the Forward, Parvez Sharma sounded a pessimistic note about the future: \"In my lifetime I do not see Islam drafting a uniform edict that homosexuality is permissible.\" Following is material from two chapters dealing with the present:\nRusmir Musi\u0107 in a chapter \"Queer Visions of Islam\" said that \"Queer Muslims struggle daily to reconcile their sexuality and their faith.\" Musi\u0107 began to study in college \"whether or not my love for somebody of the same gender disgusts God and whether it will propel me to hell. The answer, for me, is an unequivocal \"no\".\" Furthermore, Musi\u0107 wrote, \"my research and reflection helped me to imagine my sexuality as a gift from a loving, not hateful, God.\"\nMarhuq Fatima Khan in a chapter \"Queer, American, and Muslim: Cultivating Identities and Communities of Affirmation\", says that \"Queer Muslims employ a few narratives to enable them to reconcile their religious and sexual identities.\" They \"fall into three broad categories: (1) God Is Merciful; (2) That Is Just Who I Am; and (3) It's Not Just Islam.\"\n\"Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism\".\nIn his 2003 book \"Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism\", Professor Scott Siraj al-Haqq Kugle asserts \"that Islam does not address homosexuality.\" In Kugle's reading, the Quran holds \"a positive assessment of diversity\". It \"respects diversity in physical appearance, constitution, stature, and color of human beings as a natural consequence of Divine wisdom in creation.\" Therefore, Islam can be described as \"a religion that positively assesses diversity in creation and in human societies.\" Furthermore, in Kugle's reading, the Quran \"implies that some people are different in their sexual desires than others.\" Thus, homosexuality can be seen as part of the \"natural diversity in sexuality in human societies.\" This is the way \"gay and lesbian Muslims\" view their homosexuality.\nIn addition to the Qur'an, Kugle refers to the benediction of Imam Al-Ghazali (the 11th-century Muslim theologian) which says \"praise be to God, the marvels of whose creation are not subject to the arrows of accident.\" For Kugle, this benediction implies that \"if sexuality is inherent in a person's personality, then sexual diversity is a part of creation, which is never accidental but is always marvelous.\" Kugle also refers to \"a rich archive of same-sex sexual desires and expressions, written by or reported about respected members of society: literati, educated elites, and religious scholars.\" Given these writings, Kugle concludes that \"one might consider Islamic societies (like classical Greece) to provide a vivid illustration of a 'homosexual-friendly' environment.\" This evoked from \"medieval and early modern Christian Europeans\" accusations that Muslim were \"engaging openly in same-sex practices.\"\nKugle goes a step further in his argument and asserts that \"if some Muslims find it necessary to deny that sexual diversity is part of the natural created world, then the burden of proof rests on their shoulders to illustrate their denial from the Qur'anic discourse itself.\"\n\"Sexual Ethics and Islam\".\nKecia Ali in her 2016 book \"Sexual Ethics and Islam\" says that \"there is no one Muslim perspective on anything.\" Regarding the Quran, Ali says that modern scholars disagree about what it says about \"same-sex intimacy\". Some scholars argue that \"the Qur'an does not address homosexuality or homosexuals explicitly.\"\nRegarding homosexuality, Ali says the belief that \"exclusively homosexual desire is innate in some individuals\" has been adopted \"even among some relatively conservative Western Muslim thinkers.\" 100 Homosexual Muslims believe their homosexuality to be innate and view \"their sexual orientation as God-given and immutable.\" She observes that \"queer and trans people are sometimes treated as defective or deviant\", and adds that it is \"vital not to assume that variation implies imperfection or disability.\"\nRegarding \"medieval Muslim culture\", Ali says that \"male desire to penetrate desirable youth ... was perfectly normal.\" Even if same-sex relations were not lawful, there was \"an unwillingness to seek out and condemn instances of same-sex activity, but rather to let them pass by ... unpunished.\" Ali states that some scholars claim that Islamic societies were 'homosexual-friendly' in history.\nIn her article \"Same-sex Sexual Activity and Lesbian and Bisexual Women\", Ali elaborates on homosexuality as an aspect of medieval Muslim culture. She says that \"same-sex sexual expression has been a more or less recognized aspect of Muslim societies for many centuries.\" There are many explicit discussions of \"same-sex sexual activity\" in medieval Arabic literature. Ali states there is a lack of focus in medieval tradition on female same-sex sexual activity, where the Qur'an mainly focuses male/male sex. With female same-sex sexual activity there is more focus on the punishment for the acts and the complications with the dower, compared to men where there is a focus on punishment but also the need for ablutions and the effect of the act on possible marriage decisions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "15473", "revid": "6151339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15473", "title": "Fraser Kilmister", "text": ""}
{"id": "15474", "revid": "40043980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15474", "title": "Infanticide", "text": "Intentional killing of human offspring\nInfanticide (or infant homicide) is the intentional killing of infants or offspring. Infanticide was a widespread practice throughout human history that was mainly used to dispose of unwanted children, its main purpose being the prevention of resources being spent on weak or disabled offspring. Unwanted infants were usually abandoned to die of exposure, but in some societies they were deliberately killed. Infanticide is generally illegal, but in some places the practice is tolerated, or the prohibition is not strictly enforced.\nMost Stone Age human societies routinely practiced infanticide, and estimates of children killed by infanticide in the Mesolithic and Neolithic eras vary from 15 to 50 percent. Infanticide continued to be common in most societies after the historical era began, including ancient Greece, ancient Rome, the Phoenicians, ancient China, ancient Japan, Pre-Islamic Arabia, early modern Europe, Aboriginal Australia, Native Americans, and Native Alaskans.\nInfanticide became forbidden in the Near East during the 1st millennium. Christianity forbade infanticide from its earliest times, which led Constantine the Great and Valentinian I to ban infanticide across the Roman Empire in the 4th century.\nThe practice ceased in Arabia in the 7th century after the founding of Islam, since the Quran prohibits infanticide. Infanticide of male babies had become uncommon in China by the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), whereas infanticide of female babies became more common during the One-Child Policy era (1979\u20132015). During the period of Company rule in India, the East India Company attempted to eliminate infanticide but were only partially successful, and female infanticide in some parts of India still continues. Infanticide is very rare in industrialised countries but may persist elsewhere.\nParental infanticide researchers have found that mothers are more likely to commit infanticide. In the special case of neonaticide (murder in the first 24 hours of life), mothers account for almost all the perpetrators. Fatherly cases of neonaticide are so rare that they are individually recorded.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe practice of infanticide has taken many forms over time. Child sacrifice to supernatural figures or forces, such as that believed to have been practiced in ancient Carthage, may be only the most notorious example in the ancient world.\nA frequent method of infanticide in ancient Europe and Asia was simply to abandon the infant, leaving it to die by exposure (i.e., hypothermia, hunger, thirst, or animal attack).\nOn at least one island in Oceania, infanticide was carried out until the 20th century by suffocating the infant, while in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica and in the Inca Empire it was carried out by sacrifice (see below).\nA minority of academics subscribe to an alternate school of thought, considering the practice as \"early infanticidal childrearing\". They attribute parental infanticidal wishes to massive projection or displacement of the parents' unconscious onto the child, because of intergenerational, ancestral abuse by their own parents. Clearly, an infanticidal parent may have multiple motivations, conflicts, emotions, and thoughts about their baby and their relationship with their baby, which are often colored both by their individual psychology, current relational context and attachment history, and, perhaps most saliently, their psychopathology Almeida, Merminod, and Schechter suggest that parents with fantasies, projections, and delusions involving infanticide need to be taken seriously and assessed carefully, whenever possible, by an interdisciplinary team that includes infant mental health specialists or mental health practitioners who have experience in working with parents, children, and families.\nPaleolithic and Neolithic.\nMany Neolithic groups routinely resorted to infanticide in order to control their numbers so that their lands could support them. Joseph Birdsell believed that infanticide rates in prehistoric times were between 15% and 50% of the total number of births, while Laila Williamson estimated a lower rate ranging from 15% to 20%. Both anthropologists believed that these high rates of infanticide persisted until the development of agriculture during the Neolithic Revolution. A book published in 1981 stated that comparative anthropologists estimated that 50% of female newborn babies may have been killed by their parents during the Paleolithic era. The anthropologist Raymond Dart has interpreted fractures on the skulls of hominid infants (e.g. the Taung Child) as due to deliberate killing followed by cannibalism, but such explanations are by now considered uncertain and possibly wrong. Children were not necessarily actively killed, but neglect and intentional malnourishment may also have occurred, as proposed by Vicente Lull as an explanation for an apparent surplus of men and the below average height of women in prehistoric Menorca.\nIn ancient history.\nIn the New World.\nArchaeologists have uncovered physical evidence of child sacrifice at several locations. Some of the best attested examples are the diverse rites which were part of the religious practices in Mesoamerica and the Inca Empire.\nIn the Old World.\nThree thousand bones of young children, with evidence of sacrificial rituals, have been found in Sardinia. Pelasgians offered a sacrifice of every tenth child during difficult times. Many remains of children have been found in Gezer excavations with signs of sacrifice. Child skeletons with the marks of sacrifice have been found also in Egypt dating 950\u2013720 BCE. Child sacrifice was particularly widespread in ancient Carthage. Besides the Carthaginians, other Phoenicians, and the Canaanites, Moabites and Sepharvites offered their first-born as a sacrifice to their gods.\nAncient Egypt.\nIn Egyptian households, at all social levels, children of both sexes were valued and there is no evidence of infanticide. The religion of the ancient Egyptians forbade infanticide and during the Greco-Roman period they rescued abandoned babies from manure heaps, a common method of infanticide by Greeks or Romans, and were allowed to either adopt them as foundling or raise them as slaves, often giving them names such as \"copro -\" to memorialize their rescue. Strabo considered it a peculiarity of the Egyptians that every child must be reared. Diodorus indicates infanticide was a punishable offence. Egypt was heavily dependent on the annual flooding of the Nile to irrigate the land and in years of low inundation, severe famine could occur with breakdowns in social order resulting, notably between \u00a0CE and \u00a0CE. Instances of cannibalism are recorded during these periods, but it is unknown if this happened during the pharaonic era of ancient Egypt. Beatrix Midant-Reynes describes human sacrifice as having occurred at Abydos in the early dynastic period (c. \u00a0BCE), while Jan Assmann asserts there is no clear evidence of human sacrifice ever happening in ancient Egypt.\nCarthage.\nAccording to Shelby Brown, Carthaginians, descendants of the Phoenicians, sacrificed infants to their gods. Charred bones of hundreds of infants have been found in Carthaginian archaeological sites. One such area harbored as many as 20,000 burial urns. Skeptics suggest that the bodies of children found in Carthaginian and Phoenician cemeteries were merely the cremated remains of children who died naturally.\nPlutarch (c. \u00a0CE) mentions the practice, as do Tertullian, Orosius, Diodorus Siculus and Philo. The Hebrew Bible also mentions what appears to be child sacrifice practiced at a place called the Tophet (from the Hebrew \"taph\" or \"toph\", to burn) by the Canaanites. Writing in the \u00a0BCE, Kleitarchos, one of the historians of Alexander the Great, described that the infants rolled into the flaming pit. Diodorus Siculus wrote that babies were roasted to death inside the burning pit of the god Baal Hamon, a bronze statue.\nGreece and Rome.\nThe historical Greeks considered the practice of adult and child sacrifice barbarous, however, infant exposure was widely practiced in ancient Greece. It was advocated by Aristotle in the case of congenital deformity: \"As to the exposure of children, let there be a law that no deformed child shall live.\"\nIn Greece, the decision to expose a child was typically the father's, although in Sparta the decision was made by a group of elders. Exposure was the preferred method of disposal, as that act in itself was not considered to be murder; moreover, the exposed child technically had a chance of being rescued by the gods or any passersby. This very situation was a recurring motif in Greek mythology.\nThe practice was prevalent in ancient Rome, as well. Philo was the first known philosopher to speak out against it. A letter from a Roman citizen to his sister, or a pregnant wife from her husband, dating from \u00a0BCE, demonstrates the casual nature with which infanticide was often viewed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn some periods of Roman history it was traditional for a newborn to be brought to the \"pater familias\", the family patriarch, who would then decide whether the child was to be kept and raised, or left to die by exposure. The Twelve Tables of Roman law obliged him to put to death a child that was visibly deformed. The concurrent practices of slavery and infanticide contributed to the \"background noise\" of the crises during the Republic.\nInfanticide became a capital offense in Roman law in 374, but offenders were rarely, if ever, prosecuted.\nAccording to mythology, Romulus and Remus, twin infant sons of the war god Mars, survived near-infanticide after being tossed into the Tiber River. According to the myth, they were raised by wolves, and later founded the city of Rome.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhereas theologians and clerics preached sparing their lives, newborn abandonment continued as registered in both the literature record and in legal documents. According to William Lecky, exposure in the early Middle Ages, as distinct from other forms of infanticide, \"was practiced on a gigantic scale with absolute impunity, noticed by writers with most frigid indifference and, at least in the case of destitute parents, considered a very venial offence\". However the first foundling house in Europe was established in Milan in 787 on account of the high number of infanticides and out-of-wedlock births. The Hospital of the Holy Spirit in Rome was founded by Pope Innocent III because women were throwing their infants into the Tiber river.\nUnlike other European regions, in the Middle Ages the German mother had the right to expose the newborn. Generally, unwanted children were often abandoned in the High Middle Ages, usually by leaving them the door of a church or abbey. If the baby was found in time, the clergy would take care of their upbringing, which gave rise to the first orphanages.\nHowever, very high sex ratios were common in even late medieval Europe, which may indicate sex-selective infanticide. The Waldensians, a pre-Reformation medieval Christian sect deemed heretical by the Catholic Church, were accused of participating in infanticide.\nJudaism.\nJudaism prohibits infanticide, and has for some time, dating back to at least the early Common Era. Roman historians wrote about the ideas and customs of other peoples, which often diverged from their own. Tacitus recorded that the Jews \"take thought to increase their numbers, for they regard it as a crime to kill any late-born children\". Josephus, whose works give an important insight into 1st-century Judaism, wrote that God \"forbids women to cause abortion of what is begotten, or to destroy it afterward\".\nPagan European tribes.\nIn his book \"Germania\", Tacitus wrote in \u00a0CE that the ancient Germanic tribes enforced a similar prohibition. He found such mores remarkable and commented: \"To restrain generation and the increase of children, is esteemed [by the Germans] an abominable sin, as also to kill infants newly born.\" It has become clear over the millennia, though, that Tacitus' description was inaccurate; the consensus of modern scholarship significantly differs. John Boswell believed that in ancient Germanic tribes unwanted children were exposed, usually in the forest. \"It was the custom of the [Teutonic] pagans, that if they wanted to kill a son or daughter, they would be killed before they had been given any food.\" Usually children born out of wedlock were disposed of that way.\nIn his highly influential \"Pre-historic Times\", John Lubbock described burnt bones indicating the practice of child sacrifice in pagan Britain.\nChristianity.\nChristianity explicitly rejects infanticide. The \"Teachings of the Apostles\" or \"Didache\" states \"thou shalt not kill a child by abortion, neither shalt thou slay it when born\". The \"Epistle of Barnabas\" makes a similar statement. Early Christian writers such as Tertullian, Athenagoras, Minucius Felix, Justin Martyr and Lactantius also maintained that exposing a baby to death was a wicked act. In 318, Constantine I considered infanticide a crime, and in 374, Valentinian I mandated the rearing of all children (exposing babies, especially girls, was still common). The Council of Constantinople declared that infanticide was homicide, and in 589, the Third Council of Toledo took measures against the custom of killing their own children. Christianity thus played a leading role in the abolition of infanticide in the Roman Empire.\nArabia.\nSome Muslim sources allege that pre-Islamic Arabian society practiced infanticide as a form of \"post-partum birth control\". The word \"wa\u02bed\" was used to describe the practice. These sources state that infanticide was practiced either out of destitution (thus practiced on males and females alike), or as \"disappointment and fear of social disgrace felt by a father upon the birth of a daughter\".\nSome authors believe that there is little evidence that infanticide was prevalent in pre-Islamic Arabia or early Muslim history, except for the case of the Tamim tribe, who practiced it during severe famine according to Islamic sources. Others state that \"female infanticide was common all over Arabia during this period of time\" (pre-Islamic Arabia), especially by burying alive a female newborn. A tablet discovered in Yemen, forbidding the people of a certain town from engaging in the practice, is the only written reference to infanticide within the peninsula in pre-Islamic times.\nIslam.\nInfanticide is explicitly prohibited by the Qur'an. \"And do not kill your children for fear of poverty; We give them sustenance and yourselves too; surely to kill them is a great wrong.\" Together with polytheism and homicide, infanticide is regarded as a grave sin (see https:// and https://). Infanticide is also implicitly denounced in the story of Pharaoh's slaughter of the male children of Israelites (see https://; https://; https://; https://; https://; https://).\nUkraine and Russia.\nInfanticide may have been practiced as human sacrifice, as part of the pagan cult of Perun. Ibn Fadlan describes sacrificial practices at the time of his trip to Kiev Rus (present-day Ukraine) in 921\u2013922, and describes an incident of a woman voluntarily sacrificing her life as part of a funeral rite for a prominent leader, but makes no mention of infanticide. The Primary Chronicle, one of the most important literary sources before the 12th\u00a0century, indicates that human sacrifice to idols may have been introduced by Vladimir the Great in 980. The same Vladimir the Great formally converted Kiev Rus into Christianity just 8 years later, but pagan cults continued to be practiced clandestinely in remote areas as late as the 13th century.\nAmerican explorer George Kennan noted that among the Koryaks, a people of north-eastern Siberia, infanticide was still common in the nineteenth century. One of a pair of twins was always sacrificed.\nGreat Britain.\nInfanticide (as a crime) gained both popular and bureaucratic significance in Victorian Britain. By the mid-19th century, in the context of criminal lunacy and the insanity defence, killing one's own child(ren) attracted ferocious debate, as the role of women in society was defined by motherhood, and it was thought that any woman who murdered her own child was by definition insane and could not be held responsible for her actions. Several cases were subsequently highlighted during the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1864\u201366, as a particular felony where an effective avoidance of the death penalty had informally begun.\nThe Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 ended parish relief for unmarried mothers and allowed fathers of illegitimate children to avoid paying for \"child support\". Unmarried mothers then received little assistance, and the poor were left with the option of either entering the workhouse, turning to prostitution, resorting to infanticide, or choosing abortion. By the middle of the century infanticide was common for social reasons, such as illegitimacy, and the introduction of child life insurance additionally encouraged some women to kill their children for gain. Examples include Mary Ann Cotton, who murdered many of her 15 children as well as three husbands; Margaret Waters, the 'Brixton Baby Farmer', a professional baby-farmer who was found guilty of infanticide in 1870; Jessie King, who was hanged in 1889; Amelia Dyer, the 'Angel Maker', who murdered over 400 babies in her care; and Ada Chard-Williams, a baby farmer who was later hanged at Newgate prison.\n\"The Times\" reported that 67 infants were murdered in London in 1861 and 150 more recorded as \"found dead\", many of which were found on the streets. Another 250 were suffocated, half of them not recorded as accidental deaths. The report noted that \"infancy in London has to creep into life in the midst of foes.\"\nRecording a birth as a still-birth was also another way of concealing infanticide because still-births did not need to be registered until 1926 and they did not need to be buried in public cemeteries. In 1895 \"The Sun\" (London) published the article, \"Massacre of the Innocents\", highlighting the dangers of baby-farming, the recording of stillbirths, and quoting Athelstan Braxton Hicks, the London coroner, on lying-in houses: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have not the slightest doubt that a large amount of crime is covered by the expression 'still-birth'. There are a large number of cases of what are called newly-born children, which are found all over England, more especially in London and large towns, abandoned in streets, rivers, on commons, and so on... [A] great deal of that crime is due to what are called lying-in houses, which are not registered, or under the supervision of that sort, where the people who act as midwives constantly, as soon as the child is born, either drop it into a pail of water or smother it with a damp cloth. It is a very common thing, also, to find that they bash their heads on the floor and break their skulls.\nThe last British woman to be executed for infanticide of her own child was Rebecca Smith, who was hanged in Wiltshire in 1849.\nThe Infant Life Protection Act 1897 required local authorities to be notified within 48 hours of changes in custody or the death of children under seven years. Under the Children Act 1908 \"no infant could be kept in a home that was so unfit and so overcrowded as to endanger its health, and no infant could be kept by an unfit nurse who threatened, by neglect or abuse, its proper care, and maintenance.\"\nInstances of infanticide in Britain in the 18th and 19th centuries are often attributed to the economic position of the women, with juries committing \"pious perjury\" in many subsequent murder cases. The knowledge of the difficulties faced in the 18th century by those women who attempted to keep their children can be seen as a reason for juries to show compassion. If the woman chose to keep the child, society was not set up to ease the pressure placed upon the woman, legally, socially or economically. In mid-18th century Britain there was assistance available for women who were not able to raise their children. The Foundling Hospital opened in 1756 and was able to take in some of the illegitimate children. However, the conditions within the hospital caused Parliament to withdraw funding and the governors to live off of their own incomes. This resulted in a stringent entrance policy, with the committee requiring that the hospital:\nWill not receive a child that is more than a year old, nor the child of a domestic servant, nor any child whose father can be compelled to maintain it.\nOnce a mother had admitted her child to the hospital, the hospital did all it could to ensure that the parent and child were not re-united. MacFarlane argues in \"Illegitimacy and Illegitimates in Britain\" (1980) that English society greatly concerned itself with the burden that a bastard child places upon its communities and had gone to some lengths to ensure that the father of the child is identified in order to maintain its well-being. Assistance could be gained through maintenance payments from the father, however, this was capped \"at a miserable 2\u00a0s and 6\u00a0d a week\". If the father fell behind with the payments he could only be asked \"to pay a maximum of 13\u00a0weeks arrears\".\nDespite the accusations of some that women were getting a free hand-out, there is evidence that many women were far from receiving adequate assistance from their parish. \"Within Leeds in 1822 ... relief was limited to 1\u00a0s per week\". Sheffield required women to enter the workhouse, whereas Halifax gave no relief to the women who required it. The prospect of entering the workhouse was certainly something to be avoided. Lionel Rose quotes Joseph Rogers in \"Massacre of the Innocents\". Rogers, who was employed by a London workhouse in 1856, stated that conditions in the nursery were 'wretchedly damp and miserable ... [and] ... overcrowded with young mothers and their infants'.\nThe loss of social standing for a servant girl was a particular problem in respect of producing a bastard child as they relied upon a good character reference in order to maintain their job and more importantly, to get a new or better job. In a large number of trials for the crime of infanticide, it is the servant girl that stood accused. The disadvantage of being a servant girl is that they had to live to the social standards of their superiors or risk dismissal and no references. Whereas within other professions, such as in the factory, the relationship between employer and employee was much more anonymous and the mother would be better able to make other provisions, such as employing a minder. The result of the lack of basic social care in Britain in the 18th and 19th\u00a0century is the numerous accounts in court records of women, particularly servant girls, standing trial for the murder of their child.\nThere may have been no specific offense of infanticide in England before about 1623 because infanticide was a matter for the by ecclesiastical courts, possibly because infant mortality from natural causes was high (about 15% or one in six). Thereafter the accusation of the suppression of bastard children by lewd mothers was a crime incurring the presumption of guilt.\nAsia.\nChina.\nAs of the 3rd century BC, short of execution, the harshest penalties were imposed on practitioners of infanticide by the legal codes of the Qin dynasty and Han dynasty of ancient China.\nChina's society practiced sex selective infanticide. Philosopher Han Fei Tzu, a member of the ruling aristocracy of the \u00a0BCE, who developed a school of law, wrote: \"As to children, a father and mother when they produce a boy congratulate one another, but when they produce a girl they put it to death.\" Among the Hakka people, and in Yunnan, Anhui, Sichuan, Jiangxi and Fujian a method of killing the baby was to put her into a bucket of cold water, which was called \"baby water\".\nInfanticide was reported as early as the \u00a0BCE, and, by the Song dynasty (\u00a0CE), it was widespread in some provinces. Belief in reincarnation allowed poor residents of the country to kill their newborn children if they felt unable to care for them, hoping that they would be reborn in better circumstances. Furthermore, 18th and 19th century Qing reports of villagers in Liaoning show that they did not consider newborn children fully human, instead regarding life as beginning at some point after the sixth month after birth.\nThe Venetian explorer Marco Polo claimed to have seen newborns exposed in Manzi. Contemporary writers from the Song dynasty note that, in Hubei and Fujian provinces, residents would only keep three sons and two daughters (among poor farmers, two sons and one daughter), and kill all babies beyond that number at birth. Initially the sex of the child was only one factor to consider. By the time of the Ming dynasty, however (1368\u20131644), male infanticide was becoming increasingly uncommon. The prevalence of female infanticide remained high much longer. The magnitude of this practice is subject to some dispute; however, one commonly quoted estimate is that, by late Qing, between one fifth and one-quarter of all newborn girls, across the entire social spectrum, were victims of infanticide. If one includes excess mortality among female children under 10 (ascribed to gender-differential neglect), the share of victims rises to one third.\nScottish physician John Dudgeon, who worked in Peking, China, during the early 20th century said that, \"Infanticide does not prevail to the extent so generally believed among us, and in the north, it does not exist at all.\"\nSex-selected abortion or sex identification (unless needed for medical reasons), abandonment, and infanticide are illegal in present-day mainland China. According to the US State Department and the human rights organization Amnesty International, China's former family planning program, called the one-child policy (which was later relaxed and fully abandoned in 2021), nevertheless increased the frequency of infanticide. The sex gap between males and females aged 0\u201319 years old was estimated to be 25\u00a0million in 2010 by the United Nations Population Fund. In some cases, in order to avoid China's family planning programs, parents did not report a birth to the government, so the newborn (in most cases a girl) did not receive an official identity and the parents could register another, later-born child without fines or punishment. In 2017, the government announced that all children without an identity could now have a legal identity, known as family register. Four years later, all restrictions on the number of children were abandoned.\nJapan.\nSince feudal Edo era Japan the common slang for infanticide was \"mabiki\" (\u9593\u5f15\u304d), which means to pull plants from an overcrowded garden. A typical method in Japan was smothering the baby's mouth and nose with wet paper. It became common as a method of population control. Farmers would often kill their second or third sons. Daughters were usually spared, as they could be married off, sold off as servants or prostitutes, or sent off to become geishas. \"Mabiki\" persisted in the 19th century and early 20th century. According to one estimate, at least 97% of homicide victims in Japan in 1900 were newborns. To bear twins was perceived as barbarous and unlucky and efforts were made to hide or kill one or both twins.\nSouth Asia.\nFemale infanticide of newborn girls was systematic in feudatory Rajputs in South Asia for illegitimate female children during the Middle Ages. According to Firishta, as soon as the illegitimate female child was born she was held \"in one hand, and a knife in the other, that any person who wanted a wife might take her now, otherwise she was immediately put to death\". The practice of female infanticide was also common among the Kutch, Kehtri, Nagar, Bengal, Miazed, Kalowries and Sindh communities.\nIt was not uncommon that parents threw a child to the sharks in the Ganges River as a sacrificial offering. The East India Company administration were unable to outlaw the custom until the beginning of the 19th century.\nAccording to social activists, female infanticide has remained a problem in India into the 21st century, with both NGOs and the government conducting awareness campaigns to combat it.\nAfrica.\nIn some African societies some neonates were killed because of beliefs in evil omens or because they were considered unlucky. Twins were usually put to death in Arebo; as well as by the Nama people of South West Africa; in the Lake Victoria Nyanza region; by the Tswana in Portuguese East Africa; in some parts of Igboland, Nigeria, twins were sometimes abandoned in a forest at birth (as depicted in \"Things Fall Apart\"), oftentimes one twin was killed or hidden by midwives of wealthier mothers; and by the \u01c3Kung people of the Kalahari Desert.\nThe Kikuyu, Kenya's most populous ethnic group, practiced ritual killing of twins. Infanticide is rooted in the old traditions and beliefs prevailing all over Kenya. A survey conducted by Disability Rights International found that 45% of women interviewed by them in Kenya were pressured to kill their children born with disabilities. The pressure is much higher in the rural areas, with every two mothers out of three being forced to kill their disabled child.\nAustralia.\nEstimations of the prevalence of infanticide among Aboriginal Australians vary widely. Many early European settlers considered it to be extremely common. For example, an 1866 issue of \"The Australian News for Home Readers\" informed readers that \"the crime of infanticide is so prevalent amongst the natives that it is rare to see an infant\". In later times, attitudes shifted and the issue became contested. Author Susanna de Vries said in 2007 that her accounts of Aboriginal violence, including infanticide, were censored by publishers in the 1980s and 1990s. She told reporters that the censorship \"stemmed from guilt over the stolen children question\". Keith Windschuttle weighed in on the conversation, saying this type of censorship started in the 1970s. In the same article Louis Nowra suggested that infanticide in customary Aboriginal law may have been because it was difficult to keep an abundant number of Aboriginal children alive; there were life-and-death decisions modern-day Australians no longer have to face.\nLiz Conor's 2016 work, \"Skin Deep: Settler Impressions of Aboriginal Women\", a culmination of 10 years of research, found that stories about Aboriginal women were told through a colonial lens of racism and misogyny. Vague stories of infanticide and cannibalism were repeated as reliable facts, and sometimes originated in accounts told by members of rival tribes about the other. She also refers to Daisy Bates' now contested accounts of such practices, reproaching some historians for accepting them too uncritically.\nThe anthropologists Ronald Berndt and Catherine Berndt note that \"infanticide does seem to have been practised occasionally almost all over Aboriginal Australia, but it cannot have been so frequent as Taplin ... and Bates ... suggest\", while also cautioning that others \"underestimated\" its prevalence. The flesh of killed infants was sometimes eaten, but this was not always the case. Usually only parts of the body were eaten, in \"the hope that the child will be born again, or that strength will accrue to another child\".\nSouth Australia and Victoria.\nAccording to William D. Rubinstein, \"Nineteenth-century European observers of Aboriginal life in South Australia and Victoria reported that about 30% of Aboriginal infants were killed at birth.\"\nIn 1881 James Dawson wrote a passage about infanticide among Indigenous people in the western district of Victoria, which stated that \"Twins are as common among them as among Europeans; but as food is occasionally very scarce, and a large family troublesome to move about, it is lawful and customary to destroy the weakest twin child, irrespective of sex.\nIt is usual also to destroy those which are malformed.\"\nHe also wrote \"When a woman has children too rapidly for the convenience and necessities of the parents, she makes up her mind to let one be killed, and consults with her husband which it is to be. As the strength of a tribe depends more on males than females, the girls are generally sacrificed. The child is put to death and buried, or burned without ceremony; not, however, by its father or mother, but by relatives. No one wears mourning for it. Sickly children are never killed on account of their bad health, and are allowed to die naturally.\"\nWestern Australia.\nIn 1937, a Christian reverend in the Kimberley offered a \"baby bonus\" to Aboriginal families as a deterrent against infanticide and to increase the birthrate of the local Indigenous population.\nAustralian Capital Territory.\nA Canberran journalist in 1927 wrote of the \"cheapness of life\" to the Aboriginal people local to the Canberra area 100 years before. \"If drought or bush fires had devastated the country and curtailed food supplies, babies got a short shift. Ailing babies, too would not be kept\", he wrote.\nNew South Wales.\nA bishop wrote in 1928 that it was common for Aboriginal Australians to restrict the size of their tribal groups, including by infanticide, so that the food resources of the tribal area may be sufficient for them.\nNorthern Territory.\nAnnette Hamilton, a professor of anthropology at Macquarie University, who carried out research in the Aboriginal community of Maningrida in Arnhem Land during the 1960s, wrote that prior to that time part-European babies born to Aboriginal mothers had not been allowed to live, and that \"mixed-unions are frowned on by men and women alike as a matter of principle\".\nOceania.\nMarshall Islands.\nWhen Russian explorer Otto von Kotzebue visited the Marshall Islands in Micronesia in 1817, he noted that Marshallese families practiced infanticide after the birth of a third child as a form of population planning due to frequent famines.\nNorth America.\nInuit.\nThere is no agreement about the actual estimates of the frequency of newborn female infanticide in the Inuit population. Carmel Schrire mentions diverse studies ranging from 15% to 80%. Polar Inuit (Inughuit) killed unwanted children by throwing them into the sea.\nThe Yukon and the Mahlemuit tribes of Alaska exposed the female newborns by first stuffing their mouths with grass before leaving them to die. In Arctic Canada the Inuit exposed their babies on the ice and left them to die.\nFemale Inuit infanticide disappeared in the 1930s and 1940s after contact with the Western cultures from the South.\nHowever, it must be acknowledged these infanticide claims came from non-Inuit observers, whose writings were later used to justify the forced westernization of indigenous peoples. In 2009, Travis Hedwig argued that infanticide runs counter to cultural norms at the time and that researchers were misinterpreting the actions of an unfamiliar culture and people.\nCanada.\nThe \"Handbook of North American Indians\" reports infanticide among the Dene Natives and those of the Mackenzie Mountains.\nNative Americans.\nIn the Eastern Shoshone there was a scarcity of Native American women as a result of female infanticide. For the Maidu Native Americans twins were so dangerous that they not only killed them, but the mother as well. In the region known today as southern Texas, the Mariame Native Americans practiced infanticide of females on a large scale. Wives had to be obtained from neighboring groups.\nMexico.\nBernal D\u00edaz recounted that, after landing on the Veracruz coast, they came across a temple dedicated to Tezcatlipoca. \"That day they had sacrificed two boys, cutting open their chests and offering their blood and hearts to that accursed idol\". In \"The Conquest of New Spain\" D\u00edaz describes more child sacrifices in the towns before the Spaniards reached the large Aztec city Tenochtitlan.\nSouth America.\nAlthough academic data of infanticides among the indigenous people in South America is not as abundant as that of North America, the estimates seem to be similar.\nBrazil.\nThe Tapirap\u00e9 indigenous people of Brazil allowed no more than three children per woman, and no more than two of the same sex. If the rule was broken infanticide was practiced. The Bororo killed all the newborns that did not appear healthy enough. Infanticide is also documented in the case of the Korubo people in the Amazon.\nThe Yanomami men killed children while raiding enemy villages. Helena Valero, a Brazilian woman kidnapped by Yanomami warriors in the 1930s, witnessed a Karawetari raid on her tribe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeru, Paraguay and Bolivia.\nWhile \"qhapaq hucha\" was practiced in the Peruvian large cities, child sacrifice in the pre-Columbian tribes of the region is less documented. However, even today studies on the Aymara Indians reveal high incidences of mortality among the newborn, especially female deaths, suggesting infanticide. The Abipones, a small tribe of Guaycuruan stock, of about 5,000 by the end of the 18th century in Paraguay, practiced systematic infanticide; with never more than two children being reared in one family. The Machigenga killed their disabled children. Infanticide among the Chaco in Paraguay was estimated as high as 50% of all newborns in that tribe, who were usually buried. The infanticidal custom had such roots among the Ayoreo in Bolivia and Paraguay that it persisted until the late 20th century.\nModern times.\nInfanticide has become less common in the Western world. The frequency has been estimated to be 1 in approximately 3000 to 5000 children of all ages and 2.1 per 100,000 newborns per year. It is thought that infanticide today continues at a much higher rate in areas of extremely high poverty and overpopulation, such as parts of India. Female infants, then and even now, are particularly vulnerable, a factor in sex-selective infanticide. Recent estimates suggest that over 100\u00a0million girls and women are 'missing' in Asia.\nBenin.\nIn spite of the fact that it is illegal, in Benin, West Africa, parents secretly continue with infanticidal customs.\nMainland China.\nThere have been some accusations that infanticide occurs in mainland China due to the one-child policy. In the 1990s, a certain stretch of the Yangtze River was known to be a common site of infanticide by drowning, until government projects made access to it more difficult. A study from 2012 suggests that over 40 million girls and women are missing in mainland China.\nIndia.\nThe practice has continued in some rural areas of India. India has the highest infanticide rate in the world, despite infanticide being illegal.\nAccording to a 2005 report by the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) up to 50 million girls and women are missing in India's population as a result of systematic sex discrimination and sex selective abortions.\nPakistan.\nKillings of newborn babies have been on the rise in Pakistan, corresponding to an increase in poverty across the country. More than 1,000 infants, mostly girls, were killed or abandoned to die in Pakistan in 2009 according to a Pakistani charity organization.\nThe Edhi Foundation found 1,210 dead babies in 2010. Many more are abandoned and left at the doorsteps of mosques. As a result, Edhi centers feature signs \"Do not murder, lay them here.\" Though female infanticide is punishable by life in prison, such crimes are rarely prosecuted.\nOceania.\nOn November 28, 2008, \"The National\", one of Papua New Guinea's two largest newspapers at the time, ran a story entitled \"Male Babies Killed To Stop Fights\", which claimed that in Agibu and Amosa villages of the Gimi region of the Eastern Highlands province \u2013 where tribal fighting had been going on since 1986 \u2013 women had agreed to stop producing males, allowing only female babies to survive, so that there would be no men in the future to fight. However, Salvation Army workers in the region denied that the supposed male infanticide had actually happened. Instead, women had merely hypothetically mentioned this possibility at a peace and reconciliation workshop in order to make a point, without planning to actually kill their sons.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales there were typically 30 to 50 homicides per million children less than 1 year old between 1982 and 1996. The younger the infant, the higher the risk. The rate for children 1 to 5 years was around 10 per million children. The homicide rate of infants less than 1 year is significantly higher than for the general population.\nIn English law infanticide is established as a distinct offence by the Infanticide Acts. Defined as the killing of a child under 12 months of age by their mother, the effect of the Acts are to establish a partial defence to charges of murder.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the infanticide rate during the first hour of life outside the womb dropped from 1.41 per 100,000 between the years 1963 and 1972, to 0.44 per 100,000 between 1974 and 1983. The rates during the first month after birth also declined, whereas those for older infants rose during this time. The legalization of abortion, which was completed in 1973, was the most important factor in the decline in neonatal mortality during the period from 1964 to 1977, according to a study by economists associated with the National Bureau of Economic Research.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, 114 cases of infanticide by a parent were reported during 1964\u20131968.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, far-right political party Vox has claimed that female perpetrators of infanticide outnumber male perpetrators of femicide. However, neither the Spanish National Statistics Institute nor the Ministry of the Interior keep data on the gender of perpetrators, but victims of femicide consistently number higher than victims of infanticide. From 2013 to March 2018, 28 infanticide cases perpetrated by 22 mothers and three stepmothers were reported in Spain.\nExplanations for the practice.\nThere are various reasons for infanticide. Neonaticide typically has different patterns and causes than for the killing of older infants. Traditional neonaticide is often related to economic necessity \u2013 the inability to provide for the infant. In the United Kingdom and the United States, older infants are typically killed for reasons related to child abuse, domestic violence or mental illness. For infants older than one day, younger infants are more at risk, and boys are more at risk than girls. Risk factors for the parent include: Family history of violence, violence in a current relationship, history of abuse or neglect of children, and personality disorder and/or depression.\nEconomic.\nMany historians believe the reason to be primarily economic, with more children born than the family is prepared to support. Marvin Harris estimated that among Paleolithic hunters 23\u201350% of newborn children were killed. He argued that the goal was to preserve the 0.001% population growth of that time. He also wrote that female infanticide may be a form of population control. Population control is achieved not only by limiting the number of potential mothers; increased fighting among men for access to relatively scarce wives would also lead to a decline in population. For example, on the Melanesian island of Tikopia infanticide was used to keep a stable population in line with its resource base. In 1888, Lieut. F. Elton reported that Ugi beach people in the Solomon Islands killed their infants at birth by burying them, and women were also said to practice abortion. They reported that it was too much trouble to raise a child, and instead preferred to buy one from the bush people. Research by Marvin Harris and William Divale supports this argument, it has been cited as an example of environmental determinism. However, it is argued that it has also occurred equally among rich and poor and during decadent periods of the Roman Empire as during earlier, less affluent, periods.\nIn societies that are patrilineal and patrilocal, the family may choose to allow more sons to live and practice female infanticide, as sons will support their birth family until they die, whereas daughters will leave economically and geographically to join their husband's family, possibly only after the payment of a burdensome dowry price. Under natural conditions, mortality rates for girls under five are slightly lower than boys for biological reasons. However, after birth, neglect and diverting resources to male children, such as biased feeding\npractices, inadequate clothing during winter\nand lower-quality health care, can lead to some countries having a skewed ratio with more boys than girls, with such practices killing an approximate 230,000 girls under five in India each year. While sex-selective abortion is more common among the higher income population, who can access medical technology, abuse after birth, such as infanticide and abandonment, is more common among the lower income population. Before the appearance of effective contraception, infanticide was a common occurrence in ancient brothels and prostitutes in certain areas preferred to kill their male offspring.\nCross-cultural research has found that infanticide is more likely to occur when the child has deformities or illnesses and anthropologists have argued that they are often viewed as bad omens as raising such a child in poverty stricken communities are an insurmountable hurdle. For example, in southern Ethiopia, children with physical abnormalities are considered to be ritually impure or mingi, with the ability to exert an evil influence upon others, so disabled infants have traditionally been disposed of.\nSocial stigma.\nInfants have been killed for superstitious accusations, such as being witches, often by being buried alive or left to starve. Those at higher risk of being accused and killed include the disabled, albinos, those born prematurely, twins, children of single mothers and intersex infants. Intersex infants commonly suffer from infanticide particularly in developing countries, largely caused by stigma surrounding intersex conditions. Often intersex infants are abandoned, while others are actively killed.\nIllegitimacy and its shame has led mothers or their families to kill infants. This was also the impetus for a mother's decision to give her child to a baby farmer. Baby farming is the practice of accepting custody of a child in return for payment. This was most common in Victorian Britain. Baby farmers sometimes neglected or murdered the babies to keep costs down.\nPsychiatric.\nPostpartum psychosis is also a causative factor of infanticide. Stuart S. Asch, MD, a professor of psychiatry at Cornell University Medical School established the connections between some cases of infanticide and postpartum depression., The books, \"From Cradle to Grave\", and \"The Death of Innocents\", describe selected cases of maternal infanticide and the investigative research of Professor Asch working in concert with the New York City Medical Examiner's Office.\nStanley Hopwood wrote that childbirth and lactation entail severe stress on women, and that under certain circumstances attempts at infanticide and suicide are common. The Infanticide Acts are several now repealed laws that, in 1922, made the killing of an infant child by its mother during the early months of life a lesser crime than murder, introducing the idea that postpartum depression was legally to be regarded as a form of diminished responsibility. A study published in the \"American Journal of Psychiatry\" revealed that 44% of filicidal fathers had a diagnosis of psychosis. In addition to postpartum psychosis, dissociative psychopathology, and sociopathy have also been found to be associated with neonaticide in some cases.\nIn the late 17th and early 18th centuries, \"loopholes\" were invented by some suicidal members of Lutheran churches who wanted to avoid the damnation that was promised by most Christian doctrine as a penalty of suicide. One famous example of someone who wished to end their life but avoid the eternity in hell was Christina Johansdotter (died 1740). She was a Swedish murderer who killed a child in Stockholm with the sole purpose of being executed. She is an example of those who seek suicide through execution by committing a murder. It was a common act, frequently targeting young children or infants as they were believed to be free from sin, meaning they would go \"straight to heaven\". Although mainstream Christian denominations, including Lutherans, view the murder of an innocent as being condemned in the Fifth Commandment, the suicidal members of Lutheran churches who deliberately killed children with the intent of getting executed were usually well aware of Christian doctrine against murder, and planned to repent and seek forgiveness of their sins afterwards. For example, in 18th century Denmark up until the year 1767, murderers were given the opportunity to repent of their sins before they were executed either way. In 1767, religiously motivated suicidal murders ceased in Denmark with the abolishment of the death penalty.\nEvolutionary psychology has proposed several theories for different forms of infanticide. Infanticide by stepfathers, as well as child abuse in general by stepfathers, has been explained by spending resources on not genetically related children reducing reproductive success (See the Cinderella effect and Infanticide (zoology)). Infanticide is one of the few forms of violence more often done by women than men and this has been explained as since women generally have a greater parental investment than men, spending resources on an unfit child would decrease the mother's inclusive fitness.\nEthics.\nPhilosopher Peter Singer, known for a philosophy called personism, argues that newborns lack the essential characteristics of personhood\u2014\"rationality, autonomy, and self-consciousness\"\u2014and therefore \"killing a newborn baby is never equivalent to killing a person, that is, a being who wants to go on living\". Some medical ethicists have argued for parents to be allowed to kill their newborn babies because they are not \"actual persons\"; they have proposed to call this after-birth abortion.\nCurrent law.\nAustralia.\nIn New South Wales, infanticide is defined in Section 22A(1) of the Crimes Act 1900 (NSW) as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Where a woman by any willful act or omission causes the death of her child, being a child under the age of twelve months, but at the time of the act or omission the balance of her mind was disturbed by reason of her not having fully recovered from the effect of giving birth to the child or by reason of the effect of lactation consequent upon the birth of the child, then, notwithstanding that the circumstances were such that but for this section the offense would have amounted to murder, she shall be guilty of infanticide, and may for such offense be dealt with and punished as if she had been guilty of the offense of manslaughter of such child.\nBecause Infanticide is punishable as manslaughter, as per s24, the maximum penalty for this offence is therefore 25 years imprisonment.\nIn Victoria, infanticide is defined by Section 6 of the Crimes Act of 1958 with a maximum penalty of five years.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, infanticide is provided for by Section 178 of the Crimes Act 1961 which states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Where a woman causes the death of any child of hers under the age of 10 years in a manner that amounts to culpable homicide, and where at the time of the offence the balance of her mind was disturbed, by reason of her not having fully recovered from the effect of giving birth to that or any other child, or by reason of the effect of lactation, or by reason of any disorder consequent upon childbirth or lactation, to such an extent that she should not be held fully responsible, she is guilty of infanticide, and not of murder or manslaughter, and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, infanticide is a specific offence under section 237 of the \"Criminal Code\". It is defined as a form of culpable homicide which is neither murder nor manslaughter, and occurs when \"a female person... by a wilful act or omission... causes the death of her newly-born child [defined as a child under one year of age], if at the time of the act or omission she is not fully recovered from the effects of giving birth to the child and by reason thereof or of the effect of lactation consequent on the birth of the child her mind is then disturbed.\" Infanticide is also a defence to murder, in that a person accused of murder who successfully presents the defence is entitled to be convicted of infanticide rather than murder. The maximum sentence for infanticide is five years' imprisonment; by contrast, the maximum sentence for manslaughter is life, and the mandatory sentence for murder is life.\nThe offence derives from an offence created in English law in 1922, which aimed to address the issue of judges and juries who were reluctant to return verdicts of murder against women and girls who killed their newborns out of poverty, depression, the shame of illegitimacy, or otherwise desperate circumstances, since the mandatory sentence was death (even though in those circumstances the death penalty was likely not to be carried out). With infanticide as a separate offence with a lesser penalty, convictions were more likely. The offence of infanticide was created in Canada in 1948.\nThere is ongoing debate in the Canadian legal and political fields about whether section 237 of the \"Criminal Code\" should be amended or abolished altogether.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, the Infanticide Act 1938 describes the offence of infanticide as one which would otherwise amount to murder (by their mother) if the victim was older than 12 months and the mother did not have an \"imbalance of mind\" due to the effects of childbirth or lactation. Where a mother who has killed such an infant has been charged with murder rather than infanticide s.1(3) of the Act confirms that a jury has the power to find alternative verdicts of Manslaughter in English law or guilty but insane.\nThe Netherlands.\nInfanticide is illegal in the Netherlands, although the maximum sentence is lower than for homicide. The Groningen Protocol regulates euthanasia for infants who are believed to \"suffer hopelessly and unbearably\" under strict conditions.\nPoland.\nArticle 149 of the Penal Code of Poland stipulates that a mother who kills her child in labour, while under the influence of the course of the delivery, is liable to imprisonment for between three months and five years.\nRomania.\nArticle 200 of the Penal Code of Romania stipulates that the killing of a newborn during the first 24 hours, by the mother who is in a state of mental distress, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to five years. The previous Romanian Penal Code also defined infanticide (\"pruncucidere\") as a distinct criminal offense, providing for punishment of two to seven years imprisonment, recognizing the fact that a mother's judgment may be impaired immediately after birth.\nUnited States.\nWhile legislation regarding infanticide in some countries focuses on rehabilitation, believing that treatment and education will prevent repetitive action, the United States remains focused on delivering punishment. One justification for punishment is the difficulty of implementing rehabilitation services. With an overcrowded prison system, the United States can not provide the necessary treatment and services.\nState legislation.\nIn 2009, Texas state representative Jessica Farrar proposed legislation that would define infanticide as a distinct and lesser crime than homicide. Under the terms of the proposed legislation, if jurors concluded that a mother's \"judgment was impaired as a result of the effects of giving birth or the effects of lactation following the birth,\" they would be allowed to convict her of the crime of infanticide, rather than murder. The maximum penalty for infanticide would be two years in prison. Farrar's introduction of this bill prompted liberal bioethics scholar Jacob M. Appel to call her \"the bravest politician in America\".\nFederal legislation.\nThe \"MOTHERS Act\" (Moms Opportunity To access Health, Education, Research and Support), precipitated by the death of a Chicago woman with postpartum psychosis was introduced in 2009. The act was ultimately incorporated into the \"Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act\" which passed in 2010. The act requires screening for postpartum mood disorders at any time of the adult lifespan as well as expands research on postpartum depression. Provisions of the act also authorize grants to support clinical services for women who have, or are at risk for, postpartum psychosis.\nWider effects.\nSurviving children.\nIn addition to debates over the morality of infanticide itself, there is some debate over the effects of infanticide on surviving children, and the effects of childrearing in societies that also sanction infanticide. Some argue that the practice of infanticide in any widespread form causes enormous psychological damage in children. Conversely, studying societies that practice infanticide G\u00e9za R\u00f3heim reported that even infanticidal mothers in New Guinea, who ate a child, did not affect the personality development of the surviving children; that \"these are good mothers who eat their own children\". Harris and Divale's work on the relationship between female infanticide and warfare suggests that there are, however, extensive negative effects.\nSocietal.\nFor female infanticide, mothers who keep giving birth to daughters could face divorce or violence. Skewed sex ratio with lack of available women to marry leads to violence such as bride kidnapping.\nPrevention.\nSex education and birth control.\nSince infanticide, especially neonaticide, is often a response to an unwanted birth, preventing unwanted pregnancies through improved sex education and increased contraceptive access are advocated as ways of preventing infanticide. Increased use of contraceptives and access to safe legal abortions have greatly reduced neonaticide in many developed nations. In Pakistan, advocates of legalizing abortion say it would reduce infanticide and save mothers from potentially fatal back-street terminations.\nPsychiatric intervention.\nCases of infanticide have also garnered increasing attention and interest from advocates for the mentally ill as well as organizations dedicated to postpartum disorders. Following the trial of Andrea Yates, a mother from the United States who garnered national attention for drowning her 5 children, representatives from organizations such as the Postpartum Support International and the Marc\u00e9 Society for Treatment and Prevention of Postpartum Disorders began requesting clarification of diagnostic criteria for postpartum disorders and improved guidelines for treatments. While accounts of postpartum psychosis have dated back over 2,000 years ago, perinatal mental illness is still largely under-diagnosed despite postpartum psychosis affecting 1 to 2 per 1000 women. Screening for psychiatric disorders or risk factors, and providing treatment or assistance to those at risk may help prevent infanticide.\nWhile studies on the treatment of postpartum psychosis are scarce, a number of case and cohort studies have found evidence describing the effectiveness of lithium monotherapy for both acute and maintenance treatment of postpartum psychosis, with the majority of patients achieving complete remission. Adjunctive treatments include electroconvulsive therapy, antipsychotic medication, or benzodiazepines. Electroconvulsive therapy, in particular, is the primary treatment for patients with catatonia, severe agitation, and difficulties eating or drinking. Antidepressants should be avoided throughout the acute treatment of postpartum psychosis due to risk of worsening mood instability.\nThough screening and treatment may help prevent infanticide, in the developed world, significant proportions of neonaticides that are detected occur in young women who deny their pregnancy and avoid outside contacts, many of whom may have limited contact with these health care services.\nSafe surrender.\nIn some areas baby hatches or \"safe surrender sites\", safe places for a mother to anonymously leave an infant, are offered, in part to reduce the rate of infanticide. In other places, like the United States, safe-haven laws allow mothers to anonymously give infants to designated officials; they are frequently located at hospitals and police and fire stations. Additionally, some countries in Europe have the laws of anonymous birth and confidential birth that allow mothers to give up an infant after birth. In anonymous birth, the mother does not attach her name to the birth certificate. In confidential birth, the mother registers her name and information, but the document containing her name is sealed until the child comes to age. Typically such babies are put up for adoption, or cared for in orphanages.\nEmployment.\nGranting women employment raises their status and autonomy. Having a gainful employment can raise the perceived worth of women. This can lead to an increase in the number of women getting an education and a decrease in the number of female infanticide. As a result, the infant mortality rate will decrease and economic development will increase.\nIn animals.\nThe practice has been observed in many other species of the animal kingdom since it was first seriously studied by . These include from microscopic rotifers and insects, to fish, amphibians, birds and mammals, including primates such as chacma baboons.\nAccording to studies carried out by Kyoto University in primates, including certain types of gorillas and chimpanzees, several conditions favor the tendency to kill their offspring in some species (to be performed only by males), among them are: Nocturnal life, the absence of nest construction, the marked sexual dimorphism in which the male is much larger than the female, the mating in a specific season and the high period of lactation without resumption of the estrus state in the female.\nIn art and literature.\nAn instance in which a child born on an inauspicious day is to live or die according to the chance of being trampled by cattle (death being likely) is provided by , painted by Henry Melville and engraved by J Redaway for Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1838 with a poetical illustration and notes by Letitia Elizabeth Landon.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15476", "revid": "19372301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15476", "title": "Internet protocol suite", "text": "Framework for communication protocols used in IP networking\nThe Internet protocol suite, commonly known as TCP/IP, is a framework for organizing the communication protocols used in the Internet and similar computer networks according to functional criteria. The foundational protocols in the suite are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), the User Datagram Protocol (UDP), and the Internet Protocol (IP). Early versions of this networking model were known as the Department of Defense (DoD) Internet Architecture Model because the research and development were funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) of the United States Department of Defense.\nThe Internet protocol suite provides end-to-end data communication specifying how data should be packetized, addressed, transmitted, routed, and received. This functionality is organized into four abstraction layers, which classify all related protocols according to each protocol's scope of networking. An implementation of the layers for a particular application forms a protocol stack. From lowest to highest, the layers are the link layer, containing communication methods for data that remains within a single network segment (link); the internet layer, providing internetworking between independent networks; the transport layer, handling host-to-host communication; and the application layer, providing process-to-process data exchange for applications.\nThe technical standards underlying the Internet protocol suite and its constituent protocols are maintained by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). The Internet protocol suite predates the OSI model, a more comprehensive reference framework for general networking systems.\nHistory.\nEarly research.\nThe Internet protocol suite has its roots in research and development into computer networks sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the late 1960s. After DARPA initiated the pioneering ARPANET in 1969, Steve Crocker established a \"Network Working Group\" which developed a host-host protocol, the Network Control Program (NCP). In the early 1970s, DARPA started work on several other data transmission technologies, including mobile packet radio, packet satellite service, local area networks, and other data networks in the public and private domains. In 1972, Bob Kahn joined the DARPA Information Processing Technology Office, where he worked on both satellite packet networks and ground-based radio packet networks, and recognized the value of being able to communicate across both. In the spring of 1973, Vinton Cerf, at Stanford University, began collaborating with Kahn on the goal of designing the next protocol generation for the ARPANET to enable internetworking. They drew on the experience the international research community, through the International Network Working Group (INWG), chaired by Cerf, which included researchers from the ARPANET community, Xerox PARC, the United Kingdom and France.\nDuring the summer of 1973, Kahn and Cerf worked out a fundamental reformulation, in which the differences between local network protocols were hidden by using a common internetwork protocol, and, instead of the network being responsible for reliability, as in the existing ARPANET protocols, this function was delegated to the hosts. Cerf and Khan credit several members of INWG with important influences on this design, which was published in May 1974. The first specification of this Transmission Control Program was written in December 1974 by Cerf, Yogen Dalal and Carl Sunshine at Stanford University.\nDARPA contracted with BBN Technologies, Stanford University, and University College London to begin developing operational versions of the protocol on several hardware platforms in 1975. Several versions were developed through discussion via the Internet Experiment Note (IEN) series. Initially, the Transmission Control Program, the precursor to the later protocol suite, provided only a reliable byte stream service, not datagrams. As experience with the protocol grew, collaborators recommended division of functionality into layers of distinct protocols, providing direct access to datagram service. Advocates included Bob Metcalfe and Yogen Dalal at Xerox PARC; Danny Cohen, who needed it for his packet voice work; and Jonathan Postel of the University of Southern California's Information Sciences Institute, who edited the Request for Comments (RFCs), the technical and strategic document series that has both documented and catalyzed Internet development. Postel stated, \"We are screwing up in our design of Internet protocols by violating the principle of layering.\" Encapsulation of different mechanisms was intended to create an environment where the upper layers could access only what was needed from the lower layers. A monolithic design would be inflexible and lead to scalability issues. In version 4, written in 1978, Postel split the Transmission Control Program into two distinct protocols, the Internet Protocol (IP) as a connectionless layer and the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) as a reliable connection-oriented service.\nThe design of the network included the recognition that it should provide only the functions of efficiently transmitting and routing traffic between end nodes and that all other intelligence should be located at the edge of the network, in the end nodes. This end-to-end principle was pioneered by Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann in the CYCLADES network, based on the ideas of Donald Davies. Using this design, it became possible to connect other networks to the ARPANET that used the same principle, irrespective of other local characteristics, thereby solving Kahn's initial internetworking problem. \nInternet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) was installed in the ARPANET in 1983, forming the network layer protocols used on the Internet. Initially referred to as the \"DOD Internet Architecture Model\", together with the Transmission Control Protocol, it became commonly known as \"TCP/IP\".\nEarly implementation.\nIn 1975, a two-network IP communications test was performed between Stanford and University College London. In November 1977, a three-network IP test was conducted between sites in the US, the UK, and Norway. Several other IP prototypes were developed at multiple research centers between 1978 and 1983.\nA computer called a router is provided with an interface to each network. It forwards network packets back and forth between them. Originally a router was called \"gateway\", but the term was changed to avoid confusion with other types of gateways.\nAdoption.\nIn March 1982, the US Department of Defense declared TCP/IP as the standard for all military computer networking. In the same year, Norway (NORSAR and NDRE) and Peter Kirstein's research group at University College London adopted the protocol. The migration of the ARPANET from NCP to TCP/IP was officially completed on flag day January 1, 1983, when the new protocols were permanently activated.\nIn 1985, the Internet Advisory Board (later Internet Architecture Board) held a three-day TCP/IP workshop for the computer industry, attended by 250 vendor representatives, promoting the protocol and leading to its increasing commercial use. In 1985, the first Interop conference focused on network interoperability by broader adoption of TCP/IP. The conference was founded by Dan Lynch, an early Internet activist. From the beginning, large corporations, such as IBM and DEC, attended the meeting.\nIBM, AT&amp;T and DEC were the first major corporations to adopt TCP/IP, this despite having competing proprietary protocols. In IBM, from 1984, Barry Appelman's group did TCP/IP development. They navigated the corporate politics to get a stream of TCP/IP products for various IBM systems, including MVS, VM, and OS/2. At the same time, several smaller companies, such as FTP Software and the Wollongong Group, began offering TCP/IP stacks for DOS and Microsoft Windows. The first VM/CMS TCP/IP stack came from the University of Wisconsin.\nSome programmers are notable for early TCP/IP stack implementations. Jay Elinsky and Oleg Vishnepolsky of IBM Research wrote software for VM/CMS and OS/2, respectively. In 1984, Donald Gillies at MIT wrote a \"ntcp\" multi-connection TCP which runs atop the IP/PacketDriver layer maintained by John Romkey at MIT in 1983\u201384. Romkey leveraged this TCP in 1986 when FTP Software was founded. Starting in 1985, Phil Karn created a multi-connection TCP application for ham radio systems (KA9Q TCP).\nThe spread of TCP/IP was fueled further in June 1989, when the University of California, Berkeley agreed to place the TCP/IP code developed for BSD UNIX into the public domain. Various corporate vendors, including IBM, included this code in commercial TCP/IP software releases. For Windows 3.1, the dominant PC operating system among consumers in the first half of the 1990s, Peter Tattam's release of the Trumpet Winsock TCP/IP stack was key to bringing the Internet to home users. Trumpet Winsock allowed TCP/IP operations over a serial connection (SLIP or PPP). The typical home PC of the time had an external Hayes-compatible modem connected via an RS-232 port with an 8250 or 16550 UART which required this type of stack. Later, Microsoft would release their own TCP/IP add-on stack for Windows for Workgroups 3.11 and a native stack in Windows 95. These events helped cement TCP/IP's dominance over other protocols on Microsoft-based networks, which included IBM's Systems Network Architecture (SNA), and on other platforms such as Digital Equipment Corporation's DECnet, Open Systems Interconnection (OSI), and Xerox Network Systems (XNS).\nNonetheless, for a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s, engineers, organizations and nations were polarized over the issue of which standard, the OSI model or the Internet protocol suite, would result in the best and most robust computer networks.\nFormal specification and standards.\nThe technical standards underlying the Internet protocol suite and its constituent protocols have been delegated to the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).\nThe characteristic architecture of the Internet protocol suite is its broad division into operating scopes for the protocols that constitute its core functionality. The defining specifications of the suite are RFC 1122 and 1123, which broadly outlines four abstraction layers (as well as related protocols); the link layer, IP layer, transport layer, and application layer, along with support protocols. These have stood the test of time, as the IETF has never modified this structure. As such a model of networking, the Internet protocol suite predates the OSI model, a more comprehensive reference framework for general networking systems.\nA successor Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) was developed to address issues such as IPv4 address exhaustion.\nKey architectural principles.\nThe end-to-end principle has evolved over time. Its original expression put the maintenance of state and overall intelligence at the edges, and assumed the Internet that connected the edges retained no state and concentrated on speed and simplicity. Real-world needs for firewalls, network address translators, web content caches and the like have forced changes in this principle.\nThe robustness principle states: \"In general, an implementation must be conservative in its sending behavior, and liberal in its receiving behavior. That is, it must be careful to send well-formed datagrams, but must accept any datagram that it can interpret (e.g., not object to technical errors where the meaning is still clear).\" \"The second part of the principle is almost as important: software on other hosts may contain deficiencies that make it unwise to exploit legal but obscure protocol features.\"\nEncapsulation is used to provide abstraction of protocols and services. Encapsulation is usually aligned with the division of the protocol suite into layers of general functionality. In general, an application (the highest level of the model) uses a set of protocols to send its data down the layers. The data is further encapsulated at each level.\nAn early pair of architectural documents, and , titled \"Requirements for Internet Hosts\", emphasizes architectural principles over layering. RFC 1122/23 are structured in sections referring to layers, but the documents refer to many other architectural principles, and do not emphasize layering. They loosely define a four-layer model, with the layers having names, not numbers, as follows:\nLink layer.\nThe protocols of the link layer operate within the scope of the local network connection to which a host is attached. This regime is called the \"link\" in TCP/IP parlance and is the lowest component layer of the suite. The link includes all hosts accessible without traversing a router. The size of the link is therefore determined by the networking hardware design. In principle, TCP/IP is designed to be hardware independent and may be implemented on top of virtually any link-layer technology. This includes not only hardware implementations but also virtual link layers such as virtual private networks and networking tunnels.\nThe link layer is used to move packets between the internet layer interfaces of two different hosts on the same link. The processes of transmitting and receiving packets on the link can be controlled in the device driver for the network card, as well as in firmware or by specialized chipsets. These perform functions, such as framing, to prepare the internet layer packets for transmission, and finally transmit the frames to the physical layer and over a transmission medium. The TCP/IP model includes specifications for translating the network addressing methods used in the Internet Protocol to link-layer addresses, such as media access control (MAC) addresses. All other aspects below that level, however, are implicitly assumed to exist and are not explicitly defined in the TCP/IP model.\nThe link layer in the TCP/IP model has corresponding functions in Layer 2 of the OSI model.\nInternet layer.\nInternetworking requires sending data from the source network to the destination network. This process is called routing and is supported by host addressing and identification using the hierarchical IP addressing system. The internet layer provides an unreliable datagram transmission facility between hosts located on potentially different IP networks by forwarding datagrams to an appropriate next-hop router for further relaying to its destination. The internet layer has the responsibility of sending packets across potentially multiple networks. With this functionality, the internet layer makes possible internetworking, the interworking of different IP networks, and it essentially establishes the Internet.\nThe internet layer does not distinguish between the various transport layer protocols. IP carries data for a variety of different upper layer protocols. These protocols are each identified by a unique protocol number: for example, Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) and Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) are protocols 1 and 2, respectively.\nThe Internet Protocol is the principal component of the internet layer, and it defines two addressing systems to identify network hosts and to locate them on the network. The original address system of the ARPANET and its successor, the Internet, is Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4). It uses a 32-bit IP address and is therefore capable of identifying approximately four billion hosts. This limitation was eliminated in 1998 by the standardization of Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) which uses 128-bit addresses. IPv6 production implementations emerged in approximately 2006.\nTransport layer.\nThe transport layer establishes data channels that applications use for task-specific data exchange. The layer establishes host-to-host connectivity in the form of end-to-end message transfer services that are independent of the underlying network and independent of the structure of user data and the logistics of exchanging information. Connectivity at the transport layer can be categorized as either connection-oriented, implemented in TCP, or connectionless, implemented in UDP. The protocols in this layer may provide error control, segmentation, flow control, congestion control, and application addressing (port numbers).\nFor the purpose of providing process-specific transmission channels for applications, the layer establishes the concept of the network port. This is a numbered logical construct allocated specifically for each of the communication channels an application needs. For many types of services, these \"port numbers\" have been standardized so that client computers may address specific services of a server computer without the involvement of service discovery or directory services.\nBecause IP provides only a best-effort delivery, some transport-layer protocols offer reliability.\nTCP is a connection-oriented protocol that addresses numerous reliability issues in providing a reliable byte stream:\nThe newer Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) is also a reliable, connection-oriented transport mechanism. It is message-stream-oriented, not byte-stream-oriented like TCP, and provides multiple streams multiplexed over a single connection. It also provides multihoming support, in which a connection end can be represented by multiple IP addresses (representing multiple physical interfaces), such that if one fails, the connection is not interrupted. It was developed initially for telephony applications (to transport SS7 over IP).\nReliability can also be achieved by running IP over a reliable data-link protocol such as the High-Level Data Link Control (HDLC).\nThe User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a connectionless datagram protocol. Like IP, it is a best-effort, unreliable protocol. Reliability is addressed through error detection using a checksum algorithm. UDP is typically used for applications such as streaming media (audio, video, Voice over IP, etc.) where on-time arrival is more important than reliability, or for simple query/response applications like DNS lookups, where the overhead of setting up a reliable connection is disproportionately large. Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) is a datagram protocol that is used over UDP and is designed for real-time data such as streaming media.\nThe applications at any given network address are distinguished by their TCP or UDP port. By convention, certain \" well-known ports\" are associated with specific applications.\nThe TCP/IP model's transport or host-to-host layer corresponds roughly to the fourth layer in the OSI model, also called the transport layer.\nQUIC is rapidly emerging as an alternative transport protocol. Whilst it is technically carried via UDP packets it seeks to offer enhanced transport connectivity relative to TCP. HTTP/3 works exclusively via QUIC.\nApplication layer.\nThe application layer includes the protocols used by most applications for providing user services or exchanging application data over the network connections established by the lower-level protocols. This may include some basic network support services such as routing protocols and host configuration. Examples of application layer protocols include the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the File Transfer Protocol (FTP), the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), and the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). Data coded according to application layer protocols are encapsulated into transport layer protocol units (such as TCP streams or UDP datagrams), which in turn use lower layer protocols to effect actual data transfer.\nThe TCP/IP model does not consider the specifics of formatting and presenting data and does not define additional layers between the application and transport layers as in the OSI model (presentation and session layers). According to the TCP/IP model, such functions are the realm of libraries and application programming interfaces. The application layer in the TCP/IP model is often compared to a combination of the fifth (session), sixth (presentation), and seventh (application) layers of the OSI model.\nApplication layer protocols are often associated with particular client\u2013server applications, and common services have \"well-known\" port numbers reserved by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA). For example, the HyperText Transfer Protocol uses server port 80 and Telnet uses server port 23. Clients connecting to a service usually use ephemeral ports, i.e., port numbers assigned only for the duration of the transaction at random or from a specific range configured in the application.\nAt the application layer, the TCP/IP model distinguishes between \"user protocols\" and \"support protocols\". Support protocols provide services to a system of network infrastructure. User protocols are used for actual user applications. For example, FTP is a user protocol and DNS is a support protocol.\nAlthough the applications are usually aware of key qualities of the transport layer connection such as the endpoint IP addresses and port numbers, application layer protocols generally treat the transport layer (and lower) protocols as black boxes which provide a stable network connection across which to communicate. The transport layer and lower-level layers are unconcerned with the specifics of application layer protocols. Routers and switches do not typically examine the encapsulated traffic, rather they just provide a conduit for it. However, some firewall and bandwidth throttling applications use deep packet inspection to interpret application data. An example is the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP). It is also sometimes necessary for Applications affected by NAT to consider the application payload.\nLayering evolution and representations in the literature.\nThe Internet protocol suite evolved through research and development funded over a period of time. In this process, the specifics of protocol components and their layering changed. In addition, parallel research and commercial interests from industry associations competed with design features. In particular, efforts in the International Organization for Standardization led to a similar goal, but with a wider scope of networking in general. Efforts to consolidate the two principal schools of layering, which were superficially similar, but diverged sharply in detail, led independent textbook authors to formulate abridging teaching tools.\nThe following table shows various such networking models. The number of layers varies between three and seven.\nSome of the networking models are from textbooks, which are secondary sources that may conflict with the intent of RFC 1122 and other IETF primary sources.\nComparison of TCP/IP and OSI layering.\nThe three top layers in the OSI model, i.e. the application layer, the presentation layer and the session layer, are not distinguished separately in the TCP/IP model which only has an application layer above the transport layer. While some pure OSI protocol applications, such as X.400, also combined them, there is no requirement that a TCP/IP protocol stack must impose monolithic architecture above the transport layer. For example, the NFS application protocol runs over the External Data Representation (XDR) presentation protocol, which, in turn, runs over a protocol called Remote Procedure Call (RPC). RPC provides reliable record transmission, so it can safely use the best-effort UDP transport.\nDifferent authors have interpreted the TCP/IP model differently, and disagree whether the link layer, or any aspect of the TCP/IP model, covers OSI layer 1 (physical layer) issues, or whether TCP/IP assumes a hardware layer exists below the link layer. Several authors have attempted to incorporate the OSI model's layers 1 and 2 into the TCP/IP model since these are commonly referred to in modern standards (for example, by IEEE and ITU). This often results in a model with five layers, where the link layer or network access layer is split into the OSI model's layers 1 and 2.\nThe IETF protocol development effort is not concerned with strict layering. Some of its protocols may not fit cleanly into the OSI model, although RFCs sometimes refer to it and often use the old OSI layer numbers. The IETF has repeatedly stated that Internet Protocol and architecture development is not intended to be OSI-compliant. RFC 3439, referring to the internet architecture, contains a section entitled: \"Layering Considered Harmful\".\nFor example, the session and presentation layers of the OSI suite are considered to be included in the application layer of the TCP/IP suite. The functionality of the session layer can be found in protocols like HTTP and SMTP and is more evident in protocols like Telnet and the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP). Session-layer functionality is also realized with the port numbering of the TCP and UDP protocols, which are included in the transport layer of the TCP/IP suite. Functions of the presentation layer are realized in the TCP/IP applications with the MIME standard in data exchange.\nAnother difference is in the treatment of routing protocols. The OSI routing protocol IS-IS belongs to the network layer, and does not depend on CLNS for delivering packets from one router to another, but defines its own layer-3 encapsulation. In contrast, OSPF, RIP, BGP and other routing protocols defined by the IETF are transported over IP, and, for the purpose of sending and receiving routing protocol packets, routers act as hosts. As a consequence, routing protocols are included in the application layer. Some authors, such as Tanenbaum in \"Computer Networks\", describe routing protocols in the same layer as IP, reasoning that routing protocols inform decisions made by the forwarding process of routers.\nIETF protocols can be encapsulated recursively, as demonstrated by tunnelling protocols such as Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE). GRE uses the same mechanism that OSI uses for tunnelling at the network layer.\nImplementations.\nThe Internet protocol suite is generally independent of a specific hardware or software environment. It only requires the hardware and a software layer to exist, capable of sending and receiving packets on a computer network. As a result, the suite has been implemented on essentially every computing platform. A minimal implementation of TCP/IP includes the following: Internet Protocol (IP), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP), Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), User Datagram Protocol (UDP), and Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP). In addition to IP, ICMP, TCP, UDP, Internet Protocol version 6 requires Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP), ICMPv6, and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) and is often accompanied by an integrated IPSec security layer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15477", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15477", "title": "Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi", "text": "Libyan native arrested in Afghanistan\nIbn al-Shaykh al-Libi (; born Ali Mohamed Abdul Aziz al-Fakheri; 1963 \u2013 May 10, 2009) was a Libyan national captured in Afghanistan in November 2001 after the fall of the Taliban; he was interrogated by American and Egyptian forces. The information he gave under torture to Egyptian authorities was cited by the George W. Bush administration in the months preceding its 2003 invasion of Iraq as evidence of a connection between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda. That information was frequently repeated by members of the Bush administration, although reports from both the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) strongly questioned its credibility, suggesting that al-Libi was \"intentionally misleading\" interrogators.\nIn 2006, the United States transferred al-Libi to Libya, where he was imprisoned by the government of Muammar Gaddafi. He was reported to have tuberculosis. On May 19, 2009, the government reported that he had recently committed suicide in prison. Human Rights Watch, whose representatives had recently visited him, called for an investigation into the circumstances of his death; \"The New York Times\" reported that Ayman al-Zawahiri had asserted that Libya had tortured al-Libi to death.\nTraining camp director.\nIn Afghanistan, al-Libi led the Al Khaldan training camp, where Zacarias Moussaoui and Ahmed Ressam trained for attacks in the United States. An associate of Abu Zubaydah, al-Libi had his assets frozen by the U.S. government following the September 11 attacks; on September 26, 2002, the U.S. government published a list of terrorists who were covered by this restriction.\nThe Uyghur Turkistan Islamic Party's \"Islamic Turkistan\" magazine in its 5th edition published an obituary of its member Turghun (Ibn Umar al Turkistani) speaking of his time training at the Al Khaldan training camp and his meeting with Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi. The Uyghurs in Afghanistan fought against the American bombings and the Northern Alliance after the September 11, 2001 attacks. Ibn Umar died fighting against the Americans at the Qalai Jangi prison riot.\nAl-Libi was captured by Pakistani officials in November 2001, as he attempted to flee Afghanistan following the collapse of the Taliban after the 2001 U.S. invasion of Afghanistan. He was transferred to US military custody in January 2002.\nDepartment of Defense spokesmen used to routinely describe the Khaldan training camp as an al-Qaeda training camp, and Al-Libi and Abu Zubaydah as senior members of al-Qaeda. But, during testimony at their Combatant Status Review Tribunals, several Guantanamo captives, including Zubaydah, described the Khaldan camp as having been run by a rival jihadist organization\u00a0\u2013 one that did not support attacking civilians.\nCooperation with the FBI.\nAl-Libi was turned over to the FBI and held at Bagram Air Base. When talking to the FBI interrogators Russell Fincher and Marty Mahon, he seemed \"genuinely friendly\" and spoke chiefly in English, calling for a translator only when necessary. He seemed to bond with Fincher, a devout Christian, and the two prayed together and discussed religion at length.\nAl-Libi told the interrogators details about Richard Reid, a British citizen who had joined al-Qaeda and trained to carry out a suicide bombing of an airliner, which he unsuccessfully attempted on December 22, 2001. Al-Libi agreed to continue cooperating if the United States would allow his wife and her family to emigrate, while he was prosecuted within the American legal system.\nIn CIA custody.\nThe CIA asked President George W. Bush for permission to take al-Libi into their own custody and rendition him to a foreign country for more \"tough guy\" questioning, and were granted permission. They \"simply came and took al-Libi away from the FBI.\" One CIA officer was heard telling their new prisoner that \"You know where you are going. Before you get there, I am going to find your mother and fuck her\".\nIn the second week of January 2002, al-Libi was flown to the USS \"Bataan\" in the northern Arabian Sea, a ship being used to hold eight other notable prisoners, including John Walker Lindh. He was subsequently transferred to Egyptian interrogators.\nInformation provided.\nAccording to \"The Washington Post\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOn September 15, 2002, \"Time\" published an article that detailed the CIA interrogations of Omar al-Faruq. It said,\nOn Sept. 9, according to a secret CIA summary of the interview, al-Faruq confessed that he was, in fact, al-Qaeda's senior representative in Southeast Asia. Then came an even more shocking confession: according to the CIA document, al-Faruq said two senior al-Qaeda officials, Abu Zubaydah and Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi, had ordered him to 'plan large-scale attacks against U.S. interests in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Taiwan, Vietnam and Cambodia.'\nAl-Libi has been identified as a principal source of faulty prewar intelligence regarding chemical weapons training between Iraq and al-Qaeda that was used by the Bush administration to justify the invasion of Iraq. Specifically, he told interrogators that Iraq provided training to al-Qaeda in the area of \"chemical and biological weapons\". In Cincinnati in October 2002, Bush informed the public: \"Iraq has trained al Qaeda members in bomb making and poisons and gases.\"\nThis claim was repeated several times in the run-up to the war, including in then-Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech to the UN Security Council on February 5, 2003, which concluded with a long recitation of the information provided by al-Libi. Powell's speech was made less than a month after a then-classified CIA report concluded that the information provided by al-Libi was unreliable, and about a year after a DIA report concluded the same thing.\nAl-Libi recanted these claims in January 2004 after U.S. interrogators presented \"new evidence from other detainees that cast doubt on his claims\", according to \"Newsweek\". The DIA concluded in February 2002 that al-Libi deliberately misled interrogators, in what the CIA called an \"attempt to exaggerate his importance\". Some speculate that his reason for giving disinformation was to draw the U.S. into an attack on Iraq\u2014Islam's \"weakest\" state, a remark attributed to al-Libi\u2014which al-Qaeda believed would lead to a global jihad. Others, including al-Libi himself, have insisted that he gave false information due to the use of torture (so-called \"enhanced interrogation techniques\").\nAn article published in the November 5, 2005 edition of \"The New York Times\" quoted two paragraphs of a Defense Intelligence Agency report, declassified upon request by Senator Carl Levin, that expressed doubts about the results of al-Libi's interrogation in February 2002.\nAl-Libi told a foreign intelligence service that:\nIraq \u2014 acting on the request of al-Qa'ida militant Abu Abdullah, who was Muhammad Atif's emissary \u2014 agreed to provide unspecified chemical or biological weapons training for two al-Qa'ida associates beginning in December 2000. The two individuals departed for Iraq but did not return, so al-Libi was not in a position to know if any training had taken place. \nThe September 2002 version of \"Iraqi Support for Terrorism\" stated that al-Libi said Iraq had \"provided\" chemical and biological weapons training for two al-Qaeda associates in 2000, but also stated that al-Libi \"did not know the results of the training.\"\nThe 2006 Senate Report on Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq stated that \"Although DIA coordinated on CIA's \"Iraqi Support for Terrorism\" paper, DIA analysis preceding that assessment was more skeptical of the al-Libi reporting.\" In July 2002, DIA assessed\nIt is plausible al-Qa'ida attempted to obtain CB assistance from Iraq and Ibn al-Shaykh is sufficiently senior to have access to such sensitive information. However, Ibn al-Shaykh's information lacks details concerning the individual Iraqis involved, the specific CB materials associated with the assistance and the location where the alleged training occurred. The information is also second hand, and not derived from Ibn al-Shaykh's personal experience.\nThe Senate report also states \"According to al-Libi, after his decision to fabricate information for debriefers, he 'lied about being a member of al-Qa'ida. Although he considered himself close to, but not a member of, al-Qa'ida, he knew enough about the senior members, organization and operations to claim to be a member.'\"\nSenate Reports on Pre-war Intelligence on Iraq.\nOn September 8, 2006, the United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence released \"Phase II\" of its report on prewar intelligence on Iraq. Conclusion 3 of the report states the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Postwar findings support the DIA February 2002 assessment that Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi was likely intentionally misleading his debriefers when he said that Iraq provided two al-Qa'ida associates with chemical and biological weapons (CBW) training in 2000 ... Postwar findings do not support the CIA's assessment that his reporting was credible ... No postwar information has been found that indicates CBW training occurred and the detainee who provided the key prewar reporting about this training recanted his claims after the war ... CIA's January 2003 version of Iraqi Support for Terrorism described al-Libi's reporting for CBW training \"credible\", but noted that the individuals who traveled to Iraq for CBW training had not returned, so al-Libi was not in position to know if the training had taken place ... In January 2004, al-Libi recanted his allegations about CBW training and many of his other claims about Iraq's links to al Qa'ida. He told debriefers that, to the best of his knowledge, al-Qa'ida never sent any individuals into Iraq for any kind of support in chemical or biological weapons. Al-libi told debriefers that he fabricated information while in U.S. custody to receive better treatment and in response to threats of being transferred to a foreign intelligence service which he believed would torture him ... He said that later, while he was being debriefed by a (REDACTED) foreign intelligence service, he fabricated more information in response to physical abuse and threats of torture. The foreign government service denies using any pressure during al-Libi's interrogation. In February 2004, the CIA reissued the debriefing reports from al-Libi to note that he had recanted information. A CIA officer explained that while CIA believes al-Libi fabricated information, the CIA cannot determine whether, or what portions of, the original statements or the later recants are true or false.\nOn June 11, 2008, \"Newsweek\" published an account of material from a \"previously undisclosed CIA report written in the summer of 2002\". The article reported that on August 7, 2002, CIA analysts had drafted a high-level report that expressed serious doubts about the information flowing from al-Libi's interrogation. The information that al-Libi acknowledged being a member of al-Qaeda's executive council was not supported by other sources. According to al-Libi, in Egypt he was locked in a tiny box less than 20 inches high and held for 17 hours and after being let out he was thrown to the floor and punched for 15\u00a0minutes. According to CIA operational cables, only then did he tell his \"fabricated\" story about al-Qaeda members being dispatched to Iraq.\nBook: \"Inside the Jihad\".\nIn November 2006, a Moroccan using the pseudonym Omar Nasiri, having infiltrated al-Qaeda in the 1990s, wrote the book, \"\". In the book, Nasiri claims that al-Libi deliberately planted information to encourage the U.S. to invade Iraq. In an interview with BBC2's \"Newsnight\", Nasiri said Libi \"needed the conflict in Iraq because months before I heard him telling us when a question was asked in the mosque after the prayer in the evening, where is the best country to fight the jihad?\" Nasiri said that Libi had identified Iraq as the \"weakest\" Muslim country. He suggested to \"Newsnight\" that al-Libi wanted to overthrow Saddam and use Iraq as a jihadist base. Nasiri describes al-Libi as one of the leaders at the Afghan camp, and characterizes him as \"brilliant in every way.\" He said that learning how to withstand interrogations and supply false information was a key part of the training in the camps. Al-Libi \"knew what his interrogators wanted, and he was happy to give it to them. He wanted to see Saddam toppled even more than the Americans did.\"\nBook: \"At the Center of the Storm\".\nIn April 2007, former Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet released his memoir titled \"\". With regard to al-Libi, Tenet writes the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We believed that al-Libi was withholding critical threat information at the time, so we transferred him to a third country for further debriefing. Allegations were made that we did so knowing that he would be tortured, but this is false. The country in question understood and agreed that they would hold al-Libi for a limited period. In the course of questioning while he was in U.S. custody in Afghanistan, al-Libi made initial references to possible al-Qa'ida training in Iraq. He offered up information that a militant known as Abu Abdullah had told him that at least three times between 1997 and 2000, the now-deceased al-Qa'ida leader Mohammad Atef had sent Abu Abdullah to Iraq to seek training in poisons and mustard gas. Another senior al-Qa'ida detainee told us that Mohammad Atef was interested in expanding al-Qa-ida's ties to Iraq, which, in our eyes, added credibility to the reporting. Then, shortly after the Iraq war got under way, al-Libi recanted his story. Now, suddenly, he was saying that there was no such cooperative training. Inside the CIA, there was sharp division on his recantation. It led us to recall his reporting, and here is where the mystery begins. Al-Libi's story will no doubt be that he decided to fabricate in order to get better treatment and avoid harsh punishment. He clearly lied. We just don't know when. Did he lie when he first said that al-Qa'ida members received training in Iraq or did he lie when he said they did not? In my mind, either case might still be true. Perhaps, early on, he was under pressure, assumed his interrogators already knew the story, and sang away. After time passed and it became clear that he would not be harmed, he might have changed his story to butt the minds of his captors. Al-Qa'ida operatives are trained to do just that. A recantation would restore his stature as someone who had successfully confounded the enemy. The fact is, we don't know which story is true, and since we don't know, we can assume nothing.\nRepatriation to Libya and death.\nIn 2006, the Bush administration announced that it was transferring high-value al-Qaeda detainees from CIA secret prisons so they could be put on trial by military commissions. However, the administration was conspicuously silent about al-Libi. In December 2014, it was revealed that he had been transferred to the Guantanamo Bay detention camp in 2003 and transferred to Morocco on March 27, 2004.\nNoman Benotman, a former Mujahideen who knew Libi, told \"Newsweek\" that during a recent trip to Tripoli, he met with a senior Libyan government official who confirmed to him that Libi had been transferred to Libya and was being held in prison there. He was suffering from tuberculosis.\nOn May 10, 2009, the English language edition of the Algerian newspaper \"Ennahar\" reported that the Libyan government said that Al-Libi had been repatriated to Libyan custody in 2006, and had recently committed suicide by hanging. It attributed the information to the Libyan newspaper, \"Oea\". \"Ennahar\" reported Al-Libi's real name was Ali Mohamed Abdul Aziz Al-Fakheri. It stated he was 46 years old, and had been allowed visits with international human rights workers from Human Rights Watch. The story was widely reported by other media outlets.\nAl-Libi had been visited in April 2009 by a team from Human Rights Watch. His sudden death so soon after this visit has led human rights organisations and Islamic groups to question whether it was truly a suicide. Clive Stafford Smith, Legal Director of the UK branch of the human rights group Reprieve, said, \"We are told that al-Libi committed suicide in his Libyan prison. If this is true it would be because of his torture and abuse. If false, it may reflect a desire to silence one of the greatest embarrassments to the Bush administration.\" Hafed Al-Ghwell, a Libya expert and director of communications at the Dubai campus of Harvard Kennedy School, commented:\nThis is a regime with a long history of killing people in jail and then claiming it was suicide. My guess is Libya has seen the winds of change in America and wanted to bury this man before international organisations start demanding access to him. \nOn June 19, 2009, Andy Worthington published new information on al-Libi's death. Worthington gave a detailed timeline of Al Libi's last years.\nThe head of the Washington office of Human Rights Watch said al-Libi was \"Exhibit A\" in hearings on the relationship between pre-Iraq War false intelligence and torture. Confirmation of al-Libi's location came two weeks prior to his death. An independent investigation of his death has been requested by Human Rights Watch.\nOn October 4, 2009, \"Reuters\" reported that Ayman Al Zawahiri, the head of al-Qaeda, had asserted that Libya had caused al-Libi's death through torture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15478", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15478", "title": "IDF (disambiguation)", "text": "IDF is a common abbreviation for the Israel Defense Forces.\nIDF or idf may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15487", "revid": "16120725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15487", "title": "International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement", "text": "International humanitarian movement\nThe organized International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is a humanitarian movement with approximately 16million volunteers, members, and staff worldwide. It was founded to protect human life and health, to ensure respect for all human beings, and to prevent and alleviate human suffering.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nUntil the middle of the nineteenth century, there were no organized or well-established army nursing systems for casualties, nor safe or protected institutions, to accommodate and treat those who were wounded on the battlefield. A devout Calvinist, the Swiss businessman Jean-Henri Dunant traveled to Italy to meet then-French emperor Napoleon III in June 1859 with the intention of discussing difficulties in conducting business in Algeria, which at that time was occupied by France. He arrived in the small town of Solferino on the evening of 24 June after the Battle of Solferino, an engagement in the Austro-Sardinian War. In a single day, about 40,000 soldiers on both sides died or were left wounded on the field. Dunant was shocked by the terrible aftermath of the battle, the suffering of the wounded soldiers, and the near-total lack of medical attendance and basic care. He completely abandoned the original intent of his trip and for several days he devoted himself to helping with the treatment and care of the wounded. He took part in organizing an overwhelming level of relief assistance with the local villagers to aid without discrimination.\nBack at his home in Geneva, he decided to write a book entitled \"A Memory of Solferino\", which he published using his own money in 1862. He sent copies of the book to leading political and military figures throughout Europe, and people he thought could help him make a change. His book included vivid descriptions of his experiences in Solferino in 1859, and he explicitly advocated the formation of national voluntary relief organizations to help nurse wounded soldiers in the case of war, inspired by Christian teaching regarding social responsibility and his experience after the battlefield of Solferino. He called for the development of an international treaty to guarantee the protection of medics and field hospitals for soldiers wounded on the battlefield.\nIn 1863, Gustave Moynier, a Geneva lawyer and president of the Geneva Society for Public Welfare, received a copy of Dunant's book and introduced it for discussion at a meeting of that society. As a result of this initial discussion, the society established an investigatory commission to examine the feasibility of Dunant's suggestions and eventually to organize an international conference about their possible implementation. The members of this committee, which has subsequently been referred to as the \"Committee of the Five\", aside from Dunant and Moynier were physician Louis Appia, who had significant experience working as a field surgeon; Appia's friend and colleague Th\u00e9odore Maunoir, from the Geneva Hygiene and Health Commission; and Guillaume-Henri Dufour, a Swiss army general of great renown. Eight days later, the five men decided to rename the committee to the \"International Committee for Relief to the Wounded\".\nInternational conference.\nFrom 26 to 29 October 1863, the international conference organized by the committee was held in Geneva to develop possible measures to improve medical services on the battlefield. The conference was attended by 36 individuals: eighteen official delegates from national governments, six delegates from non-governmental organizations, seven non-official foreign delegates, and the five members of the International Committee. The states and kingdoms represented by official delegates were: Swiss Confederation, Austrian Empire, Grand Duchy of Baden, Kingdom of Bavaria, French Empire, Kingdom of Hanover, Kingdom of Italy, Kingdom of the Netherlands, Kingdom of Prussia, Russian Empire, Kingdom of Saxony, Kingdom of Wurtemberg, United Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway, and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.\nAmong the proposals written in the final resolutions of the conference, adopted on 29 October 1863, were:\nGeneva Convention, national societies, and ICRC.\nOnly a year later, the Swiss government invited the governments of all European countries, as well as the United States, the Empire of Brazil and the Mexican Empire to attend an official diplomatic conference. Sixteen countries sent a total of 26 delegates to Geneva. On 22 August 1864, the conference adopted the first Geneva Convention \"for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the Field\". Representatives of 12 states and kingdoms signed the convention:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe convention contained ten articles, establishing for the first time legally binding rules guaranteeing neutrality and protection for wounded soldiers, field medical personnel, and specific humanitarian institutions in an armed conflict.\nDirectly following the establishment of the Geneva Convention, the first national societies were founded in Belgium, Denmark, France, Oldenburg, Italy, Prussia, Spain, and W\u00fcrttemberg. Also in 1864, Louis Appia and Charles van de Velde, a captain of the Dutch Army, became the first independent and neutral delegates to work under the symbol of the Red Cross in an armed conflict.\nThe Ottoman government ratified this treaty on 5 July 1865. The Turkish Red Crescent organization was founded in the Ottoman Empire in 1868, partly in response to the experience of the Crimean War (1853\u20131856), in which disease overshadowed battle as the main cause of death and suffering among Turkish soldiers. It was the first Red Crescent society of its kind and one of the most important charity organizations in the Muslim world.\nIn 1867, the first International Conference of National Aid Societies for the Nursing of the War Wounded was convened. Also in 1867, Jean-Henri Dunant was forced to declare bankruptcy due to business failures in Algeria, partly because he had neglected his business interests during his tireless activities for the International Committee. The controversy surrounding Dunant's business dealings and the resulting negative public opinion, combined with an ongoing conflict with Gustave Moynier, led to Dunant's expulsion from his position as a member and secretary. He was charged with fraudulent bankruptcy and a warrant for his arrest was issued. Thus, he was forced to leave Geneva and never returned to his home city.\nIn the following years, national societies were founded in nearly every country in Europe. The project resonated well with patriotic sentiments that were on the rise in the late-nineteenth-century, and national societies were often encouraged as signifiers of national moral superiority. In 1876, the committee adopted the name \"International Committee of the Red Cross\" (ICRC), which is still its official designation today. Five years later, the American Red Cross was founded through the efforts of Clara Barton. More and more countries signed the Geneva Convention and began to respect it in practice during armed conflicts. In a rather short period of time, the Red Cross gained huge momentum as an internationally respected movement, and the national societies became increasingly popular as a venue for volunteer work.\nWhen the first Nobel Peace Prize was awarded in 1901, the Norwegian Nobel Committee opted to give it jointly to Jean-Henri Dunant and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Passy, a leading international pacifist. More significant than the honor of the prize itself, this prize marked the overdue rehabilitation of Jean-Henri Dunant and represented a tribute to his key role in the formation of the Red Cross. Dunant died nine years later in the small Swiss health resort of Heiden. Only two months earlier his long-standing adversary Gustave Moynier had also died, leaving a mark in the history of the committee as its longest-serving president ever.\nIn 1906, the 1864 Geneva Convention was revised for the first time. One year later, the Hague Convention X, adopted at the Second International Peace Conference in The Hague, extended the scope of the Geneva Convention to naval warfare. Shortly before the beginning of the First World War in 1914, 50 years after the foundation of the ICRC and the adoption of the first Geneva Convention, there were already 45 national relief societies throughout the world. The movement had extended itself beyond Europe and North America to Central and South America (Argentine Republic, the United States of Brazil, the Republic of Chile, the Republic of Cuba, the United Mexican States, the Republic of Peru, the Republic of El Salvador, the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, the United States of Venezuela), Asia (the Republic of China, the Empire of Japan and the Kingdom of Siam), and Africa (Union of South Africa).\nWorld War I.\nWith the outbreak of World War I, the ICRC found itself confronted with enormous challenges that it could handle only by working closely with the national Red Cross societies. Red Cross nurses from around the world, including the United States and Japan, came to support the medical services of the armed forces of the European countries involved in the war. On 15 August 1914, immediately after the start of the war, the ICRC set up its International Prisoners-of-War Agency (IPWA) to trace POWs and to re-establish communications with their respective families. The Austrian writer and pacifist Stefan Zweig described the situation at the Geneva headquarters of the ICRC:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hardly had the first blows been struck when cries of anguish from all lands began to be heard in Switzerland. Thousands who were without news of fathers, husbands, and sons in the battlefields, stretched despairing arms into the void. By hundreds, by thousands, by tens of thousands, letters and telegrams poured into the little House of the Red Cross in Geneva, the only international rallying point that still remained. Isolated, like stormy petrels, came the first inquiries for missing relatives; then these inquiries themselves became a storm. The letters arrived in sackfuls. Nothing had been prepared for dealing with such an inundation of misery. The Red Cross had no space, no organization, no system, and above all no helpers.\nHowever, by the end of the year, the Agency already had some 1,200 volunteers who worked in the Mus\u00e9e Rath of Geneva, amongst them the French writer and pacifist Romain Rolland. When he was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature for 1915, he donated half of the prize money to the Agency. Most of the staff were women, some of whom\u00a0\u2013 like Marguerite van Berchem, Marguerite Cramer and Suzanne Ferri\u00e8re\u00a0\u2013 served in high positions as pioneers of gender equality in an organisation dominated by men.\nBy the end of the war, the Agency had transferred about 20 million letters and messages, 1.9 million parcels, and about 18 million Swiss francs in monetary donations to POWs of all affected countries. Furthermore, due to the intervention of the Agency, about 200,000 prisoners were exchanged between the warring parties, released from captivity and returned to their home country. The organizational card index of the Agency accumulated about 7 million records from 1914 to 1923. The card index led to the identification of about 2 million POWs and the ability to contact their families. The complete index is on loan today from the ICRC to the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Museum in Geneva. The right to access the index is still strictly restricted to the ICRC.\nDuring the entire war, the ICRC monitored warring parties' compliance with the Geneva Conventions of the 1907 revision and forwarded complaints about violations to the respective country. When chemical weapons were used in this war for the first time in history, the ICRC mounted a vigorous protest against their use. Even without having a mandate from the Geneva Conventions, the ICRC tried to ameliorate the suffering of civil populations. In territories that were officially designated as \"occupied territories\", the ICRC could assist the civilian population on the basis of the Hague Convention's \"Laws and Customs of War on Land\" of 1907. This convention was also the legal basis for the ICRC's work for prisoners of war. In addition to the work of the International Prisoner-of-War Agency as described above, this included inspection visits to POW camps. A total of 524 camps throughout Europe were visited by 41 delegates from the ICRC through the end of the war.\nBetween 1916 and 1918, the ICRC published a number of postcards with scenes from the POW camps. The pictures showed the prisoners in day-to-day activities such as the distribution of letters from home. The intention of the ICRC was to provide the families of the prisoners with some hope and solace and to alleviate their uncertainties about the fate of their loved ones. After the end of the war, between 1920 and 1922, the ICRC organized the return of about 500,000 prisoners to their home countries. In 1920, the task of repatriation was handed over to the newly founded League of Nations, which appointed the Norwegian diplomat and scientist Fridtjof Nansen as its \"High Commissioner for Repatriation of the War Prisoners\". His legal mandate was later extended to support and care for war refugees and displaced persons when his office became that of the League of Nations \"High Commissioner for Refugees\". Nansen, who invented the Nansen passport for stateless refugees and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1922, appointed two delegates from the ICRC as his deputies. A year before the end of the war, the ICRC received the 1917 Nobel Peace Prize for its outstanding wartime work. It was the only Nobel Peace Prize awarded in the period from 1914 to 1918. In 1923, the International Committee of the Red Cross adopted a change in its policy regarding the selection of new members. Until then, only citizens from the city of Geneva could serve in the committee. This limitation was expanded to include all Swiss citizens. As a direct consequence of World War I, a treaty was adopted in 1925 which outlawed the use of suffocating or poisonous gases and biological agents as weapons. Four years later, the original Convention was revised and the second Geneva Convention \"relative to the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea\" was established. The events of World War I and the respective activities of the ICRC significantly increased the reputation and authority of the Committee among the international community and led to an extension of its competencies.\nAs early as in 1934, a draft proposal for an additional convention for the protection of the civil population in occupied territories during an armed conflict was adopted by the International Red Cross Conference. Unfortunately, most governments had little interest in implementing this convention, and it was thus prevented from entering into force before the beginning of World War II.\nWorld War II.\nThe Red Cross' response to the Holocaust has been the subject of significant controversy and criticism. As early as May 1944, the ICRC was criticized for its indifference to Jewish suffering and death\u2014criticism that intensified after the end of the war, when the full extent of the Holocaust became undeniable.\nOne defense to these allegations is that the Red Cross was trying to preserve its reputation as a neutral and impartial organization by not interfering with what was viewed as a German internal matter. The Red Cross also considered its primary focus to be prisoners of war whose countries had signed the Geneva Convention.\nThe Geneva Conventions in their 1929 revision formed the legal basis of the work of the ICRC during World War II. The activities of the committee were similar to those during World War I: visiting and monitoring POW camps, organizing relief assistance for civilian populations, and administering the exchange of messages regarding prisoners and missing persons. By the end of the war, 179 delegates had conducted 12,750 visits to POW camps in 41 countries. The Central Information Agency on Prisoners-of-War (\"Agence centrale des prisonniers de guerre\") had a staff of 3,000, the card index tracking prisoners contained 45 million cards, and 120 million messages were exchanged by the Agency. One major obstacle was that the Nazi-controlled German Red Cross refused to cooperate with the Geneva statutes, including blatant violations such as the deportation of Jews from Germany, and the mass murders conducted in the Nazi concentration camps.\nTwo other main parties to the conflict, the Soviet Union and Japan, were not party to the 1929 Geneva Conventions and were not legally required to follow the rules of the conventions.\nDuring the war, the ICRC was unable to obtain an agreement with Nazi Germany about the treatment of detainees in concentration camps, and the ICRC eventually abandoned applying pressure, saying later it did so in order to avoid disrupting its work with POWs. The ICRC was also unable to obtain a response to reliable information about the extermination camps and the mass killing of European Jews, Roma, et al. After November 1943, the ICRC achieved permission to send parcels to concentration camp detainees with known names and locations. Because the notices of receipt for these parcels were often signed by other inmates, the ICRC managed to register the identities of about 105,000 detainees in the concentration camps and delivered about 1.1 million parcels, primarily to the concentration camps Dachau, Buchenwald, Ravensbr\u00fcck, and Sachsenhausen.\nMaurice Rossel was sent to Berlin as a delegate of the International Red Cross; he visited Theresienstadt Ghetto in 1944. The choice of the inexperienced Rossel for this mission has been interpreted as indicative of his organization's indifference to the \"Jewish problem\", while his report has been described as \"emblematic of the failure of the ICRC\" to advocate for Jews during the Holocaust. Rossel's report was noted for its uncritical acceptance of Nazi propaganda. He erroneously stated that Jews were not deported from Theresienstadt. Claude Lanzmann recorded his experiences in 1979, producing a documentary entitled \"A Visitor from the Living\".\nOn 12 March 1945, ICRC president Jacob Burckhardt received a message from SS General Ernst Kaltenbrunner allowing ICRC delegates to visit the concentration camps. This agreement was bound by the condition that these delegates would have to stay in the camps until the end of the war. Ten delegates, among them Louis Haefliger (Mauthausen-Gusen), Paul Dunant (Theresienstadt), and Victor Maurer (Dachau), accepted the assignment and visited the camps. Louis Haefliger prevented the forceful eviction or blasting of Mauthausen-Gusen by alerting American troops.\nFriedrich Born (1903\u20131963), an ICRC delegate in Budapest, saved the lives of about 11,000 to 15,000 Jewish people in Hungary. Marcel Junod (1904\u20131961), a physician from Geneva, was one of the first foreigners to visit Hiroshima after the atomic bomb was dropped.\nIn 1944, the ICRC received its second Nobel Peace Prize. As in World War I, it received the only Peace Prize awarded during the main period of war, 1939 to 1945. At the end of the war, the ICRC worked with national Red Cross societies to organize relief assistance to those countries most severely affected. In 1948, the Committee published a report reviewing its war-era activities from 1 September 1939 to 30 June 1947. The ICRC opened its archives from World War II in 1996.\nAfter World War II; 20th century.\nOn 12 August 1949, further revisions to the existing two Geneva Conventions were adopted. An additional convention \"for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea\", now called the second Geneva Convention, was brought under the Geneva Convention umbrella as a successor to the 1907 Hague Convention X. The 1929 Geneva convention \"relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War\" may have been the second Geneva Convention from a historical point of view (because it was actually formulated in Geneva), but after 1949 it came to be called the third Convention because it came later chronologically than the Hague Convention. Reacting to the experience of World War II, the Fourth Geneva Convention, a new Convention \"relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War\", was established. Also, the additional protocols of 8 June 1977 were intended to make the conventions apply to internal conflicts such as civil wars. Today, the four conventions and their added protocols contain more than 600 articles, while there were only 10 articles in the first 1864 convention.\nIn celebration of its centennial in 1963, the ICRC, together with the League of Red Cross Societies, received its third Nobel Peace Prize.\nOn 16 October 1990, the UN General Assembly granted the ICRC observer status for its assembly sessions and sub-committee meetings, the first observer status given to a private organization. The resolution was jointly proposed by 138 member states and introduced by the Italian ambassador, in memory of the organization's origins in the Battle of Solferino. An agreement with the Swiss government signed on 19 March 1993 affirmed the already long-standing policy of full independence of the committee from any interference by Switzerland. The agreement protects the full sanctity of all ICRC property in Switzerland including its headquarters and archive, grants members and staff legal immunity, exempts the ICRC from all taxes and fees, guarantees the protected and duty-free transfer of goods, services, and money, provides the ICRC with secure communication privileges at the same level as foreign embassies, and simplifies Committee travel in and out of Switzerland.\nAt the end of the Cold War, the ICRC's work became more dangerous. In the 1990s, more delegates died than at any point in its history, especially when working in local and internal armed conflicts. These incidents often demonstrated a lack of respect for the rules of the Geneva Conventions and their protection symbols. Among the slain delegates were:\n21st century.\nAfghanistan.\nIn the 2000s, the ICRC has been active in the Afghanistan conflict areas and has set up six physical rehabilitation centers to help land mine victims. Their support extends to the national and international armed forces, civilians and the armed opposition. They regularly visit detainees under the custody of the Afghan government and the international armed forces, but have also occasionally had access since 2009 to people detained by the Taliban. They have provided basic first aid training and aid kits to both the Afghan security forces and Taliban members because, according to an ICRC spokesperson, \"ICRC's constitution stipulates that all parties harmed by warfare will be treated as fairly as possible\". In August 2021, when NATO-led forces retreated from Afghanistan, the ICRC decided to remain in the country to continue its mission to assist and protect victims of conflict. Since June 2021, ICRC-supported facilities have treated more than 40,000 people wounded during armed confrontations there.\nRusso-Ukrainian war.\nAmong the ten largest ICRC deployments worldwide has been the mission in Ukraine, where the organization has been active since 2014, working closely with the Ukrainian Red Cross Society. At first, the ICRC was active primarily in the disputed regions of Donbas, assisting persons injured by the fighting there. When Russia invaded Ukraine on 24 February 2022, the fighting moved to more populated areas in East, North, and South Ukraine. The head of the ICRC delegation in Kyiv warned on 26 February 2022 that neighborhoods of major cities were becoming the frontline with significant consequences for their populations, including children, the sick, and elderly. The ICRC urgently called on all parties to the conflict not to forget their obligations under international humanitarian law to ensure the protection of the civilian population and infrastructure, and respect the dignity of refugees and prisoners of war.\nIn response to events in the conflict, the organisation issued rule of engagement for civilian hackers.\nGaza war.\nPrior to the Gaza war Israeli authorities required Palestinian ambulances to undergo thorough searches when passing through checkpoints, alleging without proof that the policy was driven by Palestinian organizations using ambulances to transport militants and armaments. The Israeli Ministry of Health said that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Red Crescent closely cooperated with the MDA (Magen David Adom) until April 2002. At that time, the IDF claimed that Red Crescent ambulances were being used to carry terrorists. The Red Crescent personnel involved in this violation were interrogated.\"\nIn October 2023, the ICRC responded to the Gaza war that has resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of civilians. The ICRC has called the violence \"abhorrent\" and implored both sides to reduce the suffering of civilians.\nThe ICRC, working closely with their Red Crescent partners, has a neutral, independent and exclusively humanitarian mandate during such escalations of violence in the Middle East and urged all parties to protect the lives of civilians, to reduce their suffering and protect their dignity. During the violent conflict, the ICRC and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) provided hospitals in the Gaza strip with support through large humanitarian convoys from Egypt, and was seriously affected by numerous aerial attacks on medical facilities and ambulances. The ICRC said in November that civilians have \"overwhelmingly borne the brunt\" of the fighting in the Palestinian enclave and Israel so far. Israeli forces have killed over 25,000 people, including civilians, Israeli nationals, and Hamas members in a devastating bombing campaign and ground offensive.\nIn late November 2023, the team of the ICRC started a multi-day operation to facilitate the release and transfer of hostages held in Gaza and of Palestinian prisoners to the West Bank. In early December, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken insisted that the Red Cross delegation must have access to the remaining hostages. The ICRC is not a negotiating power but the ICRC chief had direct talks with senior Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh in Qatar in November, demanding direct access to the remaining hostages.\nIn January 2024, Israeli forces killed a Red Crescent crew who had been sent to rescue the Palestinian girl Hind Rajab, who was also killed by Israeli gunfire along with her family. Despite attempts by the Israel to deny responsibility for the killings, their involvement has been confirmed by repeated investigations by independent teams. Before sending its volunteers, the Red Crescent had previously coordinated the rescue route with the Israeli army. \nIn March 2025, 15 Red Crescent workers were ambushed and killed by Israeli soldiers near Rafah, the deadliest attack on Red Crescent personnel since 2017. One worker, who was later killed, recorded the arrival of the paramedic convoy at the site of a distress call, and the start of the shooting: a group of medics in reflective outfits, driving well-marked emergency vehicles with flashing lights and headlights on, approaches a previously-attacked Red Crescent ambulance before being shot at for five minutes. Access to the site was originally forbidden, though satellite images showed the six vehicles were moved to the roadside, crushed, and buried by Israeli bulldozers. Five days after the shooting, the UN and Red Crescent negotiated access to the site and found the bodies buried in a mass grave alongside the vehicles. One witness survived, who was imprisoned by the IDF for two months following the incident. The video was released a month later, drawing international condemnation and criticism to the IDF over a statement it had made after the attack. The IDF claimed that a self-investigation had shown that the unit's commanding officer gave an inaccurate and incomplete account of the attack, and the unit's commander was fired.\nIFRC.\nHistory.\nIn 1919, representatives from the national Red Cross societies of Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the US came together in Paris to found the \"League of Red Cross Societies\" (IFRC). The original idea came from Henry Davison, who was then president of the American Red Cross. This move, led by the American Red Cross, expanded the international activities of the Red Cross movement beyond the strict mission of the ICRC to include relief assistance in response to emergency situations which were not caused by war (such as man-made or natural disasters). The ARC already had great disaster relief mission experience extending back to its foundation.\nThe formation of the League, as an additional international Red Cross organization alongside the ICRC, was not without controversy for a number of reasons. The ICRC had, to some extent, valid concerns about a possible rivalry between the two organizations. The foundation of the League was seen as an attempt to undermine the leadership position of the ICRC within the movement and to gradually transfer most of its tasks and competencies to a multilateral institution. In addition to that, all founding members of the League were national societies from countries of the Entente or from associated partners of the Entente. The original statutes of the League from May 1919 contained further regulations which gave the five founding societies a privileged status and, due to the efforts of Henry Davison, the right to permanently exclude the national Red Cross societies from the countries of the Central Powers, namely Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey, and in addition to that the national Red Cross society of Russia. These rules were contrary to the Red Cross principles of universality and equality among all national societies, a situation which furthered the concerns of the ICRC.\nThe first relief assistance mission organized by the League was an aid mission for the victims of a famine and subsequent typhus epidemic in Poland. Only five years after its foundation, the League had already issued 47 donation appeals for missions in 34 countries, an impressive indication of the need for this type of Red Cross work. The total sum raised by these appeals reached 685 million Swiss francs, which were used to bring emergency supplies to the victims of famines in Russia, Germany, and Albania; earthquakes in Chile, Persia, Japan, Colombia, Ecuador, Costa Rica, and Turkey; and refugee flows in Greece and Turkey. The first large-scale disaster mission of the League came after the 1923 earthquake in Japan which killed about 200,000 people and left countless more wounded and without shelter. Due to the League's coordination, the Red Cross society of Japan received goods from its sister societies reaching a total worth of about $100 million. Another important new field initiated by the League was the creation of youth Red Cross organizations within the national societies.\nA joint mission of the ICRC and the League in the Russian Civil War from 1917 to 1922 marked the first time the movement was involved in an internal conflict, although still without an explicit mandate from the Geneva Conventions. The League, with support from more than 25 national societies, organized assistance missions and the distribution of food and other aid goods for civil populations affected by hunger and disease. The ICRC worked with the Russian Red Cross Society and later the society of the Soviet Union, constantly emphasizing the ICRC's neutrality. In 1928, the \"International Council\" was founded to coordinate cooperation between the ICRC and the League, a task which was later taken over by the \"Standing Commission\". In the same year, a common statute for the movement was adopted for the first time, defining the respective roles of the ICRC and the League within the movement.\nDuring the Abyssinian war between Ethiopia and Italy from 1935 to 1936, the League contributed aid supplies worth about 1.7 million Swiss francs. Because the Italian fascist regime under Benito Mussolini refused any cooperation with the Red Cross, these goods were delivered solely to Ethiopia. During the war, an estimated 29 people died while being under explicit protection of the Red Cross symbol, most of them due to attacks by the Italian Army. During the civil war in Spain from 1936 to 1939 the League once again joined forces with the ICRC with the support of 41 national societies. In 1939 on the brink of the Second World War, the League relocated its headquarters from Paris to Geneva to take advantage of Swiss neutrality.\nIn 1952, the 1928 common statute of the movement was revised for the first time. Also, the period of decolonization from 1960 to 1970 was marked by a huge jump in the number of recognized national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies. By the end of the 1960s, there were more than 100 societies around the world. On 10 December 1963, the Federation and the ICRC received the Nobel Peace Prize. In 1983, the League was renamed to the \"League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies\" to reflect the growing number of national societies operating under the Red Crescent symbol. Three years later, the seven basic principles of the movement as adopted in 1965 were incorporated into its statutes. The name of the League was changed again in 1991 to its current official designation the \"International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies\". In 1997, the ICRC and the IFRC signed the Seville Agreement which further defined the responsibilities of both organizations within the movement. In 2004, the IFRC began its largest mission to date after the tsunami disaster in South Asia. More than 40 national societies have worked with more than 22,000 volunteers to bring relief to the countless victims left without food and shelter and endangered by the risk of epidemics.\nActivities.\nOrganization.\nAltogether, there are about 80 million people worldwide who serve with the ICRC, the International Federation, and the National Societies, the majority with the latter.\nFundamental principles.\nAt the 20th International Conference in Neue Hofburg, Vienna, from 2 to 9 October 1965, delegates \"proclaimed\" seven fundamental principles which are shared by all components of the Movement, and they were added to the official statutes of the Movement in 1986. The durability and universal acceptance is a result of the process through which they came into being in the form they have. Rather than an effort to arrive at agreement, it was an attempt to discover what successful operations and organisational units, over the past 100 years, had in common. As a result, the Fundamental Principles of the Red Cross and Red Crescent were not revealed, but \"found\u00a0\u2013\" through a deliberate and participative process of discovery.\nThat makes it even more important to note that the definition that appears for each principle is an integral part of the Principle in question and not an interpretation that can vary with time and place.\nInternational Conference and the Standing Commission.\nThe International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which occurs once every four years, is the highest institutional body of the Movement. It gathers delegations from all of the national societies as well as from the ICRC, the IFRC and the signatory states to the Geneva Conventions. In between the conferences, the Standing Commission of the Red Cross and Red Crescent acts as the supreme body and supervises implementation of and compliance with the resolutions of the conference. In addition, the Standing Commission coordinates the cooperation between the ICRC and the IFRC. It consists of two representatives from the ICRC (including its president), two from the IFRC (including its president), and five individuals who are elected by the International Conference. The Standing Commission convenes every six months on average. Moreover, a convention of the Council of Delegates of the Movement takes place every two years in the course of the conferences of the General Assembly of the International Federation. The Council of Delegates plans and coordinates joint activities for the Movement.\nInternational Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).\nMission.\nThe official mission of the ICRC as an impartial, neutral, and independent organization is to stand for the protection of the life and dignity of victims of international and internal armed conflicts. According to the revised Seville Agreement of 2022, the ICRC is entrusted the role of \"co-convener\" with the national Red Cross or Crescent society in situations of international and non-international armed conflicts, internal strife and their direct results.\nResponsibilities.\nThe core tasks of the committee, which are derived from the Geneva Conventions and its own statutes, are the following:\nLegal status and organization.\nThe ICRC is headquartered in the Swiss city of Geneva and has offices in over 100 countries. It has more than 22,000 staff members worldwide, about 1,400 of them working in its Geneva headquarters, 3,250 expatriate staff serving as general delegates and technical specialists, and about 17,000 locally recruited staff.\nAccording to Swiss law, the ICRC is defined as a private association. Contrary to popular belief, the ICRC is not a non-governmental organization in the most common sense of the term, nor is it an international organization. As it limits its members (a process called cooptation) to Swiss nationals only, it does not have a policy of open and unrestricted membership for individuals like other legally defined NGOs. The word \"international\" in its name does not refer to its membership but to the worldwide scope of its activities as defined by the Geneva Conventions. The ICRC has special privileges and legal immunities in many countries, based on national law in these countries or through agreements between the committee and respective national governments.\nAccording to its statutes, it consists of 15 to 25 Swiss-citizen members, which it coopts for a period of four years. There is no limit to the number of terms an individual member can have although a three-quarters majority of all members is required for re-election after the third term.\nThe leading organs of the ICRC are the Directorate and the Assembly. The Directorate is the executive body of the committee. It consists of a general director and five directors in the areas of \"Operations\", \"Human Resources\", \"Resources and Operational Support\", \"Communication\", and \"International Law and Cooperation within the Movement\". The members of the Directorate are appointed by the Assembly to serve for four years. The Assembly, consisting of all of the members of the committee, convenes regularly and is responsible for defining aims, guidelines, and strategies and for supervising the financial matters of the committee. The president of the Assembly is also the president of the committee as a whole. Furthermore, the Assembly elects a five-member Assembly Council which has the authority to decide on behalf of the full Assembly in some matters. The council is also responsible for organizing the Assembly meetings and for facilitating communication between the Assembly and the Directorate.\nDue to Geneva's location in the French-speaking part of Switzerland, the ICRC usually acts under its French name, \"Comit\u00e9 international de la Croix-Rouge\" (CICR). The official symbol of the ICRC is the Red Cross on a white background with the words \"COMITE INTERNATIONAL GENEVE\" circling the cross.\nFunding and financial matters.\nThe 2023 budget of the ICRC amounts to 2.5 billion Swiss francs. Most of that money comes from states, including Switzerland in its capacity as the depositary state of the Geneva Conventions, from national Red Cross societies, the signatory states of the Geneva Conventions, and from international organizations like the European Union. All payments to the ICRC are voluntary and are received as donations based on two types of appeals issued by the committee: an annual \"Headquarters Appeal\" to cover its internal costs and \"Emergency Appeals\" for its individual missions. In 2023, Ukraine is the ICRC's biggest humanitarian operation (at 316.5 million Swiss francs), followed by Afghanistan (218 million francs) and Syria (171.7 million francs).\nInternational Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC).\nMission and responsibilities.\nThe International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies coordinates cooperation between national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies throughout the world and supports the foundation of new national societies in countries where no official society exists. On the international stage, the IFRC organizes and leads relief assistance missions after emergencies such as natural disasters, manmade disasters, epidemics, mass refugee flights, and other emergencies. As per the 1997 Seville Agreement, the IFRC is the Lead Agency of the Movement in any emergency situation which does not take place as part of an armed conflict. The IFRC cooperates with the national societies of those countries affected\u00a0\u2013 each called the \"Operating National Society\" (ONS)\u00a0\u2013 as well as the national societies of other countries willing to offer assistance\u00a0\u2013 called \"Participating National Societies\" (PNS). Among the 187 national societies admitted to the General Assembly of the International Federation as full members or observers, about 25\u201330 regularly work as PNS in other countries. The most active of those are the American Red Cross, the British Red Cross, the German Red Cross, and the Red Cross societies of Sweden and Norway. Another major mission of the IFRC which has gained attention in recent years is its commitment to work towards a codified, worldwide ban on the use of land mines and to bring medical, psychological, and social support for people injured by land mines.\nThe tasks of the IFRC can therefore be summarized as follows:\nLegal status and organization.\nThe IFRC has its headquarters in Geneva. It also runs five zone offices (Africa, Americas, Asia Pacific, Europe, Middle East-North Africa), 14 permanent regional offices and has about 350 delegates in more than 60 delegations around the world. The legal basis for the work of the IFRC is its constitution. The executive body of the IFRC is a secretariat, led by a secretary general. The secretariat is supported by five divisions including \"Programme Services\", \"Humanitarian values and humanitarian diplomacy\", \"National Society and Knowledge Development\" and \"Governance and Management Services\".\nThe highest decision-making body of the IFRC is its General Assembly, which convenes every two years with delegates from all of the national societies. Among other tasks, the General Assembly elects the secretary general. Between the convening of General Assemblies, the Governing Board is the leading body of the IFRC. It has the authority to make decisions for the IFRC in a number of areas. The Governing Board consists of the president and the vice presidents of the IFRC, the chairpersons of the Finance and Youth Commissions, and twenty elected representatives from national societies.\nThe symbol of the IFRC is the combination of the Red Cross (left) and Red Crescent (right) on a white background surrounded by a red rectangular frame.\nFunding and financial matters.\nThe main parts of the budget of the IFRC are funded by contributions from the national societies which are members of the IFRC and through revenues from its investments. The exact amount of contributions from each member society is established by the Finance Commission and approved by the General Assembly. Any additional funding, especially for unforeseen expenses for relief assistance missions, is raised by \"appeals\" published by the IFRC and comes for voluntary donations by national societies, governments, other organizations, corporations, and individuals.\nNational Societies.\nOfficial recognition.\nNational Red Cross and Red Crescent societies exist in nearly every country in the world. Within their home country, they take on the duties and responsibilities of a national relief society as defined by International Humanitarian Law. Within the Movement, the ICRC is responsible for legally recognizing a relief society as an official national Red Cross or Red Crescent society. The exact rules for recognition are defined in the statutes of the Movement. Article 4 of these statutes contains the \"Conditions for recognition of National Societies\":\n \"In order to be recognized in terms of Article 5, paragraph 2 b) as a National Society, the Society shall meet the following conditions:\"\nOnce a National Society has been recognized by the ICRC as a component of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (the Movement), it is in principle admitted to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in accordance with the terms defined in the Constitution and Rules of Procedure of the International Federation.\nToday, there are 191 National Societies recognized within the Movement and which are members of the International Federation.\nThe most recent National Societies to have been recognized within the Movement are the Maldives Red Crescent Society (9 November 2011), the Cyprus Red Cross Society, the South Sudan Red Cross Society (12 November 2013) and, the last, the Tuvalu Red Cross Society (on 1 March 2016).\nActivities.\nDespite formal independence regarding its organizational structure and work, each national society is still bound by the laws of its home country. In many countries, national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies enjoy exceptional privileges due to agreements with their governments or specific \"Red Cross Laws\" granting full independence as required by the International Movement. The duties and responsibilities of a national society as defined by International Humanitarian Law and the statutes of the Movement include humanitarian aid in armed conflicts and emergency crises such as natural disasters through activities such as Restoring Family Links.\nDepending on their respective human, technical, financial, and organizational resources, many national societies take on additional humanitarian tasks within their home countries such as blood donation services or acting as civilian Emergency Medical Service (EMS) providers. The ICRC and the International Federation cooperate with the national societies in their international missions, especially with human, material, and financial resources and organizing on-site logistics.\nThe Russian Red Cross supports the organisation Myvmeste, which supports the Russian Army with their 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine through their \"Everything for victory\" fund.\nDuring the Gaza war, the IFRC in particular called for humanitarian access across Gaza and West Bank, the release of hostages, the protection of civilians, hospitals and humanitarian workers from indiscriminate attack and compliance with international humanitarian law to ensure its continued activities in the occupied Palestinian territories.\nHistory of the emblems.\nThe Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Crystal emblems are officially recognized by the movement. The Red Lion and Sun emblem is also an official emblem, though it has fallen to disuse. Various other countries have also lobbied for alternative symbols, which have been rejected because of concerns of territorialism.\nRed Cross.\nThe Red Cross emblem was officially approved in Geneva in 1863.\nThe Red Cross flag is not to be confused with the Saint George's Cross depicted on the flags of England, Barcelona, Georgia, Freiburg im Breisgau, and several other places. In order to avoid this confusion the protected symbol is sometimes referred to as the \"Greek Red Cross\"; that term is also used in United States law to describe the Red Cross. The red cross of the Saint George cross extends to the edge of the flag, whereas the red cross on the Red Cross flag does not.\nThe Red Cross flag is the colour-switched version of the Flag of Switzerland, in recognition of \"the pioneering work of Swiss citizens in establishing internationally recognized standards for the protection of wounded combatants and military medical facilities\". In 1906, to put an end to the argument of the Ottoman Empire that the flag took its roots from Christianity, it was decided officially to promote the idea that the Red Cross flag had been formed by reversing the federal colours of Switzerland, although no written evidence of this origin had ever been found.\nThe 1899 convention signed at the Hague extended the use of the Red Cross flag to naval ensigns, requiring that \"all hospital ships shall make themselves known by hoisting, together with their national flag, the white flag with a red cross provided by the Geneva Convention\".\nRed Crescent.\nThe Red Crescent emblem was first used by ICRC volunteers during the armed conflict of 1876\u20131878 between the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Empire. The symbol was officially adopted in 1929, and so far 33 states in the Muslim world have recognized it. In common with the official promotion of the red cross symbol as a colour-reversal of the Swiss flag (rather than a religious symbol), the red crescent is similarly presented as being derived from a colour-reversal of the flag of the Ottoman Empire.\nRed Crystal.\nThe International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) was concerned with the possibility that the two previous symbols (Red Cross and Red Crescent) were conveying religious meanings which would not be compatible with, for example, a majority Hindu, Buddhist, or Shinto country from the Asia-Pacific region, where the majority did not associate with Abrahamic symbols. Therefore, in 1992, the then-president Cornelio Sommaruga decided that a third, more neutral symbol was required.\nOn 8 December 2005, in response to growing pressure to accommodate Magen David Adom (MDA), Israel's national emergency medical, disaster, ambulance, and blood bank service, as a full member of the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement, a new emblem (officially the Third Protocol Emblem, but more commonly known as the Red Crystal) was adopted by an amendment of the Geneva Conventions known as Protocol III, fulfilling Sommaruga's suggestion.\nThe Crystal can be found on official buildings and occasionally in the field. This symbolises equality and has no political, religious, or geographical connotations, thus allowing any country not comfortable with the symbolism of the original two flags to join the movement.\nRed Lion and Sun.\nThe Red Lion and Sun Society of Iran was established in 1922 and admitted to the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement in 1923. The symbol was introduced at Geneva in 1864, as a counter example to the crescent and cross used by two of Iran's rivals, the Ottoman and the Russian empires. Although that claim is inconsistent with the Red Crescent's history, that history also suggests that the Red Lion and Sun, like the Red Crescent, may have been conceived during the 1877\u20131878 war between Russia and Turkey.\nDue to the emblem's association with the Iranian monarchy, the Islamic Republic of Iran replaced the Red Lion and Sun with the Red Crescent in 1980, consistent with two existing Red Cross and Red Crescent symbols. Although the Red Lion and Sun has now fallen into disuse, Iran has in the past reserved the right to take it up again at any time; the Geneva Conventions continue to recognize it as an official emblem, and that status was confirmed by Protocol III in 2005 even as it added the Red Crystal.\nUnrecognized emblems.\nRed Star of David.\nFor over 50 years, the State of Israel requested the addition of a red Star of David, arguing that since Christian and Muslim emblems were recognized, the corresponding Jewish emblem should be as well, despite the Red Cross and Red Crescent symbols being used outside of a religious context. This emblem has been used by Magen David Adom (MDA), or Red Star of David, but it is not recognized by the Geneva Conventions as a protected symbol. The Red Star of David is not recognized as a protected symbol outside Israel; instead the MDA uses the Red Crystal emblem during international operations in order to ensure protection. Depending on the circumstances, it may place the Red Star of David inside the Red Crystal, or use the Red Crystal alone.\nIn her March 2000 letter to the \"International Herald Tribune\" and the \"New York Times\", Bernadine Healy, then president of the American Red Cross, wrote: \"The international committee's feared proliferation of symbols is a pitiful fig leaf, used for decades as the reason for excluding the Magen David Adom\u2014the Shield (or Star) of David.\" In protest, the American Red Cross withheld millions in administrative funding to the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies since May 2000.\nRed Swastika.\nIn 1922, a Red Swastika Society was formed in China during the Warlord Era. The swastika is used in the Indian subcontinent, East, and Southeast Asia as a symbol to represent Dharma or Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism in general. While the organization has organized philanthropic relief projects (both domestic and international), as a sectarian religious body it is ineligible for recognition from the International Committee.\nHostage crisis allegations.\nIn 1999, the Australian TV network ABC Television and European human rights organization Rettet die Naturv\u00f6lker released a documentary titled \"Blood on the Cross\". The documentary alleged that the Red Cross supplied a white helicopter to the Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI) in May 1996 for a TNI operation to resolve the Mapenduma hostage crisis, which saw 26 World Wildlife Fund employees being held as hostages by the separatist Free Papua Movement (OPM).\nFollowing the broadcast of \"Blood on the Cross\", the Red Cross publicly announced it would appoint an individual outside the organization to investigate the allegations made in the documentary and any responsibility on the Red Cross' part. Polish investigator Piotr Obuchowicz was subsequently appointed to investigate the documentary's allegations. His final report stated that there was no evidence that the Red Cross personnel accused of involvement in the TNI operation by \"Blood on the Cross\" were present in the area at the time. It also stated that a white helicopter was probably used by the Indonesian military to rescue the hostages, but the helicopter was not affiliated with the Red Cross, and must have been painted so by one of several military forces operating in the region at the time. The report stated it was possible the Red Cross logo itself was also painted onto the helicopter, although there was no conclusive evidence for this claim. Obuchowicz ended his report by noting that a white helicopter with Red Cross markings was part of the TNI operation to free the hostages, but was clearly intended to achieve surprise by deceiving the OPM into thinking that a Red Cross helicopter was landing, and that the Red Cross should have responded more quickly and thoroughly to investigate the allegations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15489", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15489", "title": "Ira Gershwin", "text": "American lyricist (1896\u20131983)\nIra Gershwin (born Israel Gershovitz; December 6, 1896 \u2013 August 17, 1983) was an American lyricist who collaborated with his younger brother, composer George Gershwin, to create some of the most memorable songs in the English language of the 20th century. With George, he wrote more than a dozen Broadway shows, featuring songs such as \"I Got Rhythm\", \"Embraceable You\", \"The Man I Love\", and \"Someone to Watch Over Me\". He was also responsible, along with DuBose Heyward, for the libretto to George's opera \"Porgy and Bess\".\nThe success the Gershwin brothers had with their collaborative works has often overshadowed the creative role that Ira played. His mastery of songwriting continued after George's early death in 1937. Ira wrote additional hit songs with composers Kurt Weill, Jerome Kern and Harold Arlen. His critically acclaimed 1959 book \"Lyrics on Several Occasions\", an amalgam of autobiography and annotated anthology, is widely considered an important source for studying the art of the lyricist in the golden age of American popular song.\nEarly life.\nGershwin was born at 60 Eldridge Street in Chinatown, Manhattan, the oldest of four children of Morris (Moishe) and Rose Gershovitz (n\u00e9e\u00a0Rosa Bruskin), who were Russian Jews from Saint Petersburg and had immigrated to the United States in 1891. Ira's siblings were George (Jacob, b.\u20091898), Arthur (b.\u20091900), and Frances (b.\u20091906). Morris changed the family name to \"Gershwine\" (or alternatively \"Gershvin\") well before their children rose to fame; it was not spelled \"Gershwin\" until later.\nShy in his youth, Ira spent much of his time at home reading, but from grammar school through college, he played a prominent part in several school newspapers and magazines. He graduated in 1914 from Townsend Harris High School, a public school for intellectually gifted students, where he met Yip Harburg, with whom he enjoyed a lifelong friendship and a love of Gilbert and Sullivan. He attended the City College of New York but dropped out.\nThe childhood home of Ira and George Gershwin was in the center of the Yiddish Theatre District in the East Village, on the second floor at 91 Second Avenue, between East 5th and 6th streets. They frequented the local Yiddish theatres.\nWhile George began composing and \"plugging\" in Tin Pan Alley from the age of 18, Ira worked as a cashier in his father's Victorian-style Turkish baths. He was a joyous listener to the sounds of the modern world. \"He had a sharp eye and ear for the minutiae of living.\" He noted in a diary: \"Heard in a day: An elevator's purr, telephone's ring, telephone's buzz, a baby's moans, a shout of delight, a screech from a 'flat wheel', hoarse honks, a hoarse voice, a tinkle, a match scratch on sandpaper, a deep resounding boom of dynamiting in the impending subway, iron hooks on the gutter.\"\nCareer beginnings.\nIra's first published lyric was a parody, published in the \"New York Sun\" in 1917. He began writing lyrics for a few of his brother George's songs, and for other composers as well. To maintain his independence from his successful brother, Ira wrote under the pseudonym Arthur Francis, after their younger siblings' given names. 'Arthur' and George's \"The Real American Folk Song (is a Rag)\" was their first song used in a show, \"Ladies First\" (1918), though it was cut early in the show's New York run. Ira wrote his first published and recorded song, \"Waiting for the Sun to Come Out\", with George for \"The Sweetheart Shop\" in 1920; it made them a substantial amount of money. In 1921 they wrote five songs together for \"A Dangerous Maid\", but it closed out of town.\nLater that year, Ira did his first successful musical, \"Two Little Girls in Blue\", not with his brother but with composers Paul Lannin and (in his Broadway debut) Vincent Youmans. Having established himself, he wrote the lyrics for \"Be Yourself\" (1924) under his own name.\nSuccess with George.\nIra and George's combined talents soon became one of the most influential forces in the history of American musical theatre. In 1924 they wrote their first Broadway hit, \"Lady, Be Good\". \"When the Gershwins teamed up to write songs for \"Lady, Be Good\", the American musical found its native idiom.\" They wrote songs for together. The most celebrated was \"Girl Crazy\" (1930): it was the stage debut of both Ginger Rogers and Ethel Merman; several of its songs became hits, including \"Embraceable You\"; and it was adapted into film three times and rewritten into the 1992 musical \"Crazy for You\". Ira also supplemented DuBose Heyward's libretto for the opera \"Porgy and Bess\", composed by George, with lyrics for several songs, notably \"It Ain't Necessarily So\".\nDuring their Broadway years together, the brothers also wrote songs for one film, \"Delicious\", and Ira contributed songs to .\nWhen \"Porgy and Bess\" was a commercial disappointment, the Gershwins moved to Hollywood, where they wrote the songs for three films in quick succession: \"Shall We Dance\" and \"A Damsel in Distress\", both released in 1937, and \"The Goldwyn Follies\", released in 1938. Though the films themselves met with mixed commercial and critical reception, an unprecedented number of the Gershwins' songs for them were hits, including \"They All Laughed\", \"Let's Call the Whole Thing Off\" and \"They Can't Take That Away from Me\" from \"Shall We Dance\", \"Nice Work If You Can Get It\" and \"A Foggy Day\" from \"A Damsel in Distress\", and \"Love Is Here to Stay\" from \"The Goldwyn Follies\".\nThe Gershwins' partnership ended when George unexpectedly died of a brain tumor in 1937. Following his brother's death, Ira waited nearly three years before writing again.\nLater career.\nAfter this temporary retirement, Ira resumed writing songs for and , working with a series of accomplished composers. In 1941 he worked with Kurt Weill on the unusual but successful musical \"Lady in the Dark\". In 1943 he wrote songs with Aaron Copland for the war film \"The North Star\". In 1944, among Ira and Jerome Kern's songs for \"Cover Girl\", they wrote \"Long Ago (and Far Away)\", which yielded Ira more royalties than any other song he ever wrote. In 1945 he and Kurt Weill collaborated again, on the film \"Where Do We Go from Here?\" and the operetta \"The Firebrand of Florence\", neither of them smashes. The failure of \"Park Avenue\" in 1946 (a \"smart\" show about divorce, co-written with composer Arthur Schwartz) was his farewell to Broadway. As he wrote at the time, \"Am reading a couple of stories for possible musicalization (if there is such a word) but I hope I don't like them as I think I deserve a long rest.\"\nIra wrote songs for the film \"The Barkleys of Broadway\" with Harry Warren and for \"Give a Girl a Break\" with Burton Lane. In 1947, he took eleven compositions George had written but never used and wrote lyrics for them for the Betty Grable film \"The Shocking Miss Pilgrim\". He worked with Harold Arlen on two films released in 1954: the Judy Garland film \"A Star Is Born\", considered by most critics to have been his last major work, and \"The Country Girl\". Ira later wrote lyrics to more of his brother's unpublished compositions for Billy Wilder's 1964 movie \"Kiss Me, Stupid\".\nAmerican singer, pianist and musical historian Michael Feinstein worked for Gershwin in the lyricist's latter years, helping him with his archive. Several lost musical treasures were unearthed during this period, and Feinstein performed some of the material. Feinstein's book \"The Gershwins and Me: A Personal History in Twelve Songs\" about working for Ira, and George and Ira's music, was published in 2012.\nPersonal life.\nGershwin married Leonore (n\u00e9e Strunsky) in 1926.\nAccording to a 1999 story in \"Vanity Fair\", Ira Gershwin's love for loud music was as great as his wife's loathing of it. When Debby Boone\u2014daughter-in-law of his neighbor Rosemary Clooney\u2014returned from Japan with one of the first Sony Walkmans (utilizing cassette tape), Clooney gave it to Michael Feinstein to give to Ira, \"so he could crank it in his ears, you know. And he said, 'This is absolutely wonderful!' And he called his broker and bought Sony stock!\"\nIra died of heart disease in Beverly Hills, California, on August 17, 1983, at the age of 86. Leonore died on August 20, 1991 at the age of 90.\nAwards and honors.\nAlong with George S. Kaufman and Morrie Ryskind, Ira Gershwin was a recipient of the 1932 Pulitzer Prize for Drama for \"Of Thee I Sing\".\nThree of his songs (\"They Can't Take That Away from Me\" (1937), \"Long Ago (and Far Away)\" (1944) and \"The Man That Got Away\" (1954)) were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song, though none won.\nIra Gershwin was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1971.\nLegacy.\nIn 1987, Ira's widow, Leonore, established the Ira Gershwin Literacy Center at University Settlement, a century-old institution at 185 Eldridge Street on the Lower East Side, New York City. The center is designed to give English-language programs to primarily Hispanic and Chinese Americans. Ira and his younger brother George spent many after-school hours at the Settlement.\nIn 1988 UCLA established The George and Ira Gershwin Lifetime Musical Achievement Award in recognition of the brothers' contribution to music, and for their gift to UCLA of the fight song \"Strike Up the Band for UCLA\".\nIn 2007, the United States Library of Congress named its Prize for Popular Song after Ira and his brother George. Recognizing the profound and positive effect of American popular music on the world's culture, the prize will be given annually to a composer or performer whose lifetime contributions exemplify the standard of excellence associated with the Gershwins.\nNotable songs.\nExcept where mentioned, the following songs were composed by George Gershwin.\nSee also .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "15490", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15490", "title": "Indus River", "text": "River in Asia\nThe Indus ( ) is a transboundary river of Asia and a trans-Himalayan river of South and Central Asia. The river rises in western China, flows northwest through the disputed Kashmir region, first through the Indian-administered Ladakh, and then the Pakistani-administered Gilgit-Baltistan, bends sharply to the left after the Nanga Parbat massif, and flows south-by-southwest through Pakistan, before bifurcating and emptying into the Arabian Sea, its main stem located near the port city of Karachi.\nThe Indus River has a total drainage area of circa . Its estimated annual flow is around , making it one of the 50 largest rivers in the world in terms of average annual flow. Its left-bank tributary in Ladakh is the Zanskar River, and its left-bank tributary in the plains is the Panjnad River which is formed by the successive confluences of the five Punjab rivers, namely the Chenab, Jhelum, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej rivers. Its principal right-bank tributaries are the Shyok, Gilgit, Kabul, Kurram, and Gomal rivers. Beginning in a mountain spring and fed with glaciers and rivers in the Himalayan, Karakoram, and Hindu Kush ranges, the river supports the ecosystems of temperate forests, plains, and arid countryside.\nGeologically, the headwaters of the Indus and to their east those of the Yarlung Tsangpo (later in its course, the Brahmaputra) flow along the Indus-Yarlung suture zone, which defines the boundary along which the Indian plate collided with the Eurasian plate in the Early Eocene (approximately 50 Million years ago). These two Eurasian rivers, whose courses were continually diverted by the rising Himalayas, define the western and eastern limits, respectively, of the mountain range. After the Indus debouches from its narrow Himalayan valley, it forms, along with its tributaries, the Punjab region of South Asia. The lower course of the river ends in a large delta in the Sindh province of Pakistan. \nHistorically, the Indus was important to many cultures. The 3rd millennium BC saw the rise of Indus Valley Civilisation, a major urban civilization of the Bronze Age. During the 2nd millennium BC, the Punjab region was mentioned in the Rigveda hymns as \"Sapta Sindhu\" and in the Avesta religious texts as \"Hapta H\u0259ndu\" (both terms meaning \"seven rivers\"). Early historical kingdoms that arose in the Indus Valley include Gandh\u0101ra and Sindhu-Sauv\u012bra. The Indus River came into the knowledge of the Western world early in the classical period, when King Darius of Persia sent his Greek subject Scylax of Caryanda to explore the river, c.\u2009515\u00a0BC.\nEtymology and names.\nEtymologically, English language word \"Indus\" comes from Late Latin Indus (1598), specifically a use of classical Latin \"Indus\" (inhabitant of India, Indian) from ancient Greek \u1f38\u03bd\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 \"inhabitant of India, Indian, the River Indus\" from Achaemenian Old Persian \"hindu,\" denoting an eastern province of the Achaemenid empire (Persian language \"hind\" India), and Avestan \"hi\u1e47du\", \"h\u0259\u1e47du\" \"river,\" (natural) frontier; with same Proto Indo-Iranian language-root as Sanskrit sindhu (river), specifically the River Indus; hence also the region of the Indus, the province Sindh (which also developed into Hellenistic Greek \u03a3\u03af\u03bd\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 (\"the River Indus\"). This river's traditional name in Sanskrit and Tibetan is \"sindhu\". In Sanskrit, its range of meanings includes: stream, river; Indus; flood; sea or ocean; region or country in the vicinity of the Indus, Sindh, people of Sindh.\"\nThe modern name in Urdu is \"Sindh\" () or \"Dary\u0101-i-Sindh\" (), contrasting to the Province of Sindh (). The Ladakhis and Tibetans call the river \"Senge Tsangpo\" (\u0f66\u0f7a\u0f44\u0f0b\u0f42\u0f7a\u0f0b\u0f42\u0f59\u0f44\u0f0b\u0f54\u0f7c\u0f0d), Baltis call it \"Gemtsuh\" and \"Tsuh-Fo\", Pashtuns call it \"Nilab\", \"Sher Darya\" and \"Abbasin\", while Sindhis call it \"Sindhu\", \"Mehran\", \"Purali\" and \"Samundar\".\nDescription.\nThe Indus River provides key water resources for Pakistan's economy \u2013 especially the \"breadbasket\" of Punjab province, which accounts for most of the nation's agricultural production, and Sindh. The word Punjab means \"land of five rivers\" and the five rivers are Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas and Sutlej, all of which finally flow into the Indus. The Indus also supports many heavy industries and provides the main supply of potable water in Pakistan.\nThe total length of the river varies in different sources. The length used in this article is , taken from the \"Himalayan Climate and Water Atlas\" (2015). Historically, the 1909 \"The Imperial Gazetteer of India\" gave it as \"just over 1,800 miles\". A shorter figure of has been widely used in modern sources, as has the one of . The modern \"Encyclopedia Britannica\" was originally published in 1999 with the shorter measurement, but was updated in 2015 to use the longer measurement. Both lengths are commonly found in modern publications; in some cases, both measurements can be found within the same work. An extended figure of circa was announced by a Chinese research group in 2011, based on a comprehensive remeasurement from satellite imagery, and a ground expedition to identify an alternative source point, but detailed analysis has not yet been published.\nThe ultimate source of the Indus is in Tibet, but there is some debate about the exact source. The traditional source of the river is the \"S\u00eangg\u00ea Kanbab\" (S\u00eangg\u00ea Zangbo) or \"Lion's Mouth\", a perennial spring not far from the sacred Mount Kailash, marked by a long low line of Tibetan chortens. There are several other tributaries nearby, which may form a longer stream than S\u00eangg\u00ea Kanbab, but unlike the S\u00eangg\u00ea Kanbab, are all dependent on snowmelt. The Zanskar River, which flows into the Indus in Ladakh, has a greater volume of water than the Indus itself before that point. An alternative reckoning begins the river around 300\u00a0km further upstream, at the confluence of the \"S\u00eangg\u00ea\" Zangbo and Gar Tsangpo rivers, which drain the Nganglong Kangri and Gangdise Shan (Gang Rinpoche, Mt. Kailash) mountain ranges. The 2011 remeasurement suggested the source was a small lake northeast of Mount Kailash, rather than either of the two points previously used.\nThe Indus then flows northwest through Ladakh (Indian-administered Kashmir) and Baltistan and Gilgit (Pakistan-administered Kashmir), just south of the Karakoram range. The Shyok, Shigar and Gilgit rivers carry glacial waters into the main river. It gradually bends to the south and descends into the Punjab plains at Kalabagh, Pakistan. The Indus passes gigantic gorges deep near the Nanga Parbat massif. It flows swiftly across Hazara and is dammed at the Tarbela Reservoir. The Kabul River joins it near Attock. The remainder of its route to the sea is in the plains of the Punjab and Sindh, where the flow of the river becomes slow and highly braided. It is joined by the Panjnad at Mithankot. Beyond this confluence, the river, at one time, was named the \"Satnad River\" (\"sat\" = \"seven\", \"nad\u012b\" = \"river\"), as the river now carried the waters of the Kabul River, the Indus River and the five Punjab rivers. When the river passes Jamshoro, it ends in a large delta to the South of Thatta in the Sindh province of Pakistan.\nThe Indus is one of the few rivers in the world to exhibit a tidal bore. The Indus system is largely fed by the snow and glaciers of the Himalayas, Karakoram and the Hindu Kush ranges. The flow of the river is also determined by the seasons \u2013 it diminishes greatly in the winter while flooding its banks in the monsoon months from July to September. There is also evidence of a steady shift in the course of the river since prehistoric times \u2013 it deviated westwards from flowing into the Rann of Kutch and adjoining Banni grasslands after the 1816 earthquake. As of 2011[ [update]], Indus water flows in to the Rann of Kutch during its floods breaching flood banks.\nHistory.\nThe major cities of the Indus Valley Civilisation, such as Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, date back to around 3300\u00a0BC, and represent some of the largest human habitations of the ancient world. The Indus Valley Civilisation extended from across northeast Afghanistan to Pakistan and northwest India, with an upward reach from east of the Jhelum River to Ropar on the upper Sutlej. The coastal settlements extended from Sutkagan Dor at the Pakistan-Iran border to Kutch in modern Gujarat, India. There is an Indus site on the Amu Darya at Shortughai in northern Afghanistan, and the Indus site Alamgirpur at the Hindon River is located only from Delhi. To date, over 1,052 cities and settlements have been found, mainly in the general region of the Ghaggar-Hakra River and its tributaries. Among the settlements were the major urban centres of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, as well as Lothal, Dholavira, Ganeriwala, and Rakhigarhi. Only 40 Indus Valley sites have been discovered on the Indus and its tributaries. However, it is notable that majority of the Indus script seals and inscribed objects discovered were found at sites along the Indus river.\nSome scholars believe that settlements of Gandhara grave culture of the early Indo-Aryans flourished in Gandhara from 1700\u00a0BC to 600\u00a0BC, when Mohenjo-daro and Harappa had already been abandoned.\nThe Rigveda describes several rivers, including one named \"Sindhu\". The Rigvedic \"Sindhu\" is thought to be the present-day Indus River. It is attested 176 times in its text, 94 times in the plural, and most often used in the generic sense of \"river\". In the Rigveda, notably in the later hymns, the meaning of the word is narrowed to refer to the Indus River in particular; for example, in the list of rivers mentioned in the hymn of \"Nadistuti sukta\". The Rigvedic hymns apply a feminine gender to all the rivers mentioned therein, except for the Brahmaputra.\nThe word \"India\" is derived from the Indus River. In ancient times, \"India\" initially referred to those regions immediately along the east bank of the Indus, where are Punjab and Sindh now but by 300\u00a0BC, Greek writers including Herodotus and Megasthenes were applying the term to the entire subcontinent that extends much farther eastward.\nThe lower basin of the Indus forms a natural boundary between the Iranian Plateau and the Indian subcontinent; this region embraces all or parts of the Pakistani provinces Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh and the countries Afghanistan and India. The first West Eurasian empire to annex the Indus Valley was the Persian Empire, during the reign of Darius the Great. During his reign, the Greek explorer Scylax of Caryanda was commissioned to explore the course of the Indus. It was crossed by the invading armies of Alexander. Still, after his Macedonians conquered the west bank\u2014joining it to the Hellenic world, they elected to retreat along the southern course of the river, ending Alexander's Asian campaign. Alexander's admiral Nearchus set out from the Indus Delta to explore the Persian Gulf, until reaching the Tigris. The Indus Valley was later dominated by the Mauryan and Kushan Empires, Indo-Greek Kingdoms, Indo-Scythians and Hepthalites. Over several centuries Muslim armies of Muhammad ibn al-Qasim, Mahmud of Ghazni, Muhammad of Ghor, Timur and Babur crossed the river to invade Sindh and Punjab, providing a gateway to the Indian subcontinent.\nGeology.\nThe Indus River is an antecedent river, meaning that it existed before the Himalayas and entrenched itself while they were rising.\nThe Indus River feeds the Indus submarine fan, which is the second largest sediment body on Earth. It consists of around 5 million cubic kilometers of material eroded from the mountains. Studies of the sediment in the modern river indicate that the Karakoram Mountains in northern Pakistan and India are the single most important source of material, with the Himalayas providing the next largest contribution, mostly via the large rivers of the Punjab (Jhelum, Ravi, Chenab, Beas and Sutlej). Analysis of sediments from the Arabian Sea has demonstrated that five million years ago the Indus was not connected to these Punjab rivers which instead flowed east into the Ganga and were captured after that time. Earlier work showed that sand and silt from western Tibet was reaching the Arabian Sea by 45 million years ago, implying the existence of an ancient Indus River by that time. The delta of this proto-Indus River has subsequently been found in the Katawaz Basin, on the Afghan-Pakistan border.\nIn the Nanga Parbat region, the massive amounts of erosion due to the Indus River following the capture and rerouting through that area are thought to bring middle and lower crustal rocks to the surface.\nIn November 2011, satellite images showed that the Indus River had re-entered India and was feeding the Great Rann of Kutch, Little Rann of Kutch and a lake near Ahmedabad known as Nal Sarovar. Heavy rains had left the river basin along with the Lake Manchar, Lake Hemal and Kalri Lake (all in modern-day Pakistan) inundated. This happened two centuries after the Indus River shifted its course westwards following the 1819 Rann of Kutch earthquake.\nThe Induan Age at the start of the Triassic Period of geological time is named for the Indus region.\nTributaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWildlife.\nAccounts of the Indus Valley from the times of Alexander's campaign indicate a healthy forest cover in the region. The Mughal Emperor Babur writes of encountering rhinoceroses along its bank in his memoirs (the Baburnama). Extensive deforestation and human interference in the ecology of the Shivalik Hills has led to a marked deterioration in vegetation and growing conditions. The Indus Valley regions are arid with poor vegetation. Agriculture is sustained largely due to irrigation works. The Indus River and its watershed have a rich biodiversity. It is home to around 25 amphibian species.\nMammals.\nThe Indus River dolphin (\"Platanista indicus minor\") is found only in the Indus River. It is a subspecies of the South Asian river dolphin. The Indus River dolphin formerly also occurred in the tributaries of the Indus River. According to the World Wildlife Fund it is one of the most threatened cetaceans with only about 1,816 still existing. It is threatened by habitat degradation from the construction of dams and canals, entanglement in fishing gear, and industrial water pollution.\nThere are two otter species in the Indus River basin: the Eurasian otter in the northeastern highland sections and the smooth-coated otter elsewhere in the river basin. The smooth-coated otters in the Indus River represent a subspecies found nowhere else, the Sindh otter (\"Lutrogale perspicillata sindica\").\nFish.\nThe Indus River basin has high diversity, being the home of more than 180 freshwater fish species, including 22 which are found nowhere else. Fish also played a major role in earlier cultures of the region, including the ancient Indus Valley Civilisation where depictions of fish were frequent. The Indus script has a commonly used fish sign, which in its various forms may simply have meant \"fish\", or referred to stars or gods.\nIn the uppermost, highest part of the Indus River basin there are relatively few genera and species: \"Diptychus\", \"Ptychobarbus\", \"Schizopyge\", \"Schizopygopsis\" and \"Schizothorax\" snowtrout, \"Triplophysa\" loaches, and the catfish \"Glyptosternon reticulatum\". Going downstream these are soon joined by the golden mahseer \"Tor putitora\" (alternatively \"T. macrolepis\", although it often is regarded as a synonym of \"T. putitora\") and \"Schistura\" loaches. Downriver from around Thakot, Tarbela, the Kabul\u2013Indus river confluence, Attock Khurd and Peshawar the diversity rises strongly, including many cyprinids (\"Amblypharyngodon\", \"Aspidoparia\", \"Barilius\", \"Chela\", \"Cirrhinus\", \"Crossocheilus\", \"Cyprinion\", \"Danio\", \"Devario\", \"Esomus\", \"Garra\", \"Labeo\", \"Naziritor\", \"Osteobrama\", \"Pethia\", \"Puntius\", \"Rasbora\", \"Salmophasia\", \"Securicula\" and \"Systomus\"), true loaches (\"Botia\" and \"Lepidocephalus\"), stone loaches (\"Acanthocobitis\" and \"Nemacheilus\"), ailiid catfish (\"Clupisoma\"), bagridae catfish (\"Batasio\", \"Mystus\", \"Rita\" and \"Sperata\"), airsac catfish (\"Heteropneustes\"), schilbid catfish (\"Eutropiichthys\"), silurid catfish (\"Ompok\" and \"Wallago\"), sisorid catfish (\"Bagarius\", \"Gagata\", \"Glyptothorax\" and \"Sisor\"), gouramis (\"Trichogaster\"), nandid leaffish (\"Nandus\"), snakeheads (\"Channa\"), spiny eel (\"Macrognathus\" and \"Mastacembelus\"), knifefish (\"Notopterus\"), glassfish (\"Chanda\" and \"Parambassis\"), clupeids (\"Gudusia\"), needlefish (\"Xenentodon\") and gobies (\"Glossogobius\"), as well as a few introduced species. As the altitude further declines the Indus basin becomes overall quite slow-flowing as it passes through the Punjab Plain. Major carp become common, and chameleonfish (\"Badis\"), mullet (\"Sicamugil\") and swamp eel (\"Monopterus\") appear. In some upland lakes and tributaries of the Punjab region snow trout and mahseer are still common, but once the Indus basin reaches its lower plain the former group is absent and the latter are rare. Many of the species of the middle sections of the Indus basin are also present in the lower. Notable examples of genera that are present in the lower plain but generally not elsewhere in the Indus River basin are the \"Aphanius\" pupfish, \"Aplocheilus\" killifish, palla fish (\"Tenualosa ilisha\"), catla (\"Labeo catla\"), rohu (\"Labeo rohita\") and \"Cirrhinus mrigala\". The lowermost part of the river and its delta are home to freshwater fish, but also several brackish and marine species. This includes pomfret and prawns. The large delta has been recognized by conservationists as an important ecological region. Here, the river turns into many marshes, streams and creeks and meets the sea at shallow levels.\nPalla fish (\"Tenualosa ilisha\") of the river is a delicacy for people living along the river. The population of fish in the river is moderately high, with Sukkur, Thatta, and Kotri being the major fishing centres \u2013 all in the lower Sindh course. As a result, damming and irrigation have made fish farming an important economic activity.\nEconomy.\nThe Indus is the most important supplier of water resources to the Punjab and Sindh plains \u2013 it forms the backbone of agriculture and food production in Pakistan. The river is especially critical since rainfall is meagre in the lower Indus valley. Irrigation canals were first built by the people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, and later by the engineers of the Kushan Empire and the Mughal Empire. Modern irrigation was introduced by the British East India Company in 1850 \u2013 the construction of modern canals accompanied with the restoration of old canals. The British supervised the construction of one of the most complex irrigation networks in the world. The Guddu Barrage is long \u2013 irrigating Sukkur, Jacobabad, Larkana and Kalat. The Sukkur Barrage serves over .\nAfter Pakistan came into existence, a water control treaty signed between India and Pakistan in 1960 guaranteed that Pakistan would receive water from the Indus River and its two tributaries the Jhelum River and the Chenab River independently of upstream control by India.\nThe Indus Basin Project consisted primarily of the construction of two main dams, the Mangla Dam built on the Jhelum River and the Tarbela Dam constructed on the Indus River, together with their subsidiary dams. The Pakistan Water and Power Development Authority undertook the construction of the Chashma-Jhelum link canal \u2013 linking the waters of the Indus and Jhelum rivers \u2013 extending water supplies to the regions of Bahawalpur and Multan. Pakistan constructed the Tarbela Dam near Rawalpindi \u2013 standing long and high, with an long reservoir. It supports the Chashma Barrage near Dera Ismail Khan for irrigation use and flood control and the Taunsa Barrage near Dera Ghazi Khan which also produces 100,000\u00a0kilowatts of electricity. The Kotri Barrage near Hyderabad is long and provides additional water supplies for Karachi. The extensive linking of tributaries with the Indus has helped spread water resources to the valley of Peshawar, in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The extensive irrigation and dam projects provide the basis for Pakistan's large production of crops such as cotton, sugarcane and wheat. The dams also generate electricity for heavy industries and urban centres.\nPeople.\nThe Indus River is sacred to Hindus. The Sindhu Darshan Festival is held on every Guru Purnima on the banks of the Indus.\nThe ethnicities of the Indus Valley (Pakistan and Northwest India) have a greater amount of ANI (or West Eurasian) admixture than other South Asians, including inputs from Western Steppe Herders, with evidence of more sustained and multi-layered migrations from the west.\nModern issues.\nIndus delta.\nOriginally, the delta used to receive almost all of the water from the Indus River, which has an annual flow of approximately , and is accompanied by of silt. Since the 1940s, dams, barrages and irrigation works have been constructed on the river. The Indus Basin Irrigation System is the \"largest contiguous irrigation system developed over the past 140 years\" anywhere in the world. This has reduced the flow of water and by 2018, the average annual flow of water below the Kotri barrage was , and annual amount of silt discharged was estimated at . As a result, the 2010 Pakistan floods were considered \"good news\" for the ecosystem and population of the river delta as they brought much-needed fresh water. Any further utilization of the river basin water is not economically feasible.\nVegetation and wildlife of the Indus delta are threatened by the reduced inflow of fresh water, along with extensive deforestation, industrial pollution and global warming. Damming has also isolated the delta population of Indus River dolphins from those further upstream.\nLarge-scale diversion of the river's water for irrigation has raised far-reaching issues. Sediment clogging from poor maintenance of canals has affected agricultural production and vegetation on numerous occasions. Irrigation itself is increasing soil salinization, reducing crop yields and in some cases rendering farmland useless for cultivation.\nEffects of climate change on the river.\nThe Tibetan Plateau contains the world's third-largest store of ice. Qin Dahe, the former head of the China Meteorological Administration, said the recent fast pace of melting and warmer temperatures will be good for agriculture and tourism in the short term, but issued a strong warning:\nTemperatures are rising four times faster than elsewhere in China, and the Tibetan glaciers are retreating at a higher speed than in any other part of the world... In the short term, this will cause lakes to expand and bring floods and mudflows... In the long run, the glaciers are vital lifelines of the Indus River. Once they vanish, water supplies in Pakistan will be in peril.\n\"There is insufficient data to say what will happen to the Indus,\" says David Grey, the World Bank's senior water advisor in South Asia. \"But we all have very nasty fears that the flows of the Indus could be severely, severely affected by glacier melt as a consequence of climate change,\" and reduced by perhaps as much as 50 per cent. \"Now what does that mean to a population that lives in a desert [where], without the river, there would be no life? I don't know the answer to that question,\" he says. \"But we need to be concerned about that. Deeply, deeply concerned.\"\nU.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke said, shortly before he died in 2010, that he believed that falling water levels in the Indus River \"could very well precipitate World War III.\"\nPollution.\nOver the years factories on the banks of the Indus River have increased levels of water pollution in the river and the atmosphere around it. High levels of pollutants in the river have led to the deaths of endangered Indus River dolphin. The Sindh Environmental Protection Agency has ordered polluting factories around the river to shut down under the Pakistan Environmental Protection Act, 1997. Death of the Indus river dolphin has also been attributed to fishermen using poison to kill fish and scooping them up. As a result, the government banned fishing from Guddu Barrage to Sukkur.\nThe Indus is second among a group of ten rivers responsible for about 90% of all the plastic that reaches the oceans. The Yangtze is the only river contributing more plastic.\n2010 floods.\nFrequently, Indus River is prone to moderate to severe flooding. In July 2010, following abnormally heavy monsoon rains, the Indus River rose above its banks and started flooding. The rain continued for the next two months, devastating large areas of Pakistan. In Sindh, the Indus burst its banks near Sukkur on 8 August, submerging the village of Mor Khan Jatoi. In early August, the heaviest flooding moved southward along the Indus River from severely affected northern regions toward western Punjab, where at least of cropland was destroyed, and the southern province of Sindh. As of September 2010[ [update]], over two thousand people had died and over a million homes had been destroyed since the flooding began.\n2011 floods.\nThe 2011 Sindh floods began during the Pakistani monsoon season in mid-August 2011, resulting from heavy monsoon rains in Sindh, eastern Balochistan, and southern Punjab. The floods caused considerable damage; an estimated 434 civilians were killed, with 5.3\u00a0million people and 1,524,773 homes affected. Sindh is a fertile region and often called the \"breadbasket\" of the country; the damage and toll of the floods on the local agrarian economy was said to be extensive. At least of arable land were inundated. The flooding followed the previous year's floods, which devastated a large part of the country. Unprecedented torrential monsoon rains caused severe flooding in 16 districts of Sindh.\nBarrages, bridges, levees and dams.\nIn Pakistan currently there are six barrages on the Indus: Guddu Barrage, Sukkur Barrage, Kotri Barrage (also called Ghulam Muhammad barrage), Taunsa Barrage, Chashma Barrage and Jinnah Barrage. Another new barrage called \"Sindh Barrage\" is planned as a terminal barrage on the Indus River. There are some bridges on River Indus, such as Dadu Moro Bridge, Larkana Khairpur Indus River Bridge, Thatta-Sujawal bridge, Jhirk-Mula Katiar bridge and recently planned Kandhkot-Ghotki bridge.\nThe entire left bank of the Indus River in Sind province is protected from river flooding by constructing around 600\u00a0km long levees. The right bank side is also leveed from Guddu barrage to Lake Manchar. In response to the levees construction, the river has been aggrading rapidly over the last 20 years leading to breaches upstream of barrages and inundation of large areas.\nTarbela Dam in Pakistan is constructed on the Indus River, while the controversial Kalabagh dam is also being constructed on Indus River. Pakistan is also building Munda Dam.\nTourism.\nMany Buddhist monasteries in Ladakh, Indus-Sarasvati Valley Civilisation sites along the banks of Indus and Sarasvati River (Ghaggar-Hakra River) and in Indus Sagar Doab, Indus River Delta, various dams such as Baglihar Dam, Sindhu Darshan Festival held every year at Leh, Sindhu Pushkaram festival held every 12 years at confluence of Indus and Zanskar River at Nimoo once every 12 years for 12 days starting from when Jupiter enter into Kumbha rasi (Aquarius), etc. are tourism opportunities.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15491", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15491", "title": "Integer factorization", "text": "Decomposition of a number into a product\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in computer science\nCan integer factorization be solved in polynomial time on a classical computer?\nMore unsolved problems in computer science\nIn mathematics, integer factorization is the decomposition of a positive integer into a product of integers. Every positive integer greater than 1 is either the product of two or more integer factors greater than 1, in which case it is a composite number, or it is not, in which case it is a prime number. For example, 15 is a composite number because 15 = 3\u2009\u00b7\u20095, but 7 is a prime number because it cannot be decomposed in this way. If one of the factors is composite, it can in turn be written as a product of smaller factors, for example 60 = 3\u2009\u00b7\u200920 = 3\u2009\u00b7\u2009(5\u2009\u00b7\u20094). Continuing this process until every factor is prime is called prime factorization; the result is always unique up to the order of the factors by the prime factorization theorem.\nTo factorize a small integer n using mental or pen-and-paper arithmetic, the simplest method is trial division: checking if the number is divisible by prime numbers 2, 3, 5, and so on, up to the square root of n. For larger numbers, especially when using a computer, various more sophisticated factorization algorithms are more efficient. A prime factorization algorithm typically involves testing whether each factor is prime each time a factor is found.\nWhen the numbers are sufficiently large, no efficient non-quantum integer factorization algorithm is known. However, it has not been proven that such an algorithm does not exist. The presumed difficulty of this problem is important for the algorithms used in cryptography such as RSA public-key encryption and the RSA digital signature. Many areas of mathematics and computer science have been brought to bear on this problem, including elliptic curves, algebraic number theory, and quantum computing.\nNot all numbers of a given length are equally hard to factor. The hardest instances of these problems (for currently known techniques) are semiprimes, the product of two prime numbers. When they are both large, for instance more than two thousand bits long, randomly chosen, and about the same size (but not too close, for example, to avoid efficient factorization by Fermat's factorization method), even the fastest prime factorization algorithms on the fastest classical computers can take enough time to make the search impractical; that is, as the number of digits of the integer being factored increases, the number of operations required to perform the factorization on any classical computer increases drastically.\nMany cryptographic protocols are based on the presumed difficulty of factoring large composite integers or a related problem \u2013for example, the RSA problem. An algorithm that efficiently factors an arbitrary integer would render RSA-based public-key cryptography insecure.\nPrime decomposition.\nBy the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, every positive integer has a unique prime factorization. (By convention, 1 is the empty product.) Testing whether the integer is prime can be done in polynomial time, for example, by the AKS primality test. If composite, however, the polynomial time tests give no insight into how to obtain the factors.\nGiven a general algorithm for integer factorization, any integer can be factored into its constituent prime factors by repeated application of this algorithm. The situation is more complicated with special-purpose factorization algorithms, whose benefits may not be realized as well or even at all with the factors produced during decomposition. For example, if \"n\" = 171 \u00d7 \"p\" \u00d7 \"q\" where \"p\" &lt; \"q\" are very large primes, trial division will quickly produce the factors 3 and 19 but will take \"p\" divisions to find the next factor. As a contrasting example, if \"n\" is the product of the primes 13729, 1372933, and 18848997161, where 13729 \u00d7 1372933 = 18848997157, Fermat's factorization method will begin with which immediately yields \"b\" \n \u221a\"a\"2 \u2212 \"n\" \n \u221a4 \n 2 and hence the factors \"a\" \u2212 \"b\" = 18848997157 and \"a\" + \"b\" = 18848997161. While these are easily recognized as composite and prime respectively, Fermat's method will take much longer to factor the composite number because the starting value of for \"a\" is a factor of 10 from 1372933.\nCurrent state of the art.\nAmong the \"b\"-bit numbers, the most difficult to factor in practice using existing algorithms are those semiprimes whose factors are of similar size. For this reason, these are the integers used in cryptographic applications.\nIn 2019, a 240-digit (795-bit) number (RSA-240) was factored by a team of researchers including Paul Zimmermann, utilizing approximately 900 core-years of computing power. These researchers estimated that a 1024-bit RSA modulus would take about 500 times as long.\nThe largest such semiprime yet factored was RSA-250, an 829-bit number with 250 decimal digits, in February 2020. The total computation time was roughly 2700 core-years of computing using Intel Xeon Gold 6130 at 2.1\u00a0GHz. Like all recent factorization records, this factorization was completed with a highly optimized implementation of the general number field sieve run on hundreds of machines.\nTime complexity.\nNo algorithm has been published that can factor all integers in polynomial time, that is, that can factor a \"b\"-bit number \"n\" in time O(\"b\"\"k\") for some constant \"k\". Neither the existence nor non-existence of such algorithms has been proved, but it is generally suspected that they do not exist.\nThere are published algorithms that are faster than O((1\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03b5\")\"b\") for all positive \"\u03b5\", that is, sub-exponential. As of 2022[ [update]], the algorithm with best theoretical asymptotic running time is the general number field sieve (GNFS), first published in 1993, running on a \"b\"-bit number \"n\" in time:\n formula_1\nFor current computers, GNFS is the best published algorithm for large \"n\" (more than about 400 bits). For a quantum computer, however, Peter Shor discovered an algorithm in 1994 that solves it in polynomial time. Shor's algorithm takes only O(\"b\"3) time and O(\"b\") space on \"b\"-bit number inputs. In 2001, Shor's algorithm was implemented for the first time, by using NMR techniques on molecules that provide seven qubits.\nIn order to talk about complexity classes such as P, NP, and co-NP, the problem has to be stated as a decision problem.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is known to be in both NP and co-NP, meaning that both \"yes\" and \"no\" answers can be verified in polynomial time. An answer of \"yes\" can be certified by exhibiting a factorization \"n\" = \"d\"() with \"d\" \u2264 \"k\". An answer of \"no\" can be certified by exhibiting the factorization of \"n\" into distinct primes, all larger than \"k\"; one can verify their primality using the AKS primality test, and then multiply them to obtain \"n\". The fundamental theorem of arithmetic guarantees that there is only one possible string of increasing primes that will be accepted, which shows that the problem is in both UP and co-UP. It is known to be in BQP because of Shor's algorithm.\nThe problem is suspected to be outside all three of the complexity classes P, NP-complete, and co-NP-complete.\nIt is therefore a candidate for the NP-intermediate complexity class.\nIn contrast, the decision problem \"Is \"n\" a composite number?\" (or equivalently: \"Is \"n\" a prime number?\") appears to be much easier than the problem of specifying factors of \"n\". The composite/prime problem can be solved in polynomial time (in the number \"b\" of digits of \"n\") with the AKS primality test. In addition, there are several probabilistic algorithms that can test primality very quickly in practice if one is willing to accept a vanishingly small possibility of error. The ease of primality testing is a crucial part of the RSA algorithm, as it is necessary to find large prime numbers to start with.\nFactoring algorithms.\nSpecial-purpose.\nA special-purpose factoring algorithm's running time depends on the properties of the number to be factored or on one of its unknown factors: size, special form, etc. The parameters which determine the running time vary among algorithms.\nAn important subclass of special-purpose factoring algorithms is the \"Category 1\" or \"First Category\" algorithms, whose running time depends on the size of smallest prime factor. Given an integer of unknown form, these methods are usually applied before general-purpose methods to remove small factors. For example, naive trial division is a Category 1 algorithm.\nGeneral-purpose.\nA general-purpose factoring algorithm, also known as a \"Category 2\", \"Second Category\", or \"Kraitchik\" \"family\" algorithm, has a running time which depends solely on the size of the integer to be factored. This is the type of algorithm used to factor RSA numbers. Most general-purpose factoring algorithms are based on the congruence of squares method.\nHeuristic running time.\nIn number theory, there are many integer factoring algorithms that heuristically have expected running time\n formula_2\nin little-o and L-notation.\nSome examples of those algorithms are the elliptic curve method and the quadratic sieve.\nAnother such algorithm is the class group relations method proposed by Schnorr, Seysen, and Lenstra, which they proved only assuming the unproved generalized Riemann hypothesis.\nRigorous running time.\nThe Schnorr\u2013Seysen\u2013Lenstra probabilistic algorithm has been rigorously proven by Lenstra and Pomerance to have expected running time \"Ln\"[, 1+\"o\"(1)] by replacing the GRH assumption with the use of multipliers.\nThe algorithm uses the class group of positive binary quadratic forms of discriminant \u0394 denoted by \"G\"\u0394.\n\"G\"\u0394 is the set of triples of integers (\"a\", \"b\", \"c\") in which those integers are relative prime.\nSchnorr\u2013Seysen\u2013Lenstra algorithm.\nGiven an integer n that will be factored, where n is an odd positive integer greater than a certain constant. In this factoring algorithm the discriminant \u0394 is chosen as a multiple of n, \u0394 = \u2212\"dn\", where d is some positive multiplier. The algorithm expects that for one d there exist enough smooth forms in \"G\"\u0394. Lenstra and Pomerance show that the choice of d can be restricted to a small set to guarantee the smoothness result.\nDenote by \"P\"\u0394 the set of all primes q with Kronecker symbol . By constructing a set of generators of \"G\"\u0394 and prime forms \"f\"\"q\" of \"G\"\u0394 with q in \"P\"\u0394 a sequence of relations between the set of generators and \"f\"\"q\" are produced.\nThe size of q can be bounded by \"c\"0(log|\u0394|)2 for some constant \"c\"0.\nThe relation that will be used is a relation between the product of powers that is equal to the neutral element of \"G\"\u0394. These relations will be used to construct a so-called ambiguous form of \"G\"\u0394, which is an element of \"G\"\u0394 of order dividing 2. By calculating the corresponding factorization of \u0394 and by taking a gcd, this ambiguous form provides the complete prime factorization of n. This algorithm has these main steps:\nLet n be the number to be factored.\n x^{r(x)}\\right).\\left(\\prod_{q \\in P_\\Delta} f^{t(q)}_{q}\\right) = 1.&lt;/math&gt;\nTo obtain an algorithm for factoring any positive integer, it is necessary to add a few steps to this algorithm such as trial division, and the Jacobi sum test.\nExpected running time.\nThe algorithm as stated is a probabilistic algorithm as it makes random choices. Its expected running time is at most \"Ln\"[, 1+\"o\"(1)].\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15492", "revid": "6036800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15492", "title": "Imperial units", "text": "System of measurements\nThe imperial system of units, imperial system or imperial units (also known as British Imperial or Exchequer Standards of 1826) is the system of units first defined in the British Weights and Measures Act 1824 and continued to be developed through a series of Weights and Measures Acts and amendments.\nThe imperial system developed from earlier English units as did the related but differing system of customary units of the United States. The imperial units replaced the Winchester Standards, which were in effect from 1588 to 1825. The system came into official use across the British Empire in 1826.\nBy the late 20th century, most nations of the former empire had officially adopted the metric system as their main system of measurement, but imperial units are still used alongside metric units in the United Kingdom and in some other parts of the former empire, notably Canada.\nThe modern UK legislation defining the imperial system of units is given in the Weights and Measures Act 1985 (as amended).\nImplementation.\nThe Weights and Measures Act 1824 was initially scheduled to go into effect on 1 May 1825. The Weights and Measures Act 1825 pushed back the date to 1 January 1826. The 1824 act allowed the continued use of pre-imperial units provided that they were customary, widely known, and clearly marked with imperial equivalents.\nApothecaries' units.\nApothecaries' units are not mentioned in the acts of 1824 and 1825. At the time, apothecaries' weights and measures were regulated \"in England, Wales, and Berwick-upon-Tweed\" by the London College of Physicians, and in Ireland by the Dublin College of Physicians. In Scotland, apothecaries' units were unofficially regulated by the Edinburgh College of Physicians. The three colleges published, at infrequent intervals, pharmacopoeias, the London and Dublin editions having the force of law.\nImperial apothecaries' measures, based on the imperial pint of 20 fluid ounces, were introduced by the publication of the \"London Pharmacopoeia\" of 1836, the \"Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia\" of 1839, and the \"Dublin Pharmacopoeia\" of 1850. The Medical Act 1858 transferred to the Crown the right to publish the official pharmacopoeia and to regulate apothecaries' weights and measures.\nUnits.\nLength.\nMetric equivalents in this article usually assume the latest official definition. Before this date, the most precise measurement of the imperial Standard Yard was metres.\nVolume.\nThe Weights and Measures Act 1824 invalidated the various different gallons in use in the British Empire, declaring them to be replaced by the statute gallon (which became known as the imperial gallon), a unit close in volume to the ale gallon. The 1824 act defined as the volume of a gallon to be that of of distilled water weighed in air with brass weights with the barometer standing at at a temperature of . The 1824 act went on to give this volume as . The Weights and Measures Act 1963 refined this definition to be the volume of 10 pounds of distilled water of density weighed in air of density against weights of density , which works out to . The Weights and Measures Act 1985 defined a gallon to be exactly (approximately ).\nBritish apothecaries' volume measures.\nThese measurements were in use from 1826, when the new imperial gallon was defined. For pharmaceutical purposes, they were replaced by the metric system in the United Kingdom on 1 January 1971. In the US, though no longer recommended, the apothecaries' system is still used occasionally in medicine, especially in prescriptions for older medications.\nMass and weight.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, the UK used three different systems for mass and weight.\nThe distinction between mass and weight is not always clearly drawn. Strictly a pound is a unit of mass, but it is commonly referred to as a weight. When a distinction is necessary, the term \"pound-force\" may refer to a unit of force rather than mass. The troy pound () was made the primary unit of mass by the Weights and Measures Act 1824 and its use was abolished in the UK on 1 January 1879, with only the troy ounce () and its decimal subdivisions retained. The Weights and Measures Act 1855 made the avoirdupois pound the primary unit of mass. In all the systems, the fundamental unit is the pound, and all other units are defined as fractions or multiples of it.\nNatural equivalents.\nThe 1824 Act of Parliament defined the yard and pound by reference to the prototype standards, and it also defined the values of certain physical constants, to make provision for re-creation of the standards if they were to be damaged. For the yard, the length of a pendulum beating seconds at the latitude of Greenwich at mean sea level was defined as inches. For the pound, the mass of a cubic inch of distilled water at an atmospheric pressure of 30 inches of mercury and a temperature of 62\u00b0 Fahrenheit was defined as 252.458 grains, with there being 7,000 grains per pound.\nFollowing the destruction of the original prototypes in the 1834 Houses of Parliament fire, it proved impossible to recreate the standards from these definitions, and a new Weights and Measures Act 1855 was passed which permitted the recreation of the prototypes from recognized secondary standards.\nCurrent use.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSince the Weights and Measures Act 1985, British law defines base imperial units in terms of their metric equivalent. The metric system is routinely used in business and technology within the United Kingdom, with imperial units remaining in widespread use amongst the public. All UK roads use the imperial system except for weight limits, and newer height or width restriction signs give metric alongside imperial.\nTraders in the UK may accept requests from customers specified in imperial units, and scales which display in both unit systems are commonplace in the retail trade. Metric price signs may be accompanied by imperial price signs provided that the imperial signs are no larger and no more prominent than the metric ones.\nThe United Kingdom completed its official partial transition to the metric system in 1995, with imperial units still legally mandated for certain applications such as draught beer and cider, and road-signs. Therefore, the speedometers on vehicles sold in the UK must be capable of displaying miles per hour. Even though the troy pound was outlawed in the UK in the Weights and Measures Act 1878, the \"troy ounce\" may still be used for the weights of precious stones and metals. The original railways (many built in the Victorian era) are a big user of imperial units, with distances officially measured in miles and yards or miles and chains, and also feet and inches, and speeds are in miles per hour.\nSome British people still use one or more imperial units in everyday life for distance (miles, yards, feet, and inches) and some types of volume measurement (especially milk and beer in pints; rarely for canned or bottled soft drinks, or petrol). As of February 2021[ [update]], many British people also still use imperial units in everyday life for body weight (stones and pounds for adults, pounds and ounces for babies). Government documents aimed at the public may give body weight and height in imperial units as well as in metric. A survey in 2015 found that many people did not know their body weight or height in both systems. As of 2017, people under the age of 40 preferred the metric system but people aged 40 and over preferred the imperial system. As in other English-speaking countries, including Australia, Canada and the United States, the height of horses is usually measured in hands, standardised to . Fuel consumption for vehicles is commonly stated in miles per gallon (mpg), though official figures always include litres per equivalents and fuel is sold in litres. When sold draught in licensed premises, beer and cider must be sold in pints, half-pints or third-pints. Cow's milk is available in both litre- and pint-based containers in supermarkets and shops. Areas of land associated with farming, forestry and real estate are commonly advertised in acres and square feet but, for contracts and land registration purposes, the units are always hectares and square metres.\nOffice space and industrial units are usually advertised in square feet. Steel pipe sizes are sold in increments of inches, while copper pipe is sold in increments of millimetres. Road bicycles have their frames measured in centimetres, while off-road bicycles have their frames measured in inches. Display sizes for screens on television sets and computer monitors are always diagonally measured in inches. Food sold by length or width, e.g. pizzas or sandwiches, is generally sold in inches. Clothing is usually sized in inches, with the metric equivalent often shown as a small supplementary indicator. Gas is usually measured by the cubic foot or cubic metre, but is billed like electricity by the kilowatt hour.\nPre-packaged products can show both metric and imperial measures, and it is also common to see imperial pack sizes with metric only labels, e.g. a tin of Lyle's Golden Syrup is always labelled with no imperial indicator. Similarly most jars of jam and packs of sausages are labelled with no imperial indicator.\nIndia.\nIndia began converting to the metric system from the imperial system between 1955 and 1962. The metric system in weights and measures was adopted by the Indian Parliament in December 1956 with the \"Standards of Weights and Measures Act\", which took effect beginning 1 October 1958. By 1962, metric units became \"mandatory and exclusive.\"\nToday all official measurements are made in the metric system. In common usage some older Indians may still refer to imperial units. Some measurements, such as the heights of mountains, are still recorded in feet. Tyre rim diameters are still measured in inches, as used worldwide. Industries like the construction and the real estate industry still use both the metric and the imperial system though it is more common for sizes of homes to be given in square feet and land in acres.\nIn Standard Indian English, as in Australian, Canadian, New Zealand, Singaporean, and British English, metric units such as the litre, metre, and tonne utilise the traditional spellings brought over from French, which differ from those used in the United States and the Philippines. The imperial long ton is invariably spelt with one 'n'.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong has three main systems of units of measurement in current use:\nIn 1976 the Hong Kong Government started the conversion to the metric system, and as of 2012 measurements for government purposes, such as road signs, are almost always in metric units. All three systems are officially permitted for trade, and in the wider society a mixture of all three systems prevails.\nThe Chinese system's most commonly used units for length are (\"lei5\"), (\"zoeng6\"), (\"cek3\"), (\"cyun3\"), (\"fan1\") in descending scale order. These units are now rarely used in daily life, the imperial and metric systems being preferred. The imperial equivalents are written with the same basic Chinese characters as the Chinese system. In order to distinguish between the units of the two systems, the units can be prefixed with \"Ying\" (, \"jing1\") for the imperial system and \"Wa\" (, \"waa4\") for the Chinese system. In writing, derived characters are often used, with an additional (mouth) radical to the left of the original Chinese character, for writing imperial units. The most commonly used units are the mile or \"li\" (, \"li1\"), the yard or \"ma\" (, \"maa5\"), the foot or \"chek\" (, \"cek3\"), and the inch or \"tsun\" (, \"cyun3\").\nThe traditional measure of flat area is the square foot (, \"fong1 cek3, ping4 fong1 cek3\") of the imperial system, which is still in common use for real estate purposes. The measurement of agricultural plots and fields is traditionally conducted in (\"mau5\") of the Chinese system.\nFor the measurement of volume, Hong Kong officially uses the metric system, though the gallon (, \"gaa1 leon4-2\") is also occasionally used.\nCanada.\nDuring the 1970s, the metric system and SI units were introduced in Canada to replace the imperial system. Within the government, efforts to implement the metric system were extensive; almost any agency, institution, or function provided by the government uses SI units exclusively. Imperial units were eliminated from all public road signs and both systems of measurement will still be found on privately owned signs, such as the height warnings at the entrance of a parkade. In the 1980s, momentum to fully convert to the metric system stalled when the government of Brian Mulroney was elected. There was heavy opposition to metrication and as a compromise the government maintains legal definitions for and allows use of imperial units as long as metric units are shown as well.\nThe law requires that measured products (such as fuel and meat) be priced in metric units and an imperial price can be shown if a metric price is present. There tends to be leniency in regards to fruits and vegetables being priced in imperial units only.\nEnvironment Canada still offers an imperial unit option beside metric units, even though weather is typically measured and reported in metric units in the Canadian media. Some radio stations near the United States border (such as CIMX and CIDR) primarily use imperial units to report the weather. Railways in Canada also continue to use imperial units.\nImperial units are still used in ordinary conversation. Today, Canadians typically use a mix of metric and imperial measurements in their daily lives. The use of the metric and imperial systems varies by age. The older generation mostly uses the imperial system, while the younger generation more often uses the metric system. Quebec has implemented metrication more fully. Newborns are measured in SI at hospitals, but the birth weight and length is also announced to family and friends in imperial units. Drivers' licences use SI units, though many English-speaking Canadians give their height and weight in imperial. In livestock auction markets, cattle are sold in dollars per hundredweight (short), whereas hogs are sold in dollars per hundred kilograms. Imperial units still dominate in recipes, construction, house renovation and gardening. Land is now surveyed and registered in metric units whilst initial surveys used imperial units. For example, partitioning of farmland on the prairies in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was done in imperial units; this accounts for imperial units of distance and area retaining wide use in the Prairie Provinces. \nIn English-speaking Canada commercial and residential spaces are mostly (but not exclusively) constructed using square feet, while in French-speaking Quebec commercial and residential spaces are constructed in metres and advertised using both square metres and square feet as equivalents. Carpet or flooring tile is purchased by the square foot, but less frequently also in square metres. Motor-vehicle fuel consumption is reported in both litres per and statute miles per imperial gallon, leading to the erroneous impression that Canadian vehicles are 20% more fuel-efficient than their apparently identical American counterparts for which fuel economy is reported in statute miles per US gallon (neither country specifies which gallon is used). Canadian railways maintain exclusive use of imperial measurements to describe train length (feet), train height (feet), capacity (tons), speed (mph), and trackage (miles).\nImperial units also retain common use in firearms and ammunition. Imperial measures are still used in the description of cartridge types, even when the cartridge is of relatively recent invention (e.g., .204 Ruger, .17 HMR, where the calibre is expressed in decimal fractions of an inch). Ammunition that is already classified in metric is still kept metric (e.g., 9\u00d719mm). In the manufacture of ammunition, bullet and powder weights are expressed in terms of grains for both metric and imperial cartridges.\nIn keeping with the international standard, air navigation is based on \"nautical\" units, e.g., the nautical mile, which is neither imperial nor metric, and altitude is measured in imperial feet.\nAustralia.\nWhile metrication in Australia has largely ended the official use of imperial units, for particular measurements, international use of imperial units is still followed.\nThe influence of British and American culture in Australia has been noted to be a cause for residual use of imperial units of measure.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand introduced the metric system on 15 December 1976. Aviation was exempt, with altitude and airport elevation continuing to be measured in feet whilst navigation is done in nautical miles; all other aspects (fuel quantity, aircraft weight, runway length, etc.) use metric units.\nScreen sizes for devices such as televisions, monitors and phones, and wheel rim sizes for vehicles, are stated in inches, as is the convention in the rest of the world - and a 1992 study found a continued use of imperial units for birth weight and human height alongside metric units.\nIreland.\nIreland has officially changed over to the metric system since entering the European Union, with distances on new road signs being metric since 1997 and speed limits being metric since 2005. The imperial system remains in limited use \u2013 for sales of beer in pubs (traditionally sold by the pint). All other goods are required by law to be sold in metric units with traditional quantities being retained for goods like butter and sausages, which are sold in packaging. The majority of cars sold pre-2005 feature speedometers with miles per hour as the primary unit, but with a kilometres per hour display. Often signs such as those for bridge height can display both metric and imperial units. Imperial measurements continue to be used colloquially by the general population especially with height and distance measurements such as feet, inches, and acres as well as for weight with pounds and stones still in common use among people of all ages. Measurements such as yards have fallen out of favour with younger generations. Ireland's railways still use imperial measurements for distances and speed signage. Property is usually listed in square feet as well as metres also.\nHorse racing in Ireland still continues to use stones, pounds, miles and furlongs as measurements.\nBahamas.\nImperial measurements remain in general use in the Bahamas.\nLegally, both the imperial and metric systems are recognised by the Weights and Measures Act 2006.\nBelize.\nBoth imperial units and metric units are used in Belize. Both systems are legally recognized by the National Metrology Act.\nMyanmar.\nAccording to the CIA, in June 2009, Myanmar was one of three countries that had not adopted the SI metric system as their official system of weights and measures. Metrication efforts began in 2011. The Burmese government set a goal to metricate by 2019, which was not met, with the help of the German National Metrology Institute.\nOther countries.\nSome imperial measurements remain in limited use in Malaysia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and South Africa. Measurements in feet and inches, especially for a person's height, are frequently encountered in conversation and non-governmental publications.\nPrior to metrication, it was a common practice in Malaysia for people to refer to unnamed locations and small settlements along major roads by referring to how many miles the said locations were from the nearest major town. In some cases, these eventually became the official names of the locations; in other cases, such names have been largely or completely superseded by new names. An example of the former is Batu 32 (literally \"Mile 32\" in Malay), which refers to the area surrounding the intersection between Federal Route 22 (the Tamparuli-Sandakan highway) and Federal Route 13 (the Sandakan-Tawau highway). The area is so named because it is 32 miles west of Sandakan, the nearest major town.\nPetrol is still sold by the imperial gallon in Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Myanmar, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, St Kitts and Nevis and St. Vincent and the Grenadines. The United Arab Emirates Cabinet in 2009 issued the Decree No. (270 / 3) specifying that, from 1 January 2010, the new unit sale price for petrol will be the litre and not the gallon, which was in line with the UAE Cabinet Decision No. 31 of 2006 on the national system of measurement, which mandates the use of International System of units as a basis for the legal units of measurement in the country. Sierra Leone switched to selling fuel by the litre in May 2011.\nIn October 2011, the Antigua and Barbuda government announced the re-launch of the Metrication Programme in accordance with the Metrology Act 2007, which established the International System of Units as the legal system of units. The Antigua and Barbuda government has committed to a full conversion from the imperial system by the first quarter of 2015.\nIn March 2025, Dubai completed the switch from imperial gallons to cubic metres as the unit to measure water consumption.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15494", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15494", "title": "Incompatible-properties argument", "text": "Idea that no description of God is consistent with reality\nThe incompatible-properties argument is the idea that no description of God is consistent with reality. For example, if one takes the definition of God to be described fully from the Bible, then the claims of what properties God has described therein might be argued to lead to a contradiction.\nEvil vs. good and omnipotence.\nThe problem of evil is the argument that the existence of evil is incompatible with the concept of an omnipotent and perfectly good God.\nA variation does not depend on the existence of evil. A truly omnipotent God could create all possible worlds. A \"good\" God can create only \"good\" worlds. A God that created all possible worlds would have no moral qualities whatsoever, and could be replaced by a random generator. The standard response is to argue a distinction between \"could create\" and \"would create.\" In other words, God \"could\" create all possible worlds but that is simply not in God's nature. This has been argued by theologians for centuries. However, the result is that a \"good\" God is incompatible with some possible worlds, thus incapable of creating them without losing the property of being a totally different God. Yet, it is not necessary for God to be \"good\". He simply is good, but is capable of evil.\nPurpose vs. timelessness.\nOne argument based on incompatible properties rests on a definition of God that includes a will, plan or purpose and an existence outside of time. To say that a being possesses a purpose implies an inclination or tendency to steer events toward some state that does not yet exist. This, in turn, implies a privileged direction, which we may call \"time\". It may be one direction of causality, the direction of increasing entropy, or some other emergent property of a world. These are not identical, but one must exist in order to progress toward a goal.\nIn general, God's time would not be related to our time. God might be able to operate within our time without being constrained to do so. However, God could then step outside this game for any purpose. Thus God's time must be aligned with our time if human activities are relevant to God's purpose. (In a relativistic universe, presumably this means\u2014at any point in spacetime\u2014time measured from t=0 at the Big Bang or end of inflation.)\nA God existing outside of any sort of time could not create anything because creation substitutes one thing for another, or for nothing. Creation requires a creator that existed, by definition, prior to the thing created.\nOmniscience vs. indeterminacy or free will.\nAnother pair of alleged incompatible properties is omniscience and either indeterminacy or free will. Omniscience concerning the past and present (properly defined relative to Earth) is not a problem, but there is an argument that omniscience regarding the future implies it has been determined, what seems possible only in a deterministic world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15495", "revid": "461496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15495", "title": "International Society of Olympic Historians", "text": "Sports history organization\nThe International Society of Olympic Historians (ISOH) is a non-profit organization founded in 1991 with the purpose of promoting and studying the Olympic Movement and the Olympic Games. The majority of recent books on the Olympic Games have been written by ISOH members. The ISOH publishes the Journal of Olympic History (\"JOH\", formerly \"Citius, Altius, Fortius\") three times a year.\nHistory.\nThe International Society of Olympic Historians was formed as the result of a meeting in London, England, in December 1991. The idea of forming an Olympic historical society had been the subject of correspondence \u2013 mainly between Bill Mallon (United States) and Ture Widlund (Sweden) \u2013 for many years. On Thursday, 5 December 1991, a group of potential members met at the Duke of Clarence, a small pub in the Kensington district. Those present were Ian Buchanan (Great Britain), Stan Greenberg (Great Britain), Ove Karlsson (Sweden), Bill Mallon (United States), Peter Matthews (Great Britain), David Wallechinsky (United States), and Ture Widlund (Sweden). The invited guests who sent regrets were: Anthony Bijkerk (Netherlands), Peter Diamond (United States), Pim Huurman (Netherlands), Erich Kamper (Austria), Volker Kluge (Germany), John Lucas (United States), and Wolf Lyberg (Sweden). \nISOH was formed with the purpose of promoting and studying the Olympic Movement and the Olympic Games. This purpose is achieved primarily through research into their history, the gathering of historical and statistical data concerning the Olympic Movement and Olympic Games and the publication of the research via journals and other publications, and through the cooperation of the membership.\nIan Buchanan was the first ISOH. In 2000,he was succeeded by Bill Mallon. Subsequently the sports historian and academic Dr. Karl Lennartz (Germany) was elected President, serving from 2004 to 2012.Broadcaster and writer David Wallechinsky (United States) led the organisation from 2012 to 2020. Since then, archaeologist and sports historian Dr. Christian Wacker (Germany) has been president.\n\"Journal of Olympic History\".\nThe ISOH publishes the \"Journal of Olympic History\" (formerly \"Citius, Altius, Fortius\").This is produced three times a year and is supported by a website: www.isoh.org \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15496", "revid": "32379641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15496", "title": "Serie A", "text": "Top Italian football league\nFootball league\nThe Serie A (), officially known as Serie A Enilive in Italy and Serie A Made in Italy abroad for sponsorship reasons, is a professional association football league in Italy and the highest level of the Italian football league system. Established in the 1929\u201330 season, it restructured the existing Italian Football Championship, which had been played since 1898, into a national round-robin format alongside Serie B. It functions under a promotion and relegation system with Serie B.\nThe league was organised by the Direttorio Divisioni Superiori until 1943, the Lega Calcio from 1946 to 2010, and the Lega Serie A ever since. The 29 championships played from 1898 to the formation of the Serie A in 1929 are officially recognised by the Italian Football Federation (FIGC) as equal to later Serie A titles. Similarly the 1945\u201346 season, played under a temporary format due to World War II, is also recognized as an official championship. Since 1924, the winner of Italy's top division has worn the \"scudetto\" emblem on its kit in the following season, and since 1961, the Coppa Campioni d'Italia trophy has been awarded to the Serie A champion.\nKnown for tactical discipline and defensive rigor, the Serie A has been consistently ranked among the strongest leagues in global football. As of 2024\u201325, Serie A ranks second in the UEFA coefficient rankings based on performances in European competitions over the past five seasons, behind England's Premier League and ahead of Spain's La Liga.\nThe Serie A is home to several of football's most successful and renowned clubs, including Juventus, Inter Milan, and AC Milan. These teams have played key roles in European football governance and competition history. Juventus, the most decorated club in Italy, has achieved international success across all major UEFA and intercontinental tournaments. Milan and Inter have also earned significant honors, with Milan joint-third among clubs for most UEFA titles, and Inter achieving a continental treble in 2009\u201310. Alongside Roma, Napoli, Lazio, and Fiorentina, these clubs form the \"seven sisters\" () of Italian football. The Serie A has historically attracted top global talent, producing numerous Ballon d'Or winners.\nHistory.\nPredecessors to Serie A, 1898\u20131928.\nIn the Italian football league system, the Federazione Italiana del Football (FIF), began organising football in Italy in 1898. Its first competition, the 1898 Italian Football Championship, was held at the Velodrome Humbert I in Turin on 8 May 1898. First in the List of Italian football champions is thus Genoa CFC, who won against three Turin based teams. Other Italian teams existed but hadn't joined at this stage. Genoa won the Italian Football Championship on five out of six occasions, interrupted by AC Milan in 1901.\nFrom 1904, the tournament was named Prima Categoria, structured into regional groups. The winners of each group participated in a playoff to declare the champions.\nThe FIF joined FIFA and was renamed in 1909 to Federazione Italiana Giuoco Calcio (FIGC). The FIGC usurped the rival Federazione Ginnastica Nazionale Italiana (FGNI) as a football administration. The FGNI organised football tournaments in Italy between 1895 and 1913.\nArgument in 1921 on the number of teams to be allowed in the set up, led to a split forming the Confederazione Calcistica Italiana (CCI). In 1921\u201322 the CCI conducted a rival tournament named Prima Divisione with Northern Italy's wealthiest clubs, in opposition to the competition organised separately by the FIGC. The FIGC then accepted the Prima Divisione as the new format from 1922 to 1923 with its reduced number of teams.\nPrima Divisione played from 1921 to 1926. Prima Divisione was divided into Lega Nord (Northern League) and Lega Sud (Southern League). Lega Nord was divided into two non-regional, 12 team groups of which the winners played off in the Northern League Final. Lega Sud was sub-divided regionally with winners playing off in a finals series. The winners of the Northern and Southern Leagues then played off in the Finalissima (literally The Biggest Final), to be national champions.\nIn 1926 the Fascist regime placed the FIGC under control of politician Leandro Arpinati. Prima Divisione was replaced with Divisione Nazionale. Divisione Nazionale initially comprised the previous Liga Nord plus 2 of the 3 Roman teams that would merge in 1927 into AS Roma, and SSC Napoli (newly formed from the merger of 2 previously separate Neapolitan clubs). Divisione Nazionale was based as per the previous Lega Nord on two non-regional groups, now composed of only ten clubs each. The top 3 teams in each of the 2 groups then played in a round robin finals competition to decide the national champion.\nSerie A formation.\nItalian football was re-organised in 1929 to form a national 2 division hierarchic meritocracy, with end of season promotion and relegation between the 2 divisions. The two new divisions were branded Serie A and Serie B. The inaugural Serie A was won by Internazionale during the period they were called \"Ambrosiana\".\nAfter World War II the North - South divisions of Divisione Nazionale were restored for the single 1945\u201346 season. Serie A was re-stored in 1946 and has continued to today.\nScudetto and Coppa Campioni d'Italia.\nThe Italian league championship title is often referred to as the \"scudetto\" (\"small shield\"). That is since from 1923 to 1924 season, the winner of the Italian football league set up adorned a small coat of arms with the Italian tricolour on their strip in the following season.\nAn actual trophy is awarded to the winning club since 1960\u201361 season. The trophy is called the Coppa Campioni d'Italia. Until 2004 it was presented to the winning club at the head office of the Lega Nazionale Professionisti. Since then the trophy has been presented on-pitch at the end of the last round of games.\n21st century.\nIn April 2009, Serie A announced a split from Serie B. Nineteen of the twenty clubs voted in favour of the move in an argument over television rights; the relegation-threatened Lecce had voted against the decision. Maurizio Beretta, the former head of Italy's employers' association, became president of the new league.\nIn April 2016, it was announced that Serie A was selected by the International Football Association Board to test video replays, which were initially private for the 2016\u201317 season, allowing them to become a live pilot phase, with replay assistance implemented in the 2017\u201318 season. On the decision, FIGC President Carlo Tavecchio said: \"We were among the first supporters of using technology on the pitch and we believe we have everything required to offer our contribution to this important experiment.\"\nSerie A will continue the 20 club format after sixteen clubs voted against reducing the division to 18 teams in February 2024.\nFormat.\nFor most of Serie A's history, there were 16 or 18 clubs competing at the top level. Since 2004\u201305, however, there have been 20 clubs in total. One season (1947\u201348) was played with 21 teams for political reasons, following post-war tensions with Yugoslavia. Below is a complete record of how many teams played in each season throughout the league's history:\nDuring the season, which runs from August to May, each club plays each of the other teams twice; once at home and once away, totalling 38 games for each team by the end of the season. Thus, in Italian football a true round-robin format is used. In the first half of the season, called the \"andata\", each team plays once against each league opponent, for a total of 19 games. In the second half of the season, called the \"ritorno\", the teams play another 19 games, once more against each opponent, in which home and away matches are reversed. The two halves of the season had exactly the same order of fixtures until the 2021\u201322 season, when an asymmetrical calendar was introduced, following the format of the English, Spanish and French leagues. Since the 1994\u201395 season, teams are awarded three points for a win, one point for a draw, and no points for a loss. Prior to this, a win was worth two points. The three lowest-placed teams at the end of the season are relegated to Serie B, and three Serie B teams are promoted to replace them for the next season.\nEuropean qualification.\nIn 2023\u201324, Serie A was ranked as the best league by UEFA coefficient. This was due to a combination of all seven Serie A teams progressing into the knockout stages in European competition, picking up extra coefficient points. Additionally, Atalanta won the Europa League Final and Fiorentina were losing finalists in the UEFA Europa Conference League. This continued a strong recent record where five of the six European club finals have featured at least one Serie A side over the past two seasons. As a result of this ranking the top 5 clubs in Serie A qualify for the champions league in 2024.\nTiebreaking.\nIf after all 38 games, two teams are tied on points for either first place or for 17th (the last safety spot), the outcome is decided by a single-legged play-off match. This match consists of 90 minutes of regulation time followed by penalties if necessary (no extra time). The game is to be held at a neutral venue, with the designated \"home\" team determined by the performance-based criteria listed below. In cases where there are at least three teams tied for one of these positions, a mini table is created using the same tiebreakers to determine which two teams will play in the decider. For ties concerning all other league positions, the following tiebreakers are applied:\nBetween 2006\u201307 and 2021\u201322, the tiebreakers currently used for all places to decide the scudetto winner if necessary, though this was never needed. Before 2005\u201306, a play-off would immediately be used if teams were tied for first place, a European qualification spot, or a relegation spot. In some past years, the playoff was a single game at a neutral site while in others it was a two-legged tie decided by aggregate score.\nThe only time a playoff was used to decide the champion occurred in the 1963\u201364 season when Bologna and Inter both finished on 54 points. Bologna won the playoff 2\u20130 at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome to win the scudetto. Playoff games have been used on multiple occasions to decide European competition qualifications (most recently in 1999\u20132000) and relegation (most recently in 2022\u201323).\nClubs.\nBefore 1929, many clubs competed in the top level of Italian football as the earlier rounds were competed up to 1922 on a regional basis then interregional up to 1929. Below is a list of Serie A clubs who have competed in the competition since it has been a league format (68 in total).\n2025\u201326 season.\nClubs.\nThe following 20 clubs are competing in the Serie A during the 2025\u201326 season.\nMaps.\nCurrent teams shown in green.\nSeasons in Serie A.\nThere are 68 teams that have taken part in 94 Serie A championships in a single round that was played from the 1929\u201330 season until the 2025\u201326 season. The teams in bold compete in Serie A currently. The year in parentheses represents the most recent year of participation at this level. Inter Milan is the only team that has played Serie A football in every season.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLogos.\nSerie A had logos that featured its sponsor Telecom Italia Mobile (TIM). The logo that was introduced in 2010 had a minor change in 2016 due to the change of the logo of TIM itself. In August 2018, a new logo was announced, and another one in August 2019.\nOn 5 February 2024, Serie A signed a new sponsor deal with Eni, otherwise known as Enilive, to take the main sponsor role of the Serie A.\nTelevision rights.\nIn the past, individual clubs competing in the league had the rights to sell their broadcast rights to specific channels throughout Italy, unlike in most other European countries. Currently, the two broadcasters in Italy are the satellite broadcaster Sky Italia and streaming platform DAZN for its own pay television networks; RAI is allowed to broadcast only highlights (exclusively from 13:30 to 22:30 CET).\nThis is a list of television rights in Italy (since 2021\u201322):\nSince the 2010\u201311 season, Serie A clubs have negotiated television rights collectively rather than on an individual club basis, having previously abandoned collective negotiation at the end of the 1998\u201399 season.\nInternational broadcasters.\nIn the 1990s, Serie A was at its most popular in the United Kingdom when it was shown on \"Football Italia\" on Channel 4, although it has actually appeared on more UK channels than any other league, rarely staying in one place for long since 2002. Serie A has appeared in the UK on BSB's The Sports Channel (1990\u201391), Sky Sports (1991\u20131992), Channel 4 (1992\u20132002), Eurosport (2002\u20132004), Setanta Sports and Bravo (2004\u20132007), Channel 5 (2007\u20132008), ESPN (2009\u20132013), Eleven Sports Network (2018), Premier, FreeSports (2019\u20132021) and currently BT Sport (2013\u20132018; 2021\u2013present).\nIn the United States, Serie A is currently shown on CBS Sports and its streaming network Paramount+. Prior to 2021\u201322 it was shown on the ESPN family of networks.\n2024\u201329.\nFor the 2024\u201329 cycle, the Serie A sold its international rights to the Infront agency (except in United States and MENA), which is in charge of reaching an agreement with the interested companies.\nChampions.\nThe FIGC officially recognises 29 Italian Football Championships held prior to the 1929 reorganisation of the top division into Serie A. The most successful club in terms of national championships is Juventus, with a total of 36 titles. The second most successful club is Inter Milan, with 20 championships, followed by AC Milan, with 19 titles. In recognition of domestic success, the FIGC awards a star for every ten championships won, which may be displayed on a club's jersey.\nNo national titles were awarded for the 1926\u201327 and 2004\u201305 seasons. In both instances, the championships were revoked from Torino and Juventus respectively, due to their involvement in football-related scandals.\nRecords.\nBoldface indicates a player still active in Serie A. \"Italics\" indicates a player active outside Serie A.\n \"As of 4 June 2023\"\n \"As of 26 May 2024\"\nPlayers.\nNon-EU players.\nUnlike La Liga, for example, which has long imposed a quota on the number of players able to play for each club who hold passports from countries that are not in the European Union, Serie A has undergone many rule changes concerning the number of non-EU players clubs could sign.\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s, most Serie A clubs signed a large number of players from foreign nations (both EU and non-EU members). Notable foreign players to play in Serie A during this era included Irish international Liam Brady, England internationals Paul Gascoigne and David Platt, France's Michel Platini and Laurent Blanc, Lothar Matth\u00e4us and J\u00fcrgen Klinsmann from Germany, Dutchmen Ruud Gullit and Dennis Bergkamp, and Argentina's Diego Maradona.\nIn the middle of the 2000\u201301 season, the old quota system, which limited each team to having no more than five non-EU players and using no more than three in each match, was abolished. Concurrent with the abolishment of the quota, the FIGC had investigated footballers that used fake passports. Alberto and Warley, Alejandro Da Silva and Jorginho Paulista of Udinese; F\u00e1bio J\u00fanior and Gustavo Bartelt of Roma; Dida of Milan; \u00c1lvaro Recoba of Inter; Thomas Job, Francis Z\u00e9, Jean Ondoa of Sampdoria; and Jeda and Dede of Vicenza were all banned in July 2001 for lengths ranging from six months to one year. However, most of the bans were subsequently reduced.\nAt the start of the 2003\u201304 season, a quota was imposed on each of the clubs limiting the number of non-EU, non-EFTA and non-Swiss players who may be signed from abroad each season, following provisional measures introduced in the 2002\u201303 season, which allowed Serie A and B clubs to sign only one non-EU player in the 2002 summer transfer window.\nThe rule underwent minor changes in August 2004, June 2005, June 2006, and June 2007.\nThe number of non-EU players was reduced from 265 in 2002\u201303 season to 166 in 2006\u201307 season. This reduction also included players who received EU status after their respective countries joined the EU (see 2004 and 2007 enlargement), which made players such as Adrian Mutu, Valeri Bojinov, Marek Jankulovski and Marius Stankevi\u010dius EU players.\nThe quota system changed again at the beginning of the 2008\u201309 season: three quotas were awarded to clubs that do not have non-EU players in their squad (previously only newly promoted clubs could have three quotas); clubs that had one non-EU player had two quotas. Those clubs that had two non-EU players were awarded one quota and one conditional quota, which was awarded after: 1) Transferred 1 non-EU player abroad, or 2) Release 1 non-EU player as free agent, or 3) A non-EU player received EU nationality. Clubs with three or more non-EU players had two conditional quotas, but releasing two non-EU players as free agent only gave one quota instead of two. Serie B and Lega Pro clubs could not sign non-EU players from abroad, except those that followed a club promoted from Serie D.\nOn 2 July 2010, the above conditional quota was reduced back to one, though if a team did not have any non-EU players, that team could still sign up to three non-EU players. In 2011 the signing quota reverted to two.\nLarge clubs with many foreigners usually borrow quotas from other clubs that have few foreigners or no foreigners in order to sign more non-EU players. For example, Adrian Mutu joined Juventus via Livorno in 2005, as at the time Romania was not a member of the EU. Other examples include J\u00falio C\u00e9sar, Victor Obinna and Maxwell, who joined Inter from Chievo (first two) and Empoli, respectively.\nHomegrown players.\nSerie A also imposed Homegrown players rule, a modification of Homegrown Player Rule (UEFA). Unlike UEFA, Serie A at first did not cap the number of players in first team squad at 25, meaning the club could employ more foreigners by increasing the size of the squad. However, a cap of 25 (under-21 players were excluded) was introduced to 2015\u201316 season (in 2015\u201316 season, squad simply require 8 homegrown players but not require 4 of them from their own youth team). In the 2016\u201317 season, the FIGC sanctioned Sassuolo for fielding ineligible player, Antonino Ragusa. Although the club did not exceed the capacity of 21 players that were not from their own youth team (only Domenico Berardi was eligible as youth product of their own) as well as under 21 of age (born 1995 or after, of which four players were eligible) in their 24-men call-up, It was reported that on Lega Serie A side the squad list was not updated.\nIn 2015\u201316 season, the following quota was announced.\nSerie A Player of The Month.\n\"Main page: Serie A Player of the Month\"\nThe Serie A Player of the Month recognises the best player each month in Serie A, which is usually done via online voting out of the five nominees.\n\"As of 2024[ [update]], below the list of top winners\":\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15499", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15499", "title": "IPCC Policymakers Summary", "text": ""}
{"id": "15501", "revid": "45808397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15501", "title": "Inhalant", "text": "Chemical, often household, breathed in to cause intoxication\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nInhalants are a broad range of household and industrial chemicals whose volatile vapors or pressurized gases can be concentrated and breathed in via the nose or mouth to produce intoxication, in a manner not intended by the manufacturer. They are inhaled at room temperature through volatilization (in the case of gasoline or acetone) or from a pressurized container (e.g., nitrous oxide or butane), and do not include drugs that are sniffed after burning or heating.\nWhile a few inhalants are prescribed by medical professionals and used for medical purposes, as in the case of inhaled anesthetics and nitrous oxide (an anxiolytic and pain relief agent prescribed by dentists), this article focuses on inhalant use of household and industrial propellants, glues, fuels, and other products in a manner not intended by the manufacturer, to produce intoxication or other psychoactive effects. These products are used as recreational drugs for their intoxicating effect. According to a 1995 report by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the most serious inhalant use occurs among homeless children and teenagers who \"live on the streets completely without family ties.\" Inhalants are the only substance used more by younger teenagers than by older teenagers. Inhalant users inhale vapor or aerosol propellant gases using plastic bags held over the mouth or by breathing from a solvent-soaked rag or an open container. The practices are known colloquially as \"sniffing\", \"huffing\" or \"bagging\".\nThe effects of inhalants range from an alcohol-like intoxication and intense euphoria to vivid hallucinations, depending on the substance and the dose. Some inhalant users are injured due to the harmful effects of the solvents or gases or due to other chemicals used in the products that they are inhaling. As with any recreational drug, users can be injured due to dangerous behavior while they are intoxicated, such as driving under the influence. In some cases, users have died from hypoxia (lack of oxygen), pneumonia, heart failure, cardiac arrest, or aspiration of vomit. Brain damage is typically seen with chronic long-term use of solvents as opposed to short-term exposure.\nWhile legal when used as intended, in England, Scotland, and Wales it is illegal to sell inhalants to persons likely to use them as an intoxicant. As of 2017, thirty-seven US states impose criminal penalties on some combination of sale, possession or recreational use of various inhalants. In 15 of these states, such laws apply only to persons under the age of 18.\nMedical inhalants.\nA small number of recreational inhalant drugs are pharmaceutical products that are used illicitly.\nMedical anesthetics that have been used as recreational drugs include diethyl ether (no longer used medically due to high flammability and development of safer alternatives) and nitrous oxide, widely used since the late 20th century by dentists as an anti-anxiety drug and mild anesthetic during dental procedures. The effects of ether intoxication are similar to those of alcohol intoxication, but more potent. Also, due to NMDA antagonism, the user may experience all the psychedelic effects present in classical dissociatives such as ketamine in the forms of thought loops and the feeling of the mind being disconnected from one's body. Nitrous oxide is a dental anesthetic that is used as a recreational drug, either by users who have access to medical-grade gas canisters (e.g., dental hygienists or dentists) or by using the gas contained in whipped cream aerosol containers. Nitrous oxide inhalation can cause pain relief, depersonalization, derealization, dizziness, euphoria, and some sound distortion.\nRecreational use.\nLiquids.\nAlkyl nitrites.\nIngestion of alkyl nitrites can cause methemoglobinemia, and by inhalation it has not been ruled out.\nThe sale of alkyl nitrite-based poppers was banned in Canada in 2013. Although not considered a narcotic and not illegal to possess or use, they are considered a drug. Sales that are not authorized can now be punished with fines and prison. Since 2007, reformulated poppers containing isopropyl nitrite are sold in Europe because only isobutyl nitrite is prohibited. In France, the sale of products containing butyl nitrite, pentyl nitrite, or isomers thereof, has been prohibited since 1990 on grounds of danger to consumers. In 2007, the government extended this prohibition to all alkyl nitrites that were not authorized for sale as drugs. After litigation by sex shop owners, this extension was quashed by the Council of State on the grounds that the government had failed to justify such a blanket prohibition: according to the court, the risks cited, concerning rare accidents often following abnormal usage, rather justified compulsory warnings on the packaging.\nIn the United Kingdom, poppers are widely available and frequently (legally) sold in gay clubs/bars, sex shops, drug paraphernalia head shops, over the Internet and on markets. It is illegal under Medicines Act 1968 to sell them advertised for human consumption, and to bypass this, they are usually sold as odorizers. In the U.S., originally marketed as a prescription drug in 1937, amyl nitrite remained so until 1960, when the Food and Drug Administration removed the prescription requirement due to its safety record. This requirement was reinstated in 1969, after observation of an increase in recreational use. Other alkyl nitrites were outlawed in the U.S. by Congress through the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. The law includes an exception for commercial purposes. The term \"commercial purpose\" is defined to mean any use other than for the production of consumer products containing volatile alkyl nitrites meant for inhaling or otherwise introducing volatile alkyl nitrites into the human body for euphoric or physical effects. The law came into effect in 1990. Visits to retail outlets selling these products reveal that some manufacturers have since reformulated their products to abide by the regulations, through the use of the legal cyclohexyl nitrite as the primary ingredient in their products, which are sold as video head cleaners, polish removers, or room odorants.\nGases.\nNitrous oxide.\nNitrous oxide can be categorized as a dissociative drug, as it can cause visual and auditory hallucinations. Anesthetic gases used for surgery, such as nitrous oxide or enflurane, are believed to induce anesthesia primarily by acting as NMDA receptor antagonists, open-channel blockers that bind to the inside of the calcium channels on the outer surface of the neuron, and provide high levels of NMDA receptor blockade for a short period of time.\nThis makes inhaled anesthetic gases different from other NMDA antagonists, such as ketamine, which bind to a regulatory site on the NMDA-sensitive calcium transporter complex and provide slightly lower levels of NMDA blockade, but for a longer and much more predictable duration. This makes a deeper level of anesthesia achievable more easily using anesthetic gases but can also make them more dangerous than other drugs used for this purpose.\nNitrous oxide is thought to be particularly non-toxic, though heavy long-term use can lead to a variety of serious health problems linked to the destruction of vitamin B12 and folic acid.\nIn the United States, possession of nitrous oxide is legal under federal law and is not subject to DEA purview. It is, however, regulated by the Food and Drug Administration under the Food Drug and Cosmetics Act; prosecution is possible under its \"misbranding\" clauses, prohibiting the sale or distribution of nitrous oxide for the purpose of human consumption as a recreational drug. Many states have laws regulating the possession, sale, and distribution of nitrous oxide. Such laws usually ban distribution to minors or limit the amount of nitrous oxide that may be sold without a special license. For example, in the state of California, possession for recreational use is prohibited and qualifies as a misdemeanor. In New Zealand, the Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine, and its sale or possession without a prescription is an offense under the Medicines Act. This statement would seemingly prohibit all non-medicinal uses of the chemical, though it is implied that only recreational use will be legally targeted. In India, for general anesthesia purposes, nitrous oxide is available as Nitrous Oxide IP. India's gas cylinder rules (1985) prohibit the transfer of gas from one cylinder to another for breathing purposes. Because India's Food &amp; Drug Authority (FDA-India) rules state that transferring a drug from one container to another (refilling) is equivalent to manufacturing, anyone found doing so must possess a drug manufacturing license.\nSafety.\nIn contrast, a few inhalants like amyl nitrite and diethyl ether have medical applications and are not toxic in the same sense as solvents, though they can still be dangerous when used recreationally.\nNon-medical inhalants.\nEthanol (the alcohol which is normally drunk) is sometimes inhaled.\nThe ethanol must be converted from liquid into gaseous state (vapor) or aerosol (mist), in some cases using a nebulizer, a machine that agitates the liquid into an aerosol. The sale of nebulizers for inhaling ethanol was banned in some US states due to safety concerns.\nToxic inhalants.\nMost inhalant drugs that are used non-medically are ingredients in household or industrial chemical products that are not intended to be concentrated and inhaled.\nSolvents.\nA wide range of volatile solvents intended for household or industrial use are inhaled as recreational drugs. This includes petroleum products (gasoline and kerosene), toluene (used in paint thinner, permanent markers, contact cement and model glue), and acetone (used in nail polish remover). These solvents vaporize at room temperature.\nUntil the early 1990s, the most common solvents that were used for the ink in permanent markers were toluene and xylene. These two substances are both harmful and characterized by a very strong smell. Today, the ink is usually made on the basis of alcohols (e.g. 1-Propanol, 1-butanol, diacetone alcohol and cresols).\nOrganochlorine solvents are particularly hazardous; many of these are now restricted in developed countries due to their environmental impact.\nLegality.\nEven though solvent glue is normally a legal product, there is a 1983 case where a court ruled that supplying glue to children is illegal. \"Khaliq v HM Advocate\" was a Scottish criminal case decided by the High Court of Justiciary on appeal, in which it was decided that it was an offense at common law to supply glue-sniffing materials that were otherwise legal in the knowledge that they would be used recreationally by children. Two shopkeepers in Glasgow were arrested and charged for supplying children with \"glue-sniffing kits\" consisting of a quantity of petroleum-based glue in a plastic bag. They argued there was nothing illegal about the items that they had supplied. On appeal, the High Court took the view that, even though glue and plastic bags might be perfectly legal, everyday items, the two shopkeepers knew perfectly well that the children were going to use the articles as inhalants and the charge on the indictment should stand. When the case came to trial at Glasgow High Court the two were sentenced to three years' imprisonment.\nAs of 2023, in England, Scotland, and Wales it is illegal to sell inhalants, including solvent glues, to persons of any age likely to use them as an intoxicant. As of 2017, thirty-seven US states impose criminal penalties on some combination of sale, possession or recreational use of various inhalants. In 15 of these states, such laws apply only to persons under the age of 18.\nGasoline.\nGasoline sniffing can cause lead poisoning, in locations where leaded gas is not banned.\nToluene.\nToluene can damage myelin.\nGases.\nA number of gases intended for household or industrial use are inhaled as recreational drugs. This includes chlorofluorocarbons used in aerosols and propellants (e.g., aerosol hair spray, aerosol deodorant). A gas used as a propellant in whipped cream aerosol containers, nitrous oxide, is used as a recreational drug. Pressurized canisters of propane and butane gas, both of which are intended for use as fuels, are used as inhalants.\nLegality.\n\"New Jersey... prohibits selling or offering to sell minors products containing chlorofluorocarbon that is used in refrigerant.\"\nDangers.\nStatistics on deaths caused by heavy inhalant use are difficult to determine. It may be severely under-reported because death is often attributed to a discrete event such as a stroke or a heart attack, even if the event happened because of inhalant use. Inhalant use was mentioned on 144 death certificates in Texas during the period 1988\u20131998 and was reported in 39 deaths in Virginia between 1987 and 1996 from acute voluntary exposure to used inhalants.\nChronic solvent-induced encephalopathy.\nChronic solvent-induced encephalopathy (CSE) is a condition induced by long-term exposure to organic solvents, often\u2014but not always\u2014in the workplace, that lead to a wide variety of persisting sensorimotor polyneuropathies and neurobehavioral deficits even after solvent exposure has been removed.\nSudden sniffing death syndrome.\nSudden sniffing death syndrome, first described by Millard Bass in 1970, is commonly known as SSDS.\nSolvents have many potential risks in common, including pneumonia, cardiac failure or arrest, and aspiration of vomit. The inhaling of some solvents can cause hearing loss, limb spasms, and damage to the central nervous system and brain. Serious but potentially reversible effects include liver and kidney damage and blood-oxygen depletion. Death from inhalants is generally caused by a very high concentration of fumes. Deliberately inhaling solvents from an attached paper or plastic bag or in a closed area greatly increases the chances of suffocation. Brain damage is typically seen with chronic long-term use as opposed to short-term exposure. Parkinsonism (see: Signs and symptoms of Parkinson's disease) has been associated with huffing.\nFemale inhalant users who are pregnant may have adverse effects on the fetus, and the baby may be smaller when it is born and may need additional health care (similar to those seen with alcohol \u2013 fetal alcohol syndrome). There is some evidence of birth defects and disabilities in babies born to women who sniffed solvents such as gasoline.\nIn the short term, death from solvent use occurs most commonly from aspiration of vomit while unconscious or from a combination of respiratory depression and hypoxia.\nInhaling butane gas can cause drowsiness, unconsciousness, asphyxia, and cardiac arrhythmia. Butane is the most commonly misused volatile solvent in the UK and caused 52% of solvent-related deaths in 2000. When butane is sprayed directly into the throat, the jet of fluid can cool rapidly to \u221220\u00a0\u00b0C by adiabatic expansion, causing prolonged laryngospasm.\nSome inhalants can also indirectly cause sudden death by cardiac arrest, in a syndrome known as \"sudden sniffing death\". The anaesthetic gases present in the inhalants appear to sensitize the user to adrenaline and, in this state, a sudden surge of adrenaline (e.g., from a frightening hallucination or run-in with aggressors), may cause fatal cardiac arrhythmia.\nFurthermore, the inhalation of any gas that is capable of displacing oxygen in the lungs (especially gases heavier than oxygen) carries the risk of hypoxia as a result of the very mechanism by which breathing is triggered. Since reflexive breathing is prompted by elevated carbon dioxide levels (rather than diminished blood oxygen levels), breathing a concentrated, relatively inert gas (such as computer-duster tetrafluoroethane, helium or nitrous oxide) that removes carbon dioxide from the blood without replacing it with oxygen will produce no outward signs of suffocation even when the brain is experiencing hypoxia. Once full symptoms of hypoxia appear, it may be too late to breathe without assistance, especially if the gas is heavy enough to lodge in the lungs for extended periods. Even completely inert gases, such as argon, can have this effect if oxygen is largely excluded.\nPatterns of use.\nInhalant drugs are often used by children, teenagers, incarcerated or institutionalized people, and impoverished people, because these solvents and gases are ingredients in hundreds of legally available, inexpensive products, such as deodorant sprays, hair spray, contact cement and aerosol air fresheners. However, most users tend to be \"... adolescents (between the ages of 12 and 17).\" In some countries, chronic, heavy inhalant use is concentrated in marginalized, impoverished communities. Young people who become used to heavy amounts of inhalants chronically are also more likely to be those who are isolated from their families and community. The article \"Epidemiology of Inhalant Abuse: An International Perspective\" notes that \"[t]he most serious form of obsession with inhalant use probably occurs in countries other than the United States where young children live on the streets completely without family ties. These groups almost always use inhalants at very high levels (Leal et al. 1978). This isolation can make it harder to keep in touch with the sniffer and encourage him or her to stop sniffing.\"\nThe article also states that \"... high [inhalant use] rates among barrio Hispanics almost undoubtedly are related to the poverty, lack of opportunity, and social dysfunction that occur in barrios\" and states that the \"... same general tendency appears for Native-American youth\" because \"... Indian reservations are among the most disadvantaged environments in the United States; there are high rates of unemployment, little opportunity, and high rates of alcoholism and other health problems.\" There are a wide range of social problems associated with inhalant use, such as feelings of distress, anxiety and grief for the community; violence and damage to property; violent crime; stresses on the juvenile justice system; and stresses on youth agencies and support services.\nAfrica and Asia.\nGlue and gasoline (petrol) sniffing is also a problem in parts of Africa, especially with street children. In India and South Asia, three of the most widely used inhalants are the Dendrite brand and other forms of contact adhesives and rubber cement manufactured in Kolkata, and toluenes in paint thinners. Genkem is a brand of glue, which had become the generic name for all the glues used by glue-sniffing children in Africa before the manufacturer replaced n-hexane in its ingredients in 2000.\nThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has reported that glue sniffing is at the core of \"street culture\" in Nairobi, Kenya, and that the majority of street children in the city are habitual solvent users. Research conducted by Cottrell-Boyce for the African Journal of Drug and Alcohol Studies found that glue sniffing amongst Kenyan street children was primarily functional \u2013 dulling the senses against the hardship of life on the street \u2013 but it also provided a link to the support structure of the \"street family\" as a potent symbol of shared experience.\nSimilar incidents of glue sniffing among destitute youth in the Philippines have also been reported, most commonly from groups of street children and teenagers collectively known as \"Rugby\" boys, which were named after a brand of toluene-laden contact cement. Other toluene-containing substances have also been used, most notably the Vulca Seal brand of roof sealants. Bostik Philippines, which currently owns the Rugby and Vulca Seal brands, has since responded to the issue by adding bitterants such as mustard oil to their Rugby line, as well as reformulating it by replacing toluene with xylene. Several other manufacturers have also followed suit.\nAnother very common inhalant is Erase-X, a correction fluid that contains toluene. It has become very common for school and college students to use it, because it is easily available in stationery shops in India. This fluid is also used by street and working children in Delhi.\nEurope and North America.\nIn the UK, marginalized youth use a number of inhalants, such as solvents and propellants. In Russia and Eastern Europe, gasoline sniffing became common on Russian ships following attempts to limit the supply of alcohol to ship crews in the 1980s. The documentary \"Children Underground\" depicts the huffing of a solvent called Aurolac (a product used in chroming) by Romanian homeless children. During the interwar period, the inhalation of ether (etheromania) was widespread in some regions of Poland, especially in Upper Silesia. Tens of thousands of people were affected by this problem.\nIn Canada, Native children in the isolated Northern Labrador community of Davis Inlet were the focus of national concern in 1993, when many were found to be sniffing gasoline. The Canadian and provincial Newfoundland and Labrador governments intervened on a number of occasions, sending many children away for treatment. Despite being moved to the new community of Natuashish in 2002, serious inhalant use problems have continued. Similar problems were reported in Sheshatshiu in 2000 and also in Pikangikum First Nation. In 2012, the issue once again made the news media in Canada. In Mexico, the inhaling of a mixture of gasoline and industrial solvents, known locally as \"Activo\" or \"Chemo\", has risen in popularity among the homeless and among the street children of Mexico City in the 21st century. The mixture is poured onto a handkerchief and inhaled while held in one's fist.\nIn the US, ether was used as a recreational drug during the 1930s Prohibition era, when alcohol was made illegal. Ether was either sniffed or drunk and, in some towns, replaced alcohol entirely. However, the risk of death from excessive sedation or overdose is greater than that with alcohol, and ether drinking is associated with damage to the stomach and gastrointestinal tract. Use of glue, paint and gasoline became more common after the 1950s. Model airplane glue-sniffing as problematic behavior among youth was first reported in 1959 and increased in the 1960s. Use of aerosol sprays became more common in the 1980s, as older propellants such as CFCs were phased out and replaced by more environmentally friendly compounds such as propane and butane. Most inhalant solvents and gases are not regulated under drug laws such as the United States Controlled Substances Act. However, many US states and Canadian cities have placed restrictions on the sale of some solvent-containing products to minors, particularly for products widely associated with sniffing, such as model cement. The practice of inhaling such substances is sometimes colloquially referred to as huffing, sniffing (or glue sniffing), dusting, or chroming.\nAustralia.\nAustralia has long faced a petrol (gasoline) sniffing problem in isolated and impoverished aboriginal communities. Although some sources argue that sniffing was introduced by United States servicemen stationed in the nation's Top End during World War II or through experimentation by 1940s-era Cobourg Peninsula sawmill workers, other sources claim that inhalant abuse (such as glue inhalation) emerged in Australia in the late 1960s. Chronic, heavy petrol sniffing appears to occur among remote, impoverished indigenous communities, where the ready accessibility of petrol has helped to make it a common addictive substance.\nIn Australia, petrol sniffing now occurs widely throughout remote Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory, Western Australia, northern parts of South Australia, and Queensland. The number of people sniffing petrol goes up and down over time as young people experiment or sniff occasionally. \"Boss\", or chronic, sniffers may move in and out of communities; they are often responsible for encouraging young people to take it up.\nA 1983 survey of 4,165 secondary students in New South Wales showed that solvents and aerosols ranked just after analgesics (e.g., codeine pills) and alcohol for drugs that were inappropriately used. This 1983 study did not find any common usage patterns or social class factors. The causes of death for inhalant users in Australia included pneumonia, cardiac failure/arrest, aspiration of vomit, and burns. In 1985, there were 14 communities in Central Australia reporting young people sniffing. In July 1997, it was estimated that there were around 200 young people sniffing petrol across 10 communities in Central Australia. Approximately 40 were classified as chronic sniffers. There have been reports of young Aboriginal people sniffing petrol in the urban areas around Darwin and Alice Springs.\nIn 2005, the Government of Australia and BP Australia began the usage of opal fuel in remote areas prone to petrol sniffing. Opal is a non-sniffable fuel (which is much less likely to cause a high) and has made a difference in some indigenous communities.\nAdministration and effects.\nInhalant users inhale vapors or aerosol propellant gases using plastic bags held over the mouth or by breathing from an open container of solvents, such as gasoline or paint thinner. Nitrous oxide gases from whipped cream aerosol cans, aerosol hairspray or non-stick frying spray are sprayed into plastic bags. Some nitrous oxide users spray the gas into balloons. When inhaling non-stick cooking spray or other aerosol products, some users may filter the aerosolized particles out with a rag. Some gases, such as propane and butane gases, are inhaled directly from the canister. Once these solvents or gases are inhaled, the extensive capillary surface of the lungs rapidly absorbs the solvent or gas, and blood levels peak rapidly. The intoxication effects occur so quickly that the effects of inhalation can resemble the intensity of effects produced by intravenous injection of other psychoactive drugs.\nEthanol is also inhaled, either by vaporizing it by pouring it over dry ice in a narrow container and inhaling with a straw or by pouring alcohol in a corked bottle with a pipe, and then using a bicycle pump to make a spray. Alcohol can be vaporized using a simple container and open-flame heater. Medical devices such as asthma nebulizers and inhalers were also reported as a means of application. The practice gained popularity in 2004, with the marketing of the device dubbed AWOL (Alcohol without liquid), a play on the military term AWOL (Absent Without Leave). AWOL, created by British businessman Dominic Simler, was first introduced in Asia and Europe, and then in the United States in August 2004. AWOL was used by nightclubs, at gatherings and parties, and it garnered attraction as a novelty, as people 'enjoyed passing it around in a group'. AWOL uses a nebulizer, a machine that agitates the liquid into an aerosol. AWOL's official website states that \"AWOL and AWOL 1 are powered by \"Electrical Air Compressors\" while AWOL 2 and AWOL 3 are powered by \"electrical oxygen generators\"\", which refer to a couple of mechanisms used by the nebulizer drug delivery device for inhalation. Although the AWOL machine is marketed as having no downsides, such as the lack of calories or hangovers, Amanda Shaffer of \"Slate\" describes these claims as \"dubious at best\". Although inhaled alcohol does reduce the caloric content, the savings are minimal. After expressed safety and health concerns, sale or use of AWOL machines was banned in a number of American states.\nThe effects of solvent intoxication can vary widely depending on the dose and what type of solvent or gas is inhaled. A person who has inhaled a small amount of rubber cement or paint thinner vapor may be impaired in a manner resembling alcohol inebriation. A person who has inhaled a larger quantity of solvents or gases, or a stronger chemical, may experience stronger effects such as distortion in perceptions of time and space, hallucinations, and emotional disturbances. The effects of inhalant use are also modified by the combined use of inhalants and alcohol or other drugs.\nIn the short term, many users experience headaches, nausea and vomiting, slurred speech, loss of motor coordination, and wheezing. A characteristic \"glue sniffer's rash\" around the nose and mouth is sometimes seen after prolonged use. An odor of paint or solvents on clothes, skin, and breath is sometimes a sign of inhalant abuse, and paint or solvent residues can sometimes emerge in sweat.\nAccording to NIH, even a single session of inhalant use \"can disrupt heart rhythms and lower oxygen levels\", which can lead to death. \"Regular abuse can result in serious harm to the brain, heart, kidneys, and liver.\"\nGeneral risks.\nMany inhalants are volatile organic chemicals and can catch fire or explode, especially when combined with smoking. As with many other drugs, users may also injure themselves due to loss of coordination or impaired judgment, especially if they attempt to operate machinery.\nHypoxia.\nAll commonly abused inhalants act as asphyxiant gases, although a common myth is that their primary effects are only due to oxygen deprivation. In reality, the majority of abused inhalants still exhibit psychoactive effects, although oxygen deprivation does add to the notable effects.\nRegardless of which inhalant is used, inhaling vapors or gases can lead to injury or death. One major risk is hypoxia (lack of oxygen), which can occur due to inhaling fumes from a plastic bag, or from using proper inhalation mask equipment (e.g., a medical mask for nitrous oxide) but not adding oxygen or room air.\nFrostbite.\nAnother danger is freezing the throat. When a gas that was stored under high pressure is released, it cools abruptly and can cause frostbite if it is inhaled directly from the container. This can occur, for example, with inhaling nitrous oxide. When nitrous oxide is used as an automotive power adder, its cooling effect is used to make the fuel-air charge denser. In a person, this effect is potentially lethal.\nThe second cause being especially a risk with heavier-than-air vapors such as butane or gasoline vapor. Deaths typically occur from complications related to excessive sedation and vomiting. Actual overdose from the drug does occur, however, and inhaled solvent use is statistically more likely to result in life-threatening respiratory depression than intravenous use of opioids such as heroin. Most deaths from solvent use could be prevented if individuals were resuscitated quickly when they stopped breathing and their airways cleared if they vomited. However, most inhalant use takes place when people inhale solvents by themselves or in groups of people who are intoxicated. Certain solvents are more hazardous than others, such as gasoline.\nAerosol burn.\nUse of butane, propane, nitrous oxide and other inhalants can create a risk of freezing burns from contact with the extremely cold liquid. The risk of such contact is greatly increased by the impaired judgement and motor coordination brought on by inhalant intoxication.\nExcess NMDA antagonism.\nToxicity may also result from the pharmacological properties of the drug; excess NMDA antagonism can completely block calcium influx into neurons and provoke cell death through apoptosis, although this is more likely to be a long-term result of chronic solvent use than a consequence of short-term use.\nInhalant-related disorders.\nInhalant-related disorders are a group of mental health conditions associated with the misuse of volatile substances. These disorders are recognised in both the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-11), though there are notable differences between the two classification systems.\nThe DSM-5 identifies four primary types of inhalant-related disorders: inhalant intoxication, inhalant use disorder, inhalant-induced disorders, and unspecified inhalant-related disorder.\nThe ICD-11 includes a diagnosis for inhalant withdrawal, which is not covered in the DSM-5.\nIn popular culture.\nMusic and musical culture.\nOne of the early musical references to inhalant use occurs in the 1974 Elton John song \"The Bitch Is Back\", in the line \"I get high in the evening sniffing pots of glue.\" Inhalant use, especially glue-sniffing, is widely associated with the late-1970s punk youth subculture in the UK and North America. Raymond Cochrane and Douglas Carroll claim that when glue sniffing became widespread in the late 1970s, it was \"adopted by punks because public [negative] perceptions of sniffing fitted in with their self-image\" as rebels against societal values. While punks at first used inhalants \"experimentally and as a cheap high, adult disgust and hostility [to the practice] encouraged punks to use glue sniffing as a way of shocking society.\" As well, using inhalants was a way of expressing their anti-corporatist DIY (do it yourself) credo; by using inexpensive household products as inhalants, punks did not have to purchase industrially manufactured liquor or beer.\nOne history of the punk subculture argues that \"substance abuse was often referred to in the music and did become synonymous with the genre, glue-sniffing especially\" because the youths' \"faith in the future had died and that the youth just didn't care anymore\" due to the \"awareness of the threat of nuclear war and a pervasive sense of doom.\" In a BBC interview with a person who was a punk in the late 1970s, they said that \"there was a real fear of imminent nuclear war\u2014people were sniffing glue knowing that it could kill them, but they didn't care because they believed that very soon everybody would be dead anyway.\"\nA number of 1970s punk rock and 1980s hardcore punk songs refer to inhalant use. The Ramones, an influential early US punk band, referred to inhalant use in several of their songs. The song \"Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue\" describes adolescent boredom, and the song \"Carbona not Glue\" states, \"My brain is stuck from shooting glue.\" An influential punk fanzine about the subculture and music took its name (\"Sniffin' Glue\") from the Ramones song. The 1980s punk band The Dead Milkmen wrote a song, \"Life is Shit\" from their album \"Beelzebubba\", about two friends hallucinating after sniffing glue. Punk-band-turned-hip-hop group the Beastie Boys penned a song \"Hold it Now \u2013 Hit It\", which includes the line \"cause I'm beer drinkin, breath stinkin, sniffing glue.\" Their song \"Shake Your Rump\" includes the lines, \"Should I have another sip no skip it/In the back of the ride and bust with the whippits\". Pop punk band Sum 41 wrote a song, \"Fat Lip\", which refers to a character who does not \"make sense from all the gas you be huffing...\" The song \"Lan\u00e7a-Perfume\", written and performed by Brazilian pop star Rita Lee, became a national hit in 1980. The song is about chloroethane and its widespread recreational sale and use during the rise of Brazil's carnivals.\nInhalants are referred to by bands from other genres, including several grunge bands\u2014an early 1990s genre that was influenced by punk rock. The 1990s grunge band Nirvana, which was influenced by punk music, penned a song, \"Dumb\", in which Kurt Cobain sings \"my heart is broke / But I have some glue / help me inhale / And mend it with you\". L7, an all-female grunge band, penned a song titled \"Scrap\" about a skinhead who inhales spray-paint fumes until his mind \"starts to gel\". Also in the 1990s, the Britpop band Suede had a UK hit with their song \"Animal Nitrate\" whose title is a thinly veiled reference to amyl nitrite. The Beck song \"Fume\" from his \"Fresh Meat and Old Slabs\" release is about inhaling nitrous oxide. Another Beck song, \"Cold Ass Fashion\", contains the line \"O.G. \u2013 Original Gluesniffer!\" Primus's 1999 song \"Lacquer Head\" is about adolescents who use inhalants to get high. Hip hop performer Eminem wrote a song, \"Bad Meets Evil\", which refers to breathing \"... ether in three lethal amounts.\" The Brian Jonestown Massacre, a retro-rock band from the 1990s, has a song, \"Hyperventilation\", which is about sniffing model-airplane cement. Frank Zappa's song \"Teenage Wind\" from 1981 has a reference to glue sniffing: \"Nothing left to do but get out the 'ol glue; Parents, parents; Sniff it good now...\"\nFilms.\nA number of films have depicted or referred to the use of solvent inhalants. In the 1968 film \"How Sweet It Is!\", Grif Henderson (James Garner), refers to him and his young son once making model aeroplanes together, but says, \"...now all he wants to do is sniff the glue\". The 1980 comedy film \"Airplane!\", the character of McCroskey (Lloyd Bridges) refers to his inhalant use when he states, \"I picked the wrong week to quit sniffing glue.\" In the 1996 film \"Citizen Ruth\", the character Ruth (Laura Dern), a homeless drifter, is depicted inhaling patio sealant from a paper bag in an alleyway. In the tragicomedy \"Love Liza\", the main character, played by Philip Seymour Hoffman, plays a man who takes up building remote-controlled airplanes as a hobby to give him an excuse to sniff the fuel in the wake of his wife's suicide.\nHarmony Korine's 1997 \"Gummo\" depicts adolescent boys inhaling contact cement for a high. Edet Belzberg's 2001 documentary \"Children Underground\" chronicles the lives of Romanian street children addicted to inhaling paint. In \"The Basketball Diaries\", a group of boys is huffing Carbona cleaning liquid at 3 minutes and 27 seconds into the movie; further on, a boy is reading a diary describing the experience of sniffing the cleaning liquid.\nIn the David Lynch film \"Blue Velvet\", the bizarre and manipulative character played by Dennis Hopper uses a mask to inhale amyl nitrite. In \"Little Shop of Horrors\", Steve Martin's character dies from nitrous oxide inhalation. The 1999 independent film \"Boys Don't Cry\" depicts two young low-income women inhaling aerosol computer cleaner (compressed gas) for a buzz. In \"The Cider House Rules\", Michael Caine's character is addicted to inhaling ether vapors.\nIn \"Thirteen\", the main character, a teen, uses a can of aerosol computer cleaner to get high. In the action movie \"Shooter\", an ex-serviceman on the run from the law (Mark Wahlberg) inhales nitrous oxide gas from a number of Whip-It! whipped cream canisters until he becomes unconscious. The South African film \"The Wooden Camera\" also depicts the use of inhalants by one of the main characters, a homeless teen, and their use in terms of socio-economic stratification. The title characters in \"Samson and Delilah\" sniff petrol; in Samson's case, possibly causing brain damage.\nIn the 2004 film \"Taxi\", Queen Latifah and Jimmy Fallon are trapped in a room with a burst tank containing nitrous oxide. Queen Latifah's character curses at Fallon while they both laugh hysterically. Fallon's character asks if it is possible to die from nitrous oxide, to which Queen Latifah's character responds with \"It's laughing gas, stupid!\" Neither of them had any side effects other than their voices becoming much deeper while in the room.\nIn the French horror film \"Them\" (2006), a French couple living in Romania are pursued by a gang of street children who break into their home at night. Olivia Bonamy's character is later tortured and forced to inhale aurolac from a silver-colored bag. During a flashback scene in the 2001 film \"Hannibal\", Hannibal Lecter gets Mason Verger high on amyl nitrite poppers, then convinces Verger to cut off his own face and feed it to his dogs.\nBooks.\nThe science fiction story \"Waterspider\" by Philip K. Dick (first published in January 1964 in \"If\" magazine) contains a scene in which characters from the future are discussing the culture of the early 1950s. One character says: \"You mean he sniffed what they called 'airplane dope'? He was a 'glue-sniffer'?\", to which another character replies: \"Hardly. That was a mania among adolescents and did not become widespread in fact until a decade later. No, I am speaking about imbibing alcohol.\"\nThe book \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" describes how the two main characters inhale diethyl ether and amyl nitrite.\nTelevision.\nIn the comedy series \"Newman and Baddiel in Pieces\", Rob Newman's inhaling gas from a foghorn was a running joke in the series. One episode of the \"Jeremy Kyle Show\" featured a woman with a 20-year butane gas addiction. In the series \"It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia\", Charlie Kelly has an addiction to huffing glue. Additionally, season nine episode 8 shows Dennis, Mac, and Dee getting a can of gasoline to use as a solvent, but instead end up taking turns huffing from the canister.\nA 2008 episode of the reality show \"Intervention\" (season 5, episode 9) featured Allison, who was addicted to huffing computer duster for the short-lived, psychoactive effects. Allison has since achieved a small but significant cult following among bloggers and YouTube users. Several remixes of scenes from Allison's episode can be found online. Since 2009, Allison has worked with drug and alcohol treatment centers in Los Angeles County. In the seventh episode of the fourteenth season of \"South Park\", Towelie, an anthropomorphic towel, develops an addiction to inhaling computer duster. In the show \"Squidbillies\", the main character Early Cuyler is often seen inhaling gas or other substances.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15503", "revid": "9056972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15503", "title": "Incubus film", "text": ""}
{"id": "15505", "revid": "50792668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15505", "title": "Iceman (Marvel Comics)", "text": "Fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics\nIceman (Robert Louis \"Bobby\" Drake) is a superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics and is a founding member of the X-Men. Created by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in \"The X-Men\" #1 (Sept. 1963). Iceman is a mutant born with superhuman abilities. He has the ability to manipulate ice and cold by freezing water vapor around him. This allows him to freeze objects, as well as cover his body with ice.\nIceman has a relatively high profile among \"X-Men\" characters due to being frequently adapted into X-Men and Spider-Man-related media, including video games, animated series, and films. The character later received widespread media attention when a storyline retroactively revealed the original version of the character was a closeted gay man, in \"All-New X-Men\" #40 (April 2015), leading to his coming out.\nFollowing the publication of this storyline, Iceman has been described as one of the most notable and powerful gay characters in comic books.\nFrom 2000 to 2014, Shawn Ashmore portrayed Iceman in the 20th Century Fox \"X-Men\" films and voiced the character in \"The Super Hero Squad Show\".\nPublication history.\nCreated by writer Stan Lee and artist/co-writer Jack Kirby, the character first appeared in \"X-Men\" #1 (September 1963). Lee later admitted that Iceman was created essentially as a copy of the Human Torch, only using the opposite element for his power.\nIceman was featured in two self-titled limited comic book miniseries, one in 1984\u201385 written by J. M. DeMatteis and another in the 2000s by Andy Lanning and Dan Abnett, with art by Karl Kerschl. DeMatteis said of the first series, \"It was my idea, so there was no one to blame but myself. I'll just say that it was a mistake and if the series made any sense whatsoever it was due to [editor] Bob Budiansky. That was a case where the editor's input was really needed\u2014and Bob was a big help.\"\nA mainstay in most X-Men titles, Iceman has been a main character in both \"Uncanny X-Men\" and the second volume of \"X-Men\" and was also featured in \"The Champions\" from 1975 to 1978 and \"The New Defenders\" from 1983 to 1986 as a member. He was a main character in the first volume of \"X-Factor\", and a star in flashback stories when he was a teenager in \"X-Men: The Hidden Years\" and \"X-Men: First Class\".\nIn April 2015, in issue 40 of \"All-New X-Men\", a time-displaced version of the teenaged Iceman was revealed as gay by his teammate, Jean Grey, who discerned this with her telepathic ability. This raised questions, because the character's adult, present-day counterpart had previously been portrayed dating women. In \"Uncanny X-Men\" #600, which was published in November that year, the young Iceman confronts his older self, who confirms that he is gay as well but repressed his true self, not wanting to be both gay and a mutant. In 2017, Iceman received his first ongoing solo series, which focused on the adult Bobby Drake coming to terms with life as an out gay man, his status as an Omega-level mutant, his legacy as a hero and fighting some of the biggest villains in the Marvel Universe. The book had been cancelled, with its last issue being in early 2018. However, Marvel later reversed the decision and announced that a new book written by original writer Sina Grace as a part of their Fresh Start initiative and was released in 2019.\nFictional character biography.\nEarly life.\nRobert Louis \"Bobby\" Drake was born in Floral Park, Long Island, New York, to William Robert Drake and Madeline Beatrice Bass-Drake. His parents are Irish Catholics. His mother was also stated to be Jewish. Bobby's powers first manifested when he was on a date with Judy Harmon, and a local bully by the name of Rocky Beasely tried to take Judy away for himself. Knowing Judy could not put up a good fight, Bobby pointed his hand at Beasely and encased him in a block of ice. Later, the local townspeople, having heard of the incident, came looking for him in the form of an angry mob. The local sheriff had no choice but to put Bobby in jail for his own \"protection\". While Bobby sat in his cell at the sheriff station, the outer wall was blown open, and a young man named Scott Summers walked in and offered to take Bobby with him. After Bobby turned him down, the two mutants got into a short battle, which was soon ended by the arrival of Professor Charles Xavier.\nOriginal X-Men.\nAfter Xavier spoke with Bobby and his parents, Bobby's parents suggested that he go with Professor Xavier to his \"school for gifted youngsters\". Bobby took the suggestion and left with Professor Xavier and Cyclops to become the second member of the X-Men. He is later joined by Henry \"Hank\" McCoy, Jean Grey, and Warren Worthington III as the founding members of the X-Men. Drake remains self-conscious regarding the fact that he is the youngest member of the group. Appearing in his original snow covered form, he first battles Magneto along with the rest of the team, and later the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants. Bobby Drake's first girlfriend is Zelda. Not long after, he takes on a new ice-covered form. He then teams up with the Human Torch for the first time. The two would become close friends as time went on. With the X-Men, he visits the Savage Land and meets Ka-Zar for the first time. He then battles the Juggernaut, and is badly injured in his first battle against the Sentinels. He next battles Magneto by himself. Later, he visits Subterranea for the first time. Then, he and Beast battle the Maha Yogi. During his original stint with the X-Men, Drake pursues a relationship with Lorna Dane, although the relationship does not last. Iceman is among the original X-Men captured by Krakoa, leading to a new incarnation of X-Men of which he is not a member. With most of the original team, he quits the X-Men.\nChampions and Defenders.\nIceman moves to the American west coast to attend UCLA and becomes a founding member of The Champions of Los Angeles. However, the Champions soon dissolve.\nIceman is then abducted by Master Mold, and alongside Angel, he encounters the Hulk. Iceman next aids the Thing in battling the Circus of Crime. Drake retires from life as a superhero to earn a college degree in accounting \u2013 but apparently at a college on the east coast, not UCLA. While in college, he briefly rejoins the X-Men to rescue the captives of Arcade's henchman, Miss Locke.\nIceman is reunited with Beast, encounters Cloud, and then returns as a full-time superhero in an incarnation of the Defenders alongside his former teammates, Angel and Beast. He also battles Professor Power's Secret Empire while with the Defenders. After the Defenders disband, Drake embarks on his career as an accountant.\nSome time later, Iceman encounters Mirage, the \"daughter\" of Oblivion. Iceman journeys back in time and meets his parents before he was born, and battles Oblivion and Mirage. He then reconciles with his parents.\nX-Factor.\nThe original X-Men, including Iceman, reunite to form the superhero team X-Factor. With this new team, he encounters Apocalypse for the first time.\nDuring his time with the team, Loki captures Bobby, hoping to use him to gain control over the Frost Giants. Loki enhances Bobby's powers and then extracts them to restore the size of the Frost Giants. Iceman is rescued by Thor. Loki's tampering increases Bobby's powers to such an extent that he begins to lose control of his abilities. During a later battle with the Right, he is fitted with a power-dampening belt which actually helps him control his abilities. Once able only to sheathe his own body in a protective coating of ice, Bobby finds he can encase the entirety of the Empire State Building. With time, Bobby gains sufficient control over his augmented powers and is able to stop using the inhibitor belt. Believing he has achieved his full potential, Bobby does not attempt to develop his abilities further.\nWith X-Factor, Bobby then defeats Apocalypse's Horsemen. Iceman helps watch over many of the younger superheroes, something he once was. Most notably, he and Beast help Boom Boom gain a more normal life. For a brief while, he also helps supervise the New Mutants and their sister team, the X-Terminators. They, in turn, save him from the deadly kiss of Infectia.\nBobby also develops a romantic relationship with Opal Tanaka. After a session of ice sledding, she discovers threatening mail in her mailbox, a precursor to harassment by her cybernetically enhanced relatives of the Tatsu Clan of the Yakuza, which Bobby helps her out with.\nAfter the \"Muir Island Saga\", Iceman rejoins the X-Men along with the rest of X-Factor.\nSecond mutation.\nUpon encountering Azazel and his followers, Iceman's body is shattered from the neck down. Afterward, he regains his entire ice form, but cannot change back to his human appearance. As a result, Bobby becomes both bitter and despondent because of this drastic change.\nRogue's Team.\nIceman joins Rogue's team after she tells him that she wants him as a member. Their first mission as a team is to fight a new threat, a powerful group known as the Children of the Vault. The team is successful and during this time, Bobby learns that he can be completely destroyed but then pull himself back together again. It was shown several times during the arc.\nThe next mission for the team was to locate a man called Pandemic and defeat him. The team was again successful, but Rogue was infected with a virus called Strain 88. Cable took the team, including Bobby, to his island so Rogue could get treatment.\nWhile on Cable's island, the team and Iceman began working to defeat the Shi'ar weapon known as the Hecatomb. During the chaos, he shared a passionate kiss with Mystique. Even as he did so, he saved many lives by containing the explosion of the Conquistador, and, later, the Hecatomb itself.\nBlinded by the Light.\nAs the team recovers from Hecatomb attack in Rogue's childhood home, it appears that Mystique and Iceman begin a romantic relationship. This was a front, as Mystique was using Iceman and the X-Men as a Marauder spy for Mister Sinister. Marauders soon infiltrated the house; they attempt to gain access to Destiny's Diaries on the order of Mr. Sinister (who has been gathering information about the future from anybody and anything that could foretell the future). Bobby and Cannonball escape from the Marauders in the X-Jet, with help from Emma Frost. They are pursued by Sunfire; they manage to get the better of him and take him prisoner, but not before he manages to cripple the jet. While Sunfire is unconscious, Iceman and Sam discuss the Mauraders' plan to eliminate all precognitive mutants and anyone with knowledge of the future as well as retrieving Destiny's Diaries before the Marauders can. During this time, Bobby displayed sub-atomic control of energy transfers when he prevented Sunfire from using his fire-based powers.\nCannonball and Bobby, telepathically prompted by Emma Frost, attempt to recover the diaries which are hidden in a dilapidated brewery. Mr. Sinister uses the reverse-engineered version of Xavier's Cerebro to track the pair of X-Men to the brewery. The Marauders attack Cannonball and Iceman and overtake them. Bobby, while in his ice form, suffers a gunshot wound from Mystique, which severs one of his arms above the elbow. Mister Sinister, who takes Cannonball prisoner, attempts to telepathically erase his mind so that the X-Men will find him as an empty shell. Iceman attacks Sinister, distracting him, which allows both of the X-Men to escape.\nMessiah Complex.\nThe New X-Men team decided to raid the headquarters of the Purifiers in Washington, D.C., but were forced to retreat. Pixie teleported them back to the mansion in a rush, but the entire team was scattered between D.C. and Westchester. Iceman, after recovering from his injuries, volunteered to go look for them and was given telepathic directions by Emma Frost.\nIceman was successful in finding the New X-Men, most of them injured. On the way back, they found that the O*N*E* Sentinels guarding the Xavier Institute had become infected by nano-Sentinels and attacked the school. Iceman and New X-Man X-23 helped out in the battle with the O*N*E* Sentinels. With the help of Dust and X-23, the X-Men were able to survive this battle but the nano-Sentinel infected human escaped.\nSoon, Iceman participated in the final battle against the Marauders, the Acolytes, and Predator X. He was one of the X-Men who came running in to fight Predator X after it swallowed Wolverine whole. However, he also witnesses his mentor, Professor Xavier, \"killed\" by Bishop's bullet, which was not meant for him.\nDivided We Stand.\nIceman arrives in San Francisco, where he was set to meet Hepzibah, Warpath, and Angel. All four are caught in the effects of a citywide illusion created by Martinique Jason, who used her powers to transform the city into a hippie paradise. Now calling himself \"Frosty\", he and the others are sent by Martinique to confront Scott Summers and Emma Frost. Emma Frost is able to break up the illusion and free everyone. They eventually set up their base of operations in San Francisco as X-Men.\nSecret Invasion and Utopia.\nIceman is one of the X-Men that assists in fighting the Skrull invasion in San Francisco.\nIceman rescues Colossus from Venom and is later made a part of a team to battle Emma Frost's Dark X-Men. During the final battle on Utopia, Iceman teams up with the X-Students to take on Mimic.\nSecond Coming.\nDuring the battle with Bastion's Nimrod Sentinels, Iceman is severely injured following an attack from one of them that reversed his ice form and left him with burns on his body. He is only there for a short time because his mutant powers help him minimize the injuries he suffered and he is seen back in battle alongside Psylocke and the other X-Men.\nPost Schism.\nEarly solicitations show that after Wolverine and Cyclops have a major falling out, Wolverine decides to branch off and open \"The Jean Grey School for Higher Learning\" back in New York. Iceman is the first person Wolverine approaches and recruits to his new X-Men squad as both a professor and teammate. Iceman is chosen because Wolverine feels he has the kind of spirit the new school needs. He also has an off-and-on romantic relationship with Kitty Pryde.\nExtraordinary X-Men.\nWhen the Terrigen became toxic for mutants, Iceman was one of the recruits in Storm's new team dedicated to protecting mutants from the Terrigen by leading them to X-haven. Iceman mostly works alongside Nightcrawler, helping him search for Colossus after he is transformed into one of Apocalypse's new horsemen. Iceman and Nightcrawler manage to track Colossus to Egypt, where he ambushes them and almost kills them until another squad of X-Men comes in to help. After that Iceman joins the X-Men when they declare war against the Inhumans after discovering that in a matter of weeks the Terrigen will render earth as completely uninhabitable for mutants.\nFantastic Four Returns.\nIceman is among the heroes summoned by Mister Fantastic - a group consisting of former substitute members of the Fantastic Four - to help the Future Foundation against the cosmic entity known as the Griever. However, the Human Torch objects to Iceman's presence during the battle, emphatically asserting that Iceman was \"never\" a member of the FF. Iceman states that he \"was\" made a member during an adventure involving Namor. The Torch simply counters with \"That didn't COUNT!\"\nAs recounted in \"Fantastic Four\" vol. 6 #24, Iceman's induction into the FF did not feature Namor, but occurred during the early days of the FF and the original X-Men. One morning years ago, the youthful Torch 'quit' the FF in an immature fit of pique. That same day, the sensitive teen-aged Iceman left the X-Men after being laughed at by his peers for his poor showing in a Danger Room exercise. Iceman encountered the remaining FF members and assisted them with a day-long series of crises, being casually admitted to the team as a result. When the Torch discovered that he had been replaced, he attacked Iceman during the FF's current battle and forcefully declared that Iceman was \"not\" an FF member. The Invisible Girl forced the pair to work together to help defeat the FF's final opponent of the day. Iceman was then telepathically summoned back to the X-Men by Professor X, who praised his student's performance. Mr. Fantastic told the departing Iceman that he could return to the FF whenever he wanted. The Torch was also 'readmitted', with a penance of a week's laundry detail.\nIn the present time, Iceman returns the teen-aged Franklin Richards to the FF's Yancy Street home/headquarters from Krakoa and is recognized by the building's security system as an FF member. This angers the Torch once again, and he declares that Iceman had \"never\" been a member of the team. The two men bicker over the issue until Iceman realizes that the Torch was never upset about Iceman replacing him on the \"team\", but believes that he was trying to take his place in the FF \"family\". The Torch finally admits that what bothered him most was that other substitute members\u2014who were also considered family by the FF\u2014were always brought in due to major events, and that if Iceman was the actual first substitute member, that meant the Torch had given up his place \"over nothing.\" The Torch ultimately drops the matter of Iceman's legitimacy and says that he was an official substitute FF member, and is also a part of the FF 'family'.\nSolo series.\nAfter being outed as gay by the time-displaced Jean Grey, the younger time-displaced Iceman confronts his older self, asking him why he has been presenting as straight for most of his adult life. The older Bobby breaks down and admits that he has known he was gay for a long time but forcibly repressed that part of himself, fearful of how others would react. He further acknowledges that he was scared to reveal his true self to the world due to already facing prejudice for being a mutant and not wanting to receive hatred for another part of himself. Following all of this, Bobby decides to take a break from the limelight and focus on himself, declining to join the new X-team formed by Kitty Pryde, instead acting as a reserve member and teaching classes at the Xavier School. After a training session with his younger self, Bobby sees the time-displaced Iceman head out for a date with his boyfriend Romeo while he tries to set up an online dating profile to meet guys. He receives a text from his mother stating that his father has had a heart attack so Bobby rushes to the hospital only to be chastises by his father for missing family events due to his commitments as a superhero. Following a brief battle in the hospital, Bobby's parents ask him to leave, angry that their mutant son is bringing yet more trouble into their lives. On a mission with Kitty to rescue a new mutant, she confronts Bobby about being gay, asking why he could not tell her himself, meaning she had to find out from a secondary source. She reassures him that she only wants to help him and lets him know she is there if he ever wants to talk but suggests he should come out to his parents. Bobby arranges dinner with his family but he is constantly subjected anti-mutant rhetoric from his parents. The dinner is interrupted by a gang of Purifiers but, although Iceman takes them down quickly and the lives of his parents, they are angry that their house has been destroyed because of him and send him away (although his mother promises to try and convince his father to visit him at the X-Mansion). When the mutant that he and Kitty rescues goes missing, Iceman tracks him to a nearby nightclub where he discovers that Daken is responsible for luring him away. Daken tries to flirt with Bobby to distract him but Iceman freezes him and attempts to convince the mutant to return to the Xavier School, though he refuses. Daken mocks Bobby, saying that he can smell his fear and insecurity. Upon returning, Kitty surprises Bobby by revealing that his parents have arrived for a visit. He tells them he is gay and they both react negatively, angry that their son is both a mutant and a gay man. They chastise him for letting everyone else find out before them and try to convince him that he is straight, due to having been with women in the past. The family argument is interrupted by Juggernaut, who attacks the school looking for the young X-Men. Iceman defeats him by pushing his powers and returns to the mansion to find his father is still there. He had obtained Bobby's draft of a coming out letter from Kitty and the two men begin to reconcile.\nBobby reconnects with his former Champions teammates, Angel, Hercules, Ghost Rider and Darkstar, so they reminisce about their time with Black Widow. Bobby runs into a guy, Judah, while out shopping and he agrees to meet him that night at a local gay bar, with the rest of the Champions acting as his wingmen. The date appears to be going well but is interrupted by an attack by some Sentinels. Bobby's relationship with Judah continues to develop and he decides to move to L.A. to be closer to him. While fighting Pyro with his younger self, Bobby explains that his mother has finally made contact with him for the first time since he came out and that she wants to invite both of them to dinner. Time-displaced Iceman agrees on the condition that Bobby tries to talk sense into Romeo, who hasn't called him in weeks. Meanwhile, Daken begins training his new mutant prot\u00e9g\u00e9e for a secret mission. When both the younger Bobby and the older Bobby arrive at the restaurant, their parents see the younger Bobby as a chance to raise a new son in a way that suits them but the time-displaced Iceman refuses, saying that he is still gay and wants to live life on his own terms before they both storm out. During Bobby's moving away party at the X-Mansion, Daken uses the Purifiers to distract the other X-Men while he and his apprentice infiltrate the school and ambush Bobby. The young mutant uses his levelled-up powers to increase Daken's strength by turning him into Apocalypse's horseman Death and he mortally wounds Judah with his claws before engaging Iceman in combat. Bobby manages to defeat Daken with a kiss which freezes Death's powers but Daken escapes and Judah breaks up with Bobby because his life is too much for him to deal with.\nAfter teaming with Bishop to help the Morlocks who came under threat by Mister Sinister, Bobby finds himself approached by Emma Frost who asks him for his help. Ignoring Kitty's protests, he agrees and Emma explains that her father, who subjected her brother Christian to conversion therapy before having him institutionalized, has recently let him out and reinstalled him as the new heir to the Frost business empire. When they arrive, they discover that Christian has murdered their father and is exhibiting his own powers. Bobby and Emma help to free Christian from his mental breakdown and Emma decides to stay with him. Joining with his friends Spider-Man and Firestar, Bobby discovers that Sinister was behind the attack on the Morlocks and confronts him in his safehouse. Sinister, intent on trying to unlock the secrets of Iceman's DNA by dissecting him, sends forth an army of experimental ice creatures but Bobby's Omega Level powers absorb them all into him and he fires Mister Sinister into space. Celebrating his birthday, Bobby is confronted by Ice Wizard, a future version of himself from an alternate timeline. Ice Wizard warns Bobby that he must quit the X-Men and stop using his powers to avoid a world-destroying series of events happening. He explains that Daken seduces him and manipulates him into sacrificing the other X-Men before betraying him and gaining Thanos-level powers. Bobby is adamant that this won't happen and the two engage in battle. Jean Grey arrives and Bobby finally confronts her for the actions of her younger self when she outed him. Bobby explains to Ice Wizard that he is going to live life on his terms and that nobody, not even his future self, is going to decide for him. Bobby returns to his birthday celebration where Christian arrives and hands him a large sum of money which Bobby gives to the Morlocks. A content Bobby messages Judah, asking if he would like to meet up as friends.\nHellfire Gala and The Astonishing Iceman.\nBobby was one of the first casualties of the third annual Hellfire Gala, in which he did battle with Nimrod. He had gained the upper hand in the fight at first, only to be injected with cellular napalm that literally melted him into nothing before the horrified eyes of Kitty Pryde and Romeo. But sometime later, it was shown that Romeo had used his Inhuman powers and his emotional connection to Bobby to re-integrate him and restore him to life. However, his physical and mental cohesion is reliant on his proximity to Romeo.\nPowers and abilities.\nIceman possesses the power to instantly decrease the temperature of ambient water vapor in his immediate environment to below zero degrees Celsius, thereby freezing it into ice. He is able to make ice that will not break unless he wills it to. In this manner he is able to quickly form a great variety of ice structures, including projectiles, shields, ladders, baseball bats, etc. Iceman often makes ice slides which form rapidly beneath and behind his feet, moving him along the slick surface at high speeds. He is also able to form exceedingly complicated structures within relative short time, such as miniature cities. Originally, Iceman's own body temperature would lower dramatically when his powers were active, reaching within a few tenths of a second (now his body usually converts to organic ice; see below). Iceman is immune to sub-zero temperatures; he is also able to perceive the thermal energy level of objects around him. Because cold is the absence of heat, Iceman does not actually 'emanate' cold; rather, he decreases thermal energy. As mentioned by writer Mike Carey, Iceman is \"an Omega-level mutant\u00a0... [and] has powers that can influence the ecosystem of the entire world.\" Iceman has yet to tap into his full mutant potential, but over the years he has taken more interest in developing his abilities.\nIn his early appearances, Iceman generally covered his body in a thick layer of what appeared to be snow; hence he looked more like a traditional snowman than an ice-man. Upon further training in the use of his powers, he was able to fashion an armor of solid ice around his body when using his powers, which afforded him some degree of protection against concussive force and projectiles. Later on, he manifested the ability to convert the tissue of his body into organic ice. He sometimes augments his organic ice form with razor sharp adornments to his shoulders, elbows, knees, and fists. Iceman has also been able to move rapidly to another distant location while in his organic ice form, being able to deposit his bodily mass into a river and reconstitute his entire mass a great distance away in a matter of minutes (by temporarily merging his molecules with those of the river). On one occasion, Iceman suffered a severe chest injury while in his ice form and was able to heal himself by converting back into his normal human form.\nIceman is also able to reconstitute his organic ice form if any part of it is damaged, or even if it is completely shattered, without permanently harming himself. He can temporarily add the mass of a body of water to his own, increasing his mass, size, and strength. He can survive not only as ice, but as liquid water and water vapor. He can also transform his body from a gaseous state back to a solid, although it is physically and mentally taxing. Iceman can also freeze sea water, as seen during the \"\" story arc. While he usually does not use his powers in lethal ways, his powers are so vast that they extend to the molecular level, to the point that he can freeze all of the molecules of an object/being with a thought; he once froze every single molecule of water within the body of David Haller. Iceman is also able to dissolve his own icy constructs.\nIceman's powers were pushed to their limit while possessed by Emma Frost, who used Iceman to discover the fate of her Hellions. During this time Iceman was able to control all forms of moisture, freeze fluids inside people's bodies, travel as a liquid, solid or gas. Not even the combined might of the X-Men Gold team was able to stop Emma Frost in Iceman's body. Following this, Bobby confronted Emma about how she was able to use his powers so effectively. While together they made some initial progress, she refused to train him further. Instead he turned to Storm because they share similar elemental powers and she agreed to tutor him.\nWhen Iceman was injected with Mister Sinister's neuro-inhibitor by Mystique, he was able to save himself by drawing in all of the ambient moisture around him, rapidly replacing his poisoned cells with healthy material before the injection could kill him.\nDuring the 2013\u20132014 \"Battle of the Atom\" storyline, Iceman's future self revealed that he has the ability to create semi-independent ice structures that can act on their own, although one of these structures\u2014demonstrating a Hulk-like physique and intellect\u2014has gone on to join the future version of the Brotherhood.\nAside from his superhuman powers, Iceman is also a fair hand-to-hand combatant, and received combat training at Xavier's School as well as coaching from the Black Widow and Hercules while serving with the Champions of Los Angeles. Iceman has taken as much combat training as Cyclops or Beast.\nCharacterization.\nPersonality.\nAccording to writer Mike Carey \"one of Iceman's best personality traits is that emotionally Bobby Drake is like the ice he manipulates\u2014not cold but transparent. 'He's devastatingly honest. He is very up-front with his emotions and his thoughts all the time.'\" \"Also, he's obviously incredibly brave both in terms of facing external, physical danger as well as facing up to unpleasant situations and admitting his own mistakes.\"\nFriendships and relationships.\nIceman had a long term relationship with a Japanese-American New Yorker named Opal Tanaka. He subsequently exhibited strong feelings for his fellow X-Man Polaris, but she did not return those feelings, due to her feelings towards Havok. Northstar developed an unrequited crush for Iceman during their time on the same team, though Iceman never did find out about this. Iceman later had a brief relationship with the Xavier School's nurse, Annie, but she eventually left him for Havok, who had just left Polaris at the altar. When Iceman attempted to rekindle his relationship with Polaris, that too ended abruptly, and Polaris returned to Havok. Iceman then had a relationship with the X-Men's enemy Mystique, who later betrayed him, despite her continued fixation on him, in as much as she stated that she would either kill him or cure him of his personal uncertainty. He had a relationship with Kitty Pryde.\nIceman has long-lasting friendships with Spider-Man, Firestar and the Human Torch.\nSexuality.\nIn \"All-New X-Men\" #40, the time-displaced Iceman is revealed to be gay, which eventually forces the youth to confront the adult version of himself about the matter. As both speak, the adult Iceman confirms the fact and that he had put all his energy into just being an X-Man as he couldn't cope with being a mutant and gay simultaneously. With the help of his younger self and Jean Grey, however, he finally comes to terms with his own sexuality, and comes out to fellow gay X-Man Anole in \"Extraordinary X-Men\" #6. The end of the Extermination X-Men event saw the redirecting of the time displaced version of Bobby back into the \"closet\" when he returned to his original timeline alongside the other X-Men, due to a mind lock by Jean Grey. In the present day, the current version retains both sets of memories and remains an out gay man.\nCultural impact and legacy.\nCritical reception.\nPeter Eckhardt of \"CBR.com\" referred to Iceman as \"the biggest name amongst queer X-Men,\" writing, \"Iceman is an Omega-Level mutant and a longtime fan-favorite character. Iceman was only recently revealed as gay in a story handled somewhat clumsily in 2014's \"All-New X-Men #40\" (written by Brian Michael Bendis and drawn by Mahmud Asrar). Nevertheless, writers as far back as the 1980s hinted that Bobby was gay, particularly in the 1990s when Iceman struggled with his sense of identity. Today, Iceman's story inspires and excites those looking for anything from understanding their own identity to epic, ice-based colossi.\" Mey Rude of \"Out\" stated, \"While Northstar was the first out gay superhero in a Marvel comic, Iceman is his more famous gay X-Men teammate. Bobby Drake didn't come out until just recently in the comics, following some time travel shenanigans, but he\u2019s already become a gay favorite.\" Alyssa Gawaran of \"MovieWeb\" said, \"Iceman, also a big part of the X-Men in the Marvel Comics, is one of the more groundbreaking LGBTQ+ characters in Marvel. Iceman broke boundaries in the franchise as he became the first-ever gay leading superhero to headline a comic, the \"coming out moment\" reported in a 2015 \"Vox\" article. Marvel has recently released \"Marauders Annual #1\" that features a very heartwarming prom segment between Bobby Drake (Iceman) and his boyfriend, a new face to the comics, Christian Frost.\" Joshua Yehl of \"IGN\" described Iceman as \"the perfect gay boyfriend,\" saying, \"Bobby isn\u2019t out to be the biggest, baddest guy around. He\u2019s a more grounded and relatable guy, and while he often broadcasts his cocky attitude and wisecracking humor during battle, he\u2019s proven time and time again that his heart is in the right place when it comes to being there for his teammates. There\u2019s something incredibly charming about a guy who could become the Indomitable Iceman, laying waste to enemies with his icy wrath, yet he chooses to stay boy-next-door Bobby Drake, a funny, self-sacrificing guy who values being a friend and hero over becoming the most powerful guy in the room. Being gay has a lot in common with being a mutant, as excellently displayed during Iceman\u2019s \u201ccoming out\u201d scene in X2: X-Men United. You\u2019re born that way, you will face bullying and discrimination for it, and those who claim to be your friends and family may turn their backs on you because of it. Bobby\u2019s experiences as both a mutant and an out gay man would make him an incredibly empathetic and understanding partner, one who would share his feelings and be there to help with yours. So even though he may not be the strongest mutant around, he\u2019d be a hero to you in every way that counts.\"\nLiterary reception.\nVolumes.\n\"Iceman and Angel\" - 2011.\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Iceman and Angel\" #1 was the 161st best selling comic book in March 2011.\nRyan K. Lindsay of \"CBR.com\" called \"Iceman and Angel\" #1 \"as much fun as you want, but as pithy as you expect too,\" asserting, \"A one-shot should be a comic that stands on its own, and this issue certainly does that. It needs to give you enough narrative meat to feel like the money was well invested, and this issue mostly does that. It should elicit some form of strong reaction from you in the few pages it has, and this issue works hard to make you laugh and is more successful than not. See Namor score some bagels and Googam become a broheim. It's not earth shattering but it is solid fun and sometimes that's just what you need. Pick up this comic and feel the freedom of old funny done-in-one comics just like they did when you were a kid where the parts add up to greater than the actual whole.\" David Brothers of \"ComicsAlliance\" ranked \"Iceman and Angel\" #1 10th in their \"10 Top Marvel Comics Coming in March 2011,\" saying, \"One of the best things we don't see much of any more is the relationship between the original X-Men. The modern series is all about hard decisions, hard edges, and hard core self protection, but back in the day, they were just a bunch of kids who hung out together. Iceman and Angel in particular were pretty fun together, because one was a goofball and the other was a self-styled ladies man. Brian Clevinger has proven that he can do stories like this, where he takes a slice of time and expands on it in a meaningful way, and Juan Doe is a pretty great artist. Add in GOOM, a classic Marvel villain, and you've got a story that I think is going to be a pretty good read. \"X-Men First Class\" may be dead in name, but these one-shots are doing a pretty good job of keeping the feeling alive.\"\n\"Iceman\" - 2017.\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Iceman\" #1 was the 62nd best selling comic book in June 2017. \"Iceman\" #1 was the 655-656th best selling comic book in 2017.\nMatthew Aguilar of \"ComicBook.com\" gave \"Iceman\" #1 a grade of 4 out of 5 stars, writing, \"On the art side of things, the book is a mixed bag. Alessandro Vitti's pencils and Rachelle Rosenberg's colors shine when ice is involved in some form or fashion, as referenced early and later in the book. In the middle, though things get a bit muddy, and the facial expressions suffer. Not enough to detract in a huge way, but the book definitely improves when Drake is in his ice form. Overall writer Sina Grace is off to an excellent start here, providing a refreshing look into a fan favorite character that has always been more than his powers but needed someone to bring that out of him. It looks like this time is up for the task.\" Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" gave \"Iceman\" #1 a grade of 7.8 out of 10, stating, \"\"Iceman\" #1 doesn't make the strongest case for this series as an ongoing story, as it could just as easily be a standalone one-shot starring the frozen X-Man. But it's a very well-executed story regardless, one that showcases Bobby Drake's crazy personal life while still making the most of his incredible powers. Iceman is shaping up to be a worthy addition to the ResurrXion lineup.\"\n\"Iceman\" - 2018.\nAccording to Diamond Comic Distributors, \"Iceman\" #1 was the 43rd best selling comic book in September 2018. \"Iceman\" #1 was the 508th best selling comic book in 2018.\nJamie Lovett of \"Comicook.com\" called \"Iceman\" #1 a \"well-crafted book,\" saying,\"\"Iceman\" #1 is a stellar return. Most impressive is how the issue is completely capable of standing alone, but also seeds an exciting story to come. Even a casual X-Men fan will recognize the deadliness of the threat behind this issue's attempts to recreate the \"Mutant Massacre.\" Longtime X-Men fans, and fans of Iceman, in particular, will get something extra out of the last page reveal of who's waiting for Bobby at home. \"Iceman\" #1 is a triumphant return for an underappreciated series. The longer Sina Grace writes Bobby Drake, the more Iceman develops into a truly compelling, relatable leading man. Grace found the perfect artistic partners in Nathan Stockman and Frederico Blee. Here's hoping Iceman gets more of the attention it deserves the second time around.\" Maite Molina of \"ComicsVerse\" gave \"Iceman\" #1 a score of 80%, asserting, \"\"Iceman\" #1 is a resolute start to a new run. Thanks to some palpable character development and an intriguing plot, the issue succeeds in gripping a reader\u2019s attention. The stage has been set for some intriguing new story arcs, ones that will feature some familiar, sinister villains. Hopefully, Bobby Drake is ready for these impending challenges, ones that he may not even see coming.\"\nOther versions.\nTime-displaced Iceman.\nAll-New X-Men.\nFollowing the war with the Phoenix Five, as Cyclops begins to lash out against government oppression of mutants, a chance comment by Bobby about how the old Cyclops wouldn't tolerate what he is currently doing inspires Beast to travel back in time and recruit to stop Cyclops. The team decides to stay in the present instead of returning into the past. They are now called the All-New X-Men and led by Kitty Pryde. The past and present Bobby are particularly shocked when they see each other. The younger Bobby is especially shocked by the older Bobby's Omega level powers, like creating ice golems, and especially his future \"Ice Wizard\" self in the Battle of the Atom. Eventually he and the All-New X-Men and the Guardians of the Galaxy travel to the Shiar Empire to rescue Jean Grey from a trial for the genocide that her future Dark Phoenix self committed. The team is then teleported into the Ultimate Marvel universe, where he stumbles into Mole Man's lair. He proudly creates his first ice golem in order to escape.\nReturning to their universe, the team are reunited with Cyclops when they are called upon to aid the Guardians of the Galaxy again in retrieving the fabled Black Vortex. Cyclops, Iceman and Groot become superpowered by the Vortex before returning it to Captain Marvel.\nLater, the younger, time-displaced Bobby is forced to confront being gay by his teammate, Jean, who privately asks him why he calls women \"hot\", when she knows via her psychic abilities that he is gay. This causes the younger Bobby to speculate as to the complicated identity issues faced by his older self and the decisions his older self may have made in the time between them. Together with the young Jean, the young Bobby confronts his older self, who admits to being gay, having 'concealed' that part of himself so that he could have avoid being prejudiced against for another part of himself.\nBobby joins the time-displaced Cyclops, Angel and Beast, as well as Kid Apocalypse, All-New Wolverine and Oya as they road-trip around America trying to make their own mark on the world. Bobby is initially reluctant to talk about his sexuality with his teammates until Oya and Kid Apocalypse take him to a gay club in an attempt to make him more comfortable. He embarrasses himself and runs into Romeo, an Inhuman with the ability to manipulate and feel others' emotions. Romeo makes Bobby more comfortable and the two begin a relationship. The two are later caught in the middle when the X-Men declare war on the Inhumans. Bobby joins the X-Men when they attack New Attilan but quickly breaks off from the battle to find Romeo, with the two escaping together.\nX-Men Blue.\nAfter the X-Men's war against the Inhumans for the Terrigen ends, Iceman joins the rest of the young X-Men on an attempted return to their original timeline but they quickly realize that theirs isn't part of the Earth 616 timeline, leaving them stuck in that present time with no knowledge where they were originally from. Upon learning this, Iceman joins the rest of the young X-Men and leaves the rest of the X-Men to find their place in the world. Iceman then joins Magneto in Madripoor along with the rest of the time-displaced X-Men; however, due to a lack of trust in their new leader, the X-Men make plans and train in case Magneto returns to his former villainous ways to kill them. Instead of training with his teammates, Iceman spends most of his time trying to reach out Romeo unsuccessfully, placing him into a stupor.\nThe time-displaced X-Men continue fighting crime in the present day although following a battle with the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants from an alternate timeline, they are disheartened to realize that they must eventually return to their original time. This particularly upsets Bobby who is sad that all of their growth as people will be undone once they go back. While the team are in space working alongside Venom to defeat the Poisons, a race of mind-controlling symbiotes, Magneto attacks several Hellfire Club parties searching for Emma Frost. The X-Men find her first and offer to protect her from Magneto although they quickly discover that he had taken mutant growth hormones to enhance his powers and, rather than kill the team he has mentored, Magneto leaves. Young Jean senses that they must return to their own time period soon and the X-Men have heart-to-hearts with their adult selves. During a game of pool with older Iceman, Bobby breaks down, knowing that his memory of the present must be erased and he will be forced back into the closet and, despite Iceman's best efforts to convince his younger self that he will grow up to be someone awesome, Bobby admits that he likes the person he has already become but that remaining that person is no longer an option. As the team prepare to leave, a news report announces that Magneto has formed a new brotherhood, leading the X-Men to decide to stay in the present for a little while longer.\nExtermination.\nWhile en route to help young Cyclops, Bobby is attacked by a mysterious assailant but is rescued by Cable, who urges him to flee. Iceman refuses but is incapacitated and captured while Cable is killed. Young Jean attempts to use Cerebro to locate Bobby but states that she is unable to find him. In a secret lab, the man who attacked Bobby is revealed to be a time-displaced version of Cable who has him locked up in a tube. Kitty gathers all of the X-Men, who split into four teams tasked with protecting one of the remaining time-displaced X-Men. Young Jean uses her telepathy to guide her team to young Cable's base, where he admits to murdering his older self because he had failed in his mission to maintain the timeline by allowing the young X-Men to stay in the present for so long. They discover that Cable has been genetically modifying young Iceman so that he looks the way he looked when he left his original time period. He releases Bobby and teleports them all to Atlantis, where Ahab is attempting to kill young Cyclops so that the timeline can never be restored. The X-Men find themselves overwhelmed by Ahab's forces and Cable convinces the young X-Men that they must return home immediately in order to save the others. Young Iceman breaks down to his older self, admitting he doesn't want to be forced back into the closet but the present day Bobby tells him that his younger self finally allowed him to accept that he was gay and promises that he will be finally be able to truly be himself when he grows up. Cable then sends the X-Men back to their original time, informing them that everything will return to normal once they officially close the time loop. In 1964, the young X-Men change into their original clothes and young Jean performs a mind wipe so that they won't remember their time in the present day although she informs them that she is able to lock their memories away so that, once the loop is closed, their older selves will regain those memories. Back in modern day, the founding X-Men inherit the memories of their younger selves allowing them to defeat Ahab. Returned to their original time, the young X-Men forget about their adventures in the present and are greeted by Professor Xavier.\n\"Age of Apocalypse\".\nIn the \"Age of Apocalypse\" storyline, Bobby, along with the rest of the X-Men, is trained by Magneto. Because Magneto is harder on his students than Professor X, Bobby lacks his 616-counterpart's sense of humor. Instead, Bobby becomes very cold and inhuman, making his teammates feel uncomfortable. In addition to his normal abilities, Bobby is capable of breaking down his body and merging it with another body of water to travel great distances in a matter of seconds. He can bring others along through a process that he calls \"moisture molecular inversion\", though it is a painful process for the passengers. Bobby is also able to reconstitute his body from broken pieces. Just before Apocalypse's defeat, Colossus stormed right through Iceman, causing him to fall into pieces in an attempt to reach his sister. A couple of months later, Iceman, Exodus, Wild Child, and Morph were sent on a secret mission by Magneto; for a time, only Wild Child's fate was revealed.\nIceman returned in the \"Uncanny X-Force\" arc \"The Dark Angel Saga\", when the title team was forced to travel to the AoA reality. He abandoned the X-Men during a battle with the minions of Weapon X, who had by this time been transformed into that world's new Apocalypse, a defection later revealed to be the result of Iceman's having lost faith in his X-Men's ability to save their world. He was soon brought to Earth-616 by the Dark Beast, where he joined forces with Archangel on his quest to eradicate all life on Earth so he could create a new evolution process. Tired of seeing the people he cared about being killed fighting what he thought to be an unwinnable war, Drake agreed to help Archangel \u2013 despite the latter's now being the mainstream Marvel Universe's version of Drake's X-Men's arch-enemy, Apocalypse \u2013 in exchange for transport to the relative paradise that was Earth-616.\nAfter X-Force defeated Archangel, Bobby managed to escape with McCoy and most of Archangel's other minions, but eventually broke away from them and went into hiding, living a life of hedonistic bliss in Madripoor. The \"Age of Apocalypse\" version of Nightcrawler \u2013 who, after being brought to Earth-616 along with the rest of his world's X-Men to help take down Archangel, decided to stay behind there in order to track down and kill the various villains who also came to the mainstream Marvel Universe \u2013 eventually tracked Bobby down to execute him for his treason. Nightcrawler is quickly overwhelmed by Drake's avatars, but eventually forces Iceman into a factory boiler room, where there's not enough moisture in the air for him to effectively use his powers. Nightcrawler quickly disables his former friend, and shoves him into an incinerator, killing the once noble hero.\n\"Battle of the Atom\".\nIn the alternate future witnessed in the \"Battle of the Atom\" storyline, Iceman developed the ability to create semi-independent ice structures that can act on their own, although one of these structures, a structure called Ice Thing possessing a Hulk-like physique and intellect, has gone on to join the future version of the Brotherhood, resulting in the Brotherhood using the duplicate to reinforce the illusion of themselves as the future X-Men. The duplicate Iceman was defeated by the O5 Iceman, the present Iceman, and the future Iceman during the battle in the past (Prompting the youngest Iceman to note that they only needed one more Iceman for a five-a-side basketball team).\n\"House of M\".\nIn the alternate timeline of the \"House of M\" storyline, Iceman was seen in Magneto's army during his rise to power. Bobby later appears as one of the Horsemen of Apocalypse because Apocalypse rescued Bobby from a mutant internment camp that his parents had sent him to. Magneto sends Apocalypse to dispose of his rival Black Panther; when Apocalypse is attacked en route by Black Panther's allies, Iceman aids him by freezing Namor solid and attempting to attack Storm, but he is severely injured by Sunfire.\nUltimate Marvel.\nIn the Ultimate Marvel continuity, Bobby Drake is the youngest founding member of the X-Men. He ran away from his family at the peak of government-supported Sentinel attacks, fearing his family would be killed in such an attack.\nUltimate Iceman never had the snowman look of his counterpart, instead generating a flexible ice armor from the beginning. Bobby establishes himself as a valuable asset, single-handedly taking out the Ultimates once with a gigantic ice wall (\"see Ultimate War\"), as well as single-handedly halting an invasion by Colonel Wraith and Weapon X. He was only able to be stopped by Rogue, who was in temporary possession of Marvel Girl's telepathy. Professor X has stated that Bobby is one of the three most powerful X-Men. During the \"World Tour\" arc, after enlarging his armor to form a gigantic ice troll, Bobby is greatly injured by Proteus, which resulted in a lawsuit issued by his parents against Xavier. Bobby eventually rebels against his parents, and later returns to the X-Men.\nWhile Bobby was away from the X-Men on a vacation, he had a girlfriend, but Professor Xavier erased all memories of her from Bobby's mind when he told her too much about the X-Men (he presumably also erased the girl's memories). Upon her acceptance into the X-Men, Bobby begins to date Rogue. The pair date for a considerable amount of time, but eventually break up due to Bobby's growing feelings for Shadowcat and Rogue's feelings for Gambit. Eventually Rogue leaves, and Bobby starts to date Kitty. After this, the two rekindle their relationship, but problems erupted.\nIn \"Ultimate X-Men\" #80, Bishop and Hammer, time-travelers from the future, comment on how powerful Bobby will one day become. Cyclops disbanded the X-Men in \"Ultimate X-Men\" #81 and Bishop and Storm created a new team. Iceman stayed at the Institute as a student only until Xavier returned and reformed his X-Men.\nProfessor X is later revealed to be alive and the X-Men return to the Xavier Institute, which is also when Iceman rejoins the X-Men line up. Jean Grey soon discovers that fellow X-Man, Colossus, is using a drug called Banshee to enhance his mutant abilities. The X-Men are highly against this, but Colossus manages to convince Rogue, Dazzler, Angel, Nightcrawler, and Cyclops to join him on his own X-Men team. Iceman remains on Professor X's drug-free X-Men and fights the Banshee enhanced X-Men. Xavier's X-Men win and the two teams combine again with nobody using drugs.\nThe Ultimatum Wave hits the X-Men next killing several of the X-Men (Beast, Dazzler, and Nightcrawler). Magneto and the Brotherhood attack the world and Iceman helps the world's heroes fight them off. Most of the X-Men die, but Iceman (alongside Rogue, Storm, Colossus, and Jean Grey) is able to survive Magneto's attack. He is last seen demolishing the X-Mansion alongside Rogue and Jean Grey and burying the deceased X-Men in its place. He finds it hard to destroy their home, but he feels it to be the right thing to do now that Professor Xavier is dead.\nLater, Bobby Drake is kicked out of his home for being a mutant. With nowhere else to go, Kitty suggests to Aunt May#Ultimate Marvel that he move in with her, Peter, Gwen Stacy, and Johnny Storm (who also recently moved in their household). May agrees and enrolls Bobby at Midtown High under the guise of Bobby Parker, one of Peter's cousins and shaves his hair off to help keep his, Peter's and Johnny's secret identities safe.\nWithout knowing where to go after Peter's death, Bobby Drake asked Kitty Pride if Johnny could come with them searching for a place where to live and hide from authorities. They found the Morlock Tunnels where they live now and help mutants in danger. Firstly they rescued Rogue, who joined them, and later Jimmy Hudson (the son of Wolverine), came to them for help after escaping Stryker's imprisonment along with other mutants he freed.\nIn other media.\nFilm.\nIceman appears in 20th Century Fox's \"X-Men\" film series, portrayed by Shawn Ashmore. This version is a student at the Xavier Institute.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15506", "revid": "49409394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15506", "title": "Isidore of Seville", "text": "Hispano-Roman scholar (c. 560\u2013636)\nIsidore of Seville (; c.\u2009560\u00a0\u2013 4 April 636) was a Hispano-Roman scholar, theologian and archbishop of Seville. He is widely regarded, in the words of the 19th-century historian Charles Forbes Ren\u00e9 de Montalembert, as \"the last scholar of the ancient world\".\nAt a time of disintegration of classical culture, aristocratic violence, and widespread illiteracy, Isidore was involved in the conversion of the Arian Visigothic kings to Catholicism, both assisting his brother Leander of Seville and continuing after Leander's death. He was influential in the inner circle of Sisebut, Visigothic king of Hispania. Like Leander, he played a prominent role in the Councils of Toledo and Seville.\nHis fame after his death was based on his \"Etymologiae\", an etymological encyclopedia that assembled extracts of many books from classical antiquity that would otherwise have been lost. This work also helped to standardise the use of the full stop, comma and colon.\nSince the Early Middle Ages, Isidore has sometimes been called Isidore the Younger or Isidore Junior (), because of the earlier history purportedly written by Isidore of C\u00f3rdoba.\nChildhood and education.\nIsidore was born in Cartago Spartaria (now Cartagena, Spain), a former Carthaginian colony, to a notable family in Roman Hispania, of high social rank, and probably of Greek descent. His father was named Severianus and his mother Theodora. His parents were members of an influential family who were instrumental in the political-religious manoeuvring that converted the Visigothic kings from Arianism to Catholicism. The Catholic and Orthodox Churches celebrate him and all his siblings as known saints:\nIsidore received his elementary education in the Cathedral school of Seville. In this institution, the first of its kind in Spania, a body of learned men including Archbishop Leander of Seville taught the trivium and quadrivium, the classic liberal arts. Isidore applied himself to study diligently enough that he quickly mastered classical Latin, and acquired some Greek and Hebrew.\nTwo centuries of Gothic control of Iberia incrementally suppressed the ancient institutions, classical learning, and manners of the Roman Empire. The associated culture entered a period of long-term decline. The ruling Visigoths nevertheless showed some respect for the outward trappings of Roman culture. Arianism meanwhile took deep root among the Visigoths as the form of Christianity that they received.\nScholars may debate whether Isidore ever personally embraced monastic life or affiliated with any religious order, but he undoubtedly esteemed the monks highly.\nBishop of Seville.\nAfter the death of Leander of Seville on 13 March 600 or 601, Isidore succeeded to the See of Seville. On his elevation to the episcopate, he immediately constituted himself as the protector of monks.\nRecognising that the spiritual and material welfare of the people of his see depended on the assimilation of remnant Roman and ruling barbarian cultures, Isidore attempted to weld the peoples and subcultures of the Visigothic kingdom into a united nation. He used all available religious resources toward this end and succeeded. Isidore practically eradicated the heresy of Arianism and completely stifled the new heresy of Acephali at its outset. Archbishop Isidore strengthened religious discipline throughout his see.\nArchbishop Isidore also used resources of education to counteract increasingly influential Gothic barbarism throughout his episcopal jurisdiction. His quickening spirit animated the educational movement centered on Seville. Isidore introduced his countrymen to Aristotle long before the Arabs studied Greek philosophy extensively.\nIn 619 Isidore of Seville pronounced anathema against any ecclesiastic who in any way should molest the monasteries.\nSecond Synod of Seville (November 619).\nIsidore presided over the Second Council of Seville, begun on 13 November 619 in the reign of King Sisebut, a provincial council attended by eight other bishops, all from the ecclesiastical province of Baetica in southern Spain. The Acts of the Council fully set forth the nature of Christ, countering the conceptions of Gregory, a Syrian representing the heretical Acephali.\nThird Synod of Seville (624).\nBased on a few surviving canons found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals, Isidore is known to have presided over an additional provincial council around 624.\nThe council dealt with a conflict over the See of \u00c9cija and wrongfully stripped bishop Martianus of his see, a situation that was rectified by the Fourth Council of Toledo. It also addressed a concern over Jews who had been forced to convert to Christianity.\nThe records of the council, unlike the First and Second Councils of Seville, were not preserved in the Hispana, a collection of canons and decretals likely edited by Isidore himself.\nFourth National Council of Toledo.\nAll bishops of Hispania attended the Fourth National Council of Toledo, begun on 5 December 633. The aged Archbishop Isidore presided over its deliberations and originated most enactments of the council.\nThrough Isidore's influence, this Council of Toledo promulgated a decree commanding all bishops to establish seminaries in their cathedral cities along the lines of the cathedral school at Seville, which had educated Isidore decades earlier. The decree prescribed the study of Greek, Hebrew, and the liberal arts and encouraged interest in law and medicine. The authority of the council made this education policy obligatory upon all bishops of the Kingdom of the Visigoths. The council granted remarkable position and deference to the king of the Visigoths. The independent Church bound itself in allegiance to the acknowledged king; it said nothing of allegiance to the Bishop of Rome.\nDeath.\nIsidore of Seville died on 4 April 636 after serving more than 32 years as archbishop of Seville.\nWorks.\nIsidore's Latin style in the \"Etymologiae\" and elsewhere, though simple and lucid, reveals increasing local Visigothic traditions.\n\"Etymologiae\".\nIsidore was the first Christian writer to try to compile a \"summa\" of universal knowledge, in his most important work, the \"Etymologiae\" (taking its title from the method he uncritically used in the transcription of his era's knowledge). It is also known by classicists as the \"Origines\" (the standard abbreviation being \"Orig\".). This encyclopedia\u2014the first such Christian epitome\u2014formed a huge compilation of 448 chapters in 20 volumes.\nIn it, Isidore entered his own terse digest of Roman handbooks, miscellanies and compendia. He continued the trend towards abridgements and summaries that had characterised Roman learning in Late Antiquity. In the process, many fragments of classical learning are preserved that otherwise would have been hopelessly lost; \"in fact, in the majority of his works, including the \"Origines\", he contributes little more than the mortar which connects excerpts from other authors, as if he was aware of his deficiencies and had more confidence in the \"stilus maiorum\" than his own,\" his translator Katherine Nell MacFarlane remarks.\nSome of these fragments were lost in the first place because Isidore's work was so highly regarded\u2014Braulio called it \"quaecunque fere sciri debentur\", \"practically everything that it is necessary to know\"\u2014that it superseded the use of many individual works of the classics themselves, which were not recopied and have therefore been lost: \"all secular knowledge that was of use to the Christian scholar had been winnowed out and contained in one handy volume; the scholar need search no further\".\nBook VIII of the \"Etymologiae\" covers religion, including the Christian Church, Judaism, heretical sects, pagan philosophers, sibyls, and magi. In this section, Isidore documents pre-Christian religious and magical beliefs, preserving knowledge about ancient magical practices, even while condemning them as superstition. His writings serve as one of the few surviving records of magical thought in early medieval Europe, helping to transmit classical esoteric ideas into the Middle Ages.\nThe fame of this work imparted a new impetus to encyclopedic writing, which bore abundant fruit in the subsequent centuries of the Middle Ages. It was the most popular compendium in medieval libraries. It was printed in at least ten editions between 1470 and 1530, showing Isidore's continued popularity in the Renaissance. Until the 12th century brought translations from Arabic sources, Isidore transmitted what western Europeans remembered of the works of Aristotle and other Greeks, although he understood only a limited amount of Greek. The \"Etymologiae\" was much copied, particularly into medieval bestiaries.\n\"On the Catholic Faith against the Jews\".\nIsidore's \"De fide catholica contra Iudaeos\" furthers Augustine of Hippo's ideas on the Jewish presence in the Christian society of the ancient world. Like Augustine, Isidore held an acceptance of the Jewish presence as necessary to society because of their expected role in the anticipated Second Coming of Christ.\nBut Isidore had access to Augustine's works, out of which one finds more than forced acceptance \"of\" but rather broader reasons than just an endtime role \"for\" Jews in society:\n[D]iversities in the manners, laws, and institutions whereby earthly peace is secured and maintained [are not scrupled in the heavenly city for which we strive, while its citizens sojourn on earth], but recognizing that, however various they are, they all tend to one and the same end of earthly peace.\n[The heavenly city] is therefore so far from rescinding and abolishing these diversities, that it even preserves and adopts them, so long only as no hindrance to the worship of the one supreme and true God is thus introduced...and makes this earthly peace bear upon the peace of heaven; for this alone can be truly called and esteemed the peace of the reasonable creatures, consisting as it does in the perfectly ordered and harmonious enjoyment of God and of one another in God. (\"City of God\", Book 19, Chapter 17)\nAccording to Jeremy Cohen, Isidore exceeds the anti-rabbinic polemics of earlier theologians by criticising Jewish practice as deliberately disingenuous in \"De fide catholica contra Iudaeos\".\nBut once again Isidore's same predecessor, Augustine, seems to have written of at least the possibility of Jewish rabbinical practice along that subject's content's purportedly deceptive lines in the same work cited above:\nThey say that it is not credible that the seventy translators [of the Septuagint] who simultaneously and unanimously produced one rendering, could have erred, or, in a case in which no interest of theirs was involved, could have falsified their translation, but that the Jews, envying us our translation of their Law and Prophets, have made alterations in their texts to undermine the authority of ours. (\"City of God\", Book 15, Chapter 11)\nHe contributed two decisions to the Fourth Council of Toledo: Canon 60 calling for the forced removal of children from parents practising Crypto-Judaism and their education by Christians on the basis that while their parents were concealing themselves under the guise of Christians, they had presumably allowed their children to be baptised with intent to deceive. This removal was an exception to the general rule of the treatment of Jewish children according to the 13th century \"Summa Theologica\", \"[I]t was never the custom of the Church to baptize the children of Jews against the will of their parents...\"\nHe also contributed Canon 65 thought to forbid Jews and Christians of Jewish origin from holding public office.\nOther works.\nIsidore's authored more than a dozen major works on various topics including mathematics, holy scripture, and monastic life, all in Latin:\nVeneration.\nIsidore was one of the last of the ancient Christian philosophers and was contemporary with Maximus the Confessor. He has been called the most learned man of his age by some scholars, and he exercised a far-reaching and immeasurable influence on the educational life of the Middle Ages. His contemporary and friend Braulio of Zaragoza said of him: \"After so much destruction and so many disasters, God has raised him in recent times to restore the monuments of the ancients, so that we would not fall completely into barbarism\".\nThe Eighth Council of Toledo (653) recorded its admiration of his character in these glowing terms: \"The extraordinary doctor, the latest ornament of the Catholic Church, the most learned man of the latter ages, always to be named with reverence, Isidore\". This tribute was endorsed by the Fifteenth Council of Toledo, held in 688. Isidore was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church in 1722 by Pope Innocent XIII.\nIsidore was interred in Seville. His tomb represented an important place of veneration for the Mozarabs during the centuries after the Arab conquest of Visigothic Hispania. In the middle of the 11th century, with the division of Al Andalus into taifas and the strengthening of the Christian holdings in the Iberian peninsula, Ferdinand I of Le\u00f3n and Castile found himself in a position to extract tribute from the fractured Arab states. In addition to money, Abbad II al-Mu'tadid, the Abbadid ruler of Seville (1042\u20131069), agreed to turn over St. Isidore's remains to Ferdinand I. A Catholic poet described al-Mutatid placing a brocaded cover over Isidore's sarcophagus, and remarked, \"Now you are leaving here, revered Isidore. You know well how much your fame was mine!\" Ferdinand had Isidore's remains reinterred in the then-recently constructed Basilica of San Isidoro in Le\u00f3n. Today, many of his bones are buried in the cathedral of Murcia, Spain.\nCriticisms and contemporary appraisal.\nContemporary researchers have criticised Isidore\u2014specifically, his work in the \"Etymologies.\" The historian Sandro D'Onofrio has argued that \"job consisted here and there of restating, recapitulating, and sometimes simply transliterating both data and theories that lacked research and originality.\"\nIn this view, Isidore\u2014considering the large popularity his works enjoyed during the Middle Ages and the founding role he had in Scholasticism\u2014would be less a brilliant thinker than a Christian gatekeeper making etymologies fit into the Christian worldview. \"[H]e prescribed what they should mean,\" asserts D'Onofrio.\nThe researcher Victor Bruno has countered this argument. According to him, it was not the meaning of the \"Etymologies\", or of Isidore's work as a whole, to give a scientific or philological account of the words, as a modern researcher would do. \"It is obvious that, from a material point of view,\" argues Bruno, \"Isidore's practical knowledge on etymology, geography, and history are considered outdated; his methods, from the current academic and scientific standpoint, are questionable, and some of his conclusions are indeed incorrect. But Isidore is less concerned about being etymologically or philologically right than being \"ontologically\" right.\" In Bruno's view, Isidore, despite living in the Early Middle Ages, is an archaic or \"traditional\" thinker. Being religiously inclined, Isidore would be concerned with the redeeming meaning of words and history, the ultimate quest of religions. The same researcher also found parallels between Isidore's interpretation of the word \"year\" (\"annus\") and the meaning of the same words in the \"J\u0101imin\u012bya-Upani\u1e63ad-Br\u0101ma\u1e47a\".\nHonours.\nSt. Isidore Island in Antarctica is named for him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15507", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15507", "title": "Carbon compounds", "text": "Chemical substances containing carbon\nCarbon compounds are chemical substances containing carbon. More compounds of carbon exist than any other chemical element except for hydrogen. Organic carbon compounds are far more numerous than inorganic carbon compounds. In general bonds of carbon with other elements are covalent bonds. Carbon is tetravalent but carbon free radicals and carbenes occur as short-lived intermediates. Ions of carbon are carbocations and carbanions are also short-lived. An important carbon property is catenation as the ability to form long carbon chains and rings.\nAllotropes of carbon.\nThe known inorganic chemistry of the allotropes of carbon (diamond, graphite, and the fullerenes) blossomed with the discovery of buckminsterfullerene in 1985, as additional fullerenes and their various derivatives were discovered. One such class of derivatives is inclusion compounds, in which an ion is enclosed by the all-carbon shell of the fullerene. This inclusion is denoted by the \"@\"symbol in endohedral fullerenes. For example, an ion consisting of a lithium ion trapped within buckminsterfullerene would be denoted Li+@C60. As with any other ionic compound, this complex ion could in principle pair with a counterion to form a salt. Other elements are also incorporated in so-called graphite intercalation compounds.\nCarbides.\nCarbides are binary compounds of carbon with an element that is less electronegative than it. The most important are\nAl4C3,\nB4C,\nCaC2,\nFe3C,\nHfC,\nSiC,\nTaC,\nTiC, and\nWC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nOrganic compounds.\nIt was once thought that organic compounds could only be created by living organisms. Over time, however, scientists learned how to synthesize organic compounds in the lab. The number of organic compounds is immense and the known number of defined compounds is close to 10 million. However, an indefinitely large number of such compounds is theoretically possible. \nBy definition, an organic compound must contain at least one atom of carbon, but this criterion is not generally regarded as sufficient. Indeed, the distinction between organic and inorganic compounds is ultimately a matter of convention, and there are several compounds that have been classified either way, such as:\nCOCl2,\nCSCl2,\nCS(NH2)2,\nCO(NH2)2.\nWith carbon bonded to metals the field of organic chemistry crosses over into organometallic chemistry.\nCarbon-oxygen compounds.\nThere are many oxides of carbon (oxocarbons), of which the most common are carbon dioxide (CO2) and carbon monoxide (CO). Other less known oxides include carbon suboxide (C3O2) and mellitic anhydride (C12O9). There are also numerous unstable or elusive oxides, such as dicarbon monoxide (C2O), oxalic anhydride (C2O4), and carbon trioxide (CO3).\nThere are several oxocarbon anions, negative ions that consist solely of oxygen and carbon. The most common are the carbonate (CO32\u2212) and oxalate (C2O42\u2212). The corresponding acids are the highly unstable carbonic acid (H2CO3) and the quite stable oxalic acid (H2C2O4), respectively. These anions can be partially deprotonated to give the bicarbonate (HCO3\u2212) and hydrogenoxalate (HC2O4\u2212). Other more exotic carbon\u2013oxygen anions exist, such as acetylenedicarboxylate (O2C\u2013C\u2261C\u2013CO22\u2212), mellitate (C12O96\u2212), squarate (C4O42\u2212), and rhodizonate (C6O62\u2212). The anhydrides of some of these acids are oxides of carbon; carbon dioxide, for instance, can be seen as the anhydride of carbonic acid.\nSome important carbonates are\nAg2CO3,\nBaCO3,\nCaCO3,\nCdCO3,\nCe2(CO3)3,\nCoCO3,\nCs2CO3,\nCuCO3,\nFeCO3,\nK2CO3,\nLa2(CO3)3,\nLi2CO3,\nMgCO3,\nMnCO3,\n(NH4)2CO3,\nNa2CO3,\nNiCO3,\nPbCO3,\nSrCO3, and\nZnCO3.\nThe most important bicarbonates include \nNH4HCO3,\nCa(HCO3)2,\nKHCO3, and\nNaHCO3.\nThe most important oxalates include\nAg2C2O4,\nBaC2O4,\nCaC2O4, \nCe2(C2O4)3,\nK2C2O4, and\nNa2C2O4.\nCarbonyls are coordination complexes between transition metals and carbonyl ligands. Metal carbonyls are complexes that are formed with the neutral ligand CO. These complexes are covalent. Here is a list of some carbonyls:\nCr(CO)6,\nCo2(CO)8,\nFe(CO)5,\nMn2(CO)10,\nMo(CO)6,\nNi(CO)4,\nW(CO)6.\nCarbon-sulfur compounds.\nImportant inorganic carbon-sulfur compounds are the carbon sulfides carbon disulfide (CS2) and carbonyl sulfide (OCS). Carbon monosulfide (CS) unlike carbon monoxide is very unstable. Important compound classes are thiocarbonates, thiocarbamates, dithiocarbamates and trithiocarbonates. \nCarbon-nitrogen compounds.\nSmall inorganic carbon\u2013nitrogen compounds are cyanogen, hydrogen cyanide, cyanamide, isocyanic acid and cyanogen chloride.\nParacyanogen is the polymerization product of cyanogen. Cyanuric chloride is the trimer of cyanogen chloride and 2-cyanoguanidine is the dimer of cyanamide.\nOther types of inorganic compounds include the inorganic salts and complexes of the carbon-containing cyanide, cyanate, fulminate, thiocyanate and cyanamide ions. Examples of cyanides are copper cyanide (CuCN) and potassium cyanide (KCN), examples of cyanates are potassium cyanate (KNCO) and silver cyanate (AgNCO), examples of fulminates are silver fulminate (AgOCN) and mercury fulminate (HgOCN) and an example of a thiocyanate is potassium thiocyanate (KSCN).\nCarbon halides.\nThe common carbon halides are carbon tetrafluoride (CF4), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), carbon tetrabromide (CBr4), carbon tetraiodide (CI4), and a large number of other carbon-halogen compounds.\nCarboranes.\nA carborane is a cluster composed of boron and carbon atoms such as H2C2B10H10.\nAlloys.\nThere are hundreds of alloys that contain carbon. The most common of these alloys is steel, sometimes called \"carbon steel\" (see ). All kinds of steel contain some amount of carbon, by definition, and all ferrous alloys contain some carbon.\nSome other common alloys that are based on iron and carbon include anthracite iron, cast iron, pig iron, and wrought iron.\nIn more technical uses, there are also spiegeleisen, an alloy of iron, manganese, and carbon; and stellite, an alloy of cobalt, chromium, tungsten, and carbon.\nWhether it was placed there deliberately or not, some traces of carbon is also found in these common metals and their alloys: aluminium, chromium, magnesium, molybdenum, niobium, thorium, titanium, tungsten, uranium, vanadium, zinc, and zirconium. For example, many of these metals are smelted with coke, a form of carbon; and aluminium and magnesium are made in electrolytic cells with carbon electrodes. Some distribution of carbon into all of these metals is inevitable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15508", "revid": "48010489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15508", "title": "Industrial espionage", "text": "Theft of corporate information\nIndustrial espionage, also known as economic espionage, corporate spying, or corporate espionage, refers to the systematic and unauthorized acquisition of sensitive business information. This practice typically targets trade secrets, proprietary operational data, and intellectual property belonging to competitors or other organizations. The information is gathered with the intent to gain competitive advantage, facilitate business decision-making, or for commercial sale to interested parties. Industrial espionage is conducted by various actors, including current or former employees, contractors, corporate competitors, foreign governments, and criminal organizations, and is universally recognized as both illegal and unethical.\nWhile political espionage is conducted or orchestrated by governments and is international in scope, industrial or corporate espionage is more often national and occurs between companies or corporations.\nForms of economic and industrial espionage.\nIn short, the purpose of espionage is to gather knowledge about one or more organizations. Economic or industrial espionage takes place in two main forms. It may include the acquisition of intellectual property, such as information on industrial manufacture, ideas, techniques and processes, recipes and formulas. Or it could include sequestration of proprietary or operational information, such as that on customer datasets, pricing, sales, marketing, research and development, policies, prospective bids, planning or marketing strategies or the changing compositions and locations of production. It may describe activities such as theft of trade secrets, bribery, blackmail and technological surveillance. As well as orchestrating espionage on commercial organizations, governments can also be targets \u2013 for example, to determine the terms of a tender for a government contract.\nTarget industries.\nEconomic and industrial espionage is most commonly associated with technology-heavy industries, including computer software and hardware, biotechnology, aerospace, telecommunications, transportation and engine technology, automobiles, machine tools, energy, materials and coatings and so on. Silicon Valley is known to be one of the world's most targeted areas for espionage, though any industry with information of use to competitors may be a target.\nInformation theft and sabotage.\nInformation can make the difference between success and failure; if a trade secret is stolen, the competitive playing field is leveled or even tipped in favor of a competitor. Although a lot of information-gathering is accomplished legally through competitive intelligence, at times corporations feel the best way to get information is to take it. Economic or industrial espionage is a threat to any business whose livelihood depends on information.\nIn recent years, economic or industrial espionage has taken on an expanded definition. For instance, attempts to sabotage a corporation may be considered industrial espionage; in this sense, the term takes on the wider connotations of its parent word. That espionage and sabotage (corporate or otherwise) have become more clearly associated with each other is also demonstrated by a number of profiling studies, some government, some corporate. The United States government currently has a polygraph examination entitled the \"Test of Espionage and Sabotage\" (TES), contributing to the notion of the interrelationship between espionage and sabotage countermeasures. In practice, particularly by \"trusted insiders\", they are generally considered functionally identical for the purpose of informing countermeasures.\nAgents and the process of collection.\nEconomic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways. Firstly, a dissatisfied employee appropriates information to advance interests or to damage the company. Secondly, a competitor or foreign government seeks information to advance its own technological or financial interest. \"Moles\", or trusted insiders, are generally considered the best sources for economic or industrial espionage. Historically known as a \"patsy\", an insider can be induced, willingly or under duress, to provide information. A patsy may be initially asked to hand over inconsequential information and, once compromised by committing a crime, blackmailed into handing over more sensitive material. Individuals may leave one company to take up employment with another and take sensitive information with them. Such apparent behavior has been the focus of numerous industrial espionage cases that have resulted in legal battles. Some countries hire individuals to do spying rather than the use of their own intelligence agencies. Academics, business delegates, and students are often sought to be used by governments in gathering information. Some countries, such as Japan, have been reported to expect students to be debriefed on returning home. A spy may follow a guided tour of a factory and then get \"lost\". A spy could be an engineer, a maintenance man, a cleaner, an insurance salesman, or an inspector: anyone who has legitimate access to the premises.\nA spy may break into the premises to steal data and may search through waste paper and refuse, known as \"dumpster diving\". Information may be compromised via unsolicited requests for information, marketing surveys, or use of technical support or research or software facilities. Outsourced industrial producers may ask for information outside the agreed-upon contract.\nComputers have facilitated the process of collecting information because of the ease of access to large amounts of information through physical contact or the Internet.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nEconomic and industrial espionage has a long history. Father Francois Xavier d'Entrecolles, who visited Jingdezhen, China in 1712 and later used this visit to reveal the manufacturing methods of Chinese porcelain to Europe, is sometimes considered to have conducted an early case of industrial espionage.\nHistorical accounts have been written of industrial espionage between Britain and France. Attributed to Britain's emergence as an \"industrial creditor\", the second decade of the 18th century saw the emergence of a large-scale state-sponsored effort to surreptitiously take British industrial technology to France. Witnesses confirmed both the inveigling of tradespersons abroad and the placing of apprentices in England. Protests by those such as ironworkers in Sheffield and steelworkers in Newcastle, about skilled industrial workers being enticed abroad, led to the first English legislation aimed at preventing this method of economic and industrial espionage. This did not prevent Samuel Slater from bringing British textile technology to the United States in 1789. In order to catch up with technological advances of European powers, the US government in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries actively encouraged intellectual piracy.\nAmerican founding father and first U.S. Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton advocated rewarding those bringing \"improvements and secrets of extraordinary value\" into the United States. This was instrumental in making the United States a haven for industrial spies.\n20th century.\nEast-West commercial development opportunities after World War I saw a rise in Soviet interest in American and European manufacturing know-how, exploited by Amtorg Corporation. Later, with Western restrictions on the export of items thought likely to increase military capabilities to the USSR, Soviet industrial espionage was a well known adjunct to other spying activities up until the 1980s. \"BYTE\" reported in April 1984, for example, that although the Soviets sought to develop their own microelectronics, their technology appeared to be several years behind the West's. Soviet CPUs required multiple chips and appeared to be close or exact copies of American products such as the Intel 3000 and DEC LSI-11/2.\n\"Operation Brunnhilde\".\nSome of these activities were directed via the East German Stasi (Ministry for State Security). One such operation, \"Operation Brunnhilde,\" operated from the mid-1950s until early 1966 and made use of spies from many Communist Bloc countries. Through at least 20 forays, many western European industrial secrets were compromised. One member of the \"Brunnhilde\" ring was a Swiss chemical engineer, Dr. Jean Paul Soupert (also known as \"Air Bubble\"), living in Brussels. He was described by Peter Wright in Spycatcher as having been \"doubled\" by the Belgian S\u00fbret\u00e9 de l'\u00c9tat. He revealed information about industrial espionage conducted by the ring, including the fact that Russian agents had obtained details of Concorde's advanced electronics system. He testified against two Kodak employees, living and working in Britain, during a trial in which they were accused of passing information on industrial processes to him, though they were eventually acquitted.\nAccording to a 2020 \"American Economic Review\" study, East German industrial espionage in West Germany significantly reduced the gap in total factor productivity between the two countries.\nSoviet system.\nA secret report from the Military-Industrial Commission of the USSR (VPK), from 1979 to 1980, detailed how (, \"special records\") could be utilised in twelve different military industrial areas. Writing in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, Philip Hanson detailed a system in which 12 industrial branch ministries formulated requests for information to aid technological development in their military programs. Acquisition plans were described as operating on 2-year and 5-year cycles with about 3000 tasks underway each year. Efforts were aimed at civilian and military industrial targets, such as in the petrochemical industries. Some information was gathered to compare Soviet technological advancement with that of their competitors. Much unclassified information was also gathered, blurring the boundary with \"competitive intelligence\".\nThe Soviet military was recognised as making much better use of acquired information than civilian industries, where their record in replicating and developing industrial technology was poor.\nLegacy of Cold War espionage.\nFollowing the demise of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, commentators, including the US Congressional Intelligence Committee, noted a redirection amongst the espionage community from military to industrial targets, with Western and former communist countries making use of \"underemployed\" spies and expanding programs directed at stealing information.\nThe legacy of Cold War spying included not just the redirection of personnel but the use of spying apparatus such as computer databases, scanners for eavesdropping, spy satellites, bugs and wires.\nIndustrial espionage as part of US foreign policy.\nFormer CIA Director Stansfield Turner stated in 1991, \"as we increase emphasis on securing economic intelligence, we will have to spy on the more developed countries\u2014our allies and friends with whom we compete economically\u2014but to whom we turn first for political and military assistance in a crisis. This means that rather than instinctively reaching for human, on-site spying, the United States will want to look to those impersonal technical systems, primarily satellite photography and intercepts\".\nFormer CIA Director James Woolsey acknowledged in 2000 that the United States steals economic secrets from foreign firms and their governments \"with espionage, with communications, with reconnaissance satellites\". He listed the three reasons as understanding whether sanctions are functioning for countries under sanction, monitoring dual-use technology that could be used to produce or develop weapons, and to spy on bribery.\nIn 2013 The United States was accused of spying on Brazilian oil company Petrobras. Brazil's President Dilma Rousseff stated that it was tantamount to industrial espionage and had no security justification.\nIn 2014 former US intelligence officer Edward Snowden stated that the National Security Agency (NSA) was engaged in industrial espionage and that they spied on German companies that compete with US firms. He also highlighted the fact the NSA uses mobile phone apps such as Angry Birds to gather personal data.\nAccording to a 2014 Glenn Greenwald article, \"potentially sabotaging another country's hi-tech industries and their top companies has long been a sanctioned American strategy.\" The article was based on a leaked report issued from former U.S. Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper's office that evaluated how intelligence could be used to overcome a loss of the United States' technological and innovative edge. When contacted, the Director of National Intelligence office responded, \"the United States\u2014unlike our adversaries\u2014does not steal proprietary corporate information\", and insisted that \"the Intelligence Community regularly engages in analytic exercises\". The report, he said, \"is not intended to be, and is not, a reflection of current policy or operations\".\nIn September 2019, security firm Qi An Xin published report linking the CIA to a series of attacks targeting Chinese aviation agencies between 2012 and 2017.\nSeizure and Acquisition of Foreign Patents (World War II and Post-War Era).\nA significant, state-sponsored transfer of technology occurred during and after World War II, when the U.S. government formally seized patent rights from Axis powers like Germany and Italy. This was followed by programs such as the Technical Industrial Intelligence Committee (TIIC) under the Department of Commerce, which actively dispatched missions to Europe\u2014particularly Germany\u2014to investigate, document, and acquire technical processes and patents. This systematic effort also extended to Allied nations; financially exhausted European countries, including the United Kingdom, were often compelled to make 'voluntary transfers' of intellectual property as a condition for aid or loans. Historians have argued that this large-scale acquisition of foreign intellectual property was a key factor in the post-war technological and industrial ascendancy of the United States, which subsequently licensed much of this Intellectual Property back to European firms.\nIsrael's economic espionage in the United States.\nIsrael has an active program to gather proprietary information within the United States. These collection activities are primarily directed at obtaining information on military systems and advanced computing applications that can be used in Israel's sizable armaments industry.\nIsrael was accused by the US government of selling US military technology and secrets to China in 1993.\nIn 2014 American counter-intelligence officials told members of the House Judiciary and Foreign Affairs committees that Israel's current espionage activities in America are \"unrivaled\".\nUse of computers and the Internet.\nPersonal computers.\nComputers have become key in exercising industrial espionage due to the enormous amount of information they contain and the ease at which it can be copied and transmitted. The use of computers for espionage increased rapidly in the 1990s. Information has commonly been stolen by individuals posing as subsidiary workers, such as cleaners or repairmen, gaining access to unattended computers and copying information from them. Laptops were, and still are, a prime target, with those traveling abroad on business being warned not to leave them for any period of time. Perpetrators of espionage have been known to find many ways of conning unsuspecting individuals into parting, often only temporarily, from their possessions, enabling others to access and steal information. A \"bag-op\" refers to the use of hotel staff to access data, such as through laptops, in hotel rooms. Information may be stolen in transit, in taxis, at airport baggage counters, baggage carousels, on trains and so on.\nThe Internet.\nThe rise of the Internet and computer networks has expanded the range and detail of information available and the ease of access for the purpose of industrial espionage. This type of operation is generally identified as state backed or sponsored, because the \"access to personal, financial or analytic resources\" identified exceed that which could be accessed by cyber criminals or individual hackers. Sensitive military or defense engineering or other industrial information may not have immediate monetary value to criminals, compared with, say, bank details. Analysis of cyberattacks suggests deep knowledge of networks, with targeted attacks, obtained by numerous individuals operating in a sustained organized way.\nOpportunities for sabotage.\nThe rising use of the internet has also extended opportunities for industrial espionage with the aim of sabotage. In the early 2000s, energy companies were increasingly coming under attack from hackers. Energy power systems, doing jobs like monitoring power grids or water flow, once isolated from the other computer networks, were now being connected to the internet, leaving them more vulnerable, having historically few built-in security features. The use of these methods of industrial espionage have increasingly become a concern for governments, due to potential attacks by hostile foreign governments or terrorist groups.\nMalware.\nOne of the means of perpetrators conducting industrial espionage is by exploiting vulnerabilities in computer software. Malware and spyware are \"tool[s] for industrial espionage\", in \"transmitting digital copies of trade secrets, customer plans, future plans and contacts\". Newer forms of malware include devices which surreptitiously switch on mobile phones camera and recording devices. In attempts to tackle such attacks on their intellectual property, companies are increasingly keeping important information \"off network,\" leaving an \"air gap\", with some companies building Faraday cages to shield from electromagnetic or cellphone transmissions.\nDistributed denial of service (DDoS) attack.\nThe distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack uses compromised computer systems to orchestrate a flood of requests on the target system, causing it to shut down and deny service to other users. It could potentially be used for economic or industrial espionage with the purpose of sabotage. This method was allegedly utilized by Russian secret services, over a period of two weeks on a cyberattack on Estonia in May 2007, in response to the removal of a Soviet era war memorial.\nNotable cases.\nBritish East India Company.\nIn 1848, the British East India Company broke Qing China's global near-monopoly on tea production by smuggling Chinese tea out of the nation and copying Chinese tea-making processes. The British Empire had previously run a considerable trade deficit with China by importing the nation's tea and other goods. The British attempted to rectify the deficit by trading opium to the Chinese, but encountered difficulties after the Daoguang Emperor banned the opium trade and the First Opium War broke out. To avoid further issues in trading tea with China, the East India Company hired Scottish botanist Robert Fortune to travel to China under the guise of a Chinese nobleman and obtain Chinese trade secrets and tea plants for replanting. Infiltrating Chinese tea-making facilities, Fortune recorded the Chinese process for creating tea and smuggled tea leaves and seeds back to the East India Company. The East India Company later introduced these methods to company-ruled India, using India to compete and surpass China in tea production.\nFrance and the United States.\nBetween 1987 and 1989, IBM and Texas Instruments were thought to have been targeted by French DGSE with the intention of helping France's Groupe Bull. In 1993, U.S. aerospace companies were also thought to have been targeted by French interests. During the early 1990s, France was described as one of the most aggressive pursuers of espionage to garner foreign industrial and technological secrets. France accused the U.S. of attempting to sabotage its high tech industrial base. The government of France allegedly continues to conduct ongoing industrial espionage against American aerodynamics and satellite companies.\nVolkswagen.\nIn 1993, car manufacturer Opel, the German division of General Motors, accused Volkswagen of industrial espionage after Opel's chief of production, Jose Ignacio Lopez, and seven other executives moved to Volkswagen. Volkswagen subsequently threatened to sue for defamation, resulting in a four-year legal battle. The case, which was finally settled in 1997, resulted in one of the largest settlements in the history of industrial espionage, with Volkswagen agreeing to pay General Motors $100 million and to buy at least $1 billion of car parts from the company over 7 years, although it did not explicitly apologize for Lopez's behavior.\nHilton and Starwood.\nIn April 2009, Starwood accused its rival Hilton Worldwide of a \"massive\" case of industrial espionage. After being acquired by The Blackstone Group, Hilton employed 10 managers and executives from Starwood. Starwood accused Hilton of stealing corporate information relating to its luxury brand concepts, used in setting up its Denizen hotels. Specifically, former head of its luxury brands group, Ron Klein, was accused of downloading \"truckloads of documents\" from a laptop to his personal email account.\nAmazon.\nAmazon is alleged to have used a 75% owned shell company (\"Big River\") to perform corporate espionage on its rivals eBay, Shopify, and Walmart.\nGoogle and Operation Aurora.\nOn 13 January 2010, Google announced that operators, from within China, had hacked into their Google China operation, stealing intellectual property and, in particular, accessing the email accounts of human rights activists. The attack was thought to have been part of a more widespread cyber attack on companies within China which has become known as Operation Aurora. Intruders were thought to have launched a zero-day attack, exploiting a weakness in the Microsoft Internet Explorer browser, the malware used being a modification of the trojan \"Hydraq\". Concerned about the possibility of hackers taking advantage of this previously unknown weakness in Internet Explorer, the governments of Germany and, subsequently France, issued warnings not to use the browser.\nThere was speculation that \"insiders\" had been involved in the attack, with some Google China employees being denied access to the company's internal networks after the company's announcement. In February 2010, computer experts from the U.S. National Security Agency claimed that the attacks on Google probably originated from two Chinese universities associated with expertise in computer science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University and the Shandong Lanxiang Vocational School, the latter having close links to the Chinese military.\nGoogle claimed at least 20 other companies had also been targeted in the cyber attack, said by the \"London Times\", to have been part of an \"ambitious and sophisticated attempt to steal secrets from unwitting corporate victims\" including \"defence contractors, finance and technology companies\". Rather than being the work of individuals or organised criminals, the level of sophistication of the attack was thought to have been \"more typical of a nation state\". Some commentators speculated as to whether the attack was part of what is thought to be a concerted Chinese industrial espionage operation aimed at getting \"high-tech information to jump-start China's economy\". Critics pointed to what was alleged to be a lax attitude to the intellectual property of foreign businesses in China, letting them operate but then seeking to copy or reverse engineer their technology for the benefit of Chinese \"national champions\". In Google's case, they may have (also) been concerned about the possible misappropriation of source code or other technology for the benefit of Chinese rival Baidu. In March 2010 Google subsequently decided to cease offering censored results in China, leading to the closing of its Chinese operation.\n\"USA v. Lan Lee, et al.\".\nThe United States charged two former NetLogic Inc. engineers, Lan Lee and Yuefei Ge, of committing economic espionage against TSMC and NetLogic, Inc. A jury acquitted the defendants of the charges with regard to TSMC and deadlocked on the charges with regard to NetLogic. In May 2010, a federal judge dismissed all the espionage charges against the two defendants. The judge ruled that the U.S. government presented no evidence of espionage.\nDongxiao Yue and Chordiant Software, Inc..\nIn May 2010, the federal jury convicted Chordiant Software, Inc., a U.S. corporation, of stealing Dongxiao Yue's JRPC technologies and used them in a product called Chordiant Marketing Director. Yue previously filed lawsuits against Symantec Corporation for a similar theft.\nConcerns of national governments.\nBrazil.\nRevelations from the Snowden documents have provided information to the effect that the United States, notably vis-\u00e0-vis the NSA, has been conducting aggressive economic espionage against Brazil. Canadian intelligence has apparently supported U.S. economic espionage efforts.\nChina.\nThe Chinese cybersecurity company Qihoo 360 accused the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States of an 11-year-long hacking campaign that targeted several industries including aviation organizations, scientific research institutions, petroleum firms, internet companies, and government agencies.\nUnited States.\nA 2009 report to the US government, by aerospace and defense company Northrop Grumman, describes Chinese economic espionage as comprising \"the single greatest threat to U.S. technology\". Blogging on the 2009 cyber attack on Google, Joe Stewart of SecureWorks referred to a \"persistent campaign of 'espionage-by-malware' emanating from the People's Republic of China (PRC)\" with both corporate and state secrets being \"Shanghaied\". The Northrop Grumman report states that the collection of US defense engineering data stolen through cyberattacks is regarded as having \"saved the recipient of the information years of R&amp;D and significant amounts of funding\". Concerns about the extent of cyberattacks has led to the situation being described as the dawn of a \"new cold cyberwar\".\nAccording to Edward Snowden, the National Security Agency spies on foreign companies. In June 2015 Wikileaks published documents about the National Security Agency spying on French companies.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDuring December 2007, this was suddenly revealed that Jonathan Evans, head of the United Kingdom's MI5, had sent out confidential letters to 300 chief executives and security chiefs at the country's banks, accountants and legal firms warning of attacks from Chinese 'state organisations'. A summary was also posted on the secure website of the Centre for the Protection of the National Infrastructure, accessed by some of the nation's 'critical infrastructure' companies, including 'telecoms firms, banks and water and electricity companies'. One security expert warned about the use of 'custom trojans,' software specifically designed to hack into a particular firm and feed back data. Whilst China was identified as the country most active in the use of internet spying, up to 120 other countries were said to be using similar techniques. The Chinese government responded to UK accusations of economic espionage by saying that the report of such activities was 'slanderous' and that the government opposed hacking which is prohibited by law.\nGermany.\nGerman counter-intelligence experts have maintained the German economy is losing around \u20ac53 billion or the equivalent of 30,000 jobs to economic espionage yearly.\nIn Operation Eikonal, German BND agents received \"selector lists\" from the NSA \u2013 search terms for their dragnet surveillance. They contain IP addresses, mobile phone numbers and email accounts with the BND surveillance system containing hundreds of thousands and possibly more than a million such targets. These lists have been subject of controversy as in 2008 it was revealed that they contained some terms targeting the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company (EADS), the Eurocopter project as well as French administration, which were first noticed by BND employees in 2005. After the revelations made by whistleblower Edward Snowden, the BND decided to investigate the issue whose October 2013 conclusion was that at least 2,000 of these selectors were aimed at Western European or even German interests which has been a violation of the Memorandum of Agreement that the US and Germany signed in 2002 in the wake of the 9/11 terror attacks. After reports emerged in 2014 that EADS and Eurocopter had been surveillance targets the Left Party and the Greens filed an official request to obtain evidence of the violations.\nThe BND's project group charged with supporting the NSA investigative committee in German parliament set up in spring 2014, reviewed the selectors and discovered 40,000 suspicious search parameters, including espionage targets in Western European governments and numerous companies. The group also confirmed suspicions that the NSA had systematically violated German interests and concluded that the Americans could have perpetrated economic espionage directly under the Germans' noses. The investigative parliamentary committee was not granted access to the NSA's selectors list as an appeal led by opposition politicians failed at Germany's top court. Instead the ruling coalition appointed an administrative judge, Kurt Graulich, as a \"person of trust\" who was granted access to the list and briefed the investigative commission on its contents after analyzing the 40,000 parameters. In his almost 300-paged report Graulich concluded that European government agencies were targeted massively and that Americans hence broke contractual agreements. He also found that German targets which received special protection from surveillance of domestic intelligence agencies by Germany's Basic Law (Grundgesetz) \u2212 including numerous enterprises based in Germany \u2013 were featured in the NSA's wishlist in a surprising plenitude.\nCompetitive intelligence and economic or industrial espionage.\n\"Competitive intelligence\" involves the legal and ethical activity of systematically gathering, analyzing and managing information on industrial competitors. It may include activities such as examining newspaper articles, corporate publications, websites, patent filings, specialised databases, information at trade shows and the like to determine information on a corporation. The compilation of these crucial elements is sometimes termed CIS or CRS, a \"Competitive Intelligence Solution\" or \"Competitive Response Solution\", with its roots in market research. Douglas Bernhardt has characterised \"competitive intelligence\" as involving \"the application of principles and practices from military and national intelligence to the domain of global business\"; it is the commercial equivalent of open-source intelligence.\nThe difference between competitive intelligence and economic or industrial espionage is not clear; one needs to understand the legal basics to recognize how to draw the line between the two.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewspapers and journals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15509", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15509", "title": "Instruction set architectures", "text": ""}
{"id": "15511", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15511", "title": "Isaac Bashevis Singer", "text": "Jewish American author (1903\u20131991)\nIsaac Bashevis Singer (; November 11, 1903 \u2013 July 24, 1991) was a Polish-born Jewish novelist, short-story writer, memoirist, essayist, and translator in the United States. Some of his works were adapted for the theater. He wrote and published first in Yiddish and later translated his own works into English with the help of editors and collaborators. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1978. A leading figure in the Yiddish literary movement, he was awarded two U.S. National Book Awards, one in Children's Literature for his memoir \"A Day of Pleasure: Stories of a Boy Growing Up in Warsaw\" (1970) and one in Fiction for his collection \"A Crown of Feathers and Other Stories\" (1974).\nLife.\nIsaac Bashevis Singer was born in 1903 to a Jewish family in Leoncin village near Warsaw, Poland. The Polish form of his birth name was Icek Hersz Zynger. The exact date of his birth is uncertain, but most sources say it was probably November 11, a date similar to the one that Singer gave to his official biographer Paul Kresh, his secretary Dvorah Telushkin, and Rabbi William Berkowitz. Some sources mention 1902. The year 1903 is consistent with the historical events that his brother refers to in their childhood memoirs, including the death of Theodor Herzl. The often-quoted birth date, July 14, 1904, was made up by the author in his youth, possibly to make himself younger to avoid the draft.\nHis father Pinchus-Mendel Zinger (1868\u2013?) was a Hasidic rabbi from Tomasz\u00f3w Lubelski (Lublin Governorate), and his mother, Szewa (nee Zilberman, 1871\u2013?) was from Poritsk (Vladimir-Volynsky Uyezd, Volhynia Governorate); parents registered their marriage on June 2 (14) 1889 in Bi\u0142goraj. Singer later used her first name in an initial literary pseudonym, \"Izaak Baszewis\", which he later expanded. Both his older siblings, sister Esther Kreitman (1891\u20131954) and brother Israel Joshua Singer (1893\u20131944), became writers as well. Esther was the first of the family to write stories.\nThe family moved to the court of the Rabbi of Radzymin in 1907, where his father became head of the Yeshiva. After the Yeshiva building burned down in 1908, the family moved to Warsaw, a flat at Krochmalna Street 10. In the spring of 1914, the Singers moved to No. 12.\nThe street where Singer grew up was located in the impoverished, Yiddish-speaking Jewish quarter of Warsaw. There his father served as a rabbi, and was called on to be a judge, arbitrator, religious authority and spiritual leader in the Jewish community. The unique atmosphere of pre-war Krochmalna Street can be found both in the collection of \"Varshavsky-stories\", which tell stories from Singer's childhood, as well as in those novels and stories which take place in pre-war Warsaw.\nWorld War I.\nIn 1917, because of the hardships of World War I, the family split up. Singer moved with his mother and younger brother Moshe to Bi\u0142goraj, a traditional \"shtetl,\" where his mother's brothers had followed his grandfather as rabbis. When his father became a village rabbi again in 1921, Singer returned to Warsaw. He entered the Tachkemoni Rabbinical Seminary and soon decided that neither the school nor the profession suited him. He returned to Bi\u0142goraj, where he tried to support himself by giving Hebrew lessons, but soon gave up and joined his parents, considering himself a failure. In 1923, his older brother Israel Joshua arranged for him to move to Warsaw to work as a proofreader for the Jewish magazine \"Literarishe Bleter\", of which the brother was an editor.\nUnited States.\nIn 1935, four years before the Nazi invasion, Singer emigrated from Poland to the United States. He was fearful of the growing threat in neighboring Germany. The move separated the author from his common-law first wife Runia Pontsch and son Israel Zamir (1929\u20132014); they immigrated to Moscow and then Palestine. The three met again in 1955.\nSinger settled in New York City, where he took up work as a journalist and columnist for \"The Jewish Daily Forward\" (), a Yiddish-language newspaper. (When he arrived in the US, he only knew three words of English: \"Take a chair\".) After a promising start, he became despondent and for some years felt \"Lost in America\" (title of his 1974 memoir published in Yiddish; published in English in 1981).\nIn 1938, he met Alma Wassermann (n\u00e9e Haimann) (1907\u20131996), a German-Jewish refugee from Munich. They married in 1940, and their union seemed to release energy in him; he returned to prolific writing and to contributing to the \"Forward\". In addition to his pen name of \"Bashevis\", he published under the pen names of \"Warszawski\" (pron. Varshavsky) during World War\u00a0II, and \"D. Segal\". They lived for many years in the Belnord apartment building on Manhattan's Upper West Side. He became a US citizen in 1943.\nIn 1981, Singer delivered a commencement address at the University at Albany and was presented with an honorary doctorate.\nA resident of Surfside, Florida, Singer died on July 24, 1991, after suffering a series of strokes. He was buried in Cedar Park Cemetery, Paramus, New Jersey. 95th Street in Surfside is named Isaac Singer Boulevard in his honor.\nLiterary career.\nSinger's first published story \"Oyf der elter\" (\"In Old Age\", 1925) won the literary competition of the \"Literarishe Bleter\", where he worked as a proofreader. A reflection of his formative years in \"the kitchen of literature\" can be found in many of his later works. In 1933, Singer published his first novel, \"Satan in Goray\", in installments in the literary magazine \"Globus\", which he had co-founded with his lifelong friend, the Yiddish poet Aaron Zeitlin. It is set in the years following 1648, when the Chmielnicki massacres, considered one of the greatest Jewish catastrophes, occurred. The story describes the Jewish messianic cult that arose in the village of Goraj. It explores the effects of the faraway false messiah, Shabbatai Zvi, on the local population. Its last chapter imitates the style of a medieval Yiddish chronicle. With a stark depiction of innocence crushed by circumstance, the novel appears to foreshadow coming danger. In his later work \"The Slave\" (1962), Singer returns to the aftermath of 1648 in a love story between a Jewish man and a gentile woman. He portrays the traumatized and desperate survivors of the historic catastrophe with even deeper understanding.\n\"The Family Moskat\".\nSinger became a literary contributor to \"The Jewish Daily Forward\" only after his older brother Israel died in 1944. That year, Singer published \"The Family Moskat\" in his brother's honor. His own style showed in the daring turns of his action and characters, with double adultery during the holiest of nights of Judaism, the evening of Yom Kippur (despite being printed in a Jewish family newspaper in 1945). He was nearly forced to stop writing the novel by his editor-in-chief, Abraham Cahan, but was saved by readers who wanted the story to continue. After this, his stories\u2014which he had published in Yiddish literary newspapers before\u2014were printed in the \"Forward\" as well. Throughout the 1940s, Singer's reputation grew.\nSinger believed in the power of his native language and thought that there was still a large audience, including in New York, who longed to read in Yiddish. In an interview in \"Encounter\" (February 1979), he said that although the Jews of Poland had died, \"something\u2014call it spirit or whatever\u2014is still somewhere in the universe. This is a mystical kind of feeling, but I feel there is truth in it.\"\nSome of his colleagues and readers were shocked by his all-encompassing view of human nature. He wrote about female homosexuality (\"Zeitl and Rickel\", \"Tseytl un Rikl\"), published in \"The Seance and Other Stories\", transvestism (\"Yentl the Yeshiva Boy\" in \"Short Friday\"), and of rabbis corrupted by demons (\"Zeidlus the Pope\" in \"Short Friday\"). In those novels and stories which refer to events in his own life, he portrays himself unflatteringly (with some degree of accuracy) as an artist who is self-centered yet has a keen eye for the sufferings and tribulations of others.\nLiterary influences.\nSinger had many literary influences. Besides the religious texts he studied, he grew up with a rich array of Jewish folktales and worldly Yiddish detective-stories about Max Spitzkopf and his assistant Fuchs by Jonas Kreppel. He read Russian, including Dostoyevsky's \"Crime and Punishment\" at the age of fourteen. He wrote in memoirs about the importance of the Yiddish translations donated in book-crates from America, which he studied as a teenager in Bilgoraj: \"I read everything: Stories, novels, plays, essays... I read Rajsen, Strindberg, Don Kaplanowitsch, Turgenev, Tolstoy, Maupassant and Chekhov.\" He studied the philosophers Spinoza, Arthur Schopenhauer, and Otto Weininger. Among his Yiddish contemporaries, Singer considered his elder brother to be his greatest artistic example. He was also a life-long friend and admirer of the author and poet Aaron Zeitlin.\nHis short stories, which some critics feel contain his most lasting contributions, were influenced by Anton Chekhov and Guy de Maupassant. From Maupassant, Singer developed a finely grained sense of drama. Like those of the French master, Singer's stories can pack enormous visceral excitement in the space of a few pages. From Chekhov, Singer developed his ability to draw characters of enormous complexity and dignity in the briefest of spaces. In the foreword to his personally selected volume of his finest short stories, Singer describes Chekhov, Maupassant, and \"the sublime scribe of the Joseph story in the Book of Genesis\" as the masters of the short story form.\nOf his non-Yiddish-contemporaries, he was strongly influenced by the writings of Knut Hamsun, many of whose works he later translated, while he had a more critical attitude towards Thomas Mann, whose approach to writing he considered opposed to his own. Contrary to Hamsun's approach, Singer shaped his world not only with the egos of his characters, but also from Jewish moral tradition embodied by his father in the stories about Singer's youth. There was a dichotomy between the life his heroes lead and the life they feel they should lead\u2014which gives his art a modernity his predecessors did not express. Singer's stories often involve highly individualist and anti-conformist characters rebelling alone against society. In a 1974 interview, Singer stated that \"every human being, if he is a real, sensitive human being, feels quite isolated. It is only the people with very little individuality who always feel that they belong.\" He added that \"Since I believe that the purpose of literature is to stress individuality, I also, unwillingly, stress human lonesomeness\".\nSinger's themes of witchcraft, mystery and legend draw on traditional sources, but they are contrasted with a modern and ironic consciousness. They are also concerned with the bizarre and the grotesque.\nAn important strand of his art is intra-familial strife, which he experienced when taking refuge with his mother and younger brother at his uncle's home in Bi\u0142goraj. This is the central theme in Singer's family chronicles such as \"The Family Moskat\" (1950), \"The Manor\" (1967), and \"The Estate\" (1969). Some critics believe these show the influence of Thomas Mann's novel \"Buddenbrooks\"; Singer had translated Mann's \"Der Zauberberg\" (\"The Magic Mountain\") into Yiddish as a young writer.\nLanguage.\nSinger always wrote and published in Yiddish. His novels were serialized in newspapers, which also published his short stories. He edited his novels and stories for publication in English, which was used as the basis for translation into other languages. Some of Singer's stories and novels have not been translated.\nIllustrators.\nThe artists who have illustrated Singer's novels, short stories, and children's books, include Raphael Soyer, Maurice Sendak, Larry Rivers, and Irene Lieblich. Singer personally selected Lieblich to illustrate two of his books for children, \"A Tale of Three Wishes\" and \"The Power of Light: Eight Stories for Hanukkah,\" after seeing her paintings at an Artists Equity exhibition in New York City. A Holocaust survivor, Lieblich was from Zamosc, Poland, a town adjacent to the area where Singer was raised. As their memories of \"shtetl\" life were so similar, Singer found Lieblich's images ideally suited to illustrate his texts. Of her style, Singer wrote that \"her works are rooted in Jewish folklore and are faithful to Jewish life and the Jewish spirit.\"\nSummary.\nSinger published at least 18 novels, 14 children's books, a number of memoirs, essays and articles. He is best known as a writer of short stories, which have been published in more than a dozen collections. The first collection of Singer's short stories in English, \"Gimpel the Fool\", was published in 1957. The title story was translated by Saul Bellow and published in May 1953 in the \"Partisan Review\". Selections from Singer's \"Varshavsky-stories\" in the \"Daily Forward\" were later published in anthologies such as \"My Father's Court\" (1966). Later collections include \"A Crown of Feathers\" (1973), with notable masterpieces in between, such as \"The Spinoza of Market Street\" (1961) and \"A Friend of Kafka\" (1970). His stories and novels reflect the world of the East European Jewry in which he grew up. After his many years in America, his stories also portrayed the world of the immigrants and their pursuit of an elusive American dream, which seems always beyond reach.\nPrior to Singer's winning the Nobel Prize, English translations of dozens of his stories were published in popular magazines like \"The New Yorker,\" \"Playboy\" and \"Esquire\" that published literary works.\nSinger was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1978.\nBetween 1981 and 1989, Singer contributed articles to \"Moment\", an independent magazine which focuses on the life of the American Jewish community.\nFilm adaptations.\nHis novel \"Enemies, A Love Story\" was adapted as a film by the same name (1989) and was quite popular, bringing new readers to his work. It features a Holocaust survivor who deals with varying desires, complex family relationships, and a loss of faith.\nSinger's story, \"Yentl, the Yeshiva Boy\" was adapted into a stage version by Leah Napolin (with Singer), which was the basis for the film \"Yentl\" (1983) starring and directed by Barbra Streisand.\nAlan Arkin starred as Yasha, the principal character in the film version of \"The Magician of Lublin\" (1979), which also featured Shelley Winters, Louise Fletcher, Valerie Perrine and Lou Jacobi. In the final scene, Yasha achieves his lifelong ambition of being able to fly, though not as the magic trick he had originally planned.\nPerhaps the most fascinating Singer-inspired film is \"Mr. Singer's Nightmare and Mrs. Pupkos Beard\" (1974) directed by Bruce Davidson, a renowned photographer who became Singer's neighbor. This unique film is a half-hour mixture of documentary and fantasy for which Singer wrote the script and played the leading role.\nThe 2007 film \"Love Comes Lately\", starring Otto Tausig, was adapted from several of Singer's stories.\nViews and opinions.\nJudaism.\nSinger's relationship to Judaism was complex and unconventional. He identified as a skeptic and a loner, though he felt a connection to his Orthodox roots. Ultimately, he developed a view of religion and philosophy which he called \"private mysticism\". As he put it, \"Since God was completely unknown and eternally silent, He could be endowed with whatever traits one elected to hang upon Him.\"\nSinger was raised Orthodox and learned all the Jewish prayers, studied Hebrew and learned Torah and Talmud. As he recounted in the autobiographical short story \"In My Father's Court\", he broke away from his parents in his early twenties. Influenced by his older brother, who had done the same, he began spending time with non-religious bohemian artists in Warsaw. Although Singer believed in a God, as in traditional Judaism, he stopped attending Jewish religious services of any kind, even on the High Holy Days. He struggled throughout his life with the feeling that a kind and compassionate God would never support the great suffering he saw around him, especially the Holocaust deaths of so many of the Polish Jews from his childhood. In one interview with the photographer Richard Kaplan, he said, \"I am angry at God because of what happened to my brothers\": Singer's older brother died suddenly in February 1944, in New York, of a thrombosis; his younger brother perished in Soviet Russia around 1945, after being deported with his mother and wife to Southern Kazakhstan in Stalin's purges.\nDespite the complexities of his religious outlook, Singer lived in the midst of the Jewish community throughout his life. He did not seem to be comfortable unless he was surrounded by Jews; particularly Jews born in Europe. Although he spoke English, Hebrew, and Polish fluently, he always considered Yiddish his natural tongue. He always wrote in Yiddish and he was the last notable American author to be writing in this language. After he had achieved success as a writer in New York, Singer and his wife began spending time during the winters in Miami with its Jewish community, many of them New Yorkers.\nEventually, as senior citizens, they moved to Miami. They identified closely with the Ashkenazi Jewish community. After his death, Singer was buried in a traditional Jewish ceremony in Cedar Park Cemetery, a Jewish cemetery in Paramus, New Jersey.\nVegetarianism.\nSinger was a prominent Jewish vegetarian for the last 35 years of his life and often included vegetarian themes in his works. In his short story \"The Slaughterer\", he described the anguish of an appointed slaughterer trying to reconcile his compassion for animals with his job of killing them. He felt that the ingestion of meat was a denial of all ideals and all religions: \"How can we speak of right and justice if we take an innocent creature and shed its blood?\" When asked if he had become a vegetarian for health reasons, he replied: \"I did it for the health of the chickens.\"\nVegetarianism is a recurrent theme in Singer's novel \"Enemies, a Love Story\". One character, a Holocaust survivor, declares that \"God himself eats meat\u2014human flesh. There are no vegetarians\u2014none. If you had seen what I have seen, you would know that God approves of slaughter,\" and another character points out \"that what the Nazis had done to the Jews, man was doing to animals.\" In \"The Letter Writer\", Singer wrote \"In relation to [animals], all people are Nazis; for the animals, it is an eternal Treblinka,\" which became a classic reference in the comparison of animal exploitation with the Holocaust.\nIn the preface to Steven Rosen's \"Food for Spirit: Vegetarianism and the World Religions\" (1986), Singer wrote, \"When a human kills an animal for food, he is neglecting his own hunger for justice. Man prays for mercy, but is unwilling to extend it to others. Why should man then expect mercy from God? It's unfair to expect something that you are not willing to give. It is inconsistent. I can never accept inconsistency or injustice. Even if it comes from God. If there would come a voice from God saying, 'I'm against vegetarianism!' I would say, 'Well, I am for it!' This is how strongly I feel in this regard.\"\nPolitics.\nSinger described himself as \"conservative,\" adding that \"I don't believe by flattering the masses all the time we really achieve much.\" His conservative side was most apparent in his Yiddish writing and journalism, where he was openly hostile to Marxist sociopolitical agendas. In \"Forverts\" he once wrote, \"It may seem like terrible \"apikorses\" [heresy], but conservative governments in America, England, France, have handled Jews no worse than liberal governments... The Jew's worst enemies were always those elements that the modern Jew convinced himself (really hypnotized himself) were his friends.\"\nZionism.\nIssac Bashevis was ambivalent on the question of Zionism, and he viewed the immigration of Jews to Palestine critically. As a Polish Jew from Warsaw, he was historically confronted with the question of the Jewish fate during Nazi persecution. He exercised social responsibility towards the immigration of European and American Jewish groups to Israel after World War II. Strictly based on Jewish family doctrine rather than politics and socialism, his former partner Runya Pontsch and his son Israel Zamir immigrated to Palestine in 1938, in order to live a typical kibbutz life there. In his story \"The Certificate\" (1967), which has autobiographical character, he fictionalizes this question from a time in the mid-1920s when he was himself considering moving to the British Mandate Palestine. The protagonist of the story decides to leave Palestine, however, to move back into his shtetl. For Singer then, Zionism becomes the \"road not taken\". However, through his journalistic assignments in late 1955, Singer made his first trip to Israel, accompanied by his wife Alma. Describing the trip to his Yiddish readers, he introduces the world for the first time to the young state of Israel. In a change of mind, he then describes the Land of Israel as a \"reality, and part of everyday life.\" Interestingly enough, he notes the cultural tensions between Sephardic and Ashkenazi Jewish people during the boat trip from Naples to Haifa and during his stay in the new nation. With the description of Jewish immigration camps in the new land, he foresaw the difficulties and socio-economic tensions in Israel, and hence turned back to his critical views of Zionism. He scrutinized the ideology further, as he was advancing his thought of critical Zionism.\nSinger was a member of the executive committee of the Writers and Artists for Peace in the Middle East, a pro-Israel group. In 1984, he signed a letter protesting German arms sales to Saudi Arabia.\nLegacy and honors.\nSinger is the only American Nobel Laureate in Literature not to receive a Pulitzer Prize award or citation.\nPublished works.\nNote: Publication dates refer to English editions, not the Yiddish originals, which often predate the versions in translation by 10 to 20 years.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15513", "revid": "20366851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15513", "title": "Islamic eschatology", "text": "Aspect of Islamic theology concerning the end times and afterlife\nIslamic eschatology includes the afterlife, apocalyptic signs of the End Times, and Last Judgment. It is fundamental to Islam, as life after death is one of the religion's Six Pillars. Resurrection is divided into Lesser Resurrection (\"\") and Greater Resurrection (). The former deals with the time between an individual's death and the Last Judgement. Islam acknowledges bodily resurrection. Only a few philosophers are an exception.\nFrom the 8th or 9th century onwards, Muslims increasingly believed that the day of the Greater Resurrection would be announced by several signs of an impending apocalypse. Such beliefs are recorded and elaborated upon in apocalyptic literature, which introduced new figures absent in the Quran, such as the \"Dajjal\" (Antichrist) and \"Mahdi\" (Savior). Although some themes are common across all works, there is no standardized version of apocalyptic events.\nClosely related is the matter of the fate of the individual, with branches of Islam reaching different conclusions. The Mu'tazilites hold that God's goodness obligates God to reward good actions and to punish evil actions. The Asharites believe that God neither needs to punish sins nor reward good ones. Like Maturidis, Asharis hold, in contrast to Mu'tazilites, that sinners among Muslims will eventually leave Hell. Asharis and Twelver Shias generally agree that non-Muslims who refuse to acknowledge Muhammad as the last prophet go to Hell. Neo-Salafis, such as Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar, hold that Muslims of other sects also go to Hell, although Sunnis and Twelver Shias may leave Hell eventually.\nAnother topic of discussion is the temporal place of Paradise and Hell. According to most Sunnis and Shias, Paradise and Hell coexist with and influence the contemporary world. Throughout Muslim literature, visits to and depictions of Paradise and Hell are vividly described. Mu'tazilites, on the other hand, argue that the purpose of Paradise and Hell is to reward or punish and are thus only created after the Last Judgment.\nThe \"Duny\u0101/\u0100khirah\" divide.\nIslam, like Christianity, conceptualizes the relationship between \"Duny\u0101\" (world) and \"\u0100khirah\" (hereafter) in a diachronic timeline.8 Humanity's history in the world begins with the Fall of Adam and ends with God's Judgement.8 In contrast to Christianity, however, Adam's fall does not result in an utter separation from the transcendent world.8 The two otherworldly abodes (paradise and hell) exist in proximity, both in a spatial as well as in a temporal sense, to the \"Duny\u0101\".11\nSince in Islamic beliefs, God does not reside in paradise, Islamic tradition was able to bridge the world and the hereafter without violating God's transcendence.11 Islamic literature is filled with interactions between the world and the hereafter and the world is closely intertwined with both paradise and hell.9 Muhammad visited during his \"Mi\u02bfr\u0101j\" (Night Journey) both paradise and hell.6 The same is said about the Islamic prophet \u02beIdr\u012bs.6 The palm-tree as well as the pomegranate are supposed to originate from paradise.8 A \"Wal\u012b\" (saint) grabs a pomegranate out of a vision from paradise.233 Muhammad reportedly states that river flows from hell.10 The infernal tree Zaqqum manifests in this world.9 Some animals, scorpions and snakes in particular, are said to travel between the world and hell.9 People may interact with the souls of the deceased, receive blessings, or ease the dead's abode in the otherworld. M\u0101tur\u012bdi scholar Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi (944\u2013983) explains that the otherworldly abodes coexist in order to inspire hope and cause fear.168\nThe overlap of the earthly and otherworldly domain is anchored in the Quran itself.41 Challenging the pre-Islamic Arabian conception of time (\"dahr\") as a linear and irreversible process, time has become subject to God.40 In general, the Quran \"is lacking a notion of time as divided into past, present and future.\"40 Therefore, Quranic eschatology cannot be understood through a linear conceptualization of time.41 The difference between the earth and the otherworld is not that of time but rather that of space.41 Paradise and hell are spatially connected to earth. At Judgement Day, paradise and hell do not perish, nor are they created anew, rather paradise and hell are \"brought near\" (26:90-91) Before that event, paradise is suggested to be somewhere in the high regions of the world and hell located in the depths.42\nThe coexistence of the \"duny\u0101\" with the otherworld was contested by the Mu'tazila. They argued that since before the Day of Resurrection all except God will be destroyed by the trumpet, paradise and hell have no function until after the annihilation of the world. However, God creates only with a purpose. By denying the stay of souls in either abode, paradise and hell have no function before the Day of Judgement and thus, must be created afterwards.167-168 M\u0101tur\u012bdism objects by asserting that paradise and hell do fulfill the before mentioned functions. Ash'ariya argued that although the trumpet's sounding will precede all being destroyed, creation was a \"constant process\".\nMuslim theologians (\"mutakallimun\") referred to multiple verses of the Quran for evidence that paradise and hell coexist with the current world. It is implied someone has gone to the Garden or the hell (3:169, 36:13-26, 66:10, 3:10-11, 6:93). In the Story of Adam and Eve, they once resided in Garden of Eden, which is often considered to be Jannah. This identification, however, is not universal. Al-Balluti (887 \u2013 966) reasoned that the Garden of Eden lacked the perfection and eternal character of a final paradise:167 Adam and Eve lost the primordial paradise, while the paradisiacal afterlife lasts forever; if Adam and Eve were in the otherworldly paradise, the devil (\"Shai\u1e6d\u0101n\") could not have entered and deceived them, since there is no evil or idle talk in paradise; Adam slept in his garden, but there is no sleep in paradise.167\nThe discussion may have been incited by Jahm bin \u1e62afw\u0101n who claimed that paradise and hell will end, but coexist with the world. Insisting on the impermanence of everything but God, he asserts that \"eternity\" is used hyperbolically and means that people abide in paradise and hell only as long as both worlds last.169 Most Sunnis, however, hold the opinion that paradise and hell are eternal.169\nApocalyptic literature.\nThere is no universally accepted apocalyptic tradition among either Sunnis or Shias. The Quran is primarily an eschatological work, not an apocalyptic one. The Quran, concerned about the impending Day of Judgement, leaves no room for apocalyptic events in the far future. Apocalyptic narratives are only composed 150-200 years later from different religious elements. The first known complete Islamic apocalyptic work is the \"Kit\u0101b al-Fitan\" (Book of Tribulations) by Naim ibn Hammad.\nThe extensive usage of Hebrew and Syriac vocabulary in Islamic apocalyptic writings suggests that apocalyptic narratives formed from vivid exchange between different religious traditions. These exchanges most likely did not happen among scholars, but orally among the uneducated masses. A lot of apocalyptic material is attributed to Ka'b al-Ahbar and former Jewish converts to Islam, while other transmitters indicate a Christian background. Christian apocalyptic literature was known at latest since the 9th century in Arabic.\nAlthough apocalyptic literature barely cites the Quran, the narratives refer and paraphrase Islamic sacred scripture. In contrast to the method of usage of \"\u1e25ad\u012bth\", apocalyptic literature dictates the Quran rather than explaining the text. Thus, David Cook suggested that at a certain point, the Quran was rather competing with apocalyptic literature than they were complementary.\nIslamic apocalyptic narratives were later expanded and developed by Islamic authors notably Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid, al-Ghazali, Ibn Arabi, Al-Qurtubi, Ibn Kathir, and as-Suyuti). The authors list various signs as meanings of the arrivals of the apocalypse. Some references to the Quran were frequently understood in apocalyptic terms, such as \"fitna\", \"Dabba\", and Gog and Magog. At the time of the Mongol conquests, ibn Kathir identified the latter with the historical Turks and Mongols. The apocalyptic writings frequently feature extra-Quranic figures such as the \"Dajj\u0101l\" (corresponding to Armilos and Anti-Christ) and the \"Mahd\u012by\". The \"Dajj\u0101l\" is supposed to become a cause of misguidance and causes havoc on earth, but is ultimately stopped by either the \"Mahd\u012by\" or Jesus, who returns from heaven.\nAccording to Islamic apocalyptic literature, the day of judgement (or ) will be preceded by a number of immoralities and catastrophes, as well as the advent of apocalyptic figures. They are loosely based on the Quran and the hadith, collected around 150\u2013200 years after the canonization of Islamic scripture and features several elements from other religions. There is no canonical accepted version of the signs of the Endtimes by either Sunnis or Shias. While interpretations of what the Quran and hadith say about the end times are \"diverse and complex\", the signs of Judgment Day's arrival include disruptions in the order of both human morality and the natural world; but also the appearance of dajjal and prophet Isa , which \"is seen to represent the ultimate victory of the ummah of Islam ... in some senses\".\nTraditionally interest in \"apocalyptic speculation\" was strongest among mainstream Shia (Twelver Shia), Isma'ili Islam, Sunni on the \"doctrinal and geographic margins\"\u2014such as present day Morocco\u2014but was weaker in the heartland of Sunni Islam. Various eschatological interpretations exist within Shia Islam. The concept of seven celestial Hells, as well as the idea that after death but before the End Times, one's soul would temporarily wait in either Paradise or Hellfire, are accounted for throughout Isma'ili Shi'i literature. Shia tradition broadly tends to recognize the coming of the Mahdi as signifying the coming punishment for non-believers.\nResurrection and final judgement.\nIn Islam, \"the promise and threat\" (\"wa\u02bfd wa-wa\u02bf\u012bd\") of Judgement Day ( or ),\nhas been called \"the dominant message\" of the Quran,\nand is considered a fundamental tenet of faith by all Muslims, and one of the six articles of Islamic faith. The Day of Resurrection is mentioned frequently in the Quran, especially in early Meccan Surahs, when all beings, including humans, animals, and jinn, will be judged.\nThe two themes \"central to the understanding of Islamic eschatology\" are:\nResurrection theories.\nAlthough Islamic philosophers and scholars were in general agreement on a bodily resurrection after death, interpretations differ in regard to the specifications of bodily resurrection. Only a few philosophers, such as Ibn Sina, explicitly rejected bodily resurrection, arguing that true pleasure cannot be experienced through the body, and that returning to it at the time of the Greater Resurrection would be unjust.183-185 The most prominent theories on the nature of bodily resurrection are the following:\nThe trials, tribulations and details associated with it are detailed in the Quran and the hadith (sayings of Muhammad); these have been elaborated on in creeds, Quranic commentaries (tafs\u1ecbrs), theological writing, eschatological manuals to provide more details and a sequence of events on the Day. Islamic expositors and scholarly authorities who have explained the subject in detail include al-Ghazali, Ibn Kathir, Ibn Majah, Muhammad al-Bukhari, and Ibn Khuzaymah.\nLesser Resurrection.\nSmall Resurrection (\"al-qiyamah al-sughra\") happens, when the soul is separated from the body. The soul then turns to the afterlife (\"akhira\" or \"malakut\"), where it is interrogated by two angels, Munkar and Nakir.\nThis grave period is known as the Barzakh, similar to the intermediate state in Christianity.\nGreater Resurrection.\nAt divine judgement, the resurrected will stand in a grand assembly, each person's \"Book of Deeds\" \u2013 where \"every small and great thing is recorded\" \u2013 will be read, and ultimate judgement made. The resurrected will then walk over the bridge of As-Sir\u0101t, those judged worthy for the Garden continuing to their heavenly abode, those damned to The Fire, falling off the bridge into the pit of Jahannam. There will also be a punishment of the grave (for those who disbelieved) between death and the resurrection.\nNot everyone consigned to hell will remain there, as it is believed by both scholars and lay Muslims that \"all but the \"mushrikun\", those who have committed the worst sin of impugning the \"taw\u1e25\u012bd\" of God, have the possibility of being saved;\" and God's intercession to save sinners from hellfire is a \"major theme\" in popular Islamic stories about Judgement Day.\nEschatological theological questions.\nScholars did not always agree on questions of who might go to hell; whether the creation of heaven and hell would wait until Judgement Day; whether there was a state between heaven and hell; whether those consigned to hell would be there for eternity.\nBasis of belief.\n\"Fear, hope, and finally ... faith\", have been given (by Jane I. Smith, Yvonne Y. Haddad) as motivations offered by the Quran for the belief of Muslims in an Afterlife, although some (Ab\u016b A\u02bfla al-Mawd\u016bd\u012b) have asserted it is simply a matter of reason:\nThe fact is that whatever Muhammad (peace be upon him) has told us about life after death is clearly borne out by reason. Although our belief in that Day is based upon our implicit trust in the Messenger of God, rational reflection not only confirms this belief but it also reveals that Muhammad's (peace be upon him) teachings in this respect are much more reasonable and understandable than all other view-points about life after death.\nEarly Muslim thought on damnation.\nOne of the primary beliefs pertaining to Islamic eschatology during the Early Muslim Period was that all humans could receive God's mercy and were worthy of salvation. These early depictions even show how small, insignificant deeds were enough to warrant mercy. Most early depictions of the end of days depict only those who reject \"Tawhid\", (the concept of monotheism), are subject to eternal punishment. However, everybody is held responsible for their actions. Concepts of reward and punishment were seen as beyond this world, a view that is also held today.\nLiteral or allegorical.\nAccording to scholars Jane I. Smith, Yvonne Y. Haddad, \"the vast majority of believers\", understand verses of the Quran on Jannah (and hellfire) \"to be real and specific, anticipating them\" with joy or terror.\nBesides the material notion of the paradise, descriptions of it are also interpreted as allegories, whose meaning is the state of joy believers will experience in the afterlife. For some theologians, seeing God is not a question of sight, but of awareness of God's presence. Although early Sufis, such as Hallaj, took the descriptions of paradise literal, later Sufi traditions usually stressed out the allegorical meaning.\nOn the issue of Judgement Day, early Muslims debated whether scripture should be interpreted literally or figuratively, and the school of thought that prevailed (Ash\u02bfar\u012b) \"affirmed that such things as\" connected with Judgement day as \"the individual records of deeds (including the paper, pen, and ink with which they are inscribed), the bridge, the balance, and the pond\" are \"realities\", and \"to be understood in a concrete and literal sense.\"\nModernist and postmodernist thought.\nAccording to Smith and Haddad, \"The great majority of contemporary Muslim writers, ... choose not to discuss the afterlife at all\". Islamic Modernists, according to Smith and Haddad, express a \"kind of embarrassment with the elaborate traditional detail concerning life in the grave and in the abodes of recompense, called into question by modern rationalists\". Consequently, most of \"modern Muslim Theologians\" either \"silence the issue\" or reaffirm \"the traditional position that the reality of the afterlife must not be denied but that its exact nature remains unfathomable\".\nThe beliefs of Pakistani modernist Muhammad Iqbal (died 1938), were similar to the Sufi \"spiritual and internalized interpretations of hell\" of ibn \u02bfArab\u012b, and Rumi, seeing paradise and hell \"primarily as metaphors for inner psychic\" developments. Thus \"hellfire is actually a state of realization of one's failures as a human being\", and not a supernatural subterranean realm. Egyptian modernist Muhammad \u02bfAbduh, thought it was sufficient to believe in the existence of an afterlife with rewards and punishment to be a true believer, even if you ignored \"clear\" (\"\u1e93\u0101hir\") hadith about hell.\nGender equity.\nAmina Wadud notes that the Qur'an does not mention any specific gender when talking about hell, Q. https://, for example, states that \"the guilty are immortal in hell's torment\"; and when discussing paradise, includes women, Q. https://, for example, states that \"Beautiful of mankind is love of the joys (that come) from women and offspring...\"\n\"Limbo\" or \"al-a\u02bfr\u0101f\" in Islam.\nIn terms of classical Islam, \"the only options\" afforded by the Qur'an for the resurrected are an eternity of horrible punishments of The Fire or the delightful rewards of The Garden. Islamic tradition has raised the question of whether or not consignment to the Fire is eternal, or eternal for all, but \"has found no reason to amend\" the limit of two options in the afterlife. But one verse in the Quran has \"led to a great deal of speculation concerning the possibility of a third place\".\n\"What some have called\" the \"Limbo\" Theory of Islam, as described by Jane Smith and Yvonne Haddad, implies that some individuals are not immediately sent to The Fire or The Garden, but are held in a state of limbo. Smith and Haddad believe it is \"very doubtful\" that the Qur'anic meant for \"al-a\u02bfr\u0101f\" to be understood as \"an abode for those ... in an intermediate category, but this has come to be the most commonly held interpretation\".\nAs for who the inhabitants of the inhabits \"al-a\u02bfr\u0101f\" are, the \"majority of exegetes\" support the theory that they are persons whose actions balance in terms of merit and demerit \u2013 whose good deeds keep them from the Fire and whose evil deeds keep them from the Garden. They will be the last to enter the Garden, at the mercy of their Lord.\nThe concept of eternity.\nIn Classical Islam, there was a consensus among the theological community regarding the finality of Jannah (also called Heaven, paradise, the Gardens); after Judgement Day, faithful servants of God would find themselves here for eternity. However, some practitioners in the early Muslim community held that the other abode of the hereafter (hell/Jahannam), or at least part of that abode, might not be eternal. This belief was based upon an interpretations of scripture that since the upper, less tortuous levels of hell were reserved for Muslims who were only in hell for as long as God deemed necessary. Once Muslims had their sins purged and were allowed into heaven, these levels would be empty and the need for their existence gone. These interpretations are centered on verses 11:106\u2013107 in the Quran, stating,\n\"As for those who are wretched, they shall be in the Fire, wherein there shall be for them groaning and wailing, abiding therein for so long as the heavens and the earth endure, save as thy Lord wills. Surely thy Lord does whatsoever He wills\".\nThis possibility that God may yet commute a sentence to hell, interprets (parts of) hell as being similar in function to purgatory in Christianity, with the exception to this comparison being that hell in this context is for the punishment of the sinner's complete body, as opposed to only the soul being punished in purgatory. Arguments questioning the permanence of hell take the view that hell is not necessarily solely there to punish the evil, but to purify their souls, whereas the purpose of the Garden is simply to reward the righteous.\nEvidence against the concept of hell being in part temporary, is the Quran verse stating that hell will endure as long as Heaven will, which has been established as eternal.\nPredestination.\nOrthodox Islam teaches the doctrine of \"Qadar\" (, aka Predestination, or divine destiny in Islam), whereby everything that has happened and will happen in the universe\u2014including sinful human behavior\u2014is commanded by God. At the same time, we human beings are responsible for our actions and rewarded or punished for them in the Afterlife.\n\"Qadar\"/predestination/divine destiny, is one of Sunni Islam's six articles of faith and is mentioned in the Quran.\nOf course, the fate of human beings in the Afterlife is especially crucial. It is reflected in Quranic verses such as\nMuhammad also talked about the doctrine of predestination multiple times during his mission. Thus the consensus of the Sunni Muslim community has been that scripture indicates predestination.\nNonetheless, some Muslim theologians have argued against predestination, (including at least some Shia Muslims, whose article of faith includes \"Adalah\" (justice), but not \"Qadar\". At least some Shia \u2013 such as Naser Makarem Shirazi \u2013 denounce predestination).\nOpponents of predestination in early Islam, (\"al-Qadariyah\", \"Mu\u02bftazila\") argued that if God has already determined everything that will happen, God's human creation cannot really have free will over decisions to do good or evil, or control of whether they suffer eternal torment in Jahannam\u2014which is something that (the opponents believe) a just God would never allow to happen.\nWhile \"Qadar\" is the consensus of Muslims, it is also an issue scholars discourage debate and discussion about. Hadith narrate Muhammad warning his followers to \"refrain from speaking about \"qadar\"\"; and according to the creed of Al-Tahawi, \"the principle of providence\" is such a secret that God did not let even angels, prophets and messengers in on the mystery.\nWho will enter heaven or hell.\nScholars do not all agree on who will end up in Jannah and who in Jahannam, and the criteria for deciding. Issues include whether all Muslims, even those who've committed major sins, will end up in Jannah; whether any non-Muslims will be saved or all will go to Jahannam.\nAccording to the Quran, the basic criterion for salvation in the afterlife is the belief in the oneness of God (), angels, revealed books, messengers, as well as repentance to God, and doing good deeds (\"amal salih\").51 This is qualified by the doctrine that ultimately salvation can only be attained through God's judgement.\nMuslim scholars mostly agree that ultimately all Muslims will be saved (though many may need to be purified by a spell in hellfire but disagree about the possibility for salvation of non-Muslims.\nThe idea that jinn as well as humans could find salvation was widely accepted, Like humans, their destiny in the hereafter depends on whether they accept God's guidance. The surah Al-Jinn says:\nAnd among us are those who have submitted \u02f9to Allah\u02fa and those who are deviant. So \u02f9as for\u02fa those who submitted, it is they who have attained Right Guidance. And as for the deviant, they will be fuel for Hell.\u2019\" (Q. https://)\nAngels, who are not subject to desire and do not commit sin, are found in paradise. The devils cannot return to paradise, because Islamic scripture states that their father, the fallen angel Iblis, was banished, but never suggests that he or his offspring were forgiven or promised to return.46\nScholars.\nMuslim scholars arguing in favor of non-Muslims' being able to enter paradise cite the verse:\nThose arguing against non-Muslim salvation regard this verse to have applied only until the arrival of Muhammad, after which it was abrogated by another verse:\nAlthough the Quran acknowledges the Bible as gospel, rejecting Muhammad and his message is seen as a rejection of salvation by them.\nAccording to Mohammad Hassan Khalil, on the subject of whether self-proclaimed non-Muslims might be allowed into Jannah, Islamic theologians can be classified as\nBased on these categories, four \"well-known and particularly influential Muslim thinkers\" can be sorted as:\nAsh'arism.\nAsh\u02bfarism (/\u00e6\u0283\u0259\u02c8ri\u02d0/; Arabic: \u0623\u0634\u0639\u0631\u064a\u0629: al-\u02beAsh\u02bfar\u012byah), one of the main Sunni schools of Islamic theology, founded by the Islamic scholar, Sh\u0101fi\u02bf\u012b jurist, Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan al-Ash\u02bfar\u012b in the 10th century, is known for an optimistic perspective on salvation for Muslims, repeatedly addressing God's mercy over God's wrath.165 However, according to Ash'arism, God is neither obligated to punish disobedience nor to reward obedience.167\nAsh'aris hold revelation necessary to understand good and evil, as well as religious truths.109 Accordingly, revelation is necessary to reach moral and religious truths and thus, people who hear from a prophet or messenger are obligated to follow the revealed religion. However, those who have not received revelation are not obligated, and can hope for salvation.215\nAsh'arite scholar al-Ghazali divided non-Muslims into three categories for purposes of the Afterlife according to Mohammad Hassan Khalil:\nOf these three, only the last group would be punished.\nGhazali distinguished between the \"saved\" and \"those who will attain success\". Therefore, righteous non-Muslims will neither enter hell nor Jannah, but will stay in al-Araf (a realm between Jannah and Jahannam inhabited by those who are neither entirely evil nor entirely good).\nMaturidism.\nM\u0101tur\u012bdism (: \"al-M\u0101tur\u012bdiyyah\") is also one of the main Sunni schools of Islamic theology developed and formalized by the Islamic scholar, \u1e24anaf\u012b jurist Ab\u016b Man\u1e63\u016br al-M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b in the 10th century. M\u0101tur\u012bdi scholars are thought to have been less optimistic about the chances of sinners entering paradise than Ash'aris, but more optimistic than Mu\u02bftazila. They agree that Muslims who have committed grave sins will be punished but generally acknowledge that even these people will eventually enter paradise.177 Regarding the fate of non-Muslims, scholars have different opinions.110 M\u0101tur\u012bdism holds people responsible for believing in a creator due to their intellectual capacities, even if they haven't heard about any prophetic mission.5215110 While some (like Rifat Atay) regard M\u0101tur\u012bdism to be exclusivistic, only allowing people who are Muslims to enter paradise,110 others argue that M\u0101tur\u012bdi understood that \"to believe in Islam\" meant having a subjective conceptualization of God and his laws by reason alone. This fits the doctrine, upheld by M\u0101tur\u012bdism, that human reason suffices to grasp good and evil, and arrive at religious truths.109 Accordingly, people are judged by their degree of understanding God's universal law, not by their adherence to a particular belief system.215110 In modern times, Yohei Matsuyama largely agrees with this interpretation.5 According to Abu'l-Qasim Ishaq, children cannot be considered unbelievers, thus all of them go to paradise.\nMu\u02bftazila.\nMu\u02bftazila ( \"\") emphasized God's justice, free will, and the responsibility of each human being for their actions. They have been called the \"best known exponents\" of \"Qadariyah\", the idea that human free will was necessary \"as a guarantee of divine justice\". Compared to Maturidi and Ash\u02bfar\u012b, Mu\u02bftazila had the least amount of \"salvific optimism\".\nThe \"divine threat\" (\"al-wa'id\") and \"divine promise\" (\"al wa'd\") became key tenets of the Mu'tazilites,173 who stressed that they applied to both Muslims and non-Muslims. This meant that those who committed grave or heinous sins (), even Muslims, might denied entry to paradise forever.173 The only way for a grave sinner to be forgiven, many theologians believed, is by repentance (\"tawba\"). Mu'tazilites believed God's justice obligated Him to forgive those who had repented (other schools believed He was not so constrained).175 The Mu'tazilites stress on individual accountability meant a rejection of intercession (\"Shafa'a\") on behalf of Muhammad.178 Another controversial belief of many (but not all)168 Mu'tazilites was that paradise and hell would be created only after Judgement Day. This meant rejection of the commonly accepted idea that paradise and hell coexist with the contemporary world. Their reasoning was that since God does everything for a purpose, and since paradise and hell are created to reward or punish people, they will only be created after judgement has been passed on people and they are assigned to these abodes.167\u2013168\nTwelver Shia.\nLike most Sunni, Shia Islam hold that all Muslims will eventually go to Jannah.\nOn the fate of non-Muslims in the hereafter, Shia Islam (or at least cleric Ayatullah Mahdi Hadavi Tehrani of Al-Islam.org), takes a view similar to Ash'arism. Tehrani divides non-Muslims into two groups: the heedless and stubborn who will go to hell and the ignorant who will not \"if they are truthful to their own religion\": \nAlso like mainstream schools, and unlike Mu\u02bftazila, Twelver Shia hold that Jannah and hellfire \"exist at present ... according to the Qur`an and ahadith\". However, they will not \"become fully apparent and represented\" until Judgement Day. As for three other issues in Islamic eschatology:\nthese three \"types\" of jannah (or Jahannam) are \"all simply manifestations of the ultimate, eternal heaven and hell\".\nIslamic Modernism and Salafism.\nModernist scholars Muhammad Abduh and Rashid Rida rejected the notion that the People of the Book would be excluded from Jannah, based on Q. https:// (see above). The Fate of the unlearned is also a matter of dispute within Islamic theology. Like many modern scholars advocated, including Mawlana Ali, Ismail Hakki Izmirli, and Yusuf al-Qaradawi, Muhammad Abduh and Rashid Rida asserted the doctrine of a finite hell \"fan\u0101\u02be al-n\u0101r\" (\"demise of hell\").284\nTurkish theologian S\u00fcleyman Ate\u015f cites the Quran https:// to argue that there are good and bad people in any religion, and that some Muslims may not enter paradise, but those who believe without doubt in the hereafter and a God without partners, and who do good and useful deeds may enter paradise, whatever their religions.\nNeo-Salafi trends commonly reject inclusive salvation theories. Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar, an eminent Salafi scholar, can serve to illustrate the core points of Salafi beliefs.284 Like proto-Salafi ibn Qayyim, he rejects the doctrine of \"fan\u0101\u02be al-n\u0101r\".284 He interpretes a hadith that there are 73 three Islamic sects from which only one is saved in accordance with his own sectarian beliefs.284 Only those who stick close to the Quran and the Sunnah go to paradise, while those he consider slightly deviant, such as Mu'tzilites and Kharijites go to hell temporarily, while \"extreme\" groups such as Isma'ilis, Alevites, and Druze, go to hell forever.284 Al-Ashqar elaborates on a hadith that \"most inhabitants of hell are women\" that women are more likely to go to hell due to intellectual deficiencies. He adds, despite their flaws, there are also many good and pious women.285 Similar, most Salafi authors reiterate works produced in the premodern period, but add personal preferences adjusting them to comply to their moral and sectarian convictions.285\nIslamic eschatology in the 20th and 21st centuries.\nPrior to the 20th century, Islam had \"strongly emphasized the hereafter\" (\"\u0101khira\"). Desire to counter colonialism and \"achieve material and technological parity with the West\" turned modern thinkers to stress this world (\"duny\u0101\"), without suggesting \"\u0101khira\" was less important.\nThe focus on end times/Eschatology in Islam has tended to occur among those less exposed to scholarly learning. In the 1980s however, it again became much more popular generally. Islamic leaders and scholars have always urged Muslim to be prepared for Judgement Day, but \"the particulars of the end of the world are not a mainstream concern in Islam,\" according to Graeme Wood.\nHowever, in 2012 poll conducted by the Pew Research Center found that 50% or more respondents in several Muslim-majority countries (Lebanon, Turkey, Malaysia, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iraq, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco) expected the Mahdi (the final redeemer according to Islam) to return during their lifetime. The expectation is most common in Afghanistan (83%), followed by Iraq (72%), Turkey (68%), Tunisia (67%), Malaysia (62%), Pakistan (60%), Lebanon (56%), and Muslims in southern Thailand (57%).\nStories of end times and doomsday tend to be passed on as bedtime stories or informal talk among the lay Muslims, rather than in the Imam's Friday \"khutbah\". \"Even Muslims with low levels of knowledge have heard parts of parts of it\", according to scholar Jean Pierre Filiu. In Islamic bookstores, their \"dramatic and sensational stories of final battles between good and evil, supernatural powers, the ultimate rise of a Muslim elite,\" are naturally more attention getting than more orthodox/studious works on prayer, purity or the lives of exemplary Muslims. More official Muslim sources have often either kept quiet about apocalyptic hadith or outright denied their existence\u2014an example being Nihad Awad of the Council on American-Islamic Relations who stated \"There is no apocalyptic bloodbath in Islam.\"\nCharacters can also be used by some religious groups with some shifts; Said Nursi with the concept and meaning modifications in adapting to the time he lived in, highlights the concept of Sufyani instead of Dajjal and applies numerologic methods to some \u0100yah/hadith fragments, making signs of his followers community as Mahdi (Collective ID; Sahs al-manawi\u201d) and possible dates for apocalypse.\nPopular Islamic pamphlets and tracts on the End Times have always been in circulation, but until around 2010 their \"impact on political and theological thinking was practically nil\" among Sunnis. Interest in the End Times is particularly strong among jihadis and \"since the mid-2000s, the apocalyptic currents in jihadism have surged.\" As of 2011, the belief that the end of the world is at hand and will be precipitated by an apocalyptic Great Battle has been noted as a \"fast-growing belief in Muslim countries\" though still a minority belief.\nShi\u02bfi Islam.\nAccording to J.-P. Filiu, the uprising of the (Shi\u02bfi) Mahdi Army in Iraq and July 2006 war between Israel and (Shi\u02bfi) Hizbullah are \"at least in part\" a consequence of \"mounting eschatological expectations\" coming from copious literature preaching that the return of the Hidden Imam was imminent; literature emanating from the Shi\u02bfi seminaries and scholars of holy city of Najaf, Iraq, from Lebanon, and from Iran during the administration of its president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. One Shi\u02bfi Ayatollah, Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, revered as \"the fifth martyr\" of Shi\u02bfi Islam (killed by Saddam Hussein), went to the trouble of trying to explain how the Hidden Imam could be over 1000 years old, and why the present is a propitious time for the reappearance of him. Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi army waged a violent struggle against the American military through 2004, and its ranks swelled with thousands of recruits. Muqtada's political faction won seats in parliament. During Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's presidency (2005-2013), he shared with Iranians his \"avowed conviction\" that believers must actively work for the Mahdi's reappearance, despite this bringing him \"into conflict with the highest authorities of Shiism\".\nPopular apocalyptic literature.\n\"Dramatic and sensational stories\" of the apocalypse first made an impact in the mid-1980s when Said Ayyub's \"Al-Mas\u012bh al-Dajj\u0101l\" (The Anti-Christ) started a whole new genre of Islamic \"apocalyptic fiction\" or \"millenarian speculation\" throughout the Arab world. The book was so successful Ayyub went on to write a half-dozen other spinoff books, inspired imitators who enjoyed even greater success (Muhammad Izzat Arif, Muhammad Isa Dawud, and Mansur AbdelHakim).\nThe book (and the genre) was noteworthy for rupturing the \"organic link between Islamic tradition and the last days of the world\", using Western sources (such as Gustave Le Bon and William Guy Carr) that previously would have been ignored; and lack of Sahih Bukhari (i.e. top quality) hadith (he does quote Ibn Kathir and some hadith \"repeated at second hand\"); and for an obsessively anti-Jewish point of view (\"in all great transformations of thought, there is a Jewish factor, avowed and plain, or else hidden and secret\", \"the Jews are planning the Third World War in order to eliminate the Islamic world and all opposition to Israel\", and cover art featuring a grotesque cartoon figure with a Star of David and large hooked nose).\nUnlike traditional popular works of Islamic eschatology that kept close to scripture and classical manuals of eschatology in describing \"al-Dajj\u0101l\", Said Ayyub portrayed the Dajj\u0101l as 1) the true Jewish messiah, that Jews had been waiting for, 2) a figure who will appear or reappear not only in end times, but one who has been working throughout the history of humanity to create havoc with such diabolical success that human history is really \"only a succession of nefarious maneuvers\" by him. Intermediaries of al-dajjal (according to Ayyub) include St. Paul the Apostle, who (Ayyub maintains) created Christianity by distorting the true story of Jesus, the Emperor Constantine who made possible \"the Crusader state in service to the Jews\", the Freemasons, Napoleon, the United States of America, Communists, Israel, etc. He concludes that the dajjal is hiding in Palestine (but will also \"appear in Khurasan as the head of an expansionist state\") and the Great Battle between Muslims and his forces will be World War III fought in the Middle East.\nLater books, \"The Hidden Link between the AntiChrist, the Secrets of the Bermuda Triangle, and Flying Saucers\" (1994), by Muhammad Isa Dawud, for example, move even farther away from traditional themes, disclosing that the Anti-Christ journeyed from the Middle East to the archipelago of Bermuda in the 8th century CE to make it his home base and from whence he fomented the French Revolution and other mischief, and now sends flying saucers to patrol Egypt and prepare for his eventual triumphal return to Jerusalem.\nThe success of the genre provoked a \"counteroffensive\" by pious conservatives (Abdellatif Ashur, Muhammad Bayyumi Magdi, and Muhammad Shahawi) disturbed by the liberties Said Ayyub and others had taken with Islamic doctrine.\nJihadist references.\nIn the early 1980s, when Abdullah Azzam, called on Muslims around the world to join the jihad in Afghanistan, he considered the fight \"to be a sign that the end times were imminent\". Also around that time, popular Islamic writers, such as Said Ayyub, started blaming Islamic decline in the face of the Western world, not on lack of technology and development, but on the forces of the Dajjal.\nAl-Qaeda used \"apocalyptic predictions in both its internal and external messaging\" according to Jessica Stern, and its use of \"the name Khorasan, a region that includes part of Iran, Central Asia, and Afghanistan, and from which, it is prophesied, the Mahdi will emerge alongside an army bearing black flags\", was thought to be a symbol of end times. But these claims were \"mostly symbolic\", and according to Wood, Bin Laden \"rarely mentioned\" the Apocalypse and when he did, \"he implied he would be long dead when it arrived\" (a reflection of his more \"elite\" background according to Will McCants). According to J.-P. Filiu, out of the mass of Al-Qaeda documents seized after the fall of the Taliban, only one letter made any reference to the apocalypse.\nA prominent jihadist, Abu Mus\u02bfab al-S\u016bri, (called a \"sophisticated strategist\" and \"articulate exponent of the modern jihad\"), somewhat independent and critical of Al-Qaeda, was also much more interested in end times. He wrote, \"I have no doubt that we have entered into the age of battles and tribulations [\"z\u0101man al-mal\u0101him wal-fitan\"]\" He devoted the last 100 pages of his magnum opus on jihad (\"A Call to Global Islamic Resistance\", made available online around 2005) to matters such as the proper chronology and location of related battles and other activities of the Mahdi, the Antichrist, the mountain of gold to be found in the Euphrates river, the Sufyani, Gog and Magog, etc.\nAbu Mus\u02bfab al Zarqawi, the founder of what would become the Islamic State \"injected\" the apocalyptic message into jihad. ISIS has evoked \"the apocalyptic tradition much more explicitly\" than earlier jihadis. Dabiq, Syria \u2013 a town understood \"in some versions\" of the eschatological \"narrative to be a possible location for the final apocalyptic battle\" \u2013 was captured by ISIS and made its capital. ISIS also declared its \"intent to conquer Constantinople\" \u2013 Muslims conquering Constantinople being another end times prophesy. Interviews by the \"New York Times\", and Jurgen Todenh\u00f6fer with many dozens of Muslims who had traveled to fight with Islamic State, and by Graeme Wood with Islamic State supporters elsewhere, found \"messianic expectation\" a strong motivator to join Islamic State.\nWhile Al-Qaeda and Islamic State are Sunni, Shia insurgents/militants have also been \"drawn to the battlefield\" by \"apocalyptic belief\", according to William McCants, who quotes a Shia fighter in Iraq saying, \"'I was waiting for the day when I will fight in Syria. Thank God he chose me to be one of the Imam's soldiers.'\"\nSome dissident Shi\u02bfa in Iraq, oppose not only Sunni, US and Iraqi government forces, but the Shi\u02bfi religious hierarchy as well. In Najaf, in late January 2007, at least 200 were killed in the Battle of Najaf,\n when several hundred members of an armed Iraqi Shi'a messianic sect known as the Soldiers of Heaven or \"Jund As-Sam\u0101\u02be\"(), allegedly attempted to start a \"messianic insurrection\" during the holy day of Ashura in the holy city of Najaf; planning to disguise themselves as pilgrims and kill leading Shi'a clerics. The group allegedly believed that spreading chaos would hasten the return of the 12th Imam/Mahdi, or alternately, that their leader, Dia Abdul Zahra Kadim, was the awaited Mahdi. The next year during Ashura a reported 18 officers and 53 militia members were killed in clashes between \"millenarian rebels\" and police, the violence blamed on followers of one Ahmad al-Hassan, a man claiming the Hidden Iman had designated him as his (the Hidden Imam's) representative (\"wassi\"), and who accused Ayatollahs/Shia clerics of being guilty of \"aberration and treason, of occupation and tyranny\".\nIslamic State claims of prophecy fulfilment.\nJihadis of the Islamic State see the fulfillment of many of the \"lesser signs\" of the coming of Judgement Day in current events.\nIts generally agreed that Israel Arab wars have been wars between Muslims and Jews (which were prophesied), and that moral standards have declined leading to rampant fornication, alcohol consumption, and music listening. \"A slave giving birth to her master\" can happen when the child of a slave woman and the slave's owner inherits the slave after the owner's death\u2014slavery being practiced in the Islamic State (until its defeat). An embargo of Iraq is alleged to be foretold in the hadith \"Iraq would withhold its dirhams and qafiz\". That Muslim states are being led by those who do not deserve to lead them, is an article of faith among jihadis and many other Muslims. ISIS alleges that worship of the pre-Islamic deity \"al-Lat\" is being practiced by its Shia enemy Hezbollah. The naked shepherds who will build tall buildings is interpreted to refer to Gulf State builders of skyscrapers are \"only a generation or two out of desert poverty\".\nBut the Islamic State is also attempting to fulfill prophecies itself to hasten end times.\nZarqawi published \"communiqu\u00e9s detailing the fulfillment of specific predictions\" found in a famous book on jihad and end times called, \"A Call to a Global Islamic Resistance\" by Abu Musab al Suri. His successor, Al-Baghdadi, took \"the fulfillment of apocalyptic portents even more seriously\".\nAccording to Hassan Abbas, at least part of ISIS's motivation in killing and otherwise provoking Shia is to \"deliberately ... instigate a war between Sunnis and Shi'a, in the belief that a sectarian war would be a sign that the final times has arrived\"; and also explains the ISIS Siege of Koban\u00ee: \"In the eschatological literature, there is reference to crisis in Syria and massacre of Kurds\u2014this is why Kobane is important.\"(The town of 45,000 was under siege by ISIS from September 2014 to January 2015.)\nThus, \"ISIS's obsession with the end of the world\" helps explain its lack of interest in the \"ordinary moral rules\" of the temporal world, according to Jessica Stern.\nIf you are \"participating in a cosmic war between good and evil\", (and if everyone will be dead and then resurrected relatively soon anyway), pedestrian concerns about saving the lives of the innocent are of little concern.\nQuestions and criticism.\nAmong the problems critics see with some of the concepts of, and attention given to, the eschatology of Islam, are its effect on the socio-economic health of the Muslim world, the basis of the scripture (particularly the hadith) dealing with end times, and the rational implausibility of some of the theological concepts such as resurrection of the dead.\nMustafa Akyol criticizes the current focus of the Muslim community on apocalypticism and the use of the forces of the Dajjal to explain stagnation in the Muslim world in the past two centuries vis-\u00e0-vis the West (and now East Asia). He argues that if supernatural evil is believed to be the cause of the problems of Muslims, then practical solutions such as \"science, economic development and liberal democracy\" will be ignored in favor of divine intervention. (On the other hand, a sahih hadith reports Muhammad saying that \"If the Final Hour comes while you have a shoot of a plant in your hands and it is possible to plant it before the Hour comes, you should plant it.\")\nWestern scholars (William McCants, Jane Smith, Yvonne Haddad, Jean-Pierre Filiu) agree that the apocalyptic narratives are strongly connected to the early jihad wars against the Byzantine Empire and civil wars against other Muslims. McCants, writes that the \"fitan\" (\"tribulations\") of the minor and lesser signs come from the \"fitan\" of the early Islamic civil wars (First Fitna (656\u2013661 CE), Second Fitna (c. 680/683\u2013c. 685/692 CE), Third Fitna (744\u2013750/752 CE)), where Muhammad's companions (Sahabah) and successor generations (Tabi'un and Taba Tabi'in) fought each other for political supremacy. \"Before and after each tribulation, partisans on both sides circulated prophecies in the name of the Prophet to support their champion. With time, the context was forgotten but the prophecies remained.\" Smith and Haddad also write that \"the political implications of the whole millennial idea in Islam, especially as related to the understanding of the \"mahdi\" and the rise of the 'Abbasids in the second Islamic century, are very difficult to separate from the eschatological ones.\" They also argue that it's \"difficult to determine whether\" Mu\u1e25ammad \"actually anticipated the arrival\" the \"Mahdi\" as \"an eschatological figure\" \u2013 despite the fact that \"most of the traditions about the \"Mahdi\" are credited to Mu\u1e25ammad.\" Filiu has also stated that \"the apocalyptic narrative was decisively influenced by the conflicts that filled Islam's early years, campaigns and jihad against the Byzantine Empire and recurrent civil wars among Muslims.\" Consequently, the reliability of hadith on end times has been questioned.\nSkepticism of the concept of the resurrection of the dead has been part of both \"the compatriots\" of Muhammad and the \"rational and scientifically-infused\" inhabitants of the contemporary world.\nThe fact of the resurrection of the body has been of continuing importance to Muslims and has raised very particular questions in certain circles of Islamic thought, such as those reflected in the later disputations between philosophy and theology. It was not really a point of issue for early Islam, however, and bodily resurrection has never been seriously denied by orthodoxy. It is, as many have observed, basic to the message of God as proclaimed by Muhammad and articulated clearly by the Qur'an, especially in those passages in which the contemporaries of Muhammad are presented as having scoffed or raised doubts. It continues to be, ... a point of conviction for many of the contemporary interpreters of Islam to a world in which a rational and scientifically-infused populace continues to raise the same eyebrows of skepticism as did the compatriots of the Prophet.\nEarly skeptics being quoted in the Quran as saying: \"Are we to be returned to our former state when we have become decayed bones? They say, that would be a detrimental return!\" (Q79: 10\u201312).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15514", "revid": "1319627956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15514", "title": "Iblis", "text": "Primary Devil in Islamic tradition\nIblis (), also known as Shaitan, is the leader of the devils () in Islam. According to the Quran, Iblis was thrown out of heaven after refusing to prostrate himself before Adam. In Sufi cosmology, Iblis embodies the cosmic veil supposedly separating the immanent aspect of God's love from the transcendent aspect of God's wrath. He is often compared to the Christian concept of Satan, since both figures were cast out of heaven according to their respective religious narratives. In his role as the master of cosmic illusion in Sufism, he functions in ways similar to the Buddhist concept of Mara.\nIslamic theology (\"kal\u0101m\") regards Iblis as an example of attributes and actions which God punishes with hell (\"N\u0101r\"). Regarding the origin and nature of Iblis, there are two different viewpoints.24\u201326209\u2013210 According to one, Iblis is an angel, and according to the other, he is the father of all the jinn. Quranic exegesis (\"tafs\u012br\") and the Stories of the Prophets (\"Qi\u1e63a\u1e63 al-anbiy\u0101\u02be\") elaborate on Iblis's origin story in greater detail. In Islamic tradition, Iblis is identified with (\"the Devil\"), often followed by the epithet ().23 is usually applied to Iblis in order to denote his role as the tempter, while is his proper name.\nSome Muslim scholars uphold a more ambivalent role for Iblis while preserving the term exclusively for evil forces, considering Iblis to be not simply a devil but also \"the truest monotheist\" (\"Taw\u1e25\u012bd-i Ibl\u012bs\"), because he would only bow before the Creator and not his creations.466547 Others have strongly rejected sympathies with Iblis, considering them to be deceptively instigated by Iblis. Rumi's poetic work \"Masnavi-e-Ma'navi\" explores this form of deception in detail: when Iblis wakes up Mu'awiya to the morning prayer, he appears to have benevolent intentions at first, but it turns out, Iblis is just hiding his true malevolent motivations. The ambivalent role of Iblis is also addressed in Islamic literature. Hafez, who considers Iblis to be an angel, writes that angels are incapable of emotional expression and thus that Iblis attempts to mimic piety but is incapable of worshipping God with passion. According to Muhammad Iqbal, Iblis tests humans in order to teach them to overcome their selfish tendencies.\nIblis is one of the most well-known individual supernatural entities in Islamic tradition, and has appeared extensively across Islamic and non-Islamic art, literature, and contemporary media.\nNaming, etymology, and origin.\nIn Islamic traditions, \"Ibl\u012bs\" is known by many alternative names or titles, such as (, 'Father of Bitterness'), stemming from the word \u2013 meaning 'bitter'; or (, \"enemy or foe\" of God); and (, 'the father of the plowmen').149\nThe designation () may be an epithet referencing an attribute, deriving from the Arabic verbal root BLS (, with the broad meaning of \"remain in grief\").274 According to Ibn Manzur, this is the majority opinion among Arab scholars, who maintain the tradition that the personal name of this being was .171\nSome Muslim teachers, such as al-Jili, relate this name to \"talbis\" meaning confusion, because God's command confused him.12391\nAnother possibility is that the name was derived from Ancient Greek (; also the source of the English word \"devil\") via a Syriac intermediary.133 The name is not found in Arabic literature before the Quran, suggesting it is not of pre-Islamic Arabian origin.https://\nThe Quranic story of Iblis parallels extrabiblical sources, such as \"Life of Adam and Eve\",20 about Satan's fall from heaven, preponderant in Eastern Christian circles.66\nTheology (\"Kalam\").\nQuran.\nIblis is mentioned by name in the Quran eleven times, nine of which relate to his refusal of God's Command to prostrate himself before Adam. The term \"\u0161ay\u1e6d\u0101n\" is more prevalent; although Iblis is sometimes referred to as \"\u0161ay\u1e6d\u0101n\", the terms are not interchangeable: Iblis is the proper name of the Quranic figure, while \"\u0161ay\u1e6d\u0101n\" refers to an unequivocal evil force.46 The fragments of Iblis's story are scattered across the Quran. In the aggregate, the story can be summarised as follows:18\nWhen God created Adam, He ordered the angels to bow before the new creation. All of the angels obeyed, but Iblis refused. He argued that, having been created from fire, he was superior to humans, who were made from clay-mud, and therefore should not be expected to prostrate himself before Adam. As punishment for his haughtiness, God banished Iblis from heaven and condemned him to hell. Later, Iblis requested permission to attempt to mislead Adam and his descendants, and God granted the request\u2014thus portraying God as the power behind both angels and devils.5\nSurah al-Kahf states in reference to Iblis:\n[...] except Iblis, he was one of the \"jinni\" [...]6\nThis passage led to a dispute among the \"mufassir\u016bn\" (exegetes), who disagree on whether the term is intended as a \"nisba,\" designating Iblis's heavenly origin (i.e. an angel) in contrast to the earthly Adam (and the jinn who preceded him), or if it serves to distinguish Iblis from the angels, portraying him as the progenitor of the jinn who dwelled in paradise until his fall \u2014 analogous to Adam's sin in Garden Eden followed by his fall.6146 This dispute goes back to the formative stage of Islam. These two conflicting opinions are based on the interpretations of ibn Abbas and Hasan al-Basri respectively.6 This debate resulted in two positions, at each gained substantial support by Muslim scholars.7\nIblis is arguably implicitly mentioned in Surah 21:29 (\"al-\u2019anbiy\u0101)\", claiming divinity for himself by inviting humans and jinn to follow egoistic desires (\"nafs\").6 This interpretation is shared, among others, by Tabari, Suyuti, al-Nasafi,5 and al-M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b:\n\"And whosoever among them would say, \"Truly I am a god apart from Him,\" such will We requite with Hell. Thus do We requite the wrongdoers.\"\n\"Sijjin\", mentioned in Surah 83:7, is described as a prison in hell by Quranic exegetes (e.g. Tabari, Tha'labi, Nasafi).5 Iblis is chained at the bottom and sends his demons to the surface.5\nAffiliation and predestination.\nThere are different opinions regarding the origin of Iblis. This dispute is closely related to doctrinal differences regarding free will. Islam believes that like humans, jinn are created on earth to \"worship\" () God (51:56), and are capable of righteous and evil acts (11:119).101\nIt is disputed in Islam whether angels (\"mal\u0101\u02beikah\") are capable of sin. Those who hold that angels cannot sin thus assert that Iblis is merely a jinn, with only jinn and humans being capable of disobeying God.123 This is the general opinion among the Qadariyah and most Mu'tazilites.123 This view is also found among many Salafis.73 The Islamist writer Sayyid Qutb denies that angels can sin and so rejects readings which depict Iblis as an angelic being. Sunni Muslims, with al-Razi as one exception, generally adhere to the doctrine of predestination\u2014i.e. that everything that happens in the universe happens by divine decree120\u2014and assert that Iblis acts in obedience to his inner nature and God's plan, but in disobedience to God's command.\nThe context of Iblis's disobedience assumes that Iblis is an angel, as in early Islam the term (angel) is used for celestial beings. Tabarsi says that if Iblis were a jinni, he could not have been one of the custodians of Paradise.103\nMany of those who say that Iblis was an angel read Surah 18:50 as a for the term , thus referring to Iblis's heavenly origin (this reading is preferred by \u2013 among others\u00a0\u2013 Ash'ari,109 Suyuti, and al-Tha'labi).\nThe Hanbalites and Ash'arites argue that Iblis was ignorant () and did not understand God's will (),123 but Iblis's unbelief () was ultimately caused by God.123 Al-Maghr\u012bb\u012b states that, when the angels questioned the creation of Adam, God opened the angels' eyes to the characteristics of Adam, but closed the eyes of Iblis, so he would remain in resistance ().131 Therefore, Iblis would have been created as a disobedient angel and function as God's tempter.177 Abu Mansur al-Maturidi, the eponymous founder of M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b theology, argues that humans and jinn are tested on earth, while angels are tested in heaven. He argues that if angels were not tested, the Quran would not compliment angels for obedience.185\nThe Mu'tazilites, considering it impossible for God to have any negative attributes, reject the notion that Iblis's function as a tempter was initiated by God.139 Al-Zamakhshari criticizes the Sunni view as ascribing negative attributes to God.140 According to the Mu'tazilites, when Iblis blames God for leading him astray in Surah 15:39, these words belong to Iblis alone and cannot serve as a confirmation of God being the cause of Iblis's fall.140\nFunction.\nIn Muslim thought, Iblis is generally not considered to be the originator of evil. However, there are a few exceptions among Muslim scholars.123 The Qadariyah asserted that evil was introduced by disobedience to God, and Iblis was the first who disobeyed.123 This view is sometimes attributed to Hasan al-Basri. An extreme position among the Qadariyah asserted that Iblis was not even created by God, but this was generally rejected as a limitation on God's power, showing influence from the cosmic dualism of Zoroastrianism, as expressed by \"magicians\" ().123198 Al-M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b argued that such dualistic worldviews are irreconcilable with the Islamic doctrine of .198 Some extreme positions went as far as to consider belief that actions are uncaused by God to be a form of (association), as it implies a second power independent from God.\nIblis's disobedience is understood as an example and warning for humans and jinn\u00a0\u2013 i.e. the , the two types of creatures held to account for their deeds. The position that Iblis was predestined to fall views his creation as a means for God to demonstrate his entire spectrum of attributes\u00a0\u2013 including his wiliness ()\u00a0\u2013 as well as to teach the consequences of sin. As such, the example of Iblis demonstrates the necessity of avoiding transgression (), arrogance (), and comparison () between oneself and another creature of God.122Although not the cause of evil, Iblis is known as the progenitor of tempters, known as the \"father of the devils\" ().129 Hadith literature emphasizes their evil influences over humans rather than treating them as proper personalities. Muslims are advised to \"seek refuge\" from such influences and are recommended to recite prayers () for protection.82\nSufism.\nSufi formulations about the mystical union with God, although fundamentally mystical in nature, derive from the theological debates undertaken within the school of \"kalam\". In sum, there are two distinct interpretations of the role of Iblis within the Sufi tradition.\nThe first interpretation holds that Iblis refused to bow before Adam because he would not prostrate himself before anyone but his creator, thus considering Iblis to be a \"true monotheist\" only bested by Muhammad, an idea known as \"Satan's monotheism\" (). Oblivious to rewards and punishment, Iblis acts out of pure love and loyalty and disobeys the explicit command and obeys the hidden will of God. In a unity of opposites, Iblis finds in his banishment proximity to God.\nThe second interpretation disapproves of Iblis's refusal to prostrate himself before Adam. Adam, as a reflection of God's names, is more complete than the angels. Iblis, being blind to the hidden reality of Adam, refuses to bow due to his own spiritual ignorance.\n\"Satan's Monotheism\" (\"Taw\u1e25\u012bd-i Ibl\u012bs\").\n\"Satan's Monotheism\" is illustrated in a story attributed to Wahb ibn Munabbih. Accordingly, Moses met Iblis on the slopes of Sinai. When Moses asks Iblis for the reason behind his disobedience, Iblis replies that the command was a test. This story is mentioned in the \"Kit\u0101b al-Taw\u0101s\u012bn\" by the Persian poet al-Hallaj, who also became known as one of Iblis's greatest defenders. The idea also inspired later famous theologians and Sufis, including Ahmad Ghazali and Attar of Nishapur.\nAhmad Ghazali depicted Iblis as a paragon of self-sacrifice and devotion, stating: \"Whoever doesn't learn monotheism from Satan is a heretic (\"zind\u012bq\").\" His student Sheikh Adi ibn Musafir asserted that Iblis's disobedience must have been willed by God, or else God would be powerless, and a powerless being cannot be God.\nOther theologians and Sufis disapproved of \"Satan's Monotheism\". Ibn Ghanim argues that Iblis is referring to God's predetermined judgement as an excuse to cover his unbelief. Furthermore, similar to Ruzbihan Baqli, he argues that \"Satan's Monotheism\" is a subtle deception by Iblis, made in order to evoke sympathies and doubt about God's message.\nJal\u0101l al-D\u012bn Mu\u1e25ammad R\u016bm\u012b (1207\u20131273) argues that God's determinism can not be an excuse for one's own demise and failure.132 He invokes the analogy between Adam and Iblis to highlight the difference between a believer and an unbeliever: While both Adam and Iblis were destined to fall, Iblis and his offspring blamed God, while Adam pleaded for forgiveness, nonetheless. Rumi advises humans to do the same.132 In this context, Rumi declares that love is more important than intelligence132 and states: \"(Cunning) intelligence is from Iblis, and love from Adam.\" In his story of Mu'awiya, in his \"Masnavi\" (Book 2), Mu'awiya realizes that he cannot outsmart Iblis's excuses, thus seeking refuge in God's protection. At this, Iblis confesses that he only attempts to trick people. Rumi reminds the reader that the Quran emphasizes that Iblis is the enemy of humanity and that there is thus no reason to have sympathies for him.\nCosmic veil.\nWithin the context of Sufi cosmology, the \"al-Ins\u0101n al-K\u0101mil\" (\"perfected human being\") is a manifestation of God's attributes, not in the sense of incarnation, but as a mirror reflecting his divine attributes. In this interpretation, Iblis cannot comprehend the immanent aspect of God's attributes within Adam due to Iblis's own defective spiritual insight, and thus he refuses to bow down. In his attempt to avoid idolatrous treatment of Adam, he becomes the supreme idolater, because he cannot see the immanent aspects of reality through idols (the exterior reality). Since he cannot perceive God's immanent aspect (love), he can only understand (and reflect) God's transcendent aspects (wrath).\nAccording to ibn Arabi and Jami, those who cannot comprehend the unity of God and separate God from his Creation are the disciples of Iblis, unable to discern the underlying, all-pervading divine principle. In his ignorance and damnation, Iblis hovers over the mere surface of visible things, and those he leads astray suffer the same fate. Other Sufi authors, including Sana'i, 'Ayn al-Quzat, Ruzbihan, Attar, and Rumi, independently conceived a similar image of Iblis's function in the cosmos.\nIn Sufi thought, Iblis is part of God's universe and does not form an exterior reality independent of God. He is God's veil, the visible universe itself, which hides the Godhead from the unworthy. 'Ayn al-Quzat links the cosmic structure to the \"Shahada\": \"\"L\u0101\" (\"no\") is the circle of negation. One must place his first step within this circle, but he should not stop here nor dwell here. (...)\". Those who remain at the circle of \"l\u0101\", they worship the \"nafs\" (\"carnal desires\") instead of God. Only those who proceed to \"\u02beill\u0101 'll\u0101h\" (\"except God\") surpass Iblis, the divine chamberlain. As such, Iblis unknowingly symbolizes, suffers, and reflects the dark and wrathful aspect of God, uttering God's anger and executes God's justice.\nDue to the similarities in function between Iblis's web and the Hindu concept of \"m\u0101y\u0101\", the seventeenth-century Mughal prince Dara Shikoh sought to reconcile the Upanishads with Sufi cosmology.\nNarrative exegesis (\"Qi\u1e63a\u1e63\").\n\"Qi\u1e63a\u1e63\" is a form of exegesis by Muslim scholars focusing on establishing a coherent story from material of Islamic scripture (Quran, \"\u1e25ad\u012b\u1e6f\"). According to many of them, before Adam was created, the jinn, offspring of \"al-J\u0101nn\" (\u0627\u0644\u062c\u0627\u0646), lived on earth. First they were obedient, but over time immorality increased and, when they became infidels, God sent an army of angels, headed by Iblis, called \"al-Jinn\" (named after paradise, not the genus) to defeat them. These angels were created from \"n\u0101r as-sam\u016bm\", while the rest of the angels from light, and the genus of jinn from \"m\u0101rijin min n\u0101r\" (smokeless fire).\nIn reference to the interpretation of the events in Surah 2:30\u201334, when the angels complain about mankind's potential to shed blood and cause injustice, Islamic hagiographic narratives relate this to the story about angels' battle with the jinn. Tabari and al-Tha\u02bflabi explain that the angels feared that humanity will become as corrupt as the jinn.\nSome later traditions place Iblis among the genus of the jinn instead. In one narration of the \"Tarikh Khamis\", among the masses of infidel jinn only Iblis dedicated his life to worship of God, withdrawing to a high mountain. The angels soon notice him and elevate him to the heavens, where he becomes one like them in worship.\nWith reference to Surah 76:1, Islamic narrative tradition considers Adam to have been created step-by-step, beginning as an inanimate body. The story is mentioned by various scholars of the Sunni tradition, including Muqatil, Tabari, Mas'udi, Kisa'i, and Tha'labi. According to the story, the angels passing by Adam were scared and Iblis was most afraid among them. To overcome his anxiety, he enters Adam and moves through the body. He concludes that \"this is hollow clay\", whereas Iblis is \"fire\". Since fire overcomes clay, he vows to destroy Adam like fire destroys clay:\nYou are nothing \u2013 because of his ringing \u2013 and you were made for nothing! If I am to rule over you, I will kill you, and if you are to rule over me, I will rebel against you.\nSome scholars (among them Thala'bi, Tabarsi, Diyarbakri) explain, with slight variations, Iblis's entry to the Garden of Eden by the aid of a serpent and a peacock. Some traditions have the Garden of Eden being warded by an angelic guardian. Thus, Iblis persuades a peacock to get help, by promising him that, if he enters the Garden, the beauty of the peacock will never decay thanks to the fruit of immortality. The peacock, unable to carry Iblis, persuades the serpent, who decides to slip Iblis by carrying him in his mouth. From the mouth of the serpent, Iblis speaks to Adam and \u1e24aww\u0101\u02be.\nIn culture.\nIn arts.\nIblis is perhaps one of the most well-known individual supernatural entities in Islamic tradition and was depicted in multiple visual representations like the Quran and Manuscripts of Bal\u2018ami's \"\u2018Tarjamah-i Tarikh-i Tabari\". Iblis was a unique individual, described as both a pious jinni and an angel before he fell from God's grace when he refused to bow before the prophet Adam. After this incident, Iblis turned into a \"shaytan\". In visual appearance, Iblis's depiction was described in \"On the Monstrous in the Islamic Visual Tradition\" by Francesca Leoni as a being with a human-like body with flaming eyes, a tail, claws, and large horns on a grossly disproportionate large head.\nIllustrations of Iblis in Islamic paintings often depict him black-faced, a feature which would later symbolize any satanic figure or heretic, and with a black body, to symbolize his corrupted nature. Another common depiction of Iblis shows him in human form wearing a special head covering, clearly different from the traditional Islamic turban and long sleeves, signifying long lasting devotion to God. Only in one, he wears traditional Islamic head covering.\nMost pictures show and describe Iblis at the moment, when the angels prostrate themselves before Adam. In the manuscripts of Bal\u2018ami's \u2018\"Tarjamah-i Tarikh-i Tabari\" he is usually seen beyond the outcrop, his face transformed with his wings burned, to the envious countenance of a devil. In his demonic form, Iblis is portrayed similar to his cohorts (\"shay\u0101\u1e6d\u012bn\") in Turko-Persian art as Asian demons (\"D\u012bv\"). They are bangled creatures with flaming eyes, only covered by a short skirt. Similar to European arts depicting devils by traits of pagan deities, Islamic arts portray the devils with features often similar to that of Hindu deities.\nIn literature and film.\nThe complexity of Iblis's character from the Quranic story had lasting influence on Islamic literature. It elaborates on the necessity of evil and Iblis's disobedience in creative retelling of the exegetical tradition.\nIblis and the angels feature in Hafez's poetry (1325\u20131390), collected in \"The Div\u0101n of Hafez\". Hafez iterates that angels are incapable of love. They can merely praise the creator but without the passion of a human-being. When Iblis protests, either because he considers Adam's offspring unworthy or himself devoted to God alone, he is described as an imposter (\"mudda'\u012b\"). He claims to act for the sake of God's love, but is actually envious of mankind's exalted position. Hafez advises his audience not to reveal the secrets of love towards God to the imposter.\nMuhammad Iqbal's Javid Nama deal in length with the question of Good and Evil. As such, it is little surprising that Iblis plays a significant role in his works. Similar to Goethe\u2019s Mephistopheles, Iblis is a necessary obstacle for man to overcome. Only when man eventually resists and overcomes Iblis, he can finally prostrate himself and find salvation.\nEgyptian novelist Tawfiq al-Hakim's \"ash-Shahid\" (1953) describes the necessity of Iblis's evil for the world. One day, Iblis regrets his rebellion and consults religious authorities (the Pope, a Rabbi, and the head of the al-Azhar) in order to seek forgiveness. After Iblis's requests were rejected by all of them, he turns to the angel Gabriel, but is rejected again. Then Iblis realizes the necessity of his nature in order for good to exist and exclaims: \"I am a martyr!\".\nA demon called \"Semum\", from the eponymous 2008 Turkish Horror Movie \"Semum\", embodies qualities attributed to both Iblis and his offspring. Alluding to the Quran, Semum blames God for abandoning demon-kind after creating humanity and vows to destroy God's newest creatures.8 Referring to the Quranic cycle of God creating and then destroying his creatures, the \"Semum\" argues that humanity will be eventually abandoned by God, and should worship Iblis instead.9\nIblis himself does not appear, but his presence is implied throughout the movie. Described by his devilish followers, he is the master of the \"World of Fire\". On the other hand, the exorcist (representing God) describes Iblis imprisoned in the lowest pit of hell.18 The movie implies Sufistic metaphysics by asserting that \"God is everywhere\". The demon denies God's omnipresence by asserting that hell belongs to Iblis. His dualistic beliefs are disproven when God intervenes on behalf of the exorcist in hell.20 Iblis creates merely the illusion of God's absence.20\nThe fifth season of the American TV show \"Supernatural\" features \"Lucifer\" as the main antagonist. Pavel Nosachev, argues that, despite its Christian roots, the antagonist of the season bears resemblance to the Quranic Iblis. Lucifer reveals his backstory in the fourth episode, declaring:\nYou know why God cast me down? Because I loved Him, more than anything, and then God created you, the little hairless apes; and then He asked all of us to bow down before you, to love you more than Him. And I said: \u2018Father, I can\u2019t.\u2019\nThe Japanese Manga Blue Exorcist features Iblis as one of the Eight Demon Kings, though the character bears little similarity to the Quranic Iblis apart from an affinity for fire.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Azazil\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15516", "revid": "829949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15516", "title": "Intelsat", "text": "Luxembourgish communications satellite services provider\nIntelsat S.A. (formerly Intel-Sat, Intelsat) is a Luxembourgish-American multinational satellite services provider with corporate headquarters in Luxembourg and administrative headquarters in Tysons, Virginia, United States. Originally formed as International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (\"ITSO\", or Intelsat), from 1964 to 2001, it was an intergovernmental consortium owning and managing a constellation of communications satellites providing international telecommunications and broadcast services.\nIn March 2023, rival satellite operator SES confirmed that it was in talks about a merger with Intelsat but in June 2023, it was announced that these discussions had ended. On 30 April 2024, SES announced that an agreement had been reached to acquire Intelsat for US$3.1 billion, with the transaction expected to close in the second half of 2025. The acquisition was completed on 17 July 2025.\nAs of June 2022, Intelsat operated a fleet of 52 communications satellites which was then one of the world's largest fleets. In 2020, the company announced plans to procure, build and launch seven C-band satellites over the next several years. These C-band satellites will contribute to the acceleration of America's 5G buildout. In early 2022, the company announced contracts for four GEO software defined satellites (SDS), two in partnership with Airbus and two in partnership with Thales Alenia Space, that are scheduled to launch in 2023. These contracts point to the pursuit of a multi-year network transformation plan with investments designed to deliver higher speeds, more flexibility, redundancy, and backwards compatibility.\nAs of 2022, the company served approximately 1,800 customers and employed a staff of approximately 1,790 people.\nHistory.\nJohn F. Kennedy instigated the creation of Intelsat with his speech to the United Nations on 25 September 1961. Less than a year later, John F. Kennedy signed the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Intelsat was originally formed as International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO) and operated from 1964 to 2001 as an intergovernmental consortium owning and managing a constellation of communications satellites providing international broadcast services. In 2001, the international satellite market was fully commercialized, and Intelsat was privatized after 2001 as Intelsat was formed up as a private Luxembourg corporation.\nInternational Governmental Organization (1964\u20132001).\nThe International Governmental Organization (IGO) began on (20 August 1964; \u00a0(20 August 1964)), with 7 participating countries. The 1964 agreement was an interim arrangement on a path to a more permanent agreement. The permanent international organization was established in 1973, following inter-nation negotiations from 1969 to 1971. The most difficult issue to \"resolve concerned the shift from management of the system by a national entity to management by the international organization itself\".\nOn 6 April 1965, Intelsat's first satellite, the Intelsat I (nicknamed \"Early Bird\"), was placed in geostationary orbit above the Atlantic Ocean by a Delta D rocket.\nIn 1973, the name was changed and there were 81 signatories. Intelsat was \"governed initially by two international agreements: The Agreement setting forth the basic provisions and principles and structure of the organization, signed by the governments through their foreign ministries, and an Operating Agreement setting forth more detailed financial and technical provisions and signed by the governments or their designated telecommunications entities\", \u2014 in most cases, the latter are the ministries of communications of the party countries, but in the case of the United States, was the Communications Satellite Corporation (COMSAT), a private corporation established by federal legislation to represent the U.S. in international governance for the global communication satellite system. Intelsat at that time directly owned and managed a global communications satellite system, and structurally consisted of three parts:\nThe 1973 Agreement called for a seven-year transition from national to international management, but continued until 1976 to carve out \"technical and operational management of the system [to the U.S. signatory] the Communications Satellite Corporation [which had also] served as the Manager of the global system under the interim arrangements in force from 1964 to 1973\". Later phases of the transition resulted in full international governance by 1980. Financial contribution to the organization, its so-called \"investment share\", was strictly proportional to each member's use of the system, determined annually; and this corresponded to the weighted vote each would have on the Board of Governors.\nAs of 2018,[ [update]] Intelsat provides service to over 600 Earth stations in more than 149 countries, territories and dependencies. By 2001, Intelsat had over 100 members. It was also this year that Intelsat privatized and changed its name to Intelsat.\nSince its inception, Intelsat has used several versions (blocks) of its dedicated Intelsat satellites. Intelsat completes each block of spacecraft independently, leading to a variety of satellite manufacturing contractors over the years. Intelsat's largest spacecraft supplier by 2012 was Space Systems/Loral, having built 47 spacecraft (Intelsat 20) by that time.\nThe network in its early years was not as robust as it is now. A failure of the Atlantic satellite in the spring of 1969 threatened to stop the \"Apollo 11\" mission; a replacement satellite went into a bad orbit and could not be recovered in time; NASA used undersea cable telephone circuits as an alternative to route Apollo's communications to NASA during the mission. During the Apollo 11 moonwalk, the Moon was over the Pacific Ocean, and so other antennas were used, as well as Intelsat III, which was in geostationary orbit over the Pacific.\nCommercialization.\nBy the 1990s, building and launching satellites was no longer exclusively a government domain and as country-specific telecommunications systems were privatized, several private satellite operators arose to meet the growing demand. In the U.S., satellite operators such as PanAmSat, Orion Communications, Columbia Communications, Iridium, Globalstar, TRW and others formed under the umbrella of the Alliance for Competitive International Satellite Services (ACISS) to press for an end to the exclusively-intergovernmental organizations operating communication satellites and the monopoly position of COMSAT the U.S. signatory to Intelsat and Inmarsat. In March 2001, the U.S. Congress passed the Open-market Reorganization for the Betterment of International Telecommunications (ORBIT) Act to privatize COMSAT. In April 1998, to address U.S. government concerns about market power, Intelsat's senior management spun off five of its older satellites to a private Dutch entity, New Skies Satellites, which became a direct competitor to Intelsat.\nPrivatization.\nOn 18 July 2001, Intelsat became a private company, 37 years after formation. Prior to Intelsat's privatization in 2001, ownership and investment in Intelsat (measured in shares) was distributed among Intelsat members according to their use of services. Investment shares determined each member's percentage of the total contribution needed to finance capital expenditures. The organization's primary source of revenue was satellite usage fees which, after deduction of operating costs, was redistributed to Intelsat members in proportion to their shares as repayment of capital and compensation for use of capital. Satellite services were available to any organization (both Intelsat members and non-members), and all users paid the same rates.\nIntelsat Americas-7 (known formerly as Telstar 7 and known as Galaxy 27 since on 1 February 2007) experienced a several-day power failure on 29 November 2004. The satellite returned to service with reduced capacity.\nIntelsat was sold for US$3.1 billion in January 2005 to four private equity firms: Madison Dearborn Partners, Apax Partners, Permira and Apollo Global Management. The company acquired PanAmSat on 3 July 2006, and was then the world's largest provider of fixed satellite services, operating a fleet of 52 satellites in prime orbital locations.\nIn June 2007, BC Partners announced they had acquired 76% of Intelsat for about \u20ac3.75 billion.\nIntelsat S.A. (Luxembourg).\nIn April 2013, the renamed Intelsat S.A. undertook an initial public offering on the New York Stock Exchange, raising a net US$550 million, of which US$492 million was paid immediately to reduce outstanding company debts of US$15.9 billion. In May 2013, the company announced it would be purchasing four new high-performance Boeing EpicNG 702 MP satellites.\nIn 2015, Intelsat reincorporated in Delaware and became Intelsat Corporation.\nThere were negotiations in 2017 that Intelsat could potentially merge with Softbank-backed OneWeb. However, on 1 June 2017, it was announced that the bondholders would not accept the offer and that the potential merger would be terminated as of 2 June 2017.\nOperations.\nAfter 2014, Intelsat maintained its corporate administrative headquarters in Tysons, Virginia, where a majority of its employees worked at the time. Intelsat maintains constantly staffed global network operations centers in its Tysons Corner location and in Ellenwood, Georgia. A highly international business, Intelsat sources the majority of its revenue from non-U.S. located customers. In addition to its satellite fleet, Intelsat owns and operates eight teleports around the world.\nBankruptcy.\nIntelsat filed for a Chapter 11 bankruptcy in U.S. courts on 13 May 2020, just before the new 5G spectrum auctions, with over US$15 billion in total debt.\nPublic reporting showed that the company had been considering bankruptcy protection as early as February 2020,\nas Intelsat formally withdrew from the C-Band Alliance. The C-Band Alliance was an industry consortium of the major satellite operators. The consortium had been formed to lobby U.S. regulator, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regarding the reassignment and payment for the legacy 5G spectrum of its members.\nAccording to company statements, the company was hoping to restructure so that it could raise requisite capital to launch new satellite technology in 2022/2023, at a cost of some US$1.6 billion. The technology could compress existing licensed C-band spectrum customers into just forty per cent of the spectrum used in 2019. The release of spectrum would enable the company to receive up to US$4.86 billion in \"spectrum clearing payments\" from the FCC for clearing the spectrum by December 2023, two years ahead of the FCC baseline plan.\nEmergence from bankruptcy as a private company.\nOn 24 February 2022, Intelsat emerged from Chapter 11 as a private company with a strengthened capital structure which reduced debt by more than half, from approximately $16 billion to $7 billion. The company's plan of reorganization was supported by all creditors and confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court on 16 December 2021. In connection with the emergence from bankruptcy, Intelsat also obtained $6.7 billion in new financing including a revolving credit facility, term loan, and secured notes.\nAccording to then company CEO, Stephen Spengler, post bankruptcy, the company plans to pursue aggressive network innovation plans, and strategic growth initiatives, including building a software-defined 5G network. The company also announced a new board of directors, led by Lisa Hammitt, executive vice president and chief technology officer at Davidson Technologies.\nAcquisition of Gogo Commercial Aviation.\nIn December 2020, Intelsat completed its acquisition of Gogo's Commercial Aviation (CA) business. The vertical integration combined Intelsat's next-generation global telecommunications network with Gogo CA's customer-facing capabilities offering airlines and passengers an enhanced inflight entertainment and connectivity (IFEC) experience.\nAcquisition by SES.\nOn 30 April 2024, satellite operator, SES announced that an agreement had been reached to acquire Intelsat for \u20ac2.8 billion (US$3.1 billion) cash, with the transaction expected to complete regulatory clearance in the second half of 2025. With over 100 GEO satellites, 26 MEO satellites, and 13 satellites on order, the combined company's multi-orbit capability will improve competitiveness against rival LEO satellite networks, and has an expected 2024 revenue of \u20ac3.8 billion. The UK Competition and Markets Authority was first to clear the acquisition in May 2025, deciding to not open an in-depth investigation, and in June 2025, the European Commission gave its unconditional approval, determining that the acquisition does not raise competition concerns in the European Economic Area. On 11 July 2025, US Federal Communications Commission approved the acquisition. Six days later, the acquisition was completed. The Intelsat brand will continue to be used until it is phased out at a later date.\nIn-space refueling demonstration project.\nAs of \u00a02011,[ [update]] Intelsat has agreed to purchase one-half of the propellant payload that an MDA Corporation spacecraft satellite-servicing demonstration project would take to geostationary orbit. Catching up in orbit with four or five Intelsat communication satellites, a load of of fuel delivered to each satellite would add somewhere between two and four years of additional service life. A near-end-of-life Intelsat satellite will be moved to a graveyard orbit above the geostationary belt where the refueling will be done, \"without consequence\" to the Intelsat business.\nAs of \u00a02010,[ [update]] the business model was still evolving. MDA \"could ask customers to pay per kilogram of fuel successfully added to [each] satellite, with the per-kilogram price being a function of the additional revenue the operator can expect to generate from the spacecraft's extended operational life\".\nThe plan is that the fuel-depot vehicle would maneuver to several satellites, dock at the target satellite's apogee kick motor, remove a small part of the target spacecraft's thermal protection blanket, connect to a fuel-pressure line and deliver the propellant. \"MDA officials estimate the docking maneuver would take the communications satellite out of service for about 20 minutes\".\nOn 25 February 2020, a Northrop Grumman robotic servicing spacecraft, Mission Extension Vehicle 1 (MEV 1) docked with the Intelsat 901 satellite. The MEV 1 spacecraft has provided propulsion capabilities to Intelsat 901 to extend its usable life for five years.\nSatellites.\nRenaming.\nOn 1 February 2007, Intelsat changed the names of 16 of its satellites formerly known under the Intelsat Americas and PanAmSat brands to Galaxy and Intelsat, respectively.\nLaunch vehicles.\nOver time, Intelsat has worked with most of the commercial launch services providers worldwide. Their satellites are often among the most massive of their generation, requiring the most powerful and reliable rockets on the market at a given time. In the 21st century, most Intelsat missions were conducted by Arianespace with the European Ariane 4 and Ariane 5 launchers, and by International Launch Services (ILS) with Proton-K and Proton-M rockets manufactured by Khrunichev in Russia. Intelsat also took advantage of the equatorial Sea Launch offering with Zenit-3SL rockets launched from the Ocean Odyssey floating platform in Pacific Ocean, until they suspended operations in 2014. On 30 May 2012, Intelsat signed a contract with SpaceX for one of the first Falcon Heavy launch vehicles, marking the return of Intelsat to American launchers after many flights on Atlas II in the 1990s and a single Atlas V launch in 2009.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15517", "revid": "7181920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15517", "title": "ITSO", "text": "ITSO may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "15520", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15520", "title": "ICPO-Interpol", "text": ""}
{"id": "15521", "revid": "50167102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15521", "title": "Devanagari numerals", "text": "Symbols used for numbers in Devanagari\nThe Devanagari numerals are the symbols used to write numbers in the Devanagari script, predominantly used for northern Indian languages. They are used to write decimal numbers, instead of the Western Arabic numerals.\nTable.\nIn modern-era, languages like Hindi, Marathi and Nepali have adopted Devanagari as the standard script, before which they were respectively written using Kaithi, Modi and Newari scripts.\nThe word for zero was calqued into Arabic as , meaning 'nothing', which became the term \"zero\" in many European languages via Medieval Latin . In Hindustani language, it was borrowed from Arabic (via Persian) as \u0938\u093f\u092b\u093c\u0930 ().\nVariants.\nDevanagari digits shapes may vary depending on geographical area or epoch. Some of the variants are also seen in older Sanskrit literature.\nIn Nepali language \u096b, \u096e, \u096f (5, 8, 9) - these numbers are slightly different from modern Devanagari numbers. In Nepali language uses old Devanagari system for writing these numbers, like , , \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15522", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15522", "title": "I.Q.", "text": ""}
{"id": "15524", "revid": "50523059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15524", "title": "Ian Botham", "text": "English cricketer (born 1955)\nIan Terence Botham, Baron Botham (born 24 November 1955) is an English cricket commentator, member of the House of Lords, a former cricketer who has been chairman of Durham County Cricket Club since 2017 and charity fundraiser. Hailed as one of the greatest all-rounders in the history of the game, Botham represented England in both Test and One-Day International cricket. He was a part of the English squads which finished as runners-up at the 1979 Cricket World Cup and as runners-up at the 1992 Cricket World Cup.\nBotham played most of his first-class cricket for Somerset, at other times competing for Worcestershire, Durham and Queensland. He was an aggressive right-handed batsman and, as a right-arm fast-medium bowler, was noted for his swing bowling. He generally fielded close to the wicket, predominantly in the slips. In Test cricket, Botham scored 14 centuries with a highest score of 208, and from 1986 to 1988 held the world record for the most Test wickets until overtaken by fellow all-rounder Sir Richard Hadlee. He took five wickets in an innings 27 times, and 10 wickets in a match four times. In 1980, he became the second player in Test history to complete the \"match double\" of scoring 100 runs and taking 10 wickets in the same match. On the occasion of England's 1000th Test in August 2018, he was named in the country's greatest Test XI by the ECB.\nBotham has at times been involved in controversies, including a highly publicised court case involving rival all-rounder Imran Khan and an ongoing dispute with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). These incidents, allied to his on-field success, have attracted media attention, especially from the tabloid press. Botham has used his fame to raise money for research into childhood leukaemia. These efforts have realised millions of pounds for Bloodwise, of which he became president. On 8 August 2009, he was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame. In July 2020, it was announced that Botham would be elevated to the House of Lords and that he would sit as a crossbench peer.\nBotham has a wide range of sporting interests outside cricket. He was a talented footballer at school and had to choose between cricket and football as a career. He chose cricket but, even so, he played professional football for a few seasons and made eleven appearances in the Football League for Scunthorpe United, becoming the club's president in 2017. He is a keen golfer, and his other pastimes include angling and shooting. He has been awarded both a knighthood and a life peerage.\nEarly life and development as a cricketer (1955\u20131973).\nIan Botham was born in Heswall, Cheshire, to Herbert Leslie (\"Les\") Botham and Violet Marie, n\u00e9e Collett. His father had been in the Fleet Air Arm for twenty years spanning the Second World War; his mother was a nurse. The family moved to Yeovil before Botham's third birthday after his father got a job as a test engineer at Westland Helicopters. Both his parents played cricket: his father for Westland Sports Club while his mother captained a nursing services team at Sherborne. Botham developed an eagerness for the game before he had started school: he would climb through the fence of the Yeovil Boys' Grammar School to watch the pupils play cricket. At the age of around four, he came home with a cricket ball and asked his mother \"Do you know how to hold a ball when you're going to bowl a daisy-cutter?\" He subsequently demonstrated the grip and went away to practise bowling it.\nBotham attended Milford Junior School in the town, and his \"love affair\" with sport began there. He played both cricket and football for the school's teams at the age of nine, two years earlier than most of his contemporaries. Playing against the older boys forced Botham to learn to hit the ball hard, and improve to their standard. At the same age he went to matches with his father, who played for Westland Sports Club, and if one of the teams was short, he would try to get a match. His father recalled that though he never got to bowl, and rarely got to bat, he received praise for the standard of his fielding. He joined the Boys' Brigade where more sporting opportunities were available. By the time he was nine, he had begun to \"haunt\" local recreation grounds with his kit always ready, looking to play for any team that was short of players. By the age of twelve he was playing occasional matches for Yeovil Cricket Club's second team.\nBotham went on to Bucklers Mead Comprehensive School in Yeovil, where he continued to do well in sport and played for the school's cricket and football teams. He became captain of their under-16 cricket team when he was thirteen. His performances for the school drew the attention of Somerset County Cricket Club's youth coach Bill Andrews. Still thirteen, he scored 80 runs on debut for Somerset's under-15s side against Wiltshire, but the team captain Phil Slocombe did not call on him to bowl as he considered him to be a specialist batsman. Two years later, Botham had the opportunity to choose between football and cricket: Bert Head, manager of Crystal Palace offered him apprentice forms with the First Division club. He already had a contract with Somerset and, after discussing the offer with his father, decided to continue to pursue a cricket career, as he believed he was a better cricketer. When informed that he wanted to be a sportsman, Botham's careers teacher said to him: \"Fine, everyone wants to play sport, but what are you really going to do?\"\nIn 1972, at the age of 16, Botham left school intent on playing cricket for Somerset, who retained his contract but felt he was too young to justify a full professional deal. So, Botham joined the ground staff at Lord's. As a ground boy, he had numerous tasks such as \"cleaning the pavilion windows, pushing the roller on matchdays, selling scorecards, pressing electronic buttons on the scoreboards and rushing bowling analyses to the dressing-room\". He also received coaching and plenty of time in the practice nets, and was often the first to arrive and the last to leave practice. Despite his time in the nets, Botham was only considered by Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) coach Harry Sharp to have the potential to become a \"good, average county cricketer.\" Botham travelled to play for Somerset under-25s a number of times during the season, but failed to excel in any of the matches. His appearances for the MCC were of a similar vein: he rarely scored more than 50 runs, and was used sparingly as a bowler. In one such match against \"Scotland A\", the MCC Young Cricketers used eight bowlers in their second innings, but Botham was not among them.\nThe following year, still a ground boy at Lord's, Botham was asked to return to play for Somerset's under-25s more often. Against Glamorgan U-25, he scored 91 runs and took three tail-end wickets, while just under a month later he claimed a further three wickets against Hampshire. He advanced to play for the county's second team in the Minor Counties Championship, and although he was still used sparingly as a bowler, he made some good scores with the bat, most significantly against Cornwall, against whom he aggregated 194 runs in four innings. During winter nets prior to the season, Botham had caught the eye of the former England Test cricketer Tom Cartwright, who coached at Millfield School in addition to playing for Somerset. Cartwright was impressed with Botham's foot-work and physical co-ordination, and helped him learn the basics of swing bowling, something Botham picked up \"astonishingly quickly\" according to Cartwright.\nCricket career (1973\u20131993).\nSomerset (1973\u20131975).\nBotham had done well for the Second XI and he later acknowledged the help and advice he received from Somerset players Peter Robinson, Graham Burgess and Ken Palmer. Botham made his senior debut, aged 17, for Somerset on Sunday, 2 September 1973 when he played in a List A John Player League (JPL) match (38 overs each) against Sussex at the County Ground, Hove. The match was in the same week that his time on the Lord's ground staff was completed. Somerset batted first, and Botham, number seven in the batting order, scored two runs before he was dismissed leg before wicket (lbw) by Mike Buss. Somerset totalled 139 for 9. Sussex won comfortably by six wickets, reaching 141 for four with fifteen deliveries remaining. Botham bowled three overs without success, conceding 22 runs. He did impress, however, by taking a diving catch to dismiss his future England colleague Tony Greig off the bowling of his captain Brian Close.\nA week later, Botham made a second appearance in the JPL against Surrey at The Oval in the final match of the season. Somerset were well beaten by 68 runs. Botham had his first bowling success when he dismissed Geoff Howarth lbw. He bowled four overs and took one for 14. As in his first match, he scored two batting at number seven, this time being caught and bowled by Intikhab Alam. These were his only two senior appearances in 1973, Somerset finishing 11th in the JPL. In summary, Botham scored four runs, took one wicket for 14 and held one catch.\nAged 18, Botham was a regular in the Somerset team from the beginning of the 1974 season and made his first-class d\u00e9but 8\u201310 May in a County Championship match against Lancashire at the County Ground, Taunton. Viv Richards, from Antigua and Barbuda, made his County Championship d\u00e9but for Somerset in the same match and Lancashire's team included Clive Lloyd, two players who would loom large in Botham's future Test career. Brian Close won the toss and decided to bat first. On day one, Somerset were all out for 285 and Lancashire reached 41 for none. Botham batted at number seven and scored 13 before being caught. Day two was rain-affected and Lancashire advanced to 200 for none. Their innings closed on the final day at 381 for eight. Botham bowled only three overs and his figures were none for 15; he held one catch to dismiss Jack Simmons. Somerset played for the draw and were 104 for two at the end. Botham did not bat again.\nOn 12 June 1974, he played against Hampshire at Taunton in a Benson &amp; Hedges Cup (B&amp;H Cup) quarter-final. Hampshire won the toss and decided to bat. They scored 182 all out with Botham taking two for 33 including the prize wicket of Barry Richards, bowled for 13. Botham was number nine in Somerset's batting order and came in with his team struggling at 113 for 7. Almost immediately, that became 113 for 8 and he had only the tailenders Hallam Moseley and Bob Clapp to support him. He was facing the West Indian fast bowler Andy Roberts who delivered a bouncer which hit him in the mouth. Despite heavy bleeding and the eventual loss of four teeth, Botham refused to leave the field and carried on batting. He hit two sixes and made 45*, enabling Somerset to win by one wicket. He won the Gold Award. Later, he said he should have left the field but was full of praise for Moseley and Clapp.\nIn a County Championship match on 13 July 1974, Botham scored his first half-century in first-class cricket. He made 59 in Somerset's first innings against Middlesex at Taunton, the highest individual score in a low-scoring match which Somerset won by 73 runs. Middlesex's captain was Mike Brearley, who would become a very influential figure in Botham's career. A month later, in a match against Leicestershire at Clarence Park, Weston-super-Mare, Botham achieved his first-ever five wickets in an innings (5wI) with five for 59. He took seven in the match which Somerset won by 179 runs, largely thanks to Close who scored 59 and 114*.\nBotham showed great promise in 1974, his first full season in which Somerset finished fifth in the County Championship and a close second to Leicestershire in the JPL. They also reached the semi-finals in both the Gillette Cup and the B&amp;H Cup. In 18 first-class appearances, Botham scored 441 runs with a highest of 59, took 30 first-class wickets with a best of five for 59 and held 15 catches. He played in 18 List A matches too, scoring 222 runs with a highest of 45* (his Gold Award innings against Hampshire), took 12 wickets with a best of two for 16 and held four catches.\nBotham continued to make progress in 1975. Somerset struggled in the County Championship, winning only four of their twenty matches and finished joint 12th. In the JPL, they slumped badly from second to 14th. They reached the quarter-final of the B&amp;H Cup but only the second round of the Gillette Cup. Botham played in 22 first-class and 23 List A matches so it was a busy season for him. In first-class, he scored 584 runs with a highest of 65, one of two half-centuries, and held 18 catches. He took 62 wickets, doubling his 1974 tally, with a best of five for 69, his only 5wI that season. In List A, he scored 232 runs with a highest of 38* and held seven catches. He took 32 wickets with a best of three for 34.\nSomerset and England (1976).\n1976 was a significant season for Botham as he scored over 1,000 runs for the first time, completed his first century and earned international selection by England in two Limited Overs Internationals. Somerset improved in the County Championship to finish seventh, winning seven matches. They were one of five teams tied for first place in the JPL but their run rate was less than that of Kent, who were declared the champions. Somerset lost their opening match in the Gillette Cup and were eliminated at the group stage of the B&amp;H Cup. Botham, though, came on in leaps and bounds. He totalled 1,022 first-class runs in 20 matches with a highest of 167*, his first-ever century and he also scored six half-centuries. With the ball, he took 66 wickets with a best of six for 16. He had four 5wI and, for the first time, ten wickets in a match (10wM). He played in a total of 22 List A matches, including the two for England, scoring 395 runs with a highest of 46. He took 33 wickets with a best of four for 41.\nIn the County Championship match against Sussex at Hove in May, Botham came very close to his maiden century but was dismissed for 97, his highest score to date. The match was drawn. At the end of the month, Somerset played Gloucestershire in a remarkable match at Taunton. Batting first, Somerset scored 333 for seven (innings closed) and then, thanks to six for 25 by Botham, bowled out Gloucestershire for only 79. The follow-on was enforced but Gloucestershire proved a much tougher nut to crack second time around. With Zaheer Abbas scoring 141, they made 372 and left Somerset needing 118 to win. Botham took five for 125 in the second innings for a match analysis of 11 for 150, his maiden 10wM. This match ended the same way as the famous Test at Headingley in 1981 but the boot was on the other foot for Botham here because he was on the team that enforced the follow-on \u2013 and lost. Mike Procter and Tony Brown did the damage and bowled Somerset out for 110 in 42 overs, Gloucestershire winning by just eight runs.\nBotham scored his maiden first-class century at Trent Bridge on Tuesday 3 August 1976 in the County Championship game against Nottinghamshire (Notts) who won the toss and decided to bat first. Derek Randall scored 204* and the Notts innings closed at 364 for 4 (Botham one for 59). Somerset were 52 for one at close of play. On day two, Somerset scored 304 for 8 (innings closed) and Botham, batting at number six, scored 80. At close of play, Notts in their second innings were 107 for four, thus extending their lead to 167 with six wickets standing. On day three, Notts advanced to 240 for nine declared (Botham one for 16), leaving Somerset with a difficult target of 301. At 40 for two and with both their openers gone, Brian Close changed his batting order and summoned Botham to come in at number four. Close himself had gone in at three but he was out soon afterwards for 35. With support from Graham Burgess (78), Botham laid into the Notts bowling and scored an impressive 167 not out. Somerset reached 302 for four in only 65 overs and won by six wickets.\nBotham's international d\u00e9but for England was on 26 August 1976 in a Limited Overs International (LOI) against the West Indies at the North Marine Road Ground, Scarborough. The series was called the Prudential Trophy and the teams had 55 overs each per innings. Botham, still only 20, was the youngest player. At Scarborough, England captain Alan Knott lost the toss and Clive Lloyd, captaining the West Indies, elected to field first. Botham was number seven in the batting order and came in at 136 for five to join Graham Barlow. He scored only one before he was caught by Roy Fredericks off the bowling of his future \"Sky Sports\" colleague Michael Holding. England's innings closed at 202 for eight with Barlow 80 not out. West Indies lost Fredericks almost immediately but that brought Viv Richards to the crease and he hit 119 not out, winning the man of the match award, and leading West Indies to victory in only 41 overs by six wickets. Botham had the consolation of taking his first international wicket when he had Lawrence Rowe caught by Mike Hendrick for 10. He bowled only three overs and took some punishment from Richards, his return being one for 26.\nIn the second match at Lord's, Botham was replaced by returning England captain Tony Greig. England lost by 36 runs as Richards, this time with 97, was again the difference between the teams. Having lost the series, England recalled Botham for the final match at Edgbaston on 30\u201331 August. The match was extended to two days and overs reduced to 32 per side. Tony Greig won the toss and decided to field. England began well and dismissed Fredericks and Richards, for a duck, in only the second over. West Indies were then seven for one but a powerful innings by Clive Lloyd pulled them out of trouble and they reached 223 for nine, innings closed. Botham bowled three very expensive overs, conceding 31 runs, but he did manage to bowl out Michael Holding for his second international wicket. England were never in the hunt and were bowled out for 173, West Indies winning by 50 runs and claiming the series 3\u20130. Botham again batted at number seven and made a good start, scoring 20 at a run a ball, but he was then caught by Bernard Julien off Fredericks and England were 151 for seven with only Knott and the tailenders left.\nDistrict cricket in Australia (1976\u201377).\nIn the winter of 1976\u201377, after he had made his first two international appearances, Botham played District Cricket in Melbourne, Australia for the University of Melbourne Cricket Club. He was joined by Yorkshire's Graham Stevenson. They were signed for the second half of the season on a sponsorship arranged through the Test and County Cricket Board (TCCB) by Whitbread's Brewery. Five of the competition's 15 rounds were abandoned because of adverse weather. It was apparently on this trip that Botham originally fell out with the former Australian captain Ian Chappell. The cause seems to have been a cricket-related argument in a bar, which may have resulted in Chappell being pushed off his stool (the story is widely sourced but accounts differ). This became a long-running feud and, as late as the 2010\u201311 Ashes series, there was an altercation between Botham and Chappell in a car park at the Adelaide Oval.\nSomerset and England (1977).\nBotham produced a number of good batting and bowling performances for Somerset in 1977 and these impressed the Test selectors who included him in the team for the third Test against Australia at Trent Bridge, starting on 28 July. Having captured 36 first-class wickets through May and June, Botham had something of a purple patch in July which earned him his Test call-up. In the match against Sussex at Hove, which Somerset won by an innings and 37 runs, he took four for 111 and six for 50 for his second 10wM. In Somerset's innings of 448 for eight, he shared a 4th wicket partnership of 174 with Viv Richards. Botham scored 62, Richards 204. He took 22 more wickets, including two 5wI, in the next three County Championship games before his Test debut. In the whole season, playing 17 first-class matches, he took 88 wickets with six 5wI and one 10wM, his second innings return at Hove being his best. His batting was not quite as good as in 1976 as his average was down but he scored 738 runs with a highest of 114, which was his sole century, and five half-centuries. He scored the century in July against Hampshire at Taunton, 114 in Somerset's first innings of 284, and followed it with bowling returns of four for 69 and four for 43, another impressive all-round effort which earned Somerset a win by 152 runs. Somerset had a good season in the County Championship, finishing fourth. They reached the semi-final of the Gillette Cup but, without the injured Botham, were well beaten by eventual winners Middlesex. They were a poor tenth in the JPL and were eliminated from the B&amp;H Cup at the group stage.\nBotham made his Test d\u00e9but at Trent Bridge on 28 July 1977 in the third Test against Australia. His d\u00e9but was somewhat overshadowed by the return from self-imposed Test exile of Geoffrey Boycott. England went into the match with a 1\u20130 series lead having won the second Test after the first had been drawn. The series was played against the background of the so-called \"Packer Affair\" which resulted in the establishment of World Series Cricket in the next Australian season. Because of Tony Greig's involvement, he had been stripped of the England captaincy but remained in the team under new captain Mike Brearley. England had three all-rounders at Trent Bridge with Greig, Geoff Miller and Botham all playing. Australian captain Greg Chappell won the toss and decided to bat first. Australia scored 243 and were all out shortly before the close on day one. Botham, aged 21, made an immediate impact and took five for 74, the highlight being the dismissal of Chappell, his first test match wicket, bowled for just 19. England batted all through day two and into day three as Boycott, in his first Test innings since 1974, and Knott both made centuries. Botham came in at number eight on day three and scored 25 before he was bowled by Max Walker. England were all out not long afterwards for 364, a first innings lead of 121. Botham had no joy in Australia's second innings with none for 60. A century by Rick McCosker enabled Australia to score 309 before they were all out in the evening session on day four. Bob Willis took five for 88. England needed 189 to win and completed the job, by seven wickets, well into the final day with Brearley scoring 81 and Boycott, who batted on all five days, 80 not out. Botham didn't get a second innings.\nBotham's impressive bowling at Trent Bridge meant he was an automatic choice for the fourth Test at Headingley two weeks later. England won the toss, decided to bat first and went on to win by an innings and 85 runs to secure a winning 3\u20130 lead in the series and regain The Ashes, which they had lost in 1974\u201375. The match is famous for Boycott's one hundredth career century, scored on his home county ground and in his second Test since his return to the England fold. Botham was bowled third ball by Ray Bright without scoring. He made amends with the ball by taking five for 21 in only eleven overs, Australia being bowled out for only 103. The follow-on was enforced and Australia this time made 248, but Botham (none for 47) did not take a wicket. He was injured during the second innings when he accidentally trod on the ball and broke a bone in his foot. He was unable to play again in the 1977 season.\nHis promising start as Test player resulted in two awards. He was named Young Cricketer of the Year for 1977 by the Cricket Writers' Club; and was selected as one of the \"Wisden Cricketers of the Year\" (i.e., for 1977 but announced in the 1978 edition). \"Wisden\" commented that his 1977 season \"was marred only by a week's cricket idleness carrying the drinks at the Prudential matches, and a foot injury which ruined for him the end of the season and probably robbed him of a rare double. He finished with 88 wickets and 738 runs\". Importantly, the foot injury was a broken toe sustained when he trod on the ball at Headingley and Botham subsequently needed treatment for it at his local hospital in Taunton. It was while going to one of his appointments that he took a wrong turn and ended up on a children's ward where he learned that some of the children were dying of leukaemia. This incident sparked his charitable crusade on behalf of leukaemia research.\nSomerset and England (1977\u201378 to 1979\u201380).\nEngland were in Pakistan from November 1977 to January 1978, playing three Tests and three LOIs. Botham was almost fully recovered from his foot injury but did not play in any of the Tests. He took part in all three LOIs and in some of the first-class matches against club teams. From January to March, England were in New Zealand for a three-match Test series under the captaincy of Geoff Boycott. Botham impressed in a first-class match against Canterbury at Lancaster Park, scoring 126 not out in the second innings against an attack including Richard Hadlee and was selected for the first Test at Basin Reserve. Botham had an indifferent game there and England, twice bowled out by Hadlee, lost by 72 runs. In the next match at Carisbrook against Otago, Botham achieved a 10wM with seven for 58 (his career best return to date) in the second innings, enabling the England XI to win by six wickets. \nEngland won the second Test at Lancaster Park by 174 runs after an outstanding all-round performance by Botham who scored 103 and 30 not out and took five for 73 and three for 38. He also held three catches. In the second innings, promoted up the order to get quick runs before an overnight declaration, he was responsible for calling for a risky run that led to the run-out dismissal of acting-captain Geoff Boycott: Botham's own published autobiography alleges that this was deliberately done, on the orders of acting vice-captain Bob Willis, because Boycott was scoring too slowly. The final Test was played at Eden Park and was drawn, the series ending 1\u20131. New Zealand batted first and totalled 315 with Geoff Howarth scoring 122. Botham took five for 109 in 34 overs. England replied with 429 all out (Clive Radley 158, Botham 53). New Zealand then chose to bat out time and Howarth scored his second century of the match (Botham none for 51). Botham's form in New Zealand cemented his place in the England team.\nIn the 1978 English season, Pakistan and New Zealand both visited to play three Tests each and Botham featured in all six matches. Having scored exactly 100 in the first Test against Pakistan at Edgbaston, England winning by an innings and 57 runs, Botham in the second at Lord's scored 108 and then, after none for 17 in the first innings, achieved his Test and first-class career best return of eight for 34 in the second, England winning by an innings and 120 runs. The third Test was ruined by the weather and England won the series 2\u20130. Against New Zealand, Botham did little with the bat but his bowling was outstanding. In the second Test he took nine wickets in the match as England won by an innings and then a 10wM in the final match at Lord's with six for 101 and five for 39. England won the series 3\u20130.\nDue to his England commitments, Botham appeared infrequently for Somerset in 1978. His best performances for them were a return of seven for 61 against Glamorgan and an innings of 80 against Sussex in the Gillette Cup final at Lord's. This was Somerset's first limited overs final and they lost by five wickets despite Botham's effort. They were involved in a tight contest for the JPL title and were placed second on run rate after tying with Hampshire and Leicestershire on 48 points each. Somerset did quite well in the County Championship, finishing fifth after winning nine matches, and reached the semi-final of the B&amp;H Cup.\nBotham's first tour of Australia was in 1978\u201379. England, defending the Ashes they had regained in 1977, played six Tests under Mike Brearley's leadership. Australia had what was effectively \"a reserve team\" because their leading players were contracted to World Series Cricket for the season. The difference in standard was evident on the first day of the first Test at the Gabba as Botham, Chris Old and Bob Willis bowled them out for only 116 in just 38 overs, England going on to win easily enough by seven wickets. Apart from a surprise defeat in the third Test, England were never troubled and won the series 5\u20131. Botham's performance in the series was satisfactory but there were no headlines and only modest averages. He took 23 wickets at 24.65 with a best return of four for 42. He scored 291 runs with a highest of 74 at 29.10. He held 11 catches.\nBotham played for England in the 1979 Cricket World Cup and was a member of their losing team in the final. He was again an infrequent member of the Somerset team because of the World Cup and the Test series against India. It became a memorable season for Somerset as they built on their form in 1978 to win both the Gillette Cup and the JPL, their first-ever senior trophies. Botham played in the Gillette Cup final at Lord's, in which they defeated Northamptonshire by 45 runs, thanks to a century by Viv Richards. They slipped to eighth in the County Championship. In the B&amp;H Cup, however, they were expelled from the competition for bringing the game into disrepute after an unsporting declaration, designed to protect the team's run rate, by team captain Brian Rose.\nThe England v India series in 1979 took place after the World Cup ended and four Tests were played. England won the first at Edgbaston by an innings and 83 runs after opening with a massive total of 633 for five declared. Botham scored 33 and then took two for 86 and five for 70. On the first day of the second Test at Lord's, Botham swept through the Indian batting with five for 35 and a catch off Mike Hendrick to dismiss them for only 96 in 56 overs. Surprisingly, however, India recovered to salvage a draw. In the third Test at Headingley, it was Botham the batsman who did the business, scoring 137 from 152 balls in England's first innings total of 270 (the next highest innings was 31 by Geoff Boycott). The match was ruined by the weather and was drawn. In the final Test at The Oval, England opened with 305 (Botham 38); India replied with 202 (Botham four for 65); and England with 334 for eight declared (Botham run out for a duck) extended their lead to 437 with four sessions remaining. Thanks to a brilliant 221 by Sunil Gavaskar, India came agonisingly close to pulling off a remarkable last day victory but ran out of time on 429 for eight (Botham three for 97), just nine runs short, and so England won the series 1\u20130 with three draws.\nThe shambolic state of international cricket at the end of the 1970s was illustrated by the panic resulting from a hastily convened settlement between World Series Cricket and the Australian Board of Control. Although they had visited Australia only twelve months earlier to play for the Ashes, England were persuaded to go there again and play another three Tests, but with the Ashes not at stake. As \"Wisden\" put it, the programme did not have the best interests of cricket at heart, particularly Australian cricket below Test level, which had been \"swamped by the accent on Test and one-day internationals, neatly parcelled to present a cricketing package suitable for maximum exploitation on television\". \nThe matches were widely perceived to be semi-official only and received \"a definite thumbs down\". Botham was a member of the England team and played in all three matches which nevertheless count towards his Test statistics. England were largely faithful to the players who had toured Australia the previous winter and Derek Underwood was the only World Series player they recalled; they did not recall Alan Knott, for example, while Tony Greig was beyond the pale. Australia recalled Greg Chappell, Dennis Lillee, Rod Marsh and Jeff Thomson, fielding a team that was a mixture of old and new. In the first match, played at the WACA Ground, Botham had match figures of eleven for 176 but to no avail as Australia won by 138 runs. Having excelled with the ball in that match, Botham did so with his bat in the third one, scoring an unbeaten 119 in the second innings of the third. Australia won all three matches of a series best forgotten for all its attendant politics, but Botham had enhanced his reputation as a world-class all-rounder.\nJubilee Test, India, February 1980.\nBotham's third overseas tour was to India in February 1980. It was the fiftieth anniversary of India's entry into Test cricket and so England played a single commemorative Test at the Wankhede Stadium in Bombay. It turned into a personal triumph for Botham who became the first player in Test history to score a century and take ten wickets in the same match. England's wicketkeeper Bob Taylor held ten catches in the match, eight of them off Botham's bowling.\nIndia won the toss and decided to bat first but, with Botham taking six for 58, they were all out on day one for 242. England replied with 296, the highlight being Botham's 114 from just 144 balls; he began his innings with England in trouble at 57 for four. This quickly became 58 for five and Botham was joined by England's other match hero Taylor. England's first five batsmen had contributed just 51 to the total. Botham was often unfairly labelled a \"big hitter\" but in fact his style was very orthodox (i.e., he \"played straight\") and in this innings he scored 17 fours but, significantly, no sixes. Taylor provided dogged support and their sixth wicket partnership realised 171 runs. When Botham was out near the end of day two, the score was 229 for six and England reached 232 for six at close of play, still ten runs behind. On the third morning, Taylor led England past India's total and, with useful batting performances by the specialist bowlers, England totalled 296 to gain a first innings lead of 54.\nIndia's second innings was a disaster, and they lost eight wickets by the close of play on the third day with only Kapil Dev offering any resistance. They were all out early on the fourth day for 149. Botham was the outstanding performer again, taking seven for 48 which gave him match figures of thirteen for 106. Geoffrey Boycott and Graham Gooch scored the necessary runs for England to win by ten wickets with a day to spare.\nSomerset and England (1980 to 1980\u201381).\nMike Brearley announced his retirement from Test cricket after the Jubilee Test in Bombay and, somewhat surprisingly given his lack of captaincy experience, Botham was appointed to replace him as England's captain for the forthcoming home series against West Indies, who were at the time the world's outstanding team. Botham led England in twelve Tests in 1980 and 1981 but he was unsuccessful, the team achieving no wins, eight draws and four defeats under his leadership. In addition, his form suffered and was eventually dismissed from the post, although he did actually resign just before the selectors were about to fire him. In Botham's defence, nine of his matches as captain were against West Indies, who afterwards won twelve of their next thirteen Tests against England. The other three were all against Australia.\nIn 1980, which was a wet summer, West Indies arguably had the better of all five Test matches, although, with the rain constantly intervening, they were able to win only one of them. West Indies won the first Test by only two wickets, and being at one stage 180/7 chasing a tricky 208. Rain saved England from a probable heavy defeat in the 2nd and 5th Tests: they fared better in between. In the 3rd, England conceded a first-innings lead of 110, but replied strongly in the second innings with a painstakingly slow and defensive 391/7, which would have resulted in a difficult target for the Windies had there been another day to chase it \u2013 but the third day had been rained off, and time ran out. In the Fourth Test, England picked up their only first-innings lead of the series \u2013 of 105 runs \u2013 but collapsed catastrophically in the second, before being saved by a century partnership for the last wicket between Willey (100*) and Willis (24*) to reach a total 201/9, and again the loss of a day and a half to rain left no time for the Windies to chase a potentially tough target above 300. \nBotham had a poor season as a bowler and, in all first-class cricket, took just 40 wickets at the high average of 34.67 with a best return of only four for 38. He did better as a batsman, scoring 1,149 runs (the second time, after 1976, that he topped a thousand in a season) at 42.55: but this did not translate to form in the Tests. He completed two centuries and six other half-centuries for his county. His highest score in the season was ultimately the highest of his career: 228 for Somerset against Gloucestershire at Taunton in May. He batted for just over three hours, hitting 27 fours and ten sixes. With Gloucestershire batting out time for a draw on the final day, Somerset used all eleven players as bowlers. Apart from an innings of 57 in the first Test, Botham contributed little to England in the series and that innings was the only time he reached 50 in all his twelve Tests as England captain. \nSomerset came close to retaining their JPL title in 1980 but had to be content with second place, only two points behind Warwickshire. They finished a credible fifth in the County Championship but were eliminated from both the Gillette and B&amp;H Cups in the opening phase.\nBotham led England on the controversial tour of the West Indies from January to April 1981. The second Test, scheduled to be played at Bourda, was cancelled after the Guyanese government revoking the visa of Robin Jackman because of his playing and coaching links with South Africa. The other four Tests were played and West Indies won the series 2\u20130 but England were helped by rain in the two drawn matches. Botham took the most wickets for England, but \"Wisden\" said \"his bowling never recovered the full rhythm of a year before\". His batting, however, apart from one good LOI performance in the first one-day international \"was found wanting in technique, concentration and eventually in confidence\". In \"Wisden's\" view, Botham's loss of form \"could be cited as eloquent evidence of the undesirability of saddling a fast bowler and vital all-rounder with the extra burden of captaincy\". The closest England came to a victory was in the first ODI, in which England bowled the West Indies out for 127 but, thanks to six wickets from Colin Croft, failed by two runs in the chase which was anchored by Botham's 60: this was, at the time, the lowest ODI total batting first to be successfully defended.\nSomerset and England (1981).\nThe England captaincy had affected Botham's form as a player and in his last Test as captain, against Australia at Lord's in 1981, he was dismissed for a pair. According to \"Wisden\" editor Matthew Engel, writing in \"ESPNcricinfo\", Botham \"resigned (a minute before being sacked), his form shot to pieces\" after that match. Australia were then leading the series 1\u20130 after two Tests with four more to be played. Botham was replaced by the returning Mike Brearley, who had been his predecessor until retiring from Test cricket in 1980.\nBotham continued to play for England under Brearley and achieved the highpoint of his career in the next three Tests as England recovered to win The Ashes. In the third Test at Headingley, Australia opened with 401 for 9 declared, despite good bowling by Botham who took 6 for 95. England responded poorly and were dismissed for 174. Botham was the only batsman to perform at all well and scored 50, which was his first Test half-century since he had been awarded the captaincy thirteen Tests earlier. Having been forced to follow-on, England collapsed again and at 135 for 7 on the afternoon of the fourth day, an innings defeat looked certain. Bookmakers had reportedly been offering odds of 500/1 against an England win after the follow-on was enforced. Botham, himself not long at the wicket, was the sole remaining recognised batsman as he was joined by the fast bowler Graham Dilley, number nine in the batting order, with only Chris Old and Bob Willis to come. With able support from Dilley (56) and Old (29), Botham hit out and by the close of play was 145 not out with Willis hanging on at the other end on 1 not out. England's lead was just 124 but there remained a glimmer of hope. On the final day's play, Botham reached 149 not out before Willis's wicket fell. Australia, with plenty of time remaining, needed 130 to win and were generally expected to get them; but after Botham took the first wicket, Willis took 8 for 43 to dismiss Australia for only 111. England had won by 18 runs; it was only the second time in history that a team following on had won a Test match.\nBotham's outstanding form continued through the next two Tests. In the fourth at Edgbaston, a low-scoring match left Australia batting last and needing 151 to win. They reached 105 for 5 and were still favourites at that point but, in an inspired spell of bowling, Botham then took five wickets for only one run in 28 balls to give England victory by 29 runs. In the fifth Test at Old Trafford, Botham scored 118 in a partnership of 149 with Chris Tavar\u00e9 before he was dismissed. He hit six sixes in that innings. England won that match to take a winning 3\u20131 series lead. The last Test at The Oval was drawn, Botham achieving a 10wM by taking six for 125 and four for 128. He was named Man of the Series after scoring 399 runs, taking 34 wickets and holding 12 catches.\nSomerset won the Benson &amp; Hedges Cup for the first time in 1981 and did well in the County Championship too, finishing third. They were again runners-up in the JPL, but a long way behind the winners Essex. In the renamed NatWest Trophy (formerly Gillette Cup), Somerset were knocked out in the second round. Botham played in the B&amp;H final at Lord's, in which Somerset defeated Surrey by seven wickets. He took no wickets but provided Viv Richards (132 not out) with good support in the run chase. Botham ended the season with 67 wickets at 25.55, a best return of six for 90 (for Somerset v Sussex) and one 10wM (sixth Test). He scored 925 runs with a highest of 149* (third Test) at 42.04; and held 19 catches.\nSomerset and England (1981\u201382 to 1983\u201384).\nDuring this period, Botham played in 25 Tests. There were home series against both India and Pakistan in 1982; and New Zealand in 1983. His overseas tours were to India and Sri Lanka in 1981\u201382 (he took part in the inaugural Test played by Sri Lanka); to Australia in 1982\u201383; and to New Zealand and Pakistan in 1983\u201384. He played for England in the 1983 Cricket World Cup and was a member of their losing team in the semi-final.\nBotham's return to India was less than triumphant and \"Wisden\" took him to task for his \"ineffectiveness with the ball\". Having achieved a match analysis of nine for 133 at Bombay, where England were beaten on a poor pitch, Botham took only eight more wickets, at 65 each, in the last five Tests and \"Wisden\" said this \"was a telling blow to England's chance of levelling the series\".\n1982 was a good all-round season for Botham, especially as Somerset retained the Benson &amp; Hedges Cup. In 17 first-class matches, he scored 1,241 runs with a highest of 208 against India (this was ultimately his career highest in Test cricket) at a good average of 44.32. He took 66 wickets at the low average of 22.98 with a best return of five for 46. England won their Test series against Pakistan by 2\u20131 and the one against India 1\u20130. Botham scored two centuries against India: 128 at Old Trafford and his career high 208 at The Oval. Somerset finished sixth and ninth in the County Championship and the JPL respectively. They reached the quarter-final of the NatWest Trophy and their season highlight was retaining the B&amp;H Cup they won in 1981. In the final at Lord's, Somerset dismissed Nottinghamshire for only 130 (Botham two for 19) and won easily by nine wickets.\nBotham toured Australia again in 1982\u201383 with England seeking to retain the Ashes, but Australia won the series 2\u20131 despite England winning, at the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG), a Test described by \"Wisden\" as \"one of the most exciting Test matches ever played\". Botham had a poor series and tour. He played in nine first-class matches and scored only 434 runs at the low average of 24.11 with a highest of 65. He was no better with the ball, taking just 29 wickets for a too-high 35.62 with a best return of four for 43. He did, however, field well and held 17 catches, nearly two a match. \nIncidentally, it was during the subsequent ODI tournament \u2013 the annual Australian Tri-Series, at the time called the \"World Series\" \u2013 that Botham opened the batting for the first time in one-day cricket. Due to the fielding restrictions in force in that tournament (and for ODIs in Australia generally since 1980), only two fielders were permitted outside the 30 yard circle during the first ten overs (now called a Powerplay): and it was in the 9th match of the tournament, against Australia, that Botham opened the batting for the first time, with the idea that he was the batsman best equipped to hit the ball over the top. However, the tactic did not go as planned, Botham only scoring 19 and England losing the match. The tactic was more successful, two matches later against New Zealand with Botham scoring 65, but he was expensive with the ball as NZ chased the target successfully for the highest successful run-chase in ODIs at the time. England finished the tournament in third and last place and did not qualify for the finals.\nIn the 1983 English season, Somerset won the NatWest Trophy for the first time, defeating Kent in the Lord's final by 24 runs with Botham as their captain. They were very close to taking the JPL title too but, having tied with Yorkshire on 46 points, they were placed second on run rate. In the County Championship, they won only three matches and finished tenth. They were knocked out of the B&amp;H Cup early. Botham had a good season with the bat, scoring 852 runs in his 14 first-class matches at 40.57 with a highest score of 152 among three centuries. He did less well with the ball: only 22 wickets at the high average of 33.09. New Zealand played a four-match Test series against England after the World Cup and, at the 29th attempt, finally defeated England for the first time in a Test match in England. England won the other three matches convincingly, however, to take the series 3\u20131. Botham did little with the ball, the same story as in his whole season, but he did score a century (103) in the final Test at Trent Bridge (see photo).\nIn the winter of 1983\u201384, England toured New Zealand from January to February and Pakistan in March. Apart from one innings at Basin Reserve in the first Test against New Zealand, Botham was a disappointment on this tour, especially as a bowler. He scored 138 in the first Test, sharing in a sixth wicket partnership of 232 with Derek Randall (164), but the match was drawn. It was a poor tour for England, all told, and described by \"Wisden\" as \"ranking among the unhappiest they have ever undertaken\". England lost both series 1\u20130. Botham left Pakistan after the first Test there, the one England lost, to have a knee problem investigated at home.\nSomerset and England (1984 to 1986\u201387).\nAfter ten seasons as a first-team regular, Botham was appointed Somerset club captain in 1984 and 1985. In the County Championship, they finished seventh in 1984 and then dropped to 17th (bottom of the table) in 1985. In the JPL, they were 15th in 1984 and eleventh in 1985. They made little impression in either of the B&amp;H Cup or the NatWest Trophy so, all in all, Botham's captaincy period was a lean time for the club who had enjoyed its most successful period ever in the preceding seasons.\nBotham played in 18 Tests from 1984 to 1986, ten of them (five home, five away) against West Indies. Throughout Botham's Test career, the highest international standards were set by West Indies and Botham was generally unsuccessful against them. In both of these series, 1984 and 1985\u201386, West Indies beat England 5\u20130 in whitewashes that were dubbed \"blackwash\".\nHis highest score and both his best and worst bowling performances against West Indies occurred in the same match at Lord's in 1984. Clive Lloyd won the toss and, perhaps mistakenly, elected to field. The first day was rain-affected and England, 167 for two overnight, scored 286 after a century by Graeme Fowler; Botham scored a useful 30. West Indies lost three quick wickets, all of them to Botham who was a \"reminder of his old self\" in the words of \"Wisden\", but recovered to reach 119 for three at the close of play on day two. \nIn the third morning, Viv Richards was dismissed by Botham under dubious circumstances but Botham was inspired by the capture of his friend's wicket and went on to take eight for 103, dismissing West Indies for 245 and for once giving England a chance of victory against the world's best team, with a first innings lead of 41. This was Botham's best-ever bowling performance against West Indies by some distance. England began their second innings and had been reduced to 88 for four when Botham joined Allan Lamb. They reached 114 for four at day three close. There was no Sunday play and England resumed on the Monday 155 runs ahead with six wickets standing. Botham and Lamb added 128 for the fifth wicket before Botham was out for 81, including nine fours and one six, easily his highest score and best innings against West Indies. Lamb made a century and England were all out on the Tuesday morning (final day) for exactly 300. West Indies needed 342 to win in five and a half hours. They lost Desmond Haynes to a run out at 57 for 0, whereupon Larry Gomes (92 not out) joined Gordon Greenidge (214 not out) and West Indies went on to win by nine wickets with 11.5 of the last twenty overs to spare. \nAlthough \"Wisden\" does not name Botham except as an \"inattentive\" fielder who dropped a catch, it describes the England bowlers \"looking second-rate and nobody but Willis bowling the right line or setting the right field to the powerful and phlegmatic Greenidge\". Botham bowled the most overs, 20, and with nought for 117 he conceded almost a run a ball (Willis had nought for 48 from 15 overs). In mitigation, \"Wisden\" conceded that Greenidge played \"the innings of his life, and his ruthless batting probably made the bowling look worse than it was\".\nBotham also played in the one-off Test against Sri Lanka: not bowling particularly well in the first innings although he took the first wicket (1/114 out of 491), and being dismissed for 6 as England batted (370). Toward the end of Sri Lanka's second innings as the match meandered to a draw, in absolutely ferocious heat Botham dispensed with his usual fast bowler's long run-up and switched to bowling off-spin off a few paces, surprising everybody (himself included) by taking several wickets with it, out of an analysis of 6/90. He decided to take a rest over the winter, and sit out of the 1984\u201385 tour of India.\nIn 1985, Botham played in all six Tests against a poor Australian team as England, themselves a second-rate team based on their recent performances, comfortably regained the Ashes and he was the leading wicket-taker, but the series was dominated by England's specialist batsmen, especially Mike Gatting and David Gower. Botham, who by this time had adopted a dyed blonde mullet haircut as a trademark, contributed relatively little with the bat, compared with the massive totals amassed by Gower, Gatting, Graham Gooch and Tim Robinson. He scored 250 runs at 31.25 with a highest of 85. He did take the most wickets (31 at 27.58 with a best of five for 109) but he was rarely impressive and he was bowling to a weak batting side, Allan Border apart. England's best bowler was Richard Ellison who played only twice and took 17 wickets at only 10.88 with a best of six for 77 and one 10wM.\nBotham was suspended for 63 days by the Test and County Cricket Board in 1986 after he admitted in an interview that he had smoked cannabis. Due to the ban, Botham played in only one Test which was the final one of the series against New Zealand. He made his mark on that Test though: beginning it by taking the wicket of Bruce Edgar with his very first delivery, to go level with Dennis Lillee on 355 as holder of the world record for Test wickets. The next delivery was edged through the slip cordon by Jeff Crowe. Botham went past the mark in his second over to hold the record outright, by trapping Crowe leg-before. Then on the fourth day of the match, coming in after centuries from Gatting and Gower, he bashed a quickfire half-century in just 32 balls, including 24 off one over from Derek Stirling \u2013 equalling the record at the time, for most runs off an over in Tests... a record which he was responsible for, but from the other side, having conceded 24 runs to Andy Roberts back in the 1980/81 tour of the West Indies. England declared with a massive first-innings lead, but rain came after lunch on the fourth day and only one further over was bowled.\nBotham was succeeded by Peter Roebuck as Somerset captain for 1986 but, during the season, tensions arose in the Somerset dressing room which eventually exploded into a full-scale row and resulted in the sacking by the club of Botham's friends Viv Richards and Joel Garner. Botham, who supported Richards and Garner, decided to resign at the end of the season. 1986 was not a season for Botham to remember except for one brilliant List A innings when he made his career highest score in the limited overs form of 175 not out for Somerset against Northamptonshire in a 39-over JPL match at the Wellingborough School ground. It was to no avail, however, as the weather intervened and the game ended in no result. His innings remains a ground record.\nBotham's final tour of Australia was in 1986/87 under Mike Gatting's captaincy. He played in four Tests and England won the Ashes for the last time until 2005. In many ways, the series was also Botham's last hurrah because he scored his final Test century (138 in the first Test at Brisbane which England won by seven wickets) and took his final Test 5wI (five for 41 in the fourth Test at the MCG which England won by an innings and 14 runs). \"Wisden\" pointed out that although Botham had a modest series statistically, \"he was an asset to the side\" because of his enthusiasm and \"going out of his way to encourage younger players, especially Phil DeFreitas\". \nBotham suffered a severe rib injury in the Second Test in Perth, which kept him out of the 3rd Test entirely and reduced the pace of his bowling for the remainder of the tour as he tried to manage it: as a result, with reasonable success, he changed his bowling style to a defensive, miserly military-medium pace. England also won the two one-day tournaments, the one-off Benson &amp; Hedges Perth Challenge (against Australia, West Indies and Pakistan) and the World Series (against Australia and Windies): Botham produced several match-winning performances with both bat and ball despite being not fully fit, and was Man of the Match in both matches of the best-of-three final of the World Series \u2013 with the bat in the first, opening the batting for 71 (scored out of 91 while he was at the crease), and with the ball in the second, for a particularly miserly spell which also took three wickets as England defended a low total by nine runs, to win the finals 2\u20130. Once again, thanks to the fielding restrictions in place for the World Series tournament, Botham opened the batting - a tactic that had been trialled in the 1982-3 tour: the tactic met with mixed success in the group stages, but it came good in the final.\nWorcestershire and England (1987 to 1991).\nAfter his resignation from Somerset, Botham joined Worcestershire for the 1987 season and spent five seasons with them. In 1987, he scored 126* against his old county but otherwise he was more successful as a limited overs batsman, scoring two centuries and averaging 40.94. His bowling too was much better in the shorter form, wherein he averaged 21.29 against 42.04 in first-class. His limited overs efforts helped Worcestershire to win the Sunday League. They finished ninth in the County Championship and were unsuccessful in the two knockout trophies. Worcestershire, taking a leaf from England's winter tactic, sometimes used Botham to open the batting in one-day matches, in partnership with regular opener Tim Curtis.\nBotham played in the five 1987 Tests against Pakistan, the last time he represented England in a full series. He scored 232 runs in the series with one half-century (51*) at 33.14; and took only seven wickets which were enormously expensive. Pakistan won by an innings at Headingley with the other four Tests drawn, although England were in superior positions in the First and Fourth tests which lost much time to rain, and only narrowly failed to level the series in the Fourth, running out of overs chasing a small target. When Pakistan totalled 708 at The Oval, the 217 runs conceded by Botham, from 52 overs, were the most by an England bowler, passing the 204 by Ian Peebles, from 71 overs, against Australia at The Oval in 1930, although he took three wickets and also ran out Imran Khan. The half-century, his final and by far his slowest Test fifty, was a dogged, defensive effort occupying most of the last day in a drawn match, in an unbroken partnership with Gatting (150*) to save the 5th test and keep England's margin of defeat at 1\u20130. He declined to go on tour with England the following winter, either for the 1987 World Cup in India and Pakistan (in which England reached the final) or for the subsequent tours of Pakistan (lost 1\u20130) and New Zealand (a rain-ruined 0\u20130 drawn series).\nBotham spent the 1987\u201388 Australian season with Queensland, playing for them in the Sheffield Shield. Queensland were one of the better state teams in the 1980s and were always in the Shield's top three from the 1983\u201384 season through to the 1990\u201391 season, but didn't win it. In Botham's season there, his teammates including Allan Border (captain), wicketkeeper Ian Healy and pace bowler Craig McDermott, they finished second to Western Australia. Botham scored several half-centuries and took a reasonable number of wickets and helped Queensland make the Sheffield Shield final. Botham and Dennis Lillee were fined for damaging the Queensland dressing room in Launceston, Tasmania during a one-day match. When the Queensland team flew to Perth for the Shield final, Botham was involved in an altercation where he allegedly assaulted a fellow airline passenger who had intervened in an argument between the Queensland players. Queensland lost the final. Botham was fined $800 by a magistrate and $5,000 by the Australian Cricket Board. He was consequently sacked by Queensland.\nBotham was unfit for most of the 1988 season and played in only four first-class and seven limited overs matches during April and May. He did not play for England. Nevertheless, Worcestershire won both the County Championship and the Sunday League. Botham was out of action for eleven months, having had an operation to fuse vertebrae in his spine in response to a long-standing back problem.\nHe returned in May 1989 and, bowling well in the County Championship, helped Worcestershire to a second successive title. With England struggling against Allan Border's rebuilt Australian team which featured the likes of Healy, McDermott, Steve Waugh, Merv Hughes and Mark Taylor, Botham was recalled for the third, fourth and fifth Tests of the pivotal Ashes 1989 series. He could do little to stem a tide which had now turned completely in Australia's favour and looked completely out of his depth. He scored only 62 runs at the very low average of 15.50 \u2013 two-thirds of them in one innings \u2013 and took just three wickets at an enormously expensive 80.33. The summer of 1989 saw more controversy for England with the organisation of a rebel tour to South Africa, all participants being banned for three years: Botham declined the rebel tour, hoping to be selected for the winter tour of the West Indies, only to be dropped for his poor form.\nAnother two-year absence from international cricket ensued until he was recalled again to play against West Indies in 1991, on the strength of belting 161* for Worcestershire against them in their early-season tour match against the county \u2013 it was to be his only century ever against the West Indies. He was selected for the early-season ODI series at first: he took a wicket in his first over, and four in his ten-over spell, but later tore a hamstring, going for a quick single while batting. He could have retired hurt, but opted to continue with a runner, only to be dismissed by the next delivery. The injury put him out of the remaining ODIs (both won by England) and the first couple of Tests (which England won and drew to lead 1\u20130): then, on his comeback in a county match, another injury caused him to be unavailable for the 3rd and 4th Tests (both lost by England). \nHe was recalled for the 5th Test with England needing a victory to tie the series: batting in the first innings, he scored a respectable 31 before attempting to hook Curtly Ambrose and being dismissed \"hit wicket\", in circumstances which caused an infamous giggling fit in the BBC \"Test Match Special\" radio commentary box. Used sparingly with the ball, he took 1/27 and 2/40 as West Indies were bowled out, forced to follow on and bowled out again, by Tufnell (6/25) and Lawrence (5/106) in the first and second innings respectively. His only Test victory against the Windies was completed when he himself hit the winning runs \u2013 a boundary off his first delivery \u2013 as England chased a target of 143 with five wickets to spare, and tied the series. Two weeks later, he played against Sri Lanka at Lord's, achieving little of note. He helped Worcestershire to win the B&amp;H Cup for the only time in 1991.\nDurham and England (1991\u201392 to 1993).\nBotham's final tour was to Australia and New Zealand in 1991\u201392. In the tour of NZ, he played in only the last Test, and the one-day series: his most notable contribution was his highest ODI score of 79, opening the batting, in which he seemed to be set fair to finally reach a century in an ODI, but NZ managed to keep him away from the strike for several overs, he ran out of patience, slogged a delivery straight up in the air and was caught. After this came the World Cup in Australia. Botham had not previously won any man of the match awards in the World Cup, but in this competition he won two. Against India at the WACA Ground, he bowled tightly and restricted India, needing 237, to only 27 runs from his ten overs, an economy rate of 2.70 which was significantly lower than anyone else's. He captured two wickets and one of them was Sachin Tendulkar. England won by nine runs. \nAgainst Australia at Sydney Cricket Ground later in the competition, Botham won the award for the sort of all-round performance which had made his reputation. Australia won the toss and decided to bat first. They scored 171 all out in 49 overs and Botham took four for 31 in his ten. He then opened the England innings with Graham Gooch \u2013 the tactic England had trialled in Australia five years before, and again in the ODIs against NZ at the end of the tour before the World Cup \u2013 and scored 53 from only 77 balls in a partnership with Gooch of 107. England went on to win by eight wickets with nine overs to spare. He was less successful in the final, where previously economical bowling figures were ruined by a late assault from the Pakistani batting line-up, and then he was given out caught-behind for a duck (perhaps unfortunately, since he appeared not to have touched the ball according to the camera replays) in Wasim Akram's first over, England losing the match.\nIn 1992, Botham joined County Championship newcomers Durham, scoring a century in the second innings in their inaugural first-class match against Leicestershire: and he played in the first two Tests against Pakistan, the second one at Lord's being his final Test appearance. Botham scored 2 and 6, cheaply dismissed each time by the pace of Waqar Younis. As a bowler, he was used for only five overs in the first innings, his final Test return being none for nine: he did not bowl in Pakistan's second innings, due to a foot injury sustained while batting, although he fielded at slip. England lost the match by two wickets and Pakistan went on to win the series 2\u20131. \nBotham did however play in the ODI series, in all five matches, which England won 4\u20131: these were his last international matches. England's batting was so dominant in all but one of the matches, that Botham only came in right at the end of the innings, or not at all, reverting to his old place in the middle order, and he had little to do: except in the 4th match, where he opened the batting again (in Gooch's absence) and scored a respectable and workmanlike 40, but saw England lose their last four wickets for ten runs and the match by three runs. His bowling was similarly unremarkable, usually capturing one or two wickets at about four an over: he neither scored a run (did not bat) nor took a wicket (0\u201343) in his final match.\nIn 1992 Botham was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to cricket and for his charity work in the Queen's Birthday Honours.\nBotham retired from cricket midway through the 1993 season, his last match being for Durham against the visiting Australians at The Racecourse 17\u201319 July 1993. Durham batted first and scored 385 for eight declared (Wayne Larkins 151). In his final first-class innings, Botham scored 32. In reply, Australia could only make 221, due to Simon Brown who took seven for 70 (Botham none for 21). Being 164 behind, Australia had to follow on and a victory for Durham was possible but centuries by Matthew Hayden and David Boon saved Australia and the match was drawn. Botham's final bowling return was none for 45 from eleven overs. In the final over of the game, Botham also kept wicket, without wearing gloves or pads.\nRecords in international cricket.\nBotham's Test career spanned 16 seasons and he played in 102 matches. He scored 5,200 runs at an average of 33.54 with a highest score of 208 in his 14 centuries. He took 383 wickets at an average of 28.40 with a best return of eight for 34 and achieved ten wickets in a match four times. He held 120 catches.\nIn 116 LOIs from 1976 to 1992, he scored 2,113 runs with a highest score of 79; took 145 wickets with a best return of four for 31; and held 36 catches. A straight comparison of these totals with those of his Test career reveal that he was less effective in the limited overs form of the game. He did have some outstanding LOI matches, however, winning six man of the match awards. Botham took part in three editions of the Cricket World Cup: 1979, 1983 and 1992. He played in 22 World Cup matches including the finals in 1979 and 1992, both of which England lost, and he was in England's losing team in the 1983 semi-final.\nBotham was the 21st player to achieve the \"double\" of 1,000 runs and 100 wickets in Test cricket and he went on to score 5,200 runs and take 383 wickets, as well as holding 120 catches.\nHe held the world record for the greatest number of Test wickets from 21 August 1986 to 12 November 1988. His predecessor was Dennis Lillee who had retired with 355 wickets in 70 matches. Botham extended the record to 373 in 94 matches before he was overtaken by Richard Hadlee. Botham ended with 383 wickets in 102 matches while Hadlee extended the record to 431 in 86 matches. See List of Test cricket records#Career.\nAs described above, Botham in 1980 became the second player to achieve the \"match double\" of 100 runs and ten wickets in Test cricket, following Alan Davidson in 1960\u201361. Botham was, however, the first to score a century and take ten wickets in a Test match (Davidson scored 44 and 80). The century and ten double has since been achieved by Imran Khan who scored 117 and took six for 98 and five for 82 against India at the Iqbal Stadium in Faisalabad in January 1983., and again by Shakib Al Hasan for Bangladesh against Zimbabwe at Khulna in 2014.\nList of Test centuries and five-wicket innings.\nCompared with many of cricket's greatest players, most of whom were specialists, Botham's averages seem fairly ordinary but this overlooks the fact that he was a genuine all-rounder and it is rare for this type of player to achieve world-class status. Since the Second World War, Botham is one of perhaps a dozen or so world-class all-rounders whereas there have been numerous world-class specialists. Some of the great all-rounders, such as Garfield Sobers and Jacques Kallis as batsmen or Alan Davidson and Richard Hadlee as bowlers, could justifiably be described as world-class specialists in their main discipline who were effective practitioners of the other. The genuine all-rounders to achieve world-class status during the era, besides Botham himself, have included Keith Miller, Richie Benaud, Mike Procter, Clive Rice, Imran Khan, Kapil Dev and Andrew Flintoff.\nOf note, Botham's first 202 wickets came at 21.20 per wicket, while his final 181 cost on average 36.43 apiece; the first average is one that would make Botham one of the greatest bowlers of the modern era, ranking alongside the West Indian greats Curtly Ambrose (career average 20.99), Malcolm Marshall (career average 20.94), and Joel Garner (career average 20.97), but the second average depicts a player who, as a specialist bowler, would be unable to sustain a place in many Test teams. This difference can be largely attributed to the longer term effects of a back injury he sustained in 1980; this limited his bowling pace and his ability to swing the ball.\nBotham's batting\u00a0\u2013 although never the equal of his bowling abilities\u00a0\u2013 declined as well, with a batting average of 38.80 for his first 51 Tests substantially higher than the 28.87 he managed in his last 51 Tests, again a number that would be considered unsatisfactory for a specialist batsman in most Test sides. In the first 5 years of Botham's Test career, when not playing as captain, he scored 2,557 runs at an average of 49.17 including 11 centuries and a highest score of 208, took 196 wickets at an average of 21.28 including nineteen 5 wicket hauls and held 50 catches. Such figures denote a player who would easily maintain a place in any Test side as a specialist batsman or bowler alone. During this period his reputation as one of the leading Test all-rounders was firmly established.\nStyle and technique.\nBotham had an affinity with Brian Close, his first county captain who became a mentor to him, as they shared a determination to do well and win matches. \"Wisden\" has commented on another shared characteristic: \"outstanding courage\", mainly because Botham would readily field anywhere, generally in the slips but also in dangerous positions near the batsman and he was a brilliant fielder. As a batsman, Botham was often wrongly labelled by the tabloid press as a \"big hitter\" (effectively implying that he was a \"slogger\") but, while it is true that his strength enabled him to drive a ball for six and his courage to hook one for six, Botham actually had a very correct batting style as he stood side-on and played straight: \"Wisden\" praised his \"straight hitting and square cutting\". \nBotham might not have been good enough to retain a regular England place as a specialist batsman (his Test career batting average was a fairly modest 33.54) but as a bowler who was capable of taking 383 Test wickets, he certainly would. \"Wisden\" praised Tom Cartwright for helping to develop Botham's technique as a swing bowler and, by the time he made his Test debut in 1977, Botham had mastered change of pace, the outswinger and the fast inswinging yorker, all formidable parts of his repertoire which eventually enabled him to break the world Test wicket record.\nWriting in \"Barclays World of Cricket\" (1986), former England captain Tony Lewis commented on Botham's strength, enthusiasm and aggression \"which he took into every game\". Lewis, however, said that Botham's exuberance often reduced the efficiency of his play, in that he would take too many risks or refuse to give up on a bowling tactic despite ongoing heavy cost. He summarised Botham as an exciting cricketer who lacked self-discipline. Botham was in the middle of his career when the book was published, but Lewis emphasised the speed at which Botham had achieved certain milestones such as 1,000 runs and 100 wickets in Test cricket. At that time there seemed no reason why Botham should not go on reaching milestones, but he had already peaked and, in retrospect, his career had a meteoric aspect. His rival Imran Khan said: \"Botham was someone who I don't think ever did justice to his talent. When he started he could have done anything, but he declined very quickly. In a way our careers were the opposite of each other. I started quite slowly but got better, maximised my talent. He went the other way, I think\".\nLegacy.\nBotham's career and ability level has been oft-debated. For example, when naming him as a Cricketer of the Year in its 1978 edition, \"Wisden\" described Botham as \"a determined character who knows where he is aiming, and who will, quite naturally and fiercely, address himself to the interesting view that he is overrated\". Denis Compton would dismiss Botham as \"overrated\" and said he \"only did well because all the best players had joined Packer\": i.e., for World Series Cricket (WSC).\nBotham would readily give praise to his colleagues, for instance, his batting partners Hallam Moseley and Bob Clapp after the 1974 Benson and Hedges quarter-final against Hampshire; and to Bob Willis, the man whose bowling spell won the test match at Headingley in 1981.\nThe Richards\u2013Botham Trophy, set to replace the Wisden Trophy for winners of West Indies\u2013England Test series, is named in honour of Botham and Viv Richards.\nLibel cases brought against Imran Khan (1994\u20131996).\nIn 1994, the year after he retired, Botham became embroiled in a legal dispute with Imran Khan who, in an article for \"India Today\", had accused Botham and Allan Lamb of bringing cricket into disrepute. Botham and Lamb instigated a libel action in response. The case was heard at the High Court in 1996 with the court choosing to hear on the second day a separate action brought solely by Botham against Khan, who had suggested in a newspaper article that Botham had been involved in ball-tampering. This would become the subject of a court case later on, one that Khan would go on to win. Botham was liable for all expenses in the court case in the ruling, including those incurred by Khan.\nFootball career.\nBotham was a talented footballer but, believing he was better at cricket, he chose the latter for his full-time career. Even so, he played football as a centre-half from 1978 to 1985 for Yeovil Town and Scunthorpe United. He made eleven appearances in the Football League for Scunthorpe. While with Yeovil, Botham made an appearance for the Football Association XI (a representative side for non-League footballers) against the Northern Football League at Croft Park during the 1984\u201385 season.\nCharity fundraising.\nBotham has been a prodigious fundraiser for charitable causes, undertaking a total of 12 long-distance charity walks. His first, in 1985, was a 900-mile trek from John o' Groats to Land's End. His efforts were inspired after a visit to Taunton's Musgrove Park Hospital in 1977 while receiving treatment for a broken toe. When he took a wrong turn into a children's ward, he was devastated to learn that some of the children had only weeks to live, and why. At the time he was an expectant father. Since then his efforts have raised more than \u00a312\u00a0million for charity, with leukaemia research the main cause to benefit. In recognition of this work, Botham in 2003 became the first-ever President of Bloodwise, the UK's leading blood cancer charity. In November 2014, Botham designed a Paddington Bear statue, one of fifty created by various celebrities which were located around London prior to the release of the film \"Paddington\", with the statues auctioned to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC).\nOn 10 October 2007, Botham was invested a Knight Bachelor by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace, having been appointed in the Queen's Birthday Honours \"for services to Charity and to Cricket\".\nMedia career.\nAfter retiring from cricket, Botham became involved in the media and has worked as an analyst and commentator for Sky Sports for many years. Unlike Fred Trueman and others, he does not hark back to \"in my day\". \"Wisden\" editor Matthew Engel remarked on Botham's calmness, wit and sagacity as a TV commentator, though admitting he was surprised by it.\nOn 9 August 2009, while commentating on the fourth Ashes Test at Headingley that season, Botham was invited to take part in an on-field ceremony to induct him into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame along with former Yorkshire players Geoffrey Boycott, Wilfred Rhodes and Fred Trueman. Boycott was also in attendance, along with Fred Trueman's widow Veronica and Colin Graves who, as Yorkshire County Cricket Club chairman, accepted the honour on behalf of Wilfred Rhodes. Botham said: \"To be named amongst 55 of the most prolific players in cricketing history is a great honour for me. To have my cricketing career recognised in the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame is not something I would have thought when I began playing cricket but to be receiving this award today is something I'm extremely grateful for\". Colin Graves included Botham in his tribute to Rhodes when he said: \"It is a great honour to accept the cap on behalf of a Yorkshire legend. Wilfred Rhodes was an exceedingly gifted player and is rightly regarded as one of England's greatest all-rounders. I am also delighted to see two other great Yorkshiremen and another great all-rounder inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame today\".\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in 1981 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews during a meeting at Lord's.\nOn 12 August 1995, Botham was interviewed at length by Andrew Neil on his one-on-one interview show \"Is This Your Life?\" for Channel 4.\nIn 2008 he received a Honorary Doctorate from the University of Bath.\nPeerage.\nHe was nominated by Boris Johnson for a life peerage in the 2020 Political Honours, it being widely reported that the honour was a reward for his support for Brexit. He was created \"Baron Botham, of Ravensworth in the County of North Yorkshire\" on 10 September and took the oath and his seat on 5 October 2020. Botham made his maiden speech on 3 November 2020, and since then has made one further spoken contribution on 25 November 2020 regarding funding in sport, but as of November 2024, no further spoken contributions have been made since. While Botham made 61 attendances in 2020, this dropped to two attendances in 2022. As of November 2024, the parliamentary record shows his last vote in the House of Lords was in July 2021.\nOn 23 August 2021, Boris Johnson appointed him the UK's Trade Envoy to Australia.\nPersonal life.\nBotham is colour blind. In 1976, in Doncaster, Botham married Kathryn (\"Kathy\") Waller (now Lady Botham) whom he first met in June 1974. They lived in Epworth, near Scunthorpe, until the late 1980s. They have one son, Liam (born August 1977), and two daughters. The family now live in Ravensworth in North Yorkshire, and also own property in Almer\u00eda, where Botham frequently plays golf.\nBotham is an avid trout and salmon fisherman. As a result, he was invited to present a TV series called \"Botham on the Fly\". He has also been a team captain on the BBC series \"A Question of Sport\".\nBesides angling and golf, Botham enjoys game shooting and owns a grouse moor. This has resulted in a high-profile dispute with the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). In August 2016, he called for Chris Packham to be sacked by the BBC as part of a campaign funded by the grouse shooting industry, after Packham had highlighted the industry's involvement in the illegal killing of endangered species of birds of prey.\nAccording to the \"New Statesman\" in 2015, \"Botham is an old-fashioned Englishman [...] he is conservative with a small and upper-case C\" and \"a robust monarchist\". Botham was a staunch supporter of the UK's withdrawal from the European Union. He was quoted: \"Personally, I think that England is an island. I think that England should be England. And I think that we should keep that.\" He appeared at a number of pro-Leave campaign events in the run-up to the UK's EU membership referendum in 2016.\nBotham's private life has also made occasional dramatic appearances in Britain's tabloid newspapers, with at least one extra-marital affair prompting a public apology to his wife Kathy. He also fell out publicly with other players, including fellow England player Geoff Boycott, Somerset captain Peter Roebuck, and Australian batsman Ian Chappell, with whom he had an altercation in an Adelaide Oval car park during the 2010\u201311 Ashes series. Although Botham hoped to resolve his long-running feud with Chappell during a Channel 9 documentary on 27 June 2023, Chappell refused.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15526", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15526", "title": "Id Software", "text": "American video game developer\nid Software LLC () is an American video game developer based in Richardson, Texas. It was founded on February 1, 1991, by four members of the computer company Softdisk: programmers John Carmack and John Romero, game designer Tom Hall, and artist Adrian Carmack.\nid Software made important technological developments in video game technologies for the PC (running MS-DOS and Windows), including work done for the \"Wolfenstein\", \"Doom\", and \"Quake\" franchises at the time. id's work was particularly important in 3D computer graphics technology and in game engines that are used throughout the video game industry. The company was involved in the creation of the first-person shooter (FPS) genre: \"Wolfenstein 3D\" is often considered to be the first true FPS; \"Doom\" is a game that popularized the genre and PC gaming in general; and \"Quake\" was id's first true 3D FPS.\nOn June 24, 2009, ZeniMax Media acquired the company. In 2015, they opened a second studio in Frankfurt, Germany.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nThe founders of id Software \u2013 John Carmack, John Romero, and Tom Hall \u2013 met in the offices of Softdisk based in Shreveport, Louisiana, developing multiple games for Softdisk's monthly publishing, including \"Dangerous Dave\". Along with another Softdisk employee, Lane Roathe, they had formed a small group they called Ideas from the Deep (IFD), a name that Romero and Roathe had come up with. In September 1990, Carmack developed an efficient way to rapidly side-scroll graphics on the PC. Upon making this breakthrough, Carmack and Hall stayed up late into the night making a replica of the first level of the popular 1988 NES game \"Super Mario Bros. 3\", inserting stock graphics of Romero's Dangerous Dave character in lieu of Mario. When Romero saw the demo, entitled \"Dangerous Dave in Copyright Infringement\", he realized that Carmack's breakthrough could have potential. The IFD team moonlighted over a week and over two weekends to create a larger demo of their PC version of \"Super Mario Bros. 3\". They sent their work to Nintendo. According to Romero, Nintendo had told them that the demo was impressive, but \"they didn't want their intellectual property on anything but their own hardware, so they told us Good Job and You Can't Do This\". While the pair had not readily shared the demo though acknowledged its existence in the years since, a working copy of the demo was discovered in July 2021 and preserved at the Museum of Play.\nAround the same time in 1990, Scott Miller of Apogee Software learned of the group and their exceptional talent, having played one of Romero's Softdisk games, \"Dangerous Dave\", and contacted Romero under the guise of multiple fan letters that Romero came to realize all originated from the same address. When he confronted Miller, Miller explained that the deception was necessary since Softdisk screened letters it received. Although disappointed by not actually having received mail from multiple fans, Romero and other Softdisk developers began proposing ideas to Miller. One of these was \"Commander Keen\", a side-scrolling game that incorporated the previous work they had done on the \"Super Mario Bros. 3\" demonstration. The first \"Commander Keen\" game, \"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\", was released through Apogee in December 1990, which became a very successful shareware game. After their first royalty check, Romero, Carmack, and Adrian Carmack (no relation) decided to start their own company. After hiring Hall, the group finished the \"Commander Keen\" series, then hired Jay Wilbur and Kevin Cloud and began working on \"Wolfenstein 3D\". id Software was officially founded by Romero, John and Adrian Carmack and Hall on February 1, 1991. The name \"id\" came out of their previous IFD; Roathe had left the group, and they opted to drop the \"F\" to leave \"id\". They initially used \"id\" as an initialism for \"In Demand\", but by the time of the fourth \"Commander Keen\" game, they opted to let \"id\" stand out \"as a cool word\", according to Romero. In September 1991, they relocated to Madison, Wisconsin. Later on April 1, 1992, they relocated to an office in Mesquite, Texas.\nThe shareware distribution method was initially employed by id Software through Apogee Software to sell their products, such as the \"Commander Keen\", \"Wolfenstein\" and \"Doom\" games. They would release the first part of their trilogy as shareware, then sell the other two installments by mail order. Only later (about the time of the release of \"Doom II\") did id Software release their games via more traditional shrink-wrapped boxes in stores (through other game publishers).\nAfter \"Wolfenstein 3D\"'s great success, id began working on \"Doom\". After Hall left the company, Sandy Petersen and Dave Taylor were hired before the release of \"Doom\" in December 1993.\nThe end of the classic lineup.\n\"Quake\" was released on June 22, 1996, and was considered a difficult game to develop due to creative differences. Animosity grew within the company and it caused a conflict between Carmack and Romero, which led the latter to leave id after the game's release. Soon after, other staff left the company as well such as Michael Abrash, Shawn Green, Jay Wilbur, Petersen and Mike Wilson. Petersen claimed in July 2021 that the lack of a team leader was the cause of it all. In fact, he volunteered to take lead as he had five years of experience as project manager in MicroProse but he was turned down by Carmack.\nZeniMax Media and Microsoft.\nOn June 24, 2009, it was announced that id Software had been acquired by ZeniMax Media (owner of Bethesda Softworks). The deal would eventually affect publishing deals id Software had before the acquisition, namely \"Rage\", which was being published through Electronic Arts. ZeniMax received in July a $105 million investment from StrongMail Systems for the id acquisition, it's unknown if that was the exact price of the deal. While the two companies were open to technology sharing, John Carmack ruled out larger changes like having Bethesda use id Tech for \"The Elder Scrolls\", or exchanging IPs to develop \"Doom\" RPGs and \"Fallout\" first person shooters. id Software moved from the \"cube-shaped\" Mesquite office to a location in Richardson, Texas during the spring of 2011.\nOn June 26, 2013, id Software president Todd Hollenshead quit after 17 years of service. On November 22, 2013, it was announced id Software co-founder and Technical Director John Carmack had fully resigned from the company to work full-time at Oculus VR which he joined as CTO in August 2013. He was the last of the original founders to leave the company.\nTim Willits left the company in 2019. ZeniMax Media was acquired by Microsoft for US$ in March 2021 and became part of Microsoft Gaming.\nCompany name.\nThe company writes its name with a lowercase \"id\", which is pronounced as in \"did\" or \"kid\", and, according to the book \"Masters of Doom\", the group identified itself as \"Ideas from the Deep\" in the early days of Softdisk but that, in the end, the name 'id' came from the phrase \"in demand\". Disliking \"in demand\" as \"lame\", someone suggested a connection with Sigmund Freud's psychological concept of id, which the others accepted. Evidence of the reference can be found as early as \"Wolfenstein 3D\" with the statement \"that's id, as in the id, ego, and superego in the psyche\" appearing in the game's documentation. Prior to an update to the website, id's History page made a direct reference to Freud.\nFormer key employees.\nArranged in chronological order:\nGame development.\nTechnology.\nStarting with their first shareware game series, \"Commander Keen\", id Software has licensed the core source code for the game, or what is more commonly known as the engine. Brainstormed by John Romero, id Software held a weekend session titled \"The id Summer Seminar\" in the summer of 1991 with prospective buyers including Scott Miller, George Broussard, Ken Rogoway, Jim Norwood and Todd Replogle. One of the nights, id Software put together an impromptu game known as \"Wac-Man\" to demonstrate not only the technical prowess of the \"Keen\" engine, but also how it worked internally.\nid Software has developed their own game engine for each of their titles when moving to the next technological milestone, including \"Commander Keen\", \"Wolfenstein 3D\", \"ShadowCaster\", \"Doom\", \"Quake\", \"Quake II\", and \"Quake III\", as well as the technology used in making \"Doom 3\". After being used first for id Software's in-house game, the engines are licensed out to other developers. According to \"Eurogamer.net\", \"id Software has been synonymous with PC game engines since the concept of a detached game engine was first popularized\". During the mid to late 1990s, \"the launch of each successive round of technology it's been expected to occupy a headlining position\", with the \"Quake III\" engine being most widely adopted of their engines. However id Tech 4 had far fewer licensees than the Unreal Engine from Epic Games, due to the long development time that went into \"Doom 3\" which id Software had to release before licensing out that engine to others.\nDespite his enthusiasm for open source code, Carmack revealed in 2011 that he had no interest in licensing the technology to the mass market. Beginning with \"Wolfenstein 3D\", he felt bothered when third-party companies started \"pestering\" him to license the id tech engine, adding that he wanted to focus on new technology instead of providing support to existing ones. He felt very strongly that this was not why he signed up to be a game programmer for; to be \"holding the hands\" of other game developers. Carmack commended Epic Games for pursuing the licensing to the market beginning with Unreal Engine 3. Even though the said company has gained more success with its game engine than id Software over the years, Carmack had no regrets by his decision and continued to focus on open source until his departure from the company in 2013.\nIn conjunction with his self-professed affinity for sharing source code, John Carmack has open-sourced most of the major id Software engines under the GNU General Public License. Historically, the source code for each engine has been released once the code base is 5 years old. Consequently, many home grown projects have sprung up porting the code to different platforms, cleaning up the source code, or providing major modifications to the core engine. \"Wolfenstein 3D\", \"Doom\" and \"Quake\" engine ports are ubiquitous to nearly all platforms capable of running games, such as hand-held PCs, iPods, the PSP, the Nintendo DS and more. Impressive core modifications include GZDoom, which adds to the Doom engine modern hardware accelerared renderers and a scripting system called ZScript, and was also utilized in the creation of ECWolf for \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and Raze for the Build engine. Meanwhile DarkPlaces adds stencil shadow volumes into the original \"Quake\" engine along with a more efficient network protocol. Other projects include Yamagi Quake II, ioquake3, and dhewm3, which maintain the goal of cleaning up the source code, adding features and fixing bugs. Even earlier id Software code, namely for \"Hovertank 3D\" and \"Catacomb 3D\", was released in June 2014 by Flat Rock Software.\nThe GPL release of the \"Quake III\" engine's source code was moved from the end of 2004 to August 2005 as the engine was still being licensed to commercial customers who would otherwise be concerned over the sudden loss in value of their recent investment.\nOn August 4, 2011, John Carmack revealed during his QuakeCon 2011 keynote that they will be releasing the source code of the \"Doom 3\" engine (id Tech 4) during the year.\nid Software publicly stated they would not support the Wii console (possibly due to technical limitations), although they have since indicated that they may release titles on that platform (although it would be limited to their games released during the 1990s). They continued this policy with the Wii U but for Nintendo Switch, they collaborated with Panic Button starting with 2016's \"Doom\" and \"\".\nSince id Software revealed their engine id Tech 5, they call their engines \"id Tech\", followed by a version number. Older engines have retroactively been renamed to fit this scheme, with the \"Doom\" engine as id Tech 1.\nIMF Music File Format.\nIMF (\"id music file\" or \"id's music format\") is an audio file format created by id Software for the AdLib sound card for use in their video games. The format is similar to MIDI, in that it defines musical notes, and does not support sampled digital audio for sound effects. IMF files store the actual bytes sent to the AdLib's OPL2 chip, which uses FM synthesis to produce audio output. The format is based on the AdLib command syntax, with a few modifications. Due to the limited features and relatively low sound quality, modern games no longer use IMF music.\nA large number of songs in id Software's early games (such as \"Commander Keen\" and \"Wolfenstein 3D\") were composed by Bobby Prince in IMF format. Other game developers like Apogee Software also used this format in their games (such as \"Cosmo's Cosmic Adventure\", \"Duke Nukem II\", and \"Monster Bash\").\nLinux gaming.\nid Software was an early pioneer in the Linux gaming market, and id Software's Linux games have been some of the most popular of the platform. Many id Software games won the Readers' and Editors' Choice awards of Linux Journal. Some id Software titles ported to Linux are \"Doom\" (the first id Software game to be ported), \"Quake\", \"Quake II\", \"Quake III Arena\", \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\", ', \"Doom 3\", \"Quake 4\", and '. Since id Software and some of its licensees released the source code for some of their previous games, several games which were not ported (such as \"Catacomb 3D\", \"Catacomb Abyss\", \"Wolfenstein 3D\", \"Spear of Destiny\", ', ', \"Super 3D Noah's Ark\", \"Rise of the Triad\", \"Doom 64\", \"Strife\", \"Heretic\", ', \"Hexen II\", ', ', ') can run on Linux and other operating systems natively through the use of source ports. \"Quake Live\" also launched with Linux support, although this, alongside OS X support, was later removed when changed to a standalone title.\nThe tradition of porting to Linux was first started by Dave D. Taylor, with Zoid Kirsch doing some later porting. Since \"Quake III Arena\", Linux porting had been handled by Timothee Besset. The majority of all id Tech 4 games, including those made by other developers, have a Linux client available, the only current exceptions being \"Wolfenstein\" and \"Brink\". Similarly, almost all of the games utilizing the \"Quake II\" engine have Linux ports, the only exceptions being those created by Ion Storm (\"Daikatana\" later received a community port). Despite fears by the Linux gaming community that id Tech 5 would not be ported to that platform, Timothee Besset in his blog stated \"I'll be damned if we don't find the time to get Linux builds done\". Besset explained that id Software's primary justification for releasing Linux builds was better code quality, along with a technical interest in the platform. However, on January 26, 2012, Besset announced that he had left id.\nJohn Carmack has expressed his stance with regard to Linux builds in the past. In December 2000 Todd Hollenshead expressed support for Linux: \"All said, we will continue to be a leading supporter of the Linux platform because we believe it is a technically sound OS and is the OS of choice for many server ops.\" However, on April 25, 2012, Carmack revealed that \"there are no plans for a native Linux client\" of id's most recent game, \"Rage\". In February 2013, Carmack argued for improving emulation as the \"proper technical direction for gaming on Linux\", though this was also due to ZeniMax's refusal to support \"unofficial binaries\", given all prior ports (except for \"Quake III Arena\", via Loki Software, and earlier versions of \"Quake Live\") having only ever been unofficial. Carmack didn't mention official games ' and ' ported by id Software to Linux and published by Macmillan Computer Publishing USA.\nDespite no longer releasing native binaries, id was an early adopter of Stadia, a cloud gaming service powered by Debian Linux servers, and the cross-platform Vulkan API. A Linux version of \"Doom\" from 2016 was tested internally, while it and its sequel \"Doom Eternal\" can be run using Wine and Proton.\nGames.\n\"Commander Keen\".\n\"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\", a platform game in the style of those for the Nintendo Entertainment System, was one of the first MS-DOS games with smooth horizontal-scrolling. Published by Apogee Software, the title and follow-ups brought id Software success as a shareware developer. It is the series of id Software that designer Tom Hall is most affiliated with. The first \"Commander Keen\" trilogy was released on December 14, 1990.\n\"Wolfenstein\".\nThe company's breakout product was released on May 5, 1992: \"Wolfenstein 3D\", a first-person shooter (FPS) with smooth 3D graphics that were unprecedented in computer games, and with violent gameplay that many gamers found engaging. After essentially founding an entire genre with this game, id Software created \"Doom\", ', \"Quake\", \"Quake II\", \"Quake III Arena\", \"Doom 3 and Quake 4.\" Each of these first-person shooters featured progressively higher levels of graphical technology. \"Wolfenstein 3D\" spawned a prequel and a sequel: the prequel called \"Spear of Destiny\", and the second, \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\", using the id Tech 3 engine. A third \"Wolfenstein\" sequel, simply titled \"Wolfenstein\", was released by Raven Software, using the id Tech 4 engine. Another sequel, named '; was developed by MachineGames using the id Tech 5 engine and released in 2014, with it getting a prequel by the name of ' a year later; followed by a direct sequel titled ' in 2017.\n\"Doom\".\nEighteen months after their release of \"Wolfenstein 3D\", on December 10, 1993, id Software released \"Doom\" which would again set new standards for graphic quality and graphic violence in computer gaming. \"Doom\" featured a sci-fi/horror setting with graphic quality that had never been seen on personal computers or even video game consoles. \"Doom\" became a cultural phenomenon and its violent theme would eventually launch a new wave of criticism decrying the dangers of violence in video games. \"Doom\" was ported to numerous platforms, inspired many knock-offs, and was eventually followed by the technically similar \"\". id Software made its mark in video game history with the shareware release of \"Doom\", and eventually revisited the theme of this game in 2004 with their release of \"Doom 3\". John Carmack said in an interview at QuakeCon 2007 that there would be a \"Doom 4\". It began development on May 7, 2008. \"Doom 2016\", the fourth installation of the \"Doom\" series, was released on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on May 13, 2016, and was later released on Nintendo Switch on November 10, 2017. In June 2018, the sequel to the 2016 \"Doom\", \"Doom Eternal\" was officially announced at E3 2018 with a teaser trailer, followed by a gameplay reveal at QuakeCon in August 2018.\n\"Quake\".\nOn June 22, 1996, the release of \"Quake\" marked the third milestone in id Software history. \"Quake\" combined a cutting edge fully 3D engine, the \"Quake\" engine, with a distinctive art style to create critically acclaimed graphics for its time. Audio was not neglected either, having recruited Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor to facilitate unique sound effects and ambient music for the game. (A small homage was paid to Nine Inch Nails in the form of the band's logo appearing on the ammunition boxes for the nailgun weapon.) It also included the work of Michael Abrash. Furthermore, \"Quake\"'s main innovation, the capability to play a deathmatch (competitive gameplay between living opponents instead of against computer-controlled characters) over the Internet (especially through the add-on \"QuakeWorld\"), seared the title into the minds of gamers as another smash hit.\nIn 2008, id Software was honored at the 59th Annual Technology &amp; Engineering Emmy Awards for the pioneering work \"Quake\" represented in user modifiable games. id Software is the only game development company ever honored twice by the National Academy of Television Arts &amp; Sciences, having been given an Emmy Award in 2007 for creation of the 3D technology that underlies modern shooter video games.\nThe \"Quake\" series continued with \"Quake II\" in 1997. However, the game is not a storyline sequel, and instead focuses on an assault on an alien planet, Stroggos, in retaliation for Strogg attacks on Earth. Most of the subsequent entries in the \"Quake\" franchise follow this storyline. \"Quake III Arena\" (1999), the next title in the series, has minimal plot, but centers around the \"Arena Eternal\", a gladiatorial setting created by an alien race known as the Vadrigar and populated by combatants plucked from various points in time and space. Among these combatants are some characters either drawn from or based on those in \"Doom\" (\"Doomguy\"), \"Quake\" (Ranger, Wrack), and \"Quake II\" (Bitterman, Tank Jr., Grunt, Stripe). \"Quake IV\" (2005) picks up where \"Quake II\" left off \u2013 finishing the war between the humans and Strogg. The spin-off \"\" acts as a prequel to \"Quake II\", when the Strogg first invade Earth. \"Quake IV\" and \"Enemy Territory: Quake Wars\" were made by outside developers and not id.\nThere have also been other spin-offs such as Quake Mobile in 2005 and \"Quake Live\", a web browser based modification of \"Quake III\". A game called \"Quake Arena DS\" was planned and canceled for the Nintendo DS. John Carmack stated, at QuakeCon 2007, that the \"id Tech 5\" engine would be used for a new \"Quake\" game.\n\"Rage\".\nTodd Hollenshead announced in May 2007 that id Software had begun working on an all new series that would be using a new engine. Hollenshead also mentioned that the title would be completely developed in-house, marking the first game since 2004's \"Doom 3\" to be done so. At 2007's WWDC, John Carmack showed the new engine called id Tech 5. Later that year, at QuakeCon 2007, the title of the new game was revealed as \"Rage\".\nOn July 14, 2008, id Software announced at the 2008 E3 event that they would be publishing \"Rage\" through Electronic Arts, and not id's longtime publisher Activision. However, since then ZeniMax has also announced that they are publishing \"Rage\" through Bethesda Softworks.\nOn August 12, 2010, during Quakecon 2010, id Software announced \"Rage\" US ship date of September 13, 2011, and a European ship date of September 15, 2011. During the keynote, id Software also demonstrated a \"Rage\" spin-off title running on the iPhone. This technology demo later became \"Rage HD\". The game was ultimately released in October 2011.\nOn May 14, 2018, Bethesda Softworks announced \"Rage 2\", a co-development between id Software and Avalanche Studios.\nOther games.\nDuring its early days, id Software produced much more varied games; these include the early 3D first-person shooter experiments that led to \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and \"Doom\" \u2013 \"Hovertank 3D\" and \"Catacomb 3D\". There was also the \"Rescue Rover\" series, which had two games \u2013 \"Rescue Rover\" and \"Rescue Rover 2\". Also there was John Romero's \"Dangerous Dave\" series, which included such notables as the tech demo (\"In Copyright Infringement\") which led to the \"Commander Keen\" engine, and the decently popular \"Dangerous Dave in the Haunted Mansion\". \"In the Haunted Mansion\" was powered by the same engine as the earlier id Software game \"Shadow Knights\", which was one of the several games written by id Software to fulfill their contractual obligation to produce games for Softdisk, where the id Software founders had been employed. id Software has also overseen several games using its technology that were not made in one of their IPs such as \"ShadowCaster\", (early-id Tech 1), \"Heretic\", \"\" (id Tech 1), \"Hexen II\" (\"Quake\" engine), and \"Orcs and Elves\" (\"Doom RPG\" engine).\nOther media.\nid Software has also published novels based on the \"Doom\" series \"Doom\" novels. After a brief hiatus from publishing, id resumed and re-launched the novel series in 2008 with Matthew J. Costello's (a story consultant for \"Doom 3\" and now \"Rage\") new \"Doom 3\" novels: ' and '.\nid Software became involved in film development when they oversaw the film adaption of their \"Doom\" franchise in 2005. In August 2007, Todd Hollenshead stated at QuakeCon 2007 that a \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" movie is in development which re-teams the \"Silent Hill\" writer/producer team, Roger Avary as writer and director and Samuel Hadida as producer. A new \"Doom\" film, titled \"\", was released in 2019, although id itself stressed its lack of involvement.\nControversy.\nid Software was the target of controversy over two of their most popular games, \"Doom\" and the earlier \"Wolfenstein 3D\". More recently in 2022, id Software found themselves mired in a controversy concerning libel against Doom Eternal's composer.\n\"Doom\".\n\"Doom\" was notorious for its high levels of gore and occultism along with satanic imagery, which generated controversy from a broad range of groups. Yahoo! Games listed it as one of the top ten most controversial games of all time.\nThe game again sparked controversy throughout a period of school shootings in the United States when it was found that Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who committed the Columbine High School massacre in 1999, were avid players of the game. While planning for the massacre, Harris said that the killing would be \"like playing \"Doom\"\", and \"it'll be like the LA riots, the Oklahoma bombing, World War II, Vietnam, \"Duke Nukem\" and \"Doom\" all mixed together\", and that his shotgun was \"straight out of the game\". A rumor spread afterwards that Harris had designed a \"Doom\" level that looked like the high school, populated with representations of Harris's classmates and teachers, and that Harris practiced for his role in the shootings by playing the level over and over. Although Harris did design \"Doom\" levels, none of them were based on Columbine High School.\nWhile \"Doom\" and other violent video games have been blamed for nationally covered school shootings, 2008 research featured by Greater Good Science Center shows that the two are not closely related. Harvard Medical School researchers Cheryl Olson and Lawrence Kutner found that violent video games did not correlate to school shootings. The United States Secret Service and United States Department of Education analyzed 37 incidents of school violence and sought to develop a profile of school shooters; they discovered that the most common traits among shooters were that they were male and had histories of depression and attempted suicide. While many of the killers\u2014like the vast majority of young teenage boys\u2014did play video games, this study did not find a relationship between gameplay and school shootings. In fact, only one-eighth of the shooters showed any special interest in violent video games, far less than the number of shooters who seemed attracted to books and movies with violent content.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\".\nAs for \"Wolfenstein 3D\", due to its use of Nazi symbols such as the swastika and the anthem of the Nazi Party, \"Horst-Wessel-Lied\", as theme music, the PC version of the game was withdrawn from circulation in Germany in 1994, following a verdict by the Amtsgericht M\u00fcnchen on January 25, 1994. Despite the fact that Nazis are portrayed as the enemy in \"Wolfenstein\", the use of those symbols is a federal offense in Germany unless certain circumstances apply. Similarly, the Atari Jaguar version was confiscated following a verdict by the Amtsgericht Berlin Tiergarten on December 7, 1994. The Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle lifted the outright ban in 2018 in favor of analysing depictions on a case-by-case basis, and the international version of the game was removed from the list of banned titles in 2019.\nDue to concerns from Nintendo of America, the Super NES version was modified to not include any swastikas or Nazi references; furthermore, blood was replaced with sweat to make the game seem less violent, and the attack dogs in the game were replaced by giant mutant rats. Employees of id Software are quoted in \"The Official DOOM Player Guide\" about the reaction to \"Wolfenstein\", claiming it to be ironic that it was morally acceptable to shoot people and rats, but not dogs. Two new weapons were added as well. The Super NES version was not as successful as the PC version. \nSoundtrack dispute.\nIn May 2020, after the Doom Eternal Original Soundtrack was released, there was a serious backlash to the Doom Eternal OST and accusations of low quality work that did not match composer Mick Gordon's usual standards. On April 19, Gordon confirmed on Twitter that it was not his work, and Marty Stratton subsequently posted on May 20 a 2,500-word open letter on Reddit blaming Gordon for everything that went wrong with the process of creating music for the soundtrack. Following this, public outcry against Gordon reached a level where he received explicit death threats and graphic messages of intent to harm him and his family. Gordon's message accounts, servers, and phones were allegedly inundated with abuse to extreme levels, seriously impacting his mental health.\nOn November 9, 2022, Mick published a 14,000-word article on Medium explaining his side of the story as a defensive rebuttal of the nine outlined accusations in Stratton's post (described as \"an extensive series of lies\"), substantiated with various forms of evidence including photographs of emails, receipts, and file metadata to verify his claims. It included claims that Gordon had yet to receive over half of his payment for his work and awards from the soundtrack's nominations at The Game Awards 2020 Stratton had reportedly claimed to deliver on Gordon's behalf; that his name had been listed on the OST's pre-order for weeks before Bethesda had contracted him to work on it just 48 hours before the game's release; Mossholder had been composing an alternate version of the OST as early as August 2019, and in response to request from Gordon's lawyers for Stratton's Reddit post to be removed, Gordon was offered six figures in exchange for a lifetime gag order, but never the possibility of Stratton's defamatory post being removed.\nOn November 16, 2022, Bethesda released a statement backing Marty Stratton, Chad Mossholder, and everyone in the id software team. Their statement further claimed that they had evidence to rebut Gordon's claims, without releasing mentioned evidence, and expressed concern that his statement enticed harassment and violence towards the team.\nPeople.\nIn 2003, the book \"Masters of Doom\" chronicled the development of id Software, concentrating on the personalities and interaction of John Carmack and John Romero. Below are the key people involved with id's success.\nJohn Carmack.\nCarmack's skill at 3D programming is widely recognized in the software industry and from its inception, he was id's lead programmer. On August 7, 2013, he joined Oculus VR, a company developing virtual reality headsets, and left id Software on November 22, 2013.\nJohn Romero.\nJohn Romero saw the horizontal scrolling demo \"Dangerous Dave in Copyright Infringement\" and immediately had the idea to form id Software on September 20, 1990. Romero pioneered the game engine licensing business with his \"id Summer Seminar\" in 1991 where the Keen4 engine was licensed to Apogee for Biomenace. John also worked closely with the DOOM community and was the face of id to its fans. One success of this engagement was the fan-made game \"Final DOOM\", published in 1996. John also created the control scheme for the FPS, and the abstract level design style of DOOM that influenced many 3D games that came after it. John added par times to Wolfenstein 3D, and then DOOM, which started the phenomenon of Speedrunning. Romero wrote almost all the tools that enabled id Software and many others to develop games with id Software's technology. Romero was forced to resign in 1996 after the release of \"Quake\", then later formed the company Ion Storm. There, he became infamous through the development of \"Daikatana\", which was received negatively from reviewers and gamers alike upon release. Afterward, Romero co-founded The Guildhall in Dallas, Texas, served as chairman of the CPL eSports league, created an MMORPG publisher and developer named Gazillion Entertainment, created a hit Facebook game named Ravenwood Fair that garnered 25 million monthly players in 2011, and started Romero Games in Galway, Ireland in 2015.\nBoth Tom Hall and John Romero have reputations as designers and idea men who have helped shape some of the key PC gaming titles of the 1990s.\nTom Hall.\nTom Hall was forced to resign by id Software during the early days of \"Doom\" development, but not before he had some impact; for example, he was responsible for the inclusion of teleporters in the game. He was let go before the shareware release of \"Doom\" and then went to work for Apogee, developing \"Rise of the Triad\" with the \"Developers of Incredible Power\". When he finished work on that game, he found he was not compatible with the \"Prey\" development team at Apogee, and therefore left to join his ex-id Software compatriot John Romero at Ion Storm. Hall has frequently commented that if he could obtain the rights to \"Commander Keen\", he would immediately develop another Keen title.\nSandy Petersen.\nSandy Petersen was a level designer for 19 of the 27 levels in the original \"Doom\" title as well as 17 of the 32 levels of \"Doom II\". As a fan of H.P. Lovecraft, his influence is apparent in the Lovecraftian feel of the monsters for \"Quake\", and he created \"Inferno\", the third \"episode\" of the first \"Doom\". He was forced to resign from id Software during the production of \"Quake II\" and most of his work was scrapped before the title was released.\nAmerican McGee.\nAmerican McGee was a level designer for \"Doom II\", \"The Ultimate Doom\", \"Quake\", and \"Quake II\". He was asked to resign after the release of \"Quake II\", and he then moved to Electronic Arts where he gained industry notoriety with the development of his own game \"American McGee's Alice\". After leaving Electronic Arts, he became an independent entrepreneur and game developer. McGee headed the independent game development studio Spicy Horse in Shanghai, China from 2007 to 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15528", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15528", "title": "International phonetic alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "15530", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15530", "title": "Islamic Calendar", "text": ""}
{"id": "15531", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15531", "title": "Isaac Stern", "text": "American violinist (1920\u20132001)\nIsaac Stern (July 21, 1920 \u2013 September 22, 2001) was an American violinist.\nBorn in Poland, Stern moved to the United States when he was 14 months old. Stern performed both nationally and internationally, notably touring the Soviet Union and China, and performing extensively in Israel, a country to which he had close ties since shortly after its founding.\nStern received extensive recognition for his work, including winning the Presidential Medal of Freedom and six Grammy Awards, and being named to the French Legion of Honour. The Isaac Stern Auditorium at Carnegie Hall bears his name, due to his role in saving the venue from demolition in the 1960s.\nBiography.\nThe son of Solomon and Clara Stern, Isaac Stern was born in Kremenets, Poland (now Ukraine), into a Jewish family. He was 14 months old when his family moved to San Francisco in 1921. Both his parents were musical and his mother, who had studied at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory, began teaching him the piano when he was six before switching her son to the violin when he was eight. In 1928, Stern\u2019s parents enrolled him at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music, where he studied until 1931 before going on to study briefly in New York with Louis Persinger. He returned to the San Francisco Conservatory to study for five years with Naoum Blinder, the concertmaster of the San Francisco Symphony, to whom he said he owed the most. At his public d\u00e9but on February 18, 1936, aged 15, he played Saint-Sa\u00ebns' Violin Concerto No. 3 in B minor with the San Francisco Symphony under the direction of Pierre Monteux. Reflecting on his background, Stern once memorably quipped that cultural exchanges between the U.S. and Soviet Russia drew from the same city:\n \"They send us their Jews from Odessa, and we send them our Jews from Odessa.\"\nDuring World War II, Stern was rejected from military service due to flat feet. He then joined the United Service Organizations and performed for US troops. During one such performance on Guadalcanal, a Japanese soldier, mesmerized by his playing, sneaked into the audience of US personnel listening to his performance before sneaking back out.\nStern toured the Soviet Union in 1951, the first American violinist to do so. In 1967, Stern stated his refusal to return to the USSR until the Soviet regime allowed artists to enter and leave the country freely. His only visit to Germany was in 1999, for a series of master classes, but he never performed publicly in Germany.\nStern was married three times. His first marriage, in 1948 to ballerina Nora Kaye, ended in divorce after 18 months, but the two of them remained friends. On August 17, 1951, he married Vera Lindenblit (1927\u20132015). They had three children together, including conductors Michael and David Stern and also Rabbi Shira Stern, one of the first female rabbis in the USA. Their marriage ended in divorce in 1994 after 43 years. In 1996, Stern married his third wife, Linda Reynolds. His third wife, his three children, and his five grandchildren survived him.\nStern died September 22, 2001, of heart failure in a Manhattan, New York, hospital after an extended stay.\nMusic career.\nIn 1940, Stern began performing with Russian-born pianist Alexander Zakin, collaborating until 1977. Within musical circles, Stern became renowned both for his recordings and for championing certain younger players. Among his discoveries were cellists Yo-Yo Ma and Jian Wang, and violinists Itzhak Perlman and Pinchas Zukerman.\nIn the 1960s, he played a major role in saving New York City's Carnegie Hall from demolition, by organizing the Citizens' Committee to Save Carnegie Hall. Following the purchase of Carnegie Hall by New York City, the Carnegie Hall Corporation was formed, and Stern was chosen as its first president, a title he held until his death. Carnegie Hall later named its main auditorium in his honor.\nAmong Stern's many recordings are concertos by Brahms, Bach, Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Sibelius, Tchaikovsky, and Vivaldi and modern works by Barber, Bart\u00f3k, Stravinsky, Bernstein, Rochberg, Berg, Penderecki, and Dutilleux. The Dutilleux concerto, entitled \"L'arbre des songes\" [\"The Tree of Dreams\"] was a 1985 commission by Stern himself. He also dubbed actors' violin-playing in several films, such as the 1971 film adaptation of \"Fiddler on the Roof\".\nStern served as musical advisor for the 1946 film \"Humoresque\", about a rising violin star and his patron, played respectively by John Garfield and Joan Crawford. He was also the featured violin soloist on the soundtrack for the film adaptation of \"Fiddler on the Roof\". In 1999, he appeared in the film \"Music of the Heart\", along with Itzhak Perlman and several other famed violinists, with a youth orchestra led by Meryl Streep (the film was based on the true story of Roberta Guaspari, a gifted violin teacher in Harlem who eventually took her musicians to play a concert in Carnegie Hall).\nIn his autobiography, co-authored with Chaim Potok, \"My First 79 Years\", Stern cited Nathan Milstein and Arthur Grumiaux as major influences on his style of playing.\nHe won Grammys for his work with Eugene Istomin and Leonard Rose in their famous chamber music trio in the 1960s and '70s, while also continuing his duo work with Alexander Zakin during this time. Stern recorded a series of piano quartets in the 1980s and 1990s with Emanuel Ax, Jaime Laredo and Yo-Yo Ma, including those of Mozart, Beethoven, Schumann and Faur\u00e9, winning another Grammy in 1992 for the Brahms quartets Opp. 25 and 26.\nIn 1979, seven years after Richard Nixon made the first official visit by a US president to the country, the People's Republic of China offered Stern and pianist David Golub an unprecedented invitation to tour the country. While there, he collaborated with the China Central Symphony Society (now China National Symphony) under the direction of conductor Li Delun. Their visit was filmed and resulted in the Oscar-winning documentary, \"\".\nTies to Israel.\nStern maintained close ties with Israel. Stern began performing in the country in 1949. In 1973, he performed for wounded Israeli soldiers during the Yom Kippur War. During the 1991 Gulf War and Iraq's Scud missile attacks on Israel, he had been playing in the Jerusalem Theater. During his performance, an air raid siren sounded, causing the audience to panic. Stern then stepped onto the stage and began playing a movement of Bach. The audience then calmed down, donned gas masks, and sat throughout the rest of his performance. Stern was a supporter of several educational projects in Israel, among them the America-Israel Foundation and the Jerusalem Music Center.\nInstruments.\nStern's favorite instrument was the Ysa\u00ffe Guarnerius, one of the violins produced by the Cremonese luthier Giuseppe Guarneri del Ges\u00f9. It had previously been played by the violin virtuoso and composer Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe.\nAmong other instruments, Stern played the \"Kruse-Vormbaum\" Stradivarius (1728), the \"ex-Stern\" Bergonzi (1733), the \"Panette\" Guarneri del Ges\u00f9 (1737), a Michele Angelo Bergonzi (1739\u20131757), the \"Arma Senkrah\" Guadagnini (1750), a Giovanni Guadagnini (1754), a J. B. Vuillaume copy of the \"Panette\" Guarneri del Gesu of 1737 (c.1850), and the \"ex-Nicolas I\" J.B. Vuillaume (1840). He also owned two contemporary instruments by Samuel Zygmuntowicz and modern Italian Jago Peternella Violins.\nIn May 2003, Stern's collection of instruments, bows and musical ephemera was sold through Tarisio Auctions. The auction set a number of world records and was at the time the second highest grossing violin auction of all time, with total sales of over $3.3M.\nAwards and commemoration.\nIn 2012, a street in Tel Aviv was named for Stern.\nDiscography.\n \nBrahms: String Sextet No. 1 (with Alexander Schneider, Milton Katims, Milton Thomas, Pablo Casals and Madeleine Foley)\nhttps:// (with Myra Hess and Pablo Casals)\nViolin selections from the movie Humoresque (1946 film) with Oscar Levant on the piano, Columbia Masterworks Records set MM-657\nBrahms: Violin Concerto in D Major (with Sir Thomas Beecham and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra), Columbia Records\nBach: Partita in E Minor &amp; G Minor for Violin and Piano, Sonata No.3 in E Major for Violin and Piano (with Alexander Zakin)\nProkofiev: Violin Sonatas (with Alexander Zakin)\nhttps:// (with Philadelphia Orchestra; conductor: Eugene Ormandy)\nhttps:// (with Philadelphia Orchestra; conductor: Eugene Ormandy)\nhttps:// (with Philadelphia Orchestra; conductor: Eugene Ormandy)\nhttps:// (with Philadelphia Orchestra; conductor: Eugene Ormandy)\nBeethoven Violin Concerto in D, Op. 61 (with New York Philharmonic; conductor: Leonard Bernstein) Fontana 699 049 CL CFL 1051.\nHindemith: Violin Concerto (1939) (with New York Philharmonic; conductor: Leonard Bernstein)\nPenderecki: Violin Concerto No. 1 (1976)(with Minnesota Orchestra; conductor: Stanislaw Skrowaczewski)\nBach, Vivaldi: Concertos for 2 Violins\nIsaac Stern: 60th Anniversary Celebration\nMendelssohn: Violin Concerto; Beethoven: Romances in G &amp; F Major\nHaydn: London Trios\nBarber Violin Concerto\nAn Isaac Stern Vivaldi Gala\nTchaikovsky, Mendelssohn: Violin Concertos\nDutilleux: L'Arbre des Songes (Concerto pour Violin et Orchestre) \nMaxwell Davies: Concerto for Violin and Orchestra\nCelebration\nBach: Double Concerto; Violin Concertos Nos.1 &amp; 2\nBeethoven: Violin Concerto\nMozart: The Flute Quartets\nBach: Concertos for Violin, BWV 1041\u201343 &amp; 1060\nShostakovich: Piano Trio No.2; Cello Sonata\nBrahms: Concerto for Violin, Cello and Orchestra in A Minor, Op. 102 &amp; Piano Quartet No. 3 in C Minor, Op. 60\nProkofiev: Violin Concertos No. 1 &amp; 2\nBrahms: Violin Concerto\nThe Japanese Album\nMusic, My Love\nProkofiev: Concertos No. 1 &amp; 2 for Violin and Orchestra\nMozart: Violin Concertos Nos.4 &amp; 5\nBrahms, Mendelssohn, Schubert: Trios\nBrahms: The Piano Quartets\nRameau: Pieces de clavecin en concerts\nLalo, Bruch, Wenianski, others: Violin Concertos\nBach, Mozart, Brahms, others: Violin Concertos\nMozart, Telemann, J.C. Bach, Reicha: Trios, Quartets\nSchubert: Violin Sonatas\nHumoresque: Favorite Violin Encores\nBeethoven: Piano Concerto No.5 \"Emperor\"; Triple Concerto\nBeethoven: Complete Trios\nConcert of the Century: Celebrating the 85th Anniversary of Carnegie Hall\nDvor\u00e1k: Cello Concerto; Violin Concerto\nWebern: Complete Works, Op. 1 \u2013 Op. 31\nBrahms: Sextets; more\nBeethoven &amp; Schumann Piano Quartets (with Emanuel Ax, Jaime Loredo, &amp; Yo-Yo Ma) \nTchaikovsky: Concerto for Violin and Orchestra &amp; Serenade for Strings\nFaur\u00e9: Piano Quartets\nGreatest Hits: Violin\nThe House of Magical Sounds\nGreatest Hits: Schubert\nGreatest Hits: Brahms\nBeethoven, Schumann: Piano Quartets\nMozart: Sonatas for Violin and Piano, K. 454, 296 &amp; 526\nBeethoven: Piano Trios \"Ghost\" &amp; \"Archduke\"\nBach: Violin Concerto, BWV 1041; Piano Concerto, BWV 1056; Brandenburg Concerto No.5; more\nMozart: Sinfonia Concertante; Violin Concerto No.5\nBrahms: Sextet in B-flat major, Op. 18 &amp; Piano Trio No. 1 in B major, Op. 8\nSchubert: Quintet in C major, D956 &amp; Symphony No. 5 in B-flat major, D485\nIsaac Stern Presents Encores with Orchestra\nTelemann, Bach Family: Trio Sonatas\nMendelssohn: Piano Trios 1 &amp; 2\nBrahms: Piano Trios, Piano Quartets\nA Life in Music, Vol.3: Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, Mozart, more\nBeethoven: Piano Trios \"Ghost\" &amp; \"Archduke\"; Variations\nSchubert, Haydn: Piano Trios; Mozart: Piano Quartet\nBart\u00f3k: Violin Concertos\nBernstein/Dutilleux: Violin Concertos\nBerg: Violin Concerto; Kammerkonzert\nProkofiev/Bart\u00f3k: Violin Concertos; Rhapsody No.1\nStravinsky/Rochberg: Violin Concertos\nBarber/Maxwell Davies: Violin Concertos\nHindemith/Penderecki: Violin Concertos\nBerg: Piano Sonata; Krenek: Piano Sonata No.3; Webern: Piano Variations; Debussy, Ravel: works\nA Life in Music, Vol.1: Beethoven, Brahms, Mendelssohn, Sibelius, more\nMozart: Haffner Serenade\nMozart: Sonatas for Violin and Piano, Vol. II\nBeethoven, Brahms: Violin Concertos\nTchaikovsky/Sibelius: Violin Concertos\nBach: Violin Concertos; Double Concerto; more\nVivaldi: The Four Seasons; Concertos\nMozart: Violin Concertos Nos.1\u20135; Sinfonia concertante; more\nWieniawski/Bruch/Tchaikovsky: Violin Concertos\nMendelssohn/Dvor\u00e1k: Violin Concertos\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns: Violin concerto n\u00b03, Lalo: Symphonie Espagnole, Chausson: Po\u00e8me, Faur\u00e9: Berceuse, Ravel: Tzigane\nMore Mozart's Greatest Hits\nMozart: Violin Sonatas, Vol. III\nSchubert and Boccherini String Quintets\nA Life in Music, Vol.4: Bach, Bart\u00f3k, Beethoven, Copland, Schubert, more\nProkofiev: Violin Sonatas\nBart\u00f3k: Violin Sonatas; Webern: Four Pieces for Violin and Piano\nBeethoven: Violin Sonatas\nJ.S. &amp; C.P.E. Bach, Handel, Tartini: Violin Sonatas\nHindemith/Bloch/Copland: Violin Sonatas\nSchubert: Sonatinas Nos.1\u20133; Rondeau Brillant; Grand Duo Sonata\nFranck/Debussy/Enesco: Violin Sonatas\nBrahms: Violin Sonatas No. 1-3\nIsaac Stern Presents Encores with Violin &amp; Piano\nBarber: Adagio for Strings / Schuman \u2013 In Praise of Shahn etc.\nBart\u00f3k Sonatas for Violin and Piano\nMozart: The Piano Quartets\nIsaac Stern Plays Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn\nBeethoven: Violin Concerto in D\nBernstein: The Age of Anxiety; Foss: Serenade\nBach, Vivaldi: Concertos\nCaprice Viennois: Music of Kreisler\nMy First 79 Years\nTchaikovsky, Mendelssohn: Violin Concertos\nDvor\u00e1k: Piano Quartet No.2, Sonatina in G, Romantic Pieces\nVivaldi: The Four Seasons; Concertos for Two Violins\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15532", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15532", "title": "Integral", "text": "Operation in mathematical calculus\nIn mathematics, an integral is the continuous analog of a sum, and is used to calculate areas, volumes, and their generalizations. Integration, the process of computing an integral, is one of the two fundamental operations of calculus, the other being differentiation. Integration was initially used to solve problems in mathematics and physics, such as finding the area under a curve, or determining displacement from velocity. Usage of integration expanded to a wide variety of scientific fields thereafter.\nA definite integral computes the signed area of the region in the plane that is bounded by the graph of a given function between two points in the real line. Conventionally, areas above the horizontal axis of the plane are positive while areas below are negative. Integrals also refer to the concept of an \"antiderivative\", a function whose derivative is the given function; in this case, they are also called \"indefinite integrals\". The fundamental theorem of calculus relates definite integration to differentiation and provides a method to compute the definite integral of a function when its antiderivative is known; differentiation and integration are inverse operations.\nAlthough methods of calculating areas and volumes dated from ancient Greek mathematics, the principles of integration were formulated independently by Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in the late 17th century, who thought of the area under a curve as an infinite sum of rectangles of infinitesimal width. Bernhard Riemann later gave a rigorous definition of integrals, which is based on a limiting procedure that approximates the area of a curvilinear region by breaking the region into infinitesimally thin vertical slabs. In the early 20th century, Henri Lebesgue generalized Riemann's formulation by introducing what is now referred to as the Lebesgue integral; it is more general than Riemann's in the sense that a wider class of functions are Lebesgue-integrable.\nIntegrals may be generalized depending on the type of the function as well as the domain over which the integration is performed. For example, a line integral is defined for functions of two or more variables, and the interval of integration is replaced by a curve connecting two points in space. In a surface integral, the curve is replaced by a piece of a surface in three-dimensional space.\nHistory.\nPre-calculus integration.\nThe first documented systematic technique capable of determining integrals is the method of exhaustion of the ancient Greek astronomer Eudoxus and philosopher Democritus (\"ca.\" 370 BC), which sought to find areas and volumes by breaking them up into an infinite number of divisions for which the area or volume was known. This method was further developed and employed by Archimedes in the 3rd century BC and used to calculate the area of a circle, the surface area and volume of a sphere, area of an ellipse, the area under a parabola, the volume of a segment of a paraboloid of revolution, the volume of a segment of a hyperboloid of revolution, and the area of a spiral.\nA similar method was independently developed in China around the 3rd century AD by Liu Hui, who used it to find the area of the circle. This method was later used in the 5th century by Chinese father-and-son mathematicians Zu Chongzhi and Zu Geng to find the volume of a sphere.\nIn the Middle East, Hasan Ibn al-Haytham, Latinized as Alhazen (c.\u2009965\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091040\u00a0AD) derived a formula for the sum of fourth powers. Alhazen determined the equations to calculate the area enclosed by the curve represented by formula_1 (which translates to the integral formula_2 in contemporary notation), for any given non-negative integer value of formula_3. He used the results to carry out what would now be called an integration of this function, where the formulae for the sums of integral squares and fourth powers allowed him to calculate the volume of a paraboloid.\nThe next significant advances in integral calculus did not begin to appear until the 17th century. At this time, the work of Cavalieri with his method of indivisibles, and work by Fermat, began to lay the foundations of modern calculus, with Cavalieri computing the integrals of \"x\"\"n\" up to degree \"n\" \n 9 in Cavalieri's quadrature formula. The case \"n\" = \u22121 required the invention of a function, the hyperbolic logarithm, achieved by quadrature of the hyperbola in 1647.\nFurther steps were made in the early 17th century by Barrow and Torricelli, who provided the first hints of a connection between integration and differentiation. Barrow provided the first proof of the fundamental theorem of calculus. Wallis generalized Cavalieri's method, computing integrals of x to a general power, including negative powers and fractional powers.\nLeibniz and Newton.\nThe major advance in integration came in the 17th century with the independent discovery of the fundamental theorem of calculus by Leibniz and Newton. The theorem demonstrates a connection between integration and differentiation. This connection, combined with the comparative ease of differentiation, can be exploited to calculate integrals. In particular, the fundamental theorem of calculus allows one to solve a much broader class of problems. Equal in importance is the comprehensive mathematical framework that both Leibniz and Newton developed. Given the name infinitesimal calculus, it allowed for precise analysis of functions with continuous domains. This framework eventually became modern calculus, whose notation for integrals is drawn directly from the work of Leibniz.\nFormalization.\nWhile Newton and Leibniz provided a systematic approach to integration, their work lacked a degree of rigour. Bishop Berkeley memorably attacked the vanishing increments used by Newton, calling them \"ghosts of departed quantities\". Calculus acquired a firmer footing with the development of limits. Integration was first rigorously formalized, using limits, by Riemann. Although all bounded piecewise continuous functions are Riemann-integrable on a bounded interval, subsequently more general functions were considered\u2014particularly in the context of Fourier analysis\u2014to which Riemann's definition does not apply, and Lebesgue formulated a different definition of integral, founded in measure theory (a subfield of real analysis). Other definitions of integral, extending Riemann's and Lebesgue's approaches, were proposed. These approaches based on the real number system are the ones most common today, but alternative approaches exist, such as a definition of integral as the standard part of an infinite Riemann sum, based on the hyperreal number system.\nHistorical notation.\nThe notation for the indefinite integral was introduced by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1675. He adapted the integral symbol, \u222b, from the letter \"\u017f\" (long s), standing for \"summa\" (written as \"\u017fumma\"; Latin for \"sum\" or \"total\"). The modern notation for the definite integral, with limits above and below the integral sign, was first used by Joseph Fourier in \"M\u00e9moires\" of the French Academy around 1819\u20131820, reprinted in his book of 1822.\nIsaac Newton used a small vertical bar above a variable to indicate integration, or placed the variable inside a box. The vertical bar was easily confused with or \"x\"\u2032, which are used to indicate differentiation, and the box notation was difficult for printers to reproduce, so these notations were not widely adopted.\nFirst use of the term.\nThe term was first printed in Latin by Jacob Bernoulli in 1690: \"Ergo et horum Integralia aequantur\".\nTerminology and notation.\nIn general, the integral of a real-valued function \"f\"(\"x\") with respect to a real variable \"x\" on an interval [\"a\", \"b\"] is written as\nformula_4\nThe integral sign \u222b represents integration. The symbol \"dx\", called the differential of the variable \"x\", indicates that the variable of integration is \"x\". The function \"f\"(\"x\") is called the \"integrand\", the points \"a\" and \"b\" are called the limits (or bounds) of integration, and the integral is said to be over the interval [\"a\", \"b\"], called the interval of integration. \nA function is said to be integrable if its integral over its domain is finite. If limits are specified, the integral is called a definite integral.\nWhen the limits are omitted, as in\n formula_5\nthe integral is called an indefinite integral, which represents a class of functions (the antiderivative) whose derivative is the integrand. The fundamental theorem of calculus relates the evaluation of definite integrals to indefinite integrals. There are several extensions of the notation for integrals to encompass integration on unbounded domains and/or in multiple dimensions (see later sections of this article).\nIn advanced settings, it is not uncommon to leave out \"dx\" when only the simple Riemann integral is being used, or the exact type of integral is immaterial. For instance, one might write formula_6 to express the linearity of the integral, a property shared by the Riemann integral and all generalizations thereof.\nInterpretations.\nIntegrals appear in many practical situations. For instance, from the length, width and depth of a swimming pool which is rectangular with a flat bottom, one can determine the volume of water it can contain, the area of its surface, and the length of its edge. But if it is oval with a rounded bottom, integrals are required to find exact and rigorous values for these quantities. In each case, one may divide the sought quantity into infinitely many infinitesimal pieces, then sum the pieces to achieve an accurate approximation.\nAs another example, to find the area of the region bounded by the graph of the function \"f\"(\"x\") = formula_7 between \"x\" = 0 and \"x\" = 1, one can divide the interval into five pieces (0, 1/5, 2/5, ..., 1), then construct rectangles using the right end height of each piece (thus ) and sum their areas to get the approximation\nformula_8\nwhich is larger than the exact value. Alternatively, when replacing these subintervals by ones with the left end height of each piece, the approximation one gets is too low: with twelve such subintervals the approximated area is only 0.6203. However, when the number of pieces increases to infinity, it will reach a limit which is the exact value of the area sought (in this case, 2/3). One writes\nformula_9\nwhich means 2/3 is the result of a weighted sum of function values, \u221a\"x\", multiplied by the infinitesimal step widths, denoted by \"dx\", on the interval [0, 1].\nFormal definitions.\nThere are many ways of formally defining an integral, not all of which are equivalent. The differences exist mostly to deal with differing special cases which may not be integrable under other definitions, but are also occasionally for pedagogical reasons. The most commonly used definitions are Riemann integrals and Lebesgue integrals.\nRiemann integral.\nThe Riemann integral is defined in terms of Riemann sums of functions with respect to \"tagged partitions\" of an interval. A tagged partition of a closed interval [\"a\", \"b\"] on the real line is a finite sequence\n formula_10\nThis partitions the interval [\"a\", \"b\"] into n sub-intervals [\"x\"\"i\"\u22121, \"x\"\"i\"] indexed by i, each of which is \"tagged\" with a specific point \"t\"\"i\" \u2208 [\"x\"\"i\"\u22121, \"x\"\"i\"]. A \"Riemann sum\" of a function f with respect to such a tagged partition is defined as\n formula_11\nthus each term of the sum is the area of a rectangle with height equal to the function value at the chosen point of the given sub-interval, and width the same as the width of sub-interval, \u0394\"i\" \n \"x\"\"i\"\u2212\"x\"\"i\"\u22121. The \"mesh\" of such a tagged partition is the width of the largest sub-interval formed by the partition, max\"i\"\n1...\"n\" \u0394\"i\". The \"Riemann integral\" of a function f over the interval [\"a\", \"b\"] is equal to S if:\n For all formula_12 there exists formula_13 such that, for any tagged partition formula_14 with mesh less than formula_15,\n formula_16\nWhen the chosen tags are the maximum (respectively, minimum) value of the function in each interval, the Riemann sum becomes an upper (respectively, lower) Darboux sum, suggesting the close connection between the Riemann integral and the Darboux integral.\nLebesgue integral.\nIt is often of interest, both in theory and applications, to be able to pass to the limit under the integral. For instance, a sequence of functions can frequently be constructed that approximate, in a suitable sense, the solution to a problem. Then the integral of the solution function should be the limit of the integrals of the approximations. However, many functions that can be obtained as limits are not Riemann-integrable, and so such limit theorems do not hold with the Riemann integral. Therefore, it is of great importance to have a definition of the integral that allows a wider class of functions to be integrated.\nSuch an integral is the Lebesgue integral, that exploits the following fact to enlarge the class of integrable functions: if the values of a function are rearranged over the domain, the integral of a function should remain the same. Thus Henri Lebesgue introduced the integral bearing his name, explaining this integral thus in a letter to Paul Montel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have to pay a certain sum, which I have collected in my pocket. I take the bills and coins out of my pocket and give them to the creditor in the order I find them until I have reached the total sum. This is the Riemann integral. But I can proceed differently. After I have taken all the money out of my pocket I order the bills and coins according to identical values and then I pay the several heaps one after the other to the creditor. This is my integral.\nAs Folland puts it, \"To compute the Riemann integral of f, one partitions the domain [\"a\", \"b\"] into subintervals\", while in the Lebesgue integral, \"one is in effect partitioning the range of f \". The definition of the Lebesgue integral thus begins with a measure, \u03bc. In the simplest case, the Lebesgue measure \"\u03bc\"(\"A\") of an interval \"A\" = [\"a\", \"b\"] is its width, \"b\" \u2212 \"a\", so that the Lebesgue integral agrees with the (proper) Riemann integral when both exist. In more complicated cases, the sets being measured can be highly fragmented, with no continuity and no resemblance to intervals.\nUsing the \"partitioning the range of f \" philosophy, the integral of a non-negative function \"f\" : R \u2192 R should be the sum over t of the areas between a thin horizontal strip between \"y\" = \"t\" and \"y\" = \"t\" + \"dt\". This area is just \"\u03bc\"{ \"x\" : \"f\"(\"x\") &gt; \"t\"}\u2009\"dt\". Let \"f\"\u2217(\"t\") = \"\u03bc\"{ \"x\" : \"f\"(\"x\") &gt; \"t\" }. The Lebesgue integral of f is then defined by\n formula_17\nwhere the integral on the right is an ordinary improper Riemann integral (\"f\"\u2217 is a strictly decreasing positive function, and therefore has a well-defined improper Riemann integral). For a suitable class of functions (the measurable functions) this defines the Lebesgue integral.\nA general measurable function f is Lebesgue-integrable if the sum of the absolute values of the areas of the regions between the graph of f and the x-axis is finite:\n formula_18\nIn that case, the integral is, as in the Riemannian case, the difference between the area above the x-axis and the area below the x-axis:\n formula_19\nwhere\n formula_20\nOther integrals.\nAlthough the Riemann and Lebesgue integrals are the most widely used definitions of the integral, a number of others exist, including:\nProperties.\nLinearity.\nThe collection of Riemann-integrable functions on a closed interval [\"a\", \"b\"] forms a vector space under the operations of pointwise addition and multiplication by a scalar, and the operation of integration\n formula_21\nis a linear functional on this vector space. Thus, the collection of integrable functions is closed under taking linear combinations, and the integral of a linear combination is the linear combination of the integrals:\n formula_22\nSimilarly, the set of real-valued Lebesgue-integrable functions on a given measure space E with measure \u03bc is closed under taking linear combinations and hence form a vector space, and the Lebesgue integral\n formula_23\nis a linear functional on this vector space, so that:\n formula_24\nMore generally, consider the vector space of all measurable functions on a measure space (\"E\",\"\u03bc\"), taking values in a locally compact complete topological vector space V over a locally compact topological field \"K\", \"f\" : \"E\" \u2192 \"V\". Then one may define an abstract integration map assigning to each function f an element of V or the symbol \"\u221e\",\n formula_25\nthat is compatible with linear combinations. In this situation, the linearity holds for the subspace of functions whose integral is an element of V (i.e. \"finite\"). The most important special cases arise when K is R, C, or a finite extension of the field Q\"p\" of p-adic numbers, and V is a finite-dimensional vector space over K, and when \"K\" \n C and V is a complex Hilbert space.\nLinearity, together with some natural continuity properties and normalization for a certain class of \"simple\" functions, may be used to give an alternative definition of the integral. This is the approach of Daniell for the case of real-valued functions on a set X, generalized by Nicolas Bourbaki to functions with values in a locally compact topological vector space. See for an axiomatic characterization of the integral.\nInequalities.\nA number of general inequalities hold for Riemann-integrable functions defined on a closed and bounded interval [\"a\", \"b\"] and can be generalized to other notions of integral (Lebesgue and Daniell).\nConventions.\nIn this section, f is a real-valued Riemann-integrable function. The integral\n formula_35\nover an interval [\"a\", \"b\"] is defined if \"a\" &lt; \"b\". This means that the upper and lower sums of the function f are evaluated on a partition \"a\" \n \"x\"0 \u2264 \"x\"1 \u2264 . . . \u2264 \"x\"\"n\" \n \"b\" whose values \"x\"\"i\" are increasing. Geometrically, this signifies that integration takes place \"left to right\", evaluating f within intervals [\"x\"\u2009\"i\"\u2009, \"x\"\u2009\"i\"\u2009+1] where an interval with a higher index lies to the right of one with a lower index. The values a and b, the end-points of the interval, are called the limits of integration of f. Integrals can also be defined if \"a\" &gt; \"b\":\"\"\nformula_36\nWith \"a\" \n \"b\", this implies:\nformula_37\nThe first convention is necessary in consideration of taking integrals over subintervals of [\"a\", \"b\"]; the second says that an integral taken over a degenerate interval, or a point, should be zero. One reason for the first convention is that the integrability of f on an interval [\"a\", \"b\"] implies that f is integrable on any subinterval [\"c\", \"d\"], but in particular integrals have the property that if c is any element of [\"a\", \"b\"], then:\"\"\nformula_38\nWith the first convention, the resulting relation\n formula_39\nis then well-defined for any cyclic permutation of a, b, and c.\nFundamental theorem of calculus.\nThe \"fundamental theorem of calculus\" is the statement that differentiation and integration are inverse operations: if a continuous function is first integrated and then differentiated, the original function is retrieved. An important consequence, sometimes called the \"second fundamental theorem of calculus\", allows one to compute integrals by using an antiderivative of the function to be integrated.\nFirst theorem.\nLet f be a continuous real-valued function defined on a closed interval [\"a\", \"b\"]. Let F be the function defined, for all x in [\"a\", \"b\"], by\n formula_40\nThen, F is continuous on [\"a\", \"b\"], differentiable on the open interval (\"a\", \"b\"), and\n formula_41\nfor all x in (\"a\", \"b\").\nSecond theorem.\nLet f be a real-valued function defined on a closed interval [\"a\", \"b\"] that admits an antiderivative F on [\"a\", \"b\"]. That is, f and F are functions such that for all x in [\"a\", \"b\"],\n formula_42\nIf f is integrable on [\"a\", \"b\"] then\n formula_43\nExtensions.\nImproper integrals.\nA \"proper\" Riemann integral assumes the integrand is defined and finite on a closed and bounded interval, bracketed by the limits of integration. An improper integral occurs when one or more of these conditions is not satisfied. In some cases such integrals may be defined by considering the limit of a sequence of proper Riemann integrals on progressively larger intervals.\nIf the interval is unbounded, for instance at its upper end, then the improper integral is the limit as that endpoint goes to infinity:\n formula_44\nIf the integrand is only defined or finite on a half-open interval, for instance (\"a\", \"b\"], then again a limit may provide a finite result:\n formula_45\nThat is, the improper integral is the limit of proper integrals as one endpoint of the interval of integration approaches either a specified real number, or \u221e, or \u2212\u221e. In more complicated cases, limits are required at both endpoints, or at interior points.\nMultiple integration.\nJust as the definite integral of a positive function of one variable represents the area of the region between the graph of the function and the \"x\"-axis, the \"double integral\" of a positive function of two variables represents the volume of the region between the surface defined by the function and the plane that contains its domain. For example, a function in two dimensions depends on two real variables, \"x\" and \"y\", and the integral of a function \"f\" over the rectangle \"R\" given as the Cartesian product of two intervals formula_46 can be written\n formula_47\nwhere the differential \"dA\" indicates that integration is taken with respect to area. This double integral can be defined using Riemann sums, and represents the (signed) volume under the graph of \"z\" \n \"f\"(\"x\",\"y\") over the domain \"R\". Under suitable conditions (e.g., if \"f\" is continuous), Fubini's theorem states that this integral can be expressed as an equivalent iterated integral\n formula_48\nThis reduces the problem of computing a double integral to computing one-dimensional integrals. Because of this, another notation for the integral over \"R\" uses a double integral sign:\n formula_49\nIntegration over more general domains is possible. The integral of a function \"f\", with respect to volume, over an \"n-\"dimensional region \"D\" of formula_50 is denoted by symbols such as:\n formula_51\nLine integrals and surface integrals.\nThe concept of an integral can be extended to more general domains of integration, such as curved lines and surfaces inside higher-dimensional spaces. Such integrals are known as line integrals and surface integrals respectively. These have important applications in physics, as when dealing with vector fields.\nA \"line integral\" (sometimes called a \"path integral\") is an integral where the function to be integrated is evaluated along a curve. Various different line integrals are in use. In the case of a closed curve it is also called a \"contour integral\".\nThe function to be integrated may be a scalar field or a vector field. The value of the line integral is the sum of values of the field at all points on the curve, weighted by some scalar function on the curve (commonly arc length or, for a vector field, the scalar product of the vector field with a differential vector in the curve). This weighting distinguishes the line integral from simpler integrals defined on intervals. Many simple formulas in physics have natural continuous analogs in terms of line integrals; for example, the fact that work is equal to force, F, multiplied by displacement, s, may be expressed (in terms of vector quantities) as:\n formula_52\nFor an object moving along a path \"C\" in a vector field F such as an electric field or gravitational field, the total work done by the field on the object is obtained by summing up the differential work done in moving from s to s + \"d\"s. This gives the line integral\n formula_53\nA \"surface integral\" generalizes double integrals to integration over a surface (which may be a curved set in space); it can be thought of as the double integral analog of the line integral. The function to be integrated may be a scalar field or a vector field. The value of the surface integral is the sum of the field at all points on the surface. This can be achieved by splitting the surface into surface elements, which provide the partitioning for Riemann sums.\nFor an example of applications of surface integrals, consider a vector field v on a surface \"S\"; that is, for each point \"x\" in \"S\", v(\"x\") is a vector. Imagine that a fluid flows through \"S\", such that v(\"x\") determines the velocity of the fluid at x. The flux is defined as the quantity of fluid flowing through \"S\" in unit amount of time. To find the flux, one need to take the dot product of v with the unit surface normal to \"S\" at each point, which will give a scalar field, which is integrated over the surface:\n formula_54\nThe fluid flux in this example may be from a physical fluid such as water or air, or from electrical or magnetic flux. Thus surface integrals have applications in physics, particularly with the classical theory of electromagnetism.\nContour integrals.\nIn complex analysis, the integrand is a complex-valued function of a complex variable z instead of a real function of a real variable x. When a complex function is integrated along a curve formula_55 in the complex plane, the integral is denoted as follows\n formula_56\nThis is known as a contour integral.\nIntegrals of differential forms.\nA differential form is a mathematical concept in the fields of multivariable calculus, differential topology, and tensors. Differential forms are organized by degree. For example, a one-form is a weighted sum of the differentials of the coordinates, such as:\n formula_57\nwhere \"E\", \"F\", \"G\" are functions in three dimensions. A differential one-form can be integrated over an oriented path, and the resulting integral is just another way of writing a line integral. Here the basic differentials \"dx\", \"dy\", \"dz\" measure infinitesimal oriented lengths parallel to the three coordinate axes.\nA differential two-form is a sum of the form\n formula_58\nHere the basic two-forms formula_59 measure oriented areas parallel to the coordinate two-planes. The symbol formula_60 denotes the wedge product, which is similar to the cross product in the sense that the wedge product of two forms representing oriented lengths represents an oriented area. A two-form can be integrated over an oriented surface, and the resulting integral is equivalent to the surface integral giving the flux of formula_61.\nUnlike the cross product, and the three-dimensional vector calculus, the wedge product and the calculus of differential forms makes sense in arbitrary dimension and on more general manifolds (curves, surfaces, and their higher-dimensional analogs). The exterior derivative plays the role of the gradient and curl of vector calculus, and Stokes' theorem simultaneously generalizes the three theorems of vector calculus: the divergence theorem, Green's theorem, and the Kelvin-Stokes theorem.\nSummations.\nThe discrete equivalent of integration is summation. Summations and integrals can be put on the same foundations using the theory of Lebesgue integrals or time-scale calculus.\nFunctional integrals.\nAn integration that is performed not over a variable (or, in physics, over a space or time dimension), but over a space of functions, is referred to as a functional integral.\nApplications.\nIntegrals are used extensively in many areas. For example, in probability theory, integrals are used to determine the probability of some random variable falling within a certain range. Moreover, the integral under an entire probability density function must equal 1, which provides a test of whether a function with no negative values could be a density function or not.\nIntegrals can be used for computing the area of a two-dimensional region that has a curved boundary, as well as computing the volume of a three-dimensional object that has a curved boundary. The area of a two-dimensional region can be calculated using the aforementioned definite integral. The volume of a three-dimensional object such as a disc or washer can be computed by disc integration using the equation for the volume of a cylinder, formula_62, where formula_63 is the radius. In the case of a simple disc created by rotating a curve about the \"x\"-axis, the radius is given by \"f\"(\"x\"), and its height is the differential \"dx\". Using an integral with bounds \"a\" and \"b\", the volume of the disc is equal to:formula_64Integrals are also used in physics, in areas like kinematics to find quantities like displacement, time, and velocity. For example, in rectilinear motion, the displacement of an object over the time interval formula_65 is given by\n formula_66\nwhere formula_67 is the velocity expressed as a function of time. The work done by a force formula_68 (given as a function of position) from an initial position formula_69 to a final position formula_70 is:\n formula_71\nIntegrals are also used in thermodynamics, where thermodynamic integration is used to calculate the difference in free energy between two given states.\nComputation.\nAnalytical.\nThe most basic technique for computing definite integrals of one real variable is based on the fundamental theorem of calculus. Let \"f\"(\"x\") be the function of x to be integrated over a given interval [\"a\", \"b\"]. Then, find an antiderivative of f; that is, a function F such that \"F\"\u2032 \n \"f\" on the interval. Provided the integrand and integral have no singularities on the path of integration, by the fundamental theorem of calculus,\nformula_72\nSometimes it is necessary to use one of the many techniques that have been developed to evaluate integrals. Most of these techniques rewrite one integral as a different one which is hopefully more tractable. Techniques include integration by substitution, integration by parts, integration by trigonometric substitution, and integration by partial fractions.\nAlternative methods exist to compute more complex integrals. Many nonelementary integrals can be expanded in a Taylor series and integrated term by term. Occasionally, the resulting infinite series can be summed analytically. The method of convolution using Meijer G-functions can also be used, assuming that the integrand can be written as a product of Meijer G-functions. There are also many less common ways of calculating definite integrals; for instance, Parseval's identity can be used to transform an integral over a rectangular region into an infinite sum. Occasionally, an integral can be evaluated by a trick; for an example of this, see Gaussian integral.\nComputations of volumes of solids of revolution can usually be done with disk integration or shell integration.\nSpecific results which have been worked out by various techniques are collected in the list of integrals.\nSymbolic.\nMany problems in mathematics, physics, and engineering involve integration where an explicit formula for the integral is desired. Extensive tables of integrals have been compiled and published over the years for this purpose. With the spread of computers, many professionals, educators, and students have turned to computer algebra systems that are specifically designed to perform difficult or tedious tasks, including integration. Symbolic integration has been one of the motivations for the development of the first such systems, like Macsyma and Maple.\nA major mathematical difficulty in symbolic integration is that in many cases, a relatively simple function does not have integrals that can be expressed in closed form involving only elementary functions, include rational and exponential functions, logarithm, trigonometric functions and inverse trigonometric functions, and the operations of multiplication and composition. The Risch algorithm provides a general criterion to determine whether the antiderivative of an elementary function is elementary and to compute the integral if is elementary. However, functions with closed expressions of antiderivatives are the exception, and consequently, computerized algebra systems have no hope of being able to find an antiderivative for a randomly constructed elementary function. On the positive side, if the 'building blocks' for antiderivatives are fixed in advance, it may still be possible to decide whether the antiderivative of a given function can be expressed using these blocks and operations of multiplication and composition and to find the symbolic answer whenever it exists. The Risch algorithm, implemented in Mathematica, Maple and other computer algebra systems, does just that for functions and antiderivatives built from rational functions, radicals, logarithm, and exponential functions.\nSome special integrands occur often enough to warrant special study. In particular, it may be useful to have, in the set of antiderivatives, the special functions (like the Legendre functions, the hypergeometric function, the gamma function, the incomplete gamma function and so on). Extending Risch's algorithm to include such functions is possible but challenging and has been an active research subject.\nMore recently a new approach has emerged, using \"D\"-finite functions, which are the solutions of linear differential equations with polynomial coefficients. Most of the elementary and special functions are \"D\"-finite, and the integral of a \"D\"-finite function is also a \"D\"-finite function. This provides an algorithm to express the antiderivative of a \"D\"-finite function as the solution of a differential equation. This theory also allows one to compute the definite integral of a \"D\"-function as the sum of a series given by the first coefficients and provides an algorithm to compute any coefficient.\nRule-based integration systems facilitate integration. Rubi, a computer algebra system rule-based integrator, pattern matches an extensive system of symbolic integration rules to integrate a wide variety of integrands. This system uses over 6600 integration rules to compute integrals. The method of brackets is a generalization of Ramanujan's master theorem that can be applied to a wide range of univariate and multivariate integrals. A set of rules are applied to the coefficients and exponential terms of the integrand's power series expansion to determine the integral. The method is closely related to the Mellin transform.\nNumerical.\nDefinite integrals may be approximated using several methods of numerical integration. The rectangle method relies on dividing the region under the function into a series of rectangles corresponding to function values and multiplies by the step width to find the sum. A better approach, the trapezoidal rule, replaces the rectangles used in a Riemann sum with trapezoids. The trapezoidal rule weights the first and last values by one half, then multiplies by the step width to obtain a better approximation. The idea behind the trapezoidal rule, that more accurate approximations to the function yield better approximations to the integral, can be carried further: Simpson's rule approximates the integrand by a piecewise quadratic function.\nRiemann sums, the trapezoidal rule, and Simpson's rule are examples of a family of quadrature rules called the Newton\u2013Cotes formulas. The degree n Newton\u2013Cotes quadrature rule approximates the polynomial on each subinterval by a degree \"n\" polynomial. This polynomial is chosen to interpolate the values of the function on the interval. Higher degree Newton\u2013Cotes approximations can be more accurate, but they require more function evaluations, and they can suffer from numerical inaccuracy due to Runge's phenomenon. One solution to this problem is Clenshaw\u2013Curtis quadrature, in which the integrand is approximated by expanding it in terms of Chebyshev polynomials.\nRomberg's method halves the step widths incrementally, giving trapezoid approximations denoted by \"T\"(\"h\"0), \"T\"(\"h\"1), and so on, where \"h\"\"k\"+1 is half of \"h\"\"k\". For each new step size, only half the new function values need to be computed; the others carry over from the previous size. It then interpolate a polynomial through the approximations, and extrapolate to \"T\"(0). Gaussian quadrature evaluates the function at the roots of a set of orthogonal polynomials. An n-point Gaussian method is exact for polynomials of degree up to 2\"n\" \u2212 1.\nThe computation of higher-dimensional integrals (for example, volume calculations) makes important use of such alternatives as Monte Carlo integration.\nMechanical.\nThe area of an arbitrary two-dimensional shape can be determined using a measuring instrument called planimeter. The volume of irregular objects can be measured with precision by the fluid displaced as the object is submerged.\nGeometrical.\nArea can sometimes be found via geometrical compass-and-straightedge constructions of an equivalent square.\nIntegration by differentiation.\nKempf, Jackson and Morales demonstrated mathematical relations that allow an integral to be calculated by means of differentiation. Their calculus involves the Dirac delta function and the partial derivative operator formula_73. This can also be applied to functional integrals, allowing them to be computed by functional differentiation.\nExamples.\nUsing the fundamental theorem of calculus.\nThe fundamental theorem of calculus allows straightforward calculations of basic functions:\n formula_74\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15533", "revid": "46973502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15533", "title": "Zionist political violence", "text": "Violence or terrorism motivated by Zionism\nZionist political violence refers to acts of political violence committed by Zionists in support of establishing and maintaining a Jewish state in Palestine. These actions have been carried out by individuals, paramilitary groups, and the State of Israel and its military forces since the early 20th century as part of the ongoing Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nIn the pre-state period (1920s\u20131940s), Zionist paramilitaries such as the Irgun, Lehi, Haganah and Palmach engaged in violent campaigns against British authorities, Palestinian Arabs, and more moderate Jews to advance their political goals. Targets included security personnel, government figures, civilians, and infrastructure. After Israel's establishment in 1948, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and other state security forces continued to employ violence against Palestinian and neighboring Arab populations during the 1948 war (known by Palestinians as the Nakba, catastrophe), subsequent Arab-Israeli wars, and the military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.\nLater acts of Zionist violence have ranged from the government's use of force to suppress Palestinian unrest (such as during the intifadas from 1987 to 1993 and 2000 to 2005), to attacks perpetrated by Israeli settlers and right-wing extremists against Palestinian civilians, property and holy sites. In an act of intra-Jewish political violence, former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was assassinated in 1995 by Yigal Amir who opposed Rabin's peace initiatives and territorial concessions to the Palestinians. The Israeli military has also conducted large-scale assaults in the occupied territories and neighbouring states including Lebanon, resulting in widespread destruction and civilian casualties.\nHuman and Palestinian rights organisations have accused Israel of state terrorism, war crimes, and disproportionate use of force against Palestinians. Israel defends its actions as necessary to preserve the security of the Jewish state and its citizens in the face of Palestinian political violence and regional threats.\nHistory.\nZionist militant groups.\nBar-Giora (, from Simon bar Giora; 1907\u20131909) was a militia of primarily of Russian Jewish immigrants founded to protect Jewish settlements during the second wave of Zionist migration to Palestine. It 1909, it expanded into HaShomer ( 'the watchman'), an armed paramilitary cavalry that was active until the establishment of the British Mandate for Palestine (1920\u20131948). After the 1920 Nebi Musa riots, the Haganah ( 'the defense') was founded in June and drew forces from the Zion Mule Corps and Jewish Legion, both of which fought for the British in World War I. Increasing Zionist migration to Palestine raised tensions and intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine. The Irgun ( 'organization'; 1931\u20131948), associated with Betar and Revisionist Zionism, was founded as an offshoot of the Haganah. The Irgun notably bombed the King David Hotel in 1946. Lehi (; 1940\u20131948), also known as the Stern Gang for its founder Avraham Stern, broke off from the Irgun in 1940 to keep fighting against the British. It also sought to make alliances with fascist Italy and the Nazi Germany. The Palmach (; 1941\u20131948) was established in by the High Command of the Haganah in 1941 and served as the main paramilitary organization of the Yishuv, or the Jewish community in Palestine before 1948.\nAttacks on Palestinian civilians increased after 1936, with groups such as the Irgun and Lehi rejecting the official Haganah policy of \"Havlagah\" ( 'restraint').\nJewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine (1944\u20131948).\nThe Jewish Agency organized the Jewish Resistance Movement (JRM), which included the Haganah, Palmach, Lehi, and Irgun. Its first operation was October 1945, when the Palmach attacked the Atlit internment camp and to release Jews arrested by the British for illegal immigration into Palestine. In November, the JRM targeted railroads throughout Palestine and sank a number of British coast guard patrol launches. It then attacked British police stations, aerodromes, coast guard stations, and radar infrastructure, and in June 1946, it blew up bridges connecting Palestine with neighboring countries. In Operation Agatha, the British responded with arrests and searches of the bureaus of the Jewish Agency, the Histadrut, and 27 Jewish settlements. The Jewish Agency called for a halt to armed attacks on the British and their infrastructure, but Lehi and Irgun refused and bombed the King David Hotel, site of the central British administrative offices, July 1946.\nThe Nakba and the 1948 Palestine War.\nIn Plan Dalet (1 April 1948 \u201314 May 1948), a military plan developed by the Haganah, Zionist forces depopulated and destroyed Palestinian villages to deliver the of conquered territory for the establishment of the State of Israel. Zionist forces terrorized Palestinian communities to encourage flight.\nOn April 9, Zionist forces killed 254 Palestinians in the Deir Yassin massacre\nAfter 1948.\nIsraeli settler violence has been committed by Zionist gangs such as Lehava or the Hilltop Youth. This violence has included 'price tag attacks'.\nImpact.\nActions were carried out by individuals and Jewish paramilitary groups such as the Irgun, the Lehi, the Haganah and the Palmach as part of a conflict between Jews, British authorities, and Palestinian Arabs, regarding land, immigration, and control over Palestine.\nBritish soldiers and officials, United Nations personnel, Palestinian Arab fighters and civilians, and Jewish fighters and civilians were targets or victims of these actions. Domestic, commercial, and government property, infrastructure, and material have also been attacked.\nMain occurrences.\nDuring the 1920 Nebi Musa riots, the 1921 Jaffa riots and the 1929 Palestine riots, Palestinian Arabs manifested hostility against Zionist immigration, which provoked the reaction of Jewish militias. In 1935, the Irgun, a Zionist underground military organization, split off from the Haganah. The Irgun were the armed expression of the nascent ideology of Revisionist Zionism founded by Ze'ev Jabotinsky. He expressed this ideology as \"every Jew had the right to enter Palestine; only active retaliation would deter the Arab and the British; only Jewish armed force would ensure the Jewish state\".\nDuring the 1936\u201339 Arab revolt in Palestine, Palestinian Arabs fought for the end of the Mandate and the creation of an Arab state based on the whole of Palestine. They attacked both British and Jews as well as some Palestinian Arabs who supported a Pan-Arabism. Mainstream Zionists, represented by the Vaad Leumi and the Haganah, practiced the policy of Havlagah (restraint); Irgun militants did not follow this policy and called themselves \"Havlagah breakers.\" The Irgun began bombing Palestinian Arab civilian targets in 1938. While the Palestinian Arabs were \"carefully disarmed\" by the British Mandatory authorities by 1939, the Zionists were not. As a conciliation to the Arabs, the White Paper of 1939 was passed, imposing significant limits in Jewish immigration in the shadow of World War II.\nAfter the British Declaration of War in September 1939, the head of the Jewish Agency for Palestine David Ben-Gurion declared: 'We will fight the White Paper as if there is no war, and fight the war as if there is no White Paper.'; the Haganah and Irgun subsequently suspended their activity against the British in support of their war against Nazi Germany. However, the smaller Lehi continued anti-British attacks and direct action throughout the war. At that time, the British also supported the creation and the training of Palmach, as a unit that could withstand a German offensive in the area, with the consent of the Yishuv which saw an opportunity to get trained units and soldiers for the planned Jewish state and during 1944\u20131945, the most mainstream Jewish paramilitary organization, Haganah, cooperated with the British authorities against the Lehi and Etzel.\nAfter World War II, between 1945 and the 29 November 1947 Partition vote, British soldiers and policemen were targeted by Irgun and Lehi. The Haganah and Palmach at first collaborated with the British against them, particularly during the Hunting Season, before actively joining them in the Jewish Resistance Movement, then finally choosing an official neutral position after 1946 while the Irgun and the Lehi continued their attacks against the British.\nThe Haganah, Irgun and Lehi also executed dozens of Jews for alleged treason or collaboration with Britain or Arabs, often after irregular drumhead courts-martial.\nThe Haganah also carried out violent attacks in Palestine, such as the liberation of interned immigrants from the Atlit detainee camp, the bombing of the country's railroad network, sabotage raids on radar installations and bases of the British Palestine police. It continued to organize illegal immigration throughout the entire war.\nIn February 1947, the British announced that they would end the mandate and withdraw from Palestine and they asked for the arbitration of the United Nations. After the vote of the Partition Plan for Palestine on 30 November 1947, civil war broke out in Palestine. Jewish and Arab communities fought each other violently in campaigns of attacks, retaliations, and counter-retaliations which provoked around 800 deaths after two months. Arab volunteers entered Palestine to fight alongside the Palestinian Arabs. In April, 6 weeks before the termination of the Mandate, the Jewish militias launched wide operations to control the territory dedicated to them by the Partition Plan. Many atrocities occurred during this time. The Arab population in the mixed cities of Tiberias, Safed, Haifa and Jaffa, as well as Beisan and Acre and in the neighbouring villages, fled or were expelled during this period. During the Battle for Jerusalem (1948) where the Jewish community of 100,000 people was besieged, most Arab villages of the Tel Aviv \u2013 Jerusalem corridor were captured by Jewish militias and leveled.\nAt the beginning of the civil war, the Jewish militias organized several bombing attacks against civilians and military Arab targets. On 12 December, Irgun placed a car bomb opposite the Damascus Gate, killing 20 people. On 4 January 1948, the Lehi detonated a lorry bomb against the headquarters of the paramilitary Najjada located in Jaffa's Town Hall, killing 15 Arabs and injuring 80. During the night between 5 and 6 January, the Haganah bombed the Semiramis Hotel in Jerusalem that had been reported to hide Arab militiamen, killing 24 people. The next day, Irgun members in a stolen police van rolled a barrel bomb into a large group of civilians who were waiting for a bus by the Jaffa Gate, killing around 16. Another Irgun bomb went off in the Ramla market on February 18, killing 7 residents and injuring 45. On 28 February, the Palmah organised a bombing attack against a garage in Haifa, killing 30 people.\nIn 1995, Yitzhak Rabin was the Prime Minister of Israel who was assassinated by Yigal Amir after a peace rally. Amir had been opposed to Rabin's peace initiative, which included signing the Oslo Accords and withdrawing from the West Bank. He believed that Rabin was a rodef, meaning a \"pursuer\" who endangered Jewish lives, and that he was justified in removing Rabin as a threat to Jews in the territories according to the concept of din rodef (\"law of the pursuer\"), which is a part of traditional Jewish law.\nCondemnation as terrorism.\nIrgun was described as a terrorist organization by the United Nations, British, and United States governments, and in media such as \"The New York Times\" newspaper, and by the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry. In 1946, The World Zionist Congress strongly condemned terrorist activities in Palestine and \"the shedding of innocent blood as a means of political warfare\". Irgun was specifically condemned.\nMenachem Begin was called a terrorist and a fascist by Albert Einstein and 27 other prominent Jewish intellectuals in a letter to the New York Times which was published on December 4, 1948. Specifically condemned was the participation of the Irgun in the Deir Yassin massacre:\nThe letter warns American Jews against supporting Begin's request for funding of his political party Herut, and ends with the warning:\nLehi was described as a terrorist organization by the British authorities and United Nations mediator Ralph Bunche.\nJewish public opinion.\nDuring the conflict between Arabs and Jews in Palestine before the war, the criterion of \"Purity of arms\" was used to distinguish between the respective attitudes of the Irgun and Haganah towards Arabs, with the latter priding itself on its adherence to principle. The Jewish society in the British Mandate Palestine generally disapproved and denounced violent attacks both on grounds of moral rejection and political disagreement, stressing that terrorism is counter-productive in the Zionist quest for Jewish self-determination. Generally speaking, this precept requires that \"weapons remain pure [and that] they are employed only in self-defence and [never] against innocent civilians and defenceless people\". But if it \"remained a central value in education\" it was \"rather vague and intentionally blurred\" at the practical level.\nIn 1946, at a meeting held between the heads of the Haganah, David Ben-Gurion predicted a confrontation between the Arabs of Palestine and the Arab states. Concerning the \"principle of purity of arms\", he stressed that: \"The end does not justify all means. Our war is based on moral grounds\" and during the 1948 War, the Mapam, the political party affiliated to Palmach, asked \"a strict observance of the Jewish Purity of arms to secure the moral character of [the] war\". When he was later criticized by Mapam members for his attitude concerning the Arab refugee problem, Ben-Gurion reminded them of the Palestinian expulsion from Lydda and Ramle and the fact Palmah officers had been responsible for the \"outrage that had encouraged the Arabs' flight made the party uncomfortable.\"\nAccording to Avi Shlaim, this condemnation of the use of violence is one of the key features of 'the conventional Zionist account or old history' whose 'popular-heroic-moralistic version' is 'taught in Israeli schools and used extensively in the quest for legitimacy abroad'. Benny Morris adds that '[t]he Israelis' collective memory of fighters characterized by \"purity of arms\" is also undermined by the evidence of [the dozen cases] of rapes committed in conquered towns and villages.' According to him, 'after the 1948 war, the Israelis tended to hail the \"purity of arms\" of its militiamen and soldiers to contrast this with Arab barbarism, which on occasion expressed itself in the mutilation of captured Jewish corpses.' According to him, 'this reinforced the Israelis' positive self-image and helped them \"sell\" the new state abroad and (...) demonized the enemy'.\nSome Israelis justify acts of political violence. Sixty years after participating in the assassination of Swedish diplomat Folke Bernadotte, Geulah Cohen had no regrets. As a broadcaster on Lehi's radio, she recalled the threats against Bernadotte in advance of the assassination. \"I told him if you are not going to leave Jerusalem and go to your Stockholm, you won't be any more.\" Asked if it was right to assassinate Bernadotte, she replied, \"There is no question about it. We would not have Jerusalem any more.\" In July 2006, the Menachem Begin Heritage Center organized a conference to mark the 60th anniversary of the King David Hotel bombing. The conference was attended by past and future Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former members of Irgun. The British Ambassador in Tel Aviv and the Consul-General in Jerusalem protested that a plaque commemorating the bombing stated \"For reasons known only to the British, the hotel was not evacuated.\" Netanyahu, then chairman of Likud and Leader of the Opposition in the Knesset, opined that the bombing was a legitimate act with a military target, distinguishing it from an act of terror intended to harm civilians since Irgun sent warnings to evacuate the building. He said \"Imagine that Hamas or Hizbullah would call the military headquarters in Tel Aviv and say, 'We have placed a bomb and we are asking you to evacuate the area.' They don't do that. That is the difference.\" The British Ambassador in Tel Aviv and the Consul-General in Jerusalem protested, saying \"We do not think that it is right for an act of terrorism, which led to the loss of many lives, to be commemorated\", and wrote to the Mayor of Jerusalem that such an \"act of terror\" could not be honored. The British government also demanded the removal of the plaque, pointing out that the statement on it accusing the British of failing to evacuate the hotel was untrue and \"did not absolve those who planted the bomb.\" To prevent a diplomatic incident, changes were made in the plaque's text. The final English version says \"Warning phone calls have been made to the hotel, The Palestine Post and the French Consulate, urging the hotel's occupants to leave immediately. The hotel was not evacuated and after 25 minutes the bombs exploded. To the Irgun's regret, 92 persons were killed.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15536", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15536", "title": "Lists of airports", "text": "An airport is an aerodrome with facilities for flights to take off and land. Airports often have facilities to store and maintain aircraft, and a control tower. An airport consists of a landing area, which comprises an aerially accessible open space including at least one operationally active surface such as a runway for a plane to take off or a helipad, and often includes adjacent utility buildings such as control towers, hangars and terminals.\nAn airport with a helipad for rotorcraft but no runway is called a heliport. An airport for use by seaplanes and amphibious aircraft is called a seaplane base. Such a base typically includes a stretch of open water for takeoffs and landings, and seaplane docks for tying-up. An international airport has additional facilities for customs and immigration.\nBy code.\nBy IATA code.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;* \nBy ICAO code.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
