{"id": "16653", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16653", "title": "History of Kenya", "text": " \nA part of Eastern Africa, the territory of what is known as Kenya has seen human habitation since the beginning of the Lower Paleolithic. The Bantu expansion from a West African centre of dispersal reached the area by the 1st millennium AD. With the borders of the modern state at the crossroads of the Bantu, Nilo-Saharan and Afro-Asiatic ethno-linguistic areas of Africa, Kenya is a multi-ethnic state. The Wanga Kingdom was formally established in the late 17th century. The Kingdom covered from the Jinja in Uganda to Naivasha in the East of Kenya. This is the first time the Wanga people and Luhya tribe were united and led by a centralized leader, a king, known as the Nabongo.\nThe European and Arab presence in Mombasa dates back to the Early Modern period, but European exploration of the interior began in the 19th century. The British Empire established the East Africa Protectorate in 1895, from 1920 known as the Kenya Colony.\nDuring the wave of decolonisation in the 1960s, Kenya gained independence from the United Kingdom in 1963, had Elizabeth II as its first head of state, and Jomo Kenyatta as its Prime Minister. It became a republic in 1964, and was ruled as a \"de facto\" one-party state by the Kenya African National Union (KANU), led by Kenyatta from 1964 to 1978. Kenyatta was succeeded by Daniel arap Moi, who ruled until 2002. Moi attempted to transform the \"de facto\" one-party status of Kenya into a \"de jure\" status during the 1980s. However, with the end of the Cold War, the practices of political repression and torture that had been \"overlooked\" by the Western powers as necessary evils in the effort to contain communism were no longer tolerated in Kenya.\nMoi came under pressure, notably from US ambassador Smith Hempstone, to restore a multi-party system, which he did by 1991. Moi won elections in 1992 and 1997, which were overshadowed by politically motivated killings on both sides. During the 1990s, evidence of Moi's involvement in human rights abuses and corruption, such as the Goldenberg scandal, was uncovered. He was constitutionally barred from running in the 2002 election, which was won by Mwai Kibaki. Widely reported electoral fraud on Kibaki's side in the 2007 elections resulted in the 2007\u20132008 Kenyan crisis. Kibaki was succeeded by Uhuru Kenyatta in the 2013 general election. There were allegations that his rival Raila Odinga actually won the contest; however, the Supreme Court, through a thorough review of evidence adduced, found no malpractice during the conduct of the 2013 general election both from the IEBC and the Jubilee Party of Uhuru Kenyatta. Uhuru was re-elected in office five years later in 2017. His victory was, however, controversial. The supreme court had vitiated Uhuru's win after Raila Odinga disputed the result through a constitutionally allowed supreme court petition. Raila Odinga would later boycott a repeat election ordered by the court, allowing Uhuru Kenyatta sail through almost unopposed with 98% of the vote ( 50+1%).\nPaleolithic.\nFossils found in Kenya have shown that primates inhabited the area for more than 20 million years. In 1929, the first evidence of the presence of ancient early human ancestors in Kenya was discovered when Louis Leakey unearthed one million year old Acheulian handaxes at the Kariandusi Prehistoric Site in southwest Kenya. Subsequently, many species of early hominid have been discovered in Kenya. The oldest, found by Martin Pickford in 2000, is the six million year old \"Orrorin tugenensis\", named after the Tugen Hills where it was unearthed. It is the second oldest fossil hominid in the world after \"Sahelanthropus tchadensis\".\nIn 1995, Meave Leakey named a new species of hominid \"Australopithecus anamensis\" following a series of fossil discoveries near Lake Turkana in 1965, 1987 and 1994. It is around 4.1\u00a0million years old.\nIn 2011, 3.2 million year old stone tools were discovered at Lomekwi near Lake Turkana - these are the oldest stone tools found anywhere in the world and pre-date the emergence of \"Homo\".\nOne of the most famous and complete hominid skeletons ever discovered was the 1.6-million-year-old \"Homo erectus\" known as Nariokotome Boy, which was found by Kamoya Kimeu in 1984 on an excavation led by Richard Leakey.\nThe oldest Acheulean tools ever discovered anywhere in the world are from West Turkana, and were dated in 2011 through the method of magnetostratigraphy to about 1.76 million years old.\nEast Africa, including Kenya, is one of the earliest regions where modern humans (\"Homo sapiens\") are believed to have lived. Evidence was found in 2018, dating to about 320,000 years ago, at the Kenyan site of Olorgesailie, of the early emergence of modern behaviors including: long-distance trade networks (involving goods such as obsidian), the use of pigments, and the possible making of projectile points. It is observed by the authors of three 2018 studies on the site, that the evidence of these behaviors is approximately contemporary to the earliest known \"Homo sapiens\" fossil remains from Africa (such as at Jebel Irhoud and Florisbad), and they suggest that complex and modern behaviors had already begun in Africa around the time of the emergence of \"Homo sapiens\". Further evidence of modern behavior was found in 2021 when evidence of Africa's earliest funeral was found. A 78,000-year-old Middle Stone Age grave of a three-year-old child was discovered in Panga ya Saidi cave. Researchers said the child's head appeared to have been laid on a pillow. The body had been laid in a fetal position. Michael Petraglia, a professor of human evolution and prehistory at the Max Planck Institute said, \u201cIt is the oldest human burial in Africa. It tells us something about our cognition, our sociality, and our behaviors and they are all very familiar to us today.\u201d\nNeolithic.\nThe first inhabitants of present-day Kenya were hunter-gatherer groups, akin to the modern Khoisan speakers. The Kansyore culture, dating from the mid 5th millennium BCE to the 1st millennium BCE was one of East Africa's earliest ceramic producing group of hunter-gatherers. This culture was located at Gogo falls in Migori county near Lake Victoria. Kenya's rock art sites date between 2000BCE and 1000 CE. This tradition thrived at Mfangano Island, Chelelemuk hills, Namoratunga and Lewa Downs. The rock paintings are attributed to the Twa people, a hunter-gatherer group that was once widespread in East Africa. For the most part, these communities were assimilated into various food-producing societies that began moving into Kenya from the 3rd millennium BCE.\nLinguistic evidence points to a relative sequence of population movements into Kenya that begins with the entry into northern Kenya of a possibly Southern Cushitic speaking population around the 3rd millennium BCE. They were pastoralists who kept domestic stock, including cattle, sheep, goat, and donkeys. Remarkable megalithic sites from this time period include the possibly archaeoastronomical site Namoratunga on the west side of Lake Turkana. One of these megalithic sites, Lothagam North Pillar Site, is East Africa's earliest and largest monumental cemetery. At least 580 bodies are found in this well planned cemetery. By 1000 BCE and even earlier, pastoralism had spread into central Kenya and northern Tanzania. Eburran hunter gatherers, who had lived in the Ol Doinyo Eburru volcano complex near Lake Nakuru for thousands of years, start adopting livestock around this period.\nIn present times the descendants of the Southern Cushitic speakers are located in north central Tanzania near Lake Eyasi. Their past distribution, as determined by the presence of loanwords in other languages, encompasses the known distribution of the Highland Savanna Pastoral Neolithic culture.\nBeginning around 700 BCE, Southern Nilotic speaking communities whose homelands lay somewhere near the common border between Sudan, Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia moved south into the western highlands and Rift Valley region of Kenya.\nThe arrival of the Southern Nilotes in Kenya occurred shortly before the introduction of iron to East Africa. The past distribution of the Southern Nilotic speakers, as inferred from place names, loan words and oral traditions includes the known distribution of Elmenteitan sites.\nIron Age.\nEvidence suggests that autochthonous Iron production developed in West Africa as early as 3000\u20132500 BCE. The ancestors of Bantu speakers migrated in waves from west/central Africa to populate much of Eastern, Central, and Southern Africa from the first millennium BC. They brought with them iron forging technology and novel farming techniques as they migrated and integrated with the societies they encountered. The Bantu expansion is thought to have reached western Kenya around 1000 BCE.\nThe Urewe culture is one of Africa's oldest iron smelting centers. Dating from 550 BCE to 650 BCE, this culture dominated the Great Lakes region including Kenya. Sites in Kenya include Urewe, Yala, and Uyoma in northern Nyanza. By the first century BC, Bantu-speaking communities in the Great lakes region developed iron forging techniques that enabled them to produce carbon steel.\nLater migrations through Tanzania led to settlement on the Kenyan coast. Archaeological findings have shown that by 100 BCE to 300 AD, Bantu-speaking communities were present at the coastal areas of Misasa in Tanzania, Kwale in Kenya. These communities also integrated and intermarried with the communities already present on the coast. Between 300 AD-1000 AD, through participation in the long-existing Indian Ocean trade route, these communities established links with Arabian and Indian traders leading to the development of the Swahili culture.\nHistorians estimate that in the 15th century, Southern Luo speakers started migrating to Western Kenya. The Luo descend from migrants closely related to other Nilotic Luo Peoples (especially the Acholi and Padhola people) who moved from South Sudan through Uganda into western Kenya in a slow and multi-generational manner between the 15th and 20th centuries. As they moved into Kenya and Tanzania, they underwent significant genetic and cultural admixture as they encountered other communities that were long established in the region.\nThe walled settlement of Thimlich Ohinga is the largest and best preserved of 138 sites containing 521 stone structures that were built around the Lake Victoria region in Nyanza Province. Carbon dating and linguistic evidence suggest that the site is at least 550 years old. Archaeological and ethnographic analysis of the site taken with historical, linguistic, and genetic evidence suggests that the populations that built, maintained, and inhabited the site at various phases had significant ethnic admixture.\nSwahili culture and trade.\nSwahili people inhabit the Swahili coast which is the coastal area of the Indian Ocean in Southeast Africa. It includes the coastal areas of Southern Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania and Northern Mozambique with numerous islands, cities and towns including Sofala, Kilwa, Zanzibar, Comoros, Mombasa, Gede, Malindi, Pate Island and Lamu. The Swahili coast was historically known as Azania in the Greco-Roman era and as Zanj or Zinj in Middle Eastern, Chinese and Indian literature from the 7th to the 14th century. The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea is a Graeco-Roman manuscript that was written in the first century AD. It describes the East African coast (Azania) and a long existing Indian Ocean Trade route. The East African Coast was long inhabited by hunter-gatherer and Cushitic groups since at least 3000BC. Evidence of indigenous pottery and agriculture dating as far back as this period has been found along the coast and offshore islands. International trade goods including Graeco-Roman pottery, Syrian glass vessels, Sassanian pottery from Persia and glass beads dating to 600BC have been found at the Rufiji River delta in Tanzania. The oldest indigenous inhabitants of the Kenyan coast are the Cushitic-speaking peoples, including the Orma, Boni, Sanye, and Somali, who were later displaced by Bantu-speaking groups, now forming the Mijikenda, Pokomo, Taita, and Swahili clusters.\nBantu Groups had migrated to the Great Lakes Region by 1000BCE. Some Bantu speakers continued to migrate further southeast towards the East African Coast. These Bantu speakers mixed with the local inhabitants they encountered at the coast. The earliest settlements in the Swahili coast to appear on the archaeological record are found at Kwale in Kenya, Misasa in Tanzania and Ras Hafun in Somalia. The Kenyan coast had hosted communities of ironworkers and communities of Eastern Bantu subsistence-farmers, hunters and fishers who supported the economy with agriculture, fishing, metal production and trade with outside areas. \nBetween 300AD \u2013 1000AD Azanian and Zanj settlements in the Swahili coast continued to expand with local industry and international trade flourishing. Between 500 and 800 A.D. they shifted to a sea-based trading economy and began to migrate south by ship. In the following centuries, trade in goods from the African interior, such as gold, ivory, and slaves stimulated the development of market towns such as Mogadishu, Shanga, Kilwa, and Mombasa. These communities formed the earliest city-states in the region which were collectively known to the Roman Empire as \"Azania\".\nBy the 1st century CE, many of the settlements such as those in Mombasa, Malindi, and Zanzibar - began to establish trade relations with Arabs. This led ultimately to the increased economic growth of the Swahili, the introduction of Islam, Arabic influences on the Swahili Bantu language, and cultural diffusion. Islam rapidly spread across Africa between 614AD \u2013 900AD. Starting with the first Hijrah (migration) of Prophet Muhammad's followers to Ethiopia, Islam spread across Eastern, Northern and Western Africa. The Swahili city-states became part of a larger trade network. Many historians long believed that Arab or Persian traders established the city-states, but archeological evidence has led scholars to recognize the city-states as an indigenous development which, though subjected to foreign influence due to trade, retained a Bantu cultural core.\nThe Azanian and Zanj communities had a high degree of intercultural exchange and admixture. This fact is reflected in the language, culture and technology present at the coast. For instance, between 630AD - 890AD, Archaeological evidence indicates that crucible steel was manufactured at Galu, south of Mombasa. Metallurgical analysis of iron artefacts indicates that the techniques used by the inhabitants of the Swahili coast combined techniques used in other African sites as well as those in West and South Asian sites. The Swahili City States begin to emerge from pre-existing settlements between 1000AD and 1500AD. The earliest gravestone found at Gedi Ruins dates to the earlier part of this period. The oldest Swahili texts in existence also date to this period. They were written in old Swahili script (Swahili-Arabic alphabet) based on Arabic letters. This is the script found on the earliest gravestones.\nOne of the most travelled people of the ancient world, Moroccan explorer Ibn Battuta, visited Mombasa on his way to Kilwa in 1331. He describes Mombasa as a large island with banana, lemon and citron trees. The local residents were Sunni Muslims who he described as \u201creligious people, trustworthy and righteous.\u201d He noted that their mosques were made of wood and were expertly built. Another ancient traveller, Chinese Admiral Zheng He visited Malindi in 1418. Some of his ships are reported to have sunk near Lamu Island. Recent genetic tests done on local inhabitants confirmed that some residents had Chinese ancestry.\nSwahili, a Bantu language with many Arabic loan words, developed as a \"lingua franca\" for trade between the different peoples. A Swahili culture developed in the towns, notably in Pate, Malindi, and Mombasa. The impact of Arabic and Persian traders and immigrants on the Swahili culture remains controversial. During the Middle Ages,\nthe East African Swahili coast [including Zanzibar] was a wealthy and advanced region, which consisted of many autonomous merchant cities. Wealth flowed into the cities via the Africans' roles as intermediaries and facilitators of Indian, Persian, Arab, Indonesian, Malaysian, African and Chinese merchants. All of these peoples enriched the Swahili culture to some degree. The Swahili culture developed its own written language; the language incorporated elements from different civilisations, with Arabic as its strongest quality. Some Arab settlers were rich merchants who, because of their wealth, gained power\u2014sometimes as rulers of coastal cities.\nPortuguese and Omani influences.\nPortuguese explorers appeared on the East African coast at the end of the 15th century. The Portuguese did not intend to found settlements, but to establish naval bases that would give Portugal control over the Indian Ocean. After decades of small-scale conflict, Arabs from Oman defeated the Portuguese in Kenya. \nThe Portuguese became the first Europeans to explore the region of current-day Kenya: Vasco da Gama visited Mombasa in April 1498. Da Gama's voyage successfully reached India (May 1498), and this initiated direct maritime Portuguese trade links with South Asia, thus challenging older trading networks over mixed land and sea routes, such as the spice-trade routes that utilised the Persian Gulf, Red Sea and caravans to reach the eastern Mediterranean. (The Republic of Venice had gained control over much of the trade between Europe and Asia. Especially after the Ottoman Turks captured Constantinople in 1453, Turkish control of the eastern Mediterranean inhibited the use of traditional land-routes between Europe and India. Portugal hoped to use the sea route pioneered by da Gama to bypass political, monopolistic and tariff barriers.)\nPortuguese rule in East Africa focused mainly on a coastal strip centred in Mombasa. The Portuguese presence in East Africa officially began after 1505, when a naval force under the command of Dom Francisco de Almeida conquered Kilwa, an island located in the south-east of present-day Tanzania.\nThe Portuguese presence in East Africa served the purpose of controlling trade within the Indian Ocean and securing the sea routes linking Europe and Asia. Portuguese naval vessels disrupted the commerce of Portugal's enemies within the western Indian Ocean, and the Portuguese demanded high tariffs on items transported through the area, given their strategic control of ports and of shipping lanes. The construction of Fort Jesus in Mombasa in 1593 aimed to solidify Portuguese hegemony in the region. The Omani Arabs posed the most direct challenge to Portuguese influence in East Africa, besieging Portuguese fortresses. Omani forces captured Fort Jesus in 1698, only to lose it in a revolt (1728), but by 1730 the Omanis had expelled the remaining Portuguese from the coasts of present-day Kenya and Tanzania. By this time the Portuguese Empire had already lost interest in the spice-trade sea-route because of the decreasing profitability of that traffic. (Portuguese-ruled territories, ports and settlements remained active to the south, in Mozambique, until 1975.)\nUnder Seyyid Said (ruled 1807\u20131856), the Omani sultan who moved his capital to Zanzibar in 1840, the Arabs set up long-distance trade-routes into the African interior. The dry reaches of the north were lightly inhabited by semi-nomadic pastoralists. In the south, pastoralists and cultivators bartered goods and competed for land as long-distance caravan routes linked them to the Kenyan coast on the east and to the kingdoms of Uganda on the west. Arab, Shirazi and coastal African cultures produced an Islamic Swahili people trading in a variety of up-country commodities, including slaves.\n19th century history.\nOmani Arab colonisation of the Kenyan and Tanzanian coasts brought the once independent city-states under closer foreign scrutiny and domination than was experienced during the Portuguese period. \nLike their predecessors, the Omani Arabs were primarily able only to control the coastal areas, not the interior. However, the creation of plantations, intensification of the slave trade and movement of the Omani capital to Zanzibar in 1839 by Seyyid Said had the effect of consolidating the Omani power in the region. The slave trade had begun to grow exponentially starting at the end of the 17th Century with a large slave market based at Zanzibar. When Sultan Seyyid Said moved his capital to Zanzibar, the already large clove and spice plantations continued to grow, driving demand for slaves. Slaves were sourced from the hinterland. Slave caravan routes into the interior of Kenya reached as far as the foothills of Mount Kenya, Lake Victoria and past Lake Baringo into Samburu country.\nArab governance of all the major ports along the East African coast continued until British interests aimed particularly at securing their 'Indian Jewel' and creation of a system of trade among individuals began to put pressure on Omani rule. By the late 19th century, the slave trade on the open seas had been completely strangled by the British. The Omani Arabs had no interest in resisting the Royal Navy's efforts to enforce anti-slavery directives. As the Moresby Treaty demonstrated, whilst Oman sought sovereignty over its waters, Seyyid Said saw no reason to intervene in the slave trade, as the main customers for the slaves were Europeans. As Farquhar in a letter made note, only with the intervention of Said would the European Trade in slaves in the Western Indian Ocean be abolished. As the Omani presence continued in Zanzibar and Pemba until the 1964 revolution, but the official Omani Arab presence in Kenya was checked by German and British seizure of key ports and creation of crucial trade alliances with influential local leaders in the 1880s. Nevertheless, the Omani Arab legacy in East Africa is currently found through their numerous descendants found along the coast that can directly trace ancestry to Oman and are typically the wealthiest and most politically influential members of the Kenyan coastal community.\nThe first Christian mission was founded on 25 August 1846, by Dr. Johann Ludwig Krapf, a German sponsored by the Church Missionary Society of England. He established a station among the Mijikenda at Rabai on the coast. He later translated the Bible into Swahili. Many freed slaves rescued by the British Navy are settled here. The peak of the slave plantation economy in East Africa was between 1875 \u2013 1884. It is estimated that between 43,000 \u2013 47,000 slaves were present on the Kenyan coast, which made up 44 percent of the local population. In 1874, Frere Town settlement in Mombasa was established. This was another settlement for freed slaves rescued by the British Navy. Despite pressure from the British to stop the East African slave trade, it continued to persist into the early 20th century.\nBy 1850 European explorers had begun mapping the interior. Three developments encouraged European interest in East Africa in the first half of the 19th century. First, was the emergence of the island of Zanzibar, located off the east coast of Africa. Zanzibar became a base from which trade and exploration of the African mainland could be mounted. By 1840, to protect the interests of the various nationals doing business in Zanzibar, consul offices had been opened by the British, French, Germans and Americans. In 1859, the tonnage of foreign shipping calling at Zanzibar had reached 19,000 tons. By 1879, the tonnage of this shipping had reached 89,000 tons. The second development spurring European interest in Africa was the growing European demand for products of Africa including ivory and cloves. Thirdly, British interest in East Africa was first stimulated by their desire to abolish the slave trade. Later in the century, British interest in East Africa would be stimulated by German competition.\nBritish rule (1895\u20131963).\nEast Africa Protectorate.\nIn 1895, the British government took over and claimed the interior as far west as Lake Naivasha; it set up the East Africa Protectorate. The border was extended to Uganda in 1902, and in 1920 the enlarged protectorate, except for the original coastal strip, which remained a protectorate, became a crown colony. With the beginning of colonial rule in 1895, the Rift Valley and the surrounding Highlands became reserved for whites. In the 1920s Indians objected to the reservation of the Highlands for Europeans, especially British war veterans. The whites engaged in large-scale coffee farming dependent on mostly Kikuyu labour. Bitterness grew between the Indians and the Europeans.\nThis area's fertile land has always made it the site of migration and conflict. There were no significant mineral resources\u2014none of the gold or diamonds that attracted so many to South Africa.\nImperial Germany set up a protectorate over the Sultan of Zanzibar's coastal possessions in 1885, followed by the arrival of Sir William Mackinnon's British East Africa Company (BEAC) in 1888, after the company had received a royal charter and concessionary rights to the Kenya coast from the Sultan of Zanzibar for a 50-year period. Incipient imperial rivalry was forestalled when Germany handed its coastal holdings to Britain in 1890, in exchange for German control over the coast of Tanganyika. The colonial takeover met occasionally with some strong local resistance: Waiyaki Wa Hinga, a Kikuyu chief who ruled Dagoretti who had signed a treaty with Frederick Lugard of the BEAC, having been subject to considerable harassment, burnt down Lugard's fort in 1890. Waiyaki was abducted two years later by the British and killed.\nFollowing severe financial difficulties of the British East Africa Company, the British government on 1 July 1895 established direct rule through the East African Protectorate, subsequently opening (1902) the fertile highlands to white settlers. \nA key to the development of Kenya's interior was the construction, started in 1895, of a railway from Mombasa to Kisumu, on Lake Victoria, completed in 1901. This was to be the first piece of the Uganda Railway. The British government had decided, primarily for strategic reasons, to build a railway linking Mombasa with the British protectorate of Uganda. A major feat of engineering, the \"Uganda railway\" (that is the railway inside Kenya leading to Uganda) was completed in 1903 and was a decisive event in modernising the area. As governor of Kenya, Sir Percy Girouard was instrumental in initiating railway extension policy that led to construction of the Nairobi-Thika and Konza-Magadi railways.\nSome 32,000 workers were imported from British India to do the manual labour. Many stayed, as did most of the Indian traders and small businessmen who saw opportunity in the opening up of the interior of Kenya. According to one account, nearly all major Kenyan towns except Kisumu were originally founded by Somali traders. Rapid economic development was seen as necessary to make the railway pay, and since the African population was accustomed to subsistence rather than export agriculture, the government decided to encourage European settlement in the fertile highlands, which had small African populations. The railway opened up the interior, not only to the European farmers, missionaries and administrators, but also to systematic government programmes to attack slavery, witchcraft, disease and famine. The Africans saw witchcraft as a powerful influence on their lives and frequently took violent action against suspected witches. To control this, the British colonial administration passed laws, beginning in 1909, which made the practice of witchcraft illegal. These laws gave the local population a legal, nonviolent way to stem the activities of witches.\nBy the time the railway was built, military resistance by the African population to the original British takeover had petered out. However new grievances were being generated by the process of European settlement. Governor Percy Girouard is associated with the debacle of the Second Maasai Agreement of 1911, which led to their forceful removal from the fertile Laikipia plateau to semi-arid Ngong. To make way for the Europeans (largely Britons and whites from South Africa), the Maasai were restricted to the southern Loieta plains in 1913. The Kikuyu claimed some of the land reserved for Europeans and continued to feel that they had been deprived of their inheritance.\nIn the initial stage of colonial rule, the administration relied on traditional communicators, usually chiefs. When colonial rule was established and efficiency was sought, partly because of settler pressure, newly educated younger men were associated with old chiefs in local Native Councils.\nIn building the railway the British had to confront strong local opposition, especially from Koitalel Arap Samoei, a diviner and Nandi leader who prophesied that a black snake would tear through Nandi land spitting fire, which was seen later as the railway line. For ten years he fought against the builders of the railway line and train. The settlers were partly allowed in 1907 a voice in government through the legislative council, a European organisation to which some were appointed and others elected. But since most of the powers remained in the hands of the Governor, the settlers started lobbying to transform Kenya in a Crown Colony, which meant more powers for the settlers. They obtained this goal in 1920, making the Council more representative of European settlers; but Africans were excluded from direct political participation until 1944, when the first of them was admitted in the council.\nFirst World War.\nKenya became a military base for the British in the First World War (1914\u20131918), as efforts to subdue the German colony to the south were frustrated. At the outbreak of war in August 1914, the governors of British East Africa (as the Protectorate was generally known) and German East Africa agreed a truce in an attempt to keep the young colonies out of direct hostilities. However Lt Col Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck took command of the German military forces, determined to tie down as many British resources as possible. Completely cut off from Germany, von Lettow conducted an effective guerilla warfare campaign, living off the land, capturing British supplies, and remaining undefeated. He eventually surrendered in Zambia eleven days after the Armistice was signed in 1918. To chase von Lettow the British deployed Indian Army troops from India and then needed large numbers of porters to overcome the formidable logistics of transporting supplies far into the interior by foot. The Carrier Corps was formed and ultimately mobilised over 400,000 Africans, contributing to their long-term politicisation.\nKenya Colony.\nAn early anti-colonial movement opposed to British rule known as Mumboism took root in South Nyanza in the early 20th century. Colonial authorities classified it as a millennialist cult. It has since been recognised as an anti-colonial movement. In 1913, Onyango Dunde of central Kavirondo proclaimed to have been sent by the serpent god of Lake Victoria, Mumbo to spread his teachings. The colonial government recognised this movement as a threat to their authority because of the Mumbo creed. Mumbo pledged to drive out the colonialists and their supporters and condemned their religion. Violent resistance against the British had proven to be futile as the Africans were outmatched technologically. This movement therefore focused on anticipating the end of colonialism, rather than actively inducing it. Mumboism spread amongst Luo people and Kisii people. The Colonial authorities suppressed the movement by deporting and imprisoning adherents in the 1920s and 1930s. It was officially banned in 1954 following the Mau Mau rebellion.\nThe first stirrings of modern African political organisation in Kenya Colony sought to protest pro-settler policies, increased taxes on Africans and the despised \"kipande\" (Identifying metal band worn around the neck). Before the war, African political focus was diffuse. But after the war, problems caused by new taxes and reduced wages and new settlers threatening African land led to new movements. The experiences gained by Africans in the war coupled with the creation of the white-settler-dominated Kenya Crown Colony, gave rise to considerable political activity. Ishmael Ithongo called the first mass meeting in May 1921 to protest African wage reductions. Harry Thuku formed the Young Kikuyu Association (YKA) and started a publication called \"Tangazo\" which criticised the colonial administration and missions. The YKA gave a sense of nationalism to many Kikuyu and advocated civil disobedience. The YKA gave way to the Kikuyu Association (KA) which was the officially recognised tribal body with Harry Thuku as its secretary. Through the KA, Thuku advocated for African suffrage. Deeming it unwise to base a nationalist movement around one tribe, Thuku renamed his organisation the East African Association and strived for multi-ethnic membership by including the local Indian community and reaching out to other tribes. The colonial government accused Thuku of sedition, arrested him and detained him until 1930.\nIn Kavirondo (later Nyanza province), a strike at a mission school, organised by Daudi Basudde, raised concerns about the damaging implications on African land ownership by switching from the East African Protectorate to the Kenyan Colony. A series of meetings dubbed \"\u2018Piny Owacho\u2019\" (Voice of the People) culminated in a large mass meeting held in December 1921 advocating for individual title deeds, getting rid of the kipande system and a fairer tax system. Archdeacon W. E. Owen, an Anglican missionary and prominent advocate for African affairs, formalised and canalised this movement as the president of the Kavirondo Taxpayers Welfare Association. Bound by the same concerns, James Beauttah initiated an alliance between the Kikuyu and Luo communities.\nIn the mid-1920s, the Kikuyu Central Association (KCA) was formed. Led by Joseph Keng\u2019ethe and Jesse Kariuki, it picked up from Harry Thuku's East African Association except that it represented the Kikuyu almost exclusively. Jomo Kenyatta was the secretary and editor of the associations\u2019 publication \"Mugwithania\" (The unifier). The KCA focused on unifying the Kikuyu into one geographic polity, but its project was undermined by controversies over ritual tribute, land allocation and the ban on female circumcision. They also fought for the release of Harry Thuku from detention. Upon Thuku's release, he was elected president of the KCA. The government banned the KCA after World War II began when Jesse Kariuki compared the compulsory relocation of Kikuyus who lived near white owned land to Nazi policies on compulsory relocation of people.\nMost political activity between the wars was local, and this succeeded most among the Luo of Kenya, where progressive young leaders became senior chiefs. By the later 1930s government began to intrude on ordinary Africans through marketing controls, stricter educational supervision and land changes. Traditional chiefs became irrelevant and younger men became communicators by training in the missionary churches and civil service. Pressure on ordinary Kenyans by governments in a hurry to modernise in the 1930s to 1950s enabled the mass political parties to acquire support for \"centrally\" focused movements, but even these often relied on local communicators.\nDuring the early part of the 20th century, the interior central highlands were settled by British and other European farmers, who became wealthy farming coffee and tea. By the 1930s, approximately 15,000 white settlers lived in the area and gained a political voice because of their contribution to the market economy. The area was already home to over a million members of the Kikuyu tribe, most of whom had no land claims in European terms, and lived as itinerant farmers. To protect their interests, the settlers banned the growing of coffee, introduced a hut tax and the landless were granted less and less land in exchange for their labour. A massive exodus to the cities ensued as their ability to provide a living from the land dwindled.\nRepresentation.\nKenya became a focus of resettlement of young, upper class British officers after the war, giving a strong aristocratic tone to the white settlers. If they had \u00a31,000 in assets they could get a free ; the goal of the government was to speed up modernisation and economic growth. They set up coffee plantations, which required expensive machinery, a stable labour force, and four years to start growing crops. The veterans did escape democracy and taxation in Britain, but they failed in their efforts to gain control of the colony. The upper class bias in migration policy meant that whites would always be a small minority. Many of them left after independence.\nPower remained concentrated in the governor's hands; weak legislative and executive councils made up of official appointees were created in 1906. The European settlers were allowed to elect representatives to the Legislative Council in 1920, when the colony was established. The white settlers, 30,000 strong, sought \"responsible government,\" in which they would have a voice. They opposed similar demands by the far more numerous Indian community. The European settlers gained representation for themselves and minimised representation on the Legislative Council for Indians and Arabs. The government appointed a European to represent African interests on the council. In the \"Devonshire declaration\" of 1923 the Colonial Office declared that the interests of the Africans (comprising over 95% of the population) must be paramount\u2014achieving that goal took four decades. Historian Charles Mowat explained the issues:\n[The Colonial Office in London ruled that] native interests should come first; but this proved difficult to apply [in Kenya] ... where some 10,000 white settlers, many of them ex-officers of the war, insisted that their interests came before those of the three million natives and 23,000 Indians in the colony, and demanded 'responsible government', provided that they alone bore the responsibility. After three years of bitter dispute, provoked not by the natives but by the Indians, vigorously backed by the Government of India, the Colonial Office gave judgment: the interest of the natives was 'paramount', and responsible government out of the question, but no drastic change was contemplated \u2013 thus in effect preserving the ascendancy of the settlers.\nSecond World War.\nIn the Second World War (1939\u20131945) Kenya became an important British military base for successful campaigns against Italy in the Italian Somaliland and Ethiopia. The war brought money and an opportunity for military service for 98,000 men, called \"askaris\". The war stimulated African nationalism. After the war, African ex-servicemen sought to maintain the socioeconomic gains they had accrued through service in the King's African Rifles (KAR). Looking for middle class employment and social privileges, they challenged existing relationships within the colonial state. For the most part, veterans did not participate in national politics, believing that their aspirations could best be achieved within the confines of colonial society. The social and economic connotations of KAR service, combined with the massive wartime expansion of Kenyan defence forces, created a new class of modernised Africans with distinctive characteristics and interests. These socioeconomic perceptions proved powerful after the war.\nRural trends.\nBritish officials sought to modernise Kikuyu farming in the Murang'a District 1920\u20131945. Relying on concepts of trusteeship and scientific management, they imposed a number of changes in crop production and agrarian techniques, claiming to promote conservation and \"betterment\" of farming in the colonial tribal reserves. While criticised as backward by British officials and white settlers, African farming proved resilient and Kikuyu farmers engaged in widespread resistance to the colonial state's agrarian reforms.\nModernisation was accelerated by the Second World War. Among the Luo the larger agricultural production unit was the patriarch's extended family, mainly divided into a special assignment team led by the patriarch, and the teams of his wives, who, together with their children, worked their own lots on a regular basis. This stage of development was no longer strictly traditional, but still largely self-sufficient with little contact with the broader market. Pressures of overpopulation and the prospects of cash crops, already in evidence by 1945, made this subsistence economic system increasingly obsolete and accelerated a movement to commercial agriculture and emigration to cities. The Limitation of Action Act in 1968 sought to modernise traditional land ownership and use; the act has produced unintended consequences, with new conflicts raised over land ownership and social status.\nAs Kenya modernized after the war, the role of the British religious missions changed their roles, despite the efforts of the leadership of the Church Missionary Society to maintain the traditional religious focus. However the social and educational needs were increasingly obvious, and the threat of the Mau Mau uprisings pushed the missions to emphasize medical, humanitarian and especially educational programs. Fundraising efforts in Britain increasingly stressed the non-religious components. Furthermore, the imminent transfer of control to the local population became a high priority.\nKenya African Union.\nAs a reaction to their exclusion from political representation, the Kikuyu people, the most subject to pressure by the settlers, founded in 1921 Kenya's first African political protest movement, the Young Kikuyu Association, led by Harry Thuku. After the Young Kikuyu Association was banned by the government, it was replaced by the Kikuyu Central Association in 1924.\nIn 1944 Thuku founded and was the first chairman of the multi-tribal Kenya African Study Union (KASU), which in 1946 became the Kenya African Union (KAU). \nIt was an African nationalist organization that demanded access to white-owned land. KAU acted as a constituency association for the first black member of Kenya's legislative council, Eliud Mathu, who had been nominated in 1944 by the governor after consulting \u00e9lite African opinion. \nThe KAU remained dominated by the Kikuyu ethnic group. However, the leadership of KAU was multitribal. Wycliff Awori was the first vice president followed by Tom Mbotela. In 1947 Jomo Kenyatta, former president of the moderate Kikuyu Central Association, became president of the more aggressive KAU to demand a greater political voice for Africans. In an effort to gain nationwide support of KAU, Jomo Kenyatta visited Kisumu in 1952. His effort to build up support for KAU in Nyanza inspired Oginga Odinga, the \"Ker\" (chief) of the Luo Union (an organisation that represented members of the Luo community in East Africa) to join KAU and delve into politics.\nIn response to the rising pressures, the British Colonial Office broadened the membership of the Legislative Council and increased its role. By 1952 a multiracial pattern of quotas allowed for 14 European, 1 Arab, and 6 Asian elected members, together with an additional 6 Africans and 1 Arab member chosen by the governor. The council of ministers became the principal instrument of government in 1954.\nIn 1952, Princess Elizabeth and her husband Prince Philip were on holiday at the Treetops Hotel in Kenya when her father, King George VI, died in his sleep. Elizabeth cut short her trip and returned home immediately to assume the throne. She was crowned Queen Elizabeth II at Westminster Abbey in 1953 and as British hunter and conservationist Jim Corbett (who accompanied the royal couple) put it, she went up a tree in Africa a princess and came down a queen.\nMau-Mau Uprising.\nA key watershed came from 1952 to 1956, during the Mau Mau Uprising, an armed local movement directed principally against the colonial government and the European settlers. It was the largest and most successful such movement in British Africa. Members of the forty group, World War II(WW2) veterans, including Stanley Mathenge, Bildad Kaggia and Fred Kubai became core leaders in the rebellion. Their experiences during the WW2 awakened their political consciousness, giving them determination and confidence to change the system. Key leaders of KAU known as the Kapenguria six were arrested on the 21st of October. They include Jomo Kenyatta, Paul Ngei, Kungu Karumba, Bildad Kaggia, Fred Kubai and Achieng Oneko. Kenyatta denied he was a leader of the Mau Mau but was convicted at trial and was sent to prison in 1953, gaining his freedom in 1961.\nAn intense propaganda campaign by the colonial government effectively discouraged other Kenyan communities, settlers and the international community from sympathising with the movement by emphasising on real and perceived acts of barbarism perpetrated by the Mau Mau. Although a much smaller number of Europeans died compared to Africans during the uprising, each individual European loss of life was publicised in disturbing detail, emphasising elements of betrayal and bestiality. As a result, the protest was supported almost exclusively by the Kikuyu, despite issues of land rights and anti-European, anti-Western appeals designed to attract other groups. The Mau Mau movement was also a bitter internal struggle among the Kikuyu. Harry Thuku said in 1952, \"To-day we, the Kikuyu, stand ashamed and looked upon as hopeless people in the eyes of other races and before the Government. Why? Because of the crimes perpetrated by Mau Mau and because the Kikuyu have made themselves Mau Mau.\" That said, other Kenyans directly or indirectly supported the movement. Notably, Pio Gama Pinto, a Kenyan of Goan descent, facilitated the provision of firearms to forest fighters. He was arrested in 1954 and detained until 1959. Another notable example was the pioneering lawyer Argwings Kodhek, the first East African to obtain a law degree. He became known as the Mau Mau lawyer as he would successfully defend Africans accused of Mau Mau crimes pro bono. 12,000 militants were killed during the suppression of the rebellion, and the British colonial authorities also implemented policies involving the incarceration of over 150,000 suspected Mau Mau members and sympathizers (mostly from the Kikuyu people) into concentration camps. In these camps, the colonial authorities also used various forms of torture to attempt information from the detainees. In 2011, after decades of waiting, thousands of secret documents from the British Foreign Office were declassified. They show that the Mau Mau rebels were systematically tortured and subjected to the most brutal practices, men were castrated and sand introduced into their anus, women were raped after introducing boiling water into their vaginas. The Foreign Office archives also reveal that this was not the initiative of soldiers or colonial administrators but a policy orchestrated from London.\nThe Mau Mau uprising set in play a series of events that expedited the road to Kenya's Independence. A Royal Commission on Land and Population condemned the reservation of land on a racial basis. To support its military campaign of counter-insurgency the colonial government embarked on agrarian reforms that stripped white settlers of many of their former protections; for example, Africans were for the first time allowed to grow coffee, the major cash crop. Thuku was one of the first Kikuyu to win a coffee licence, and in 1959 he became the first African board member of the Kenya Planters Coffee Union. The East African Salaries Commission put forth a recommendation \u2013 'equal pay for equal work' \u2013 that was immediately accepted. Racist policies in public places and hotels were eased. John David Drummond, 17th Earl of Perth and Minister of State for Colonial affairs stated: \"The effort required to suppress Mau Mau destroyed any settlers illusions that they could go it alone; the British Government was not prepared for the shedding of [more] blood in order to preserve colonial rule.\"\nTrade Unionism and the struggle for independence.\nThe pioneers of the trade union movement were Makhan Singh, Fred Kubai and Bildad Kaggia. In 1935, Makhan Singh started the Labour trade union of Kenya. In the 1940s, Fred Kubai started the Transport and Allied Workers Union and Bildad Kaggia founded the Clerks and Commercial Workers Union. In 1949, Makhan Singh and Fred Kubai started the East Africa Trade Union Congress. They organised strikes including the railway workers strike in 1939 and the protest against granting of a Royal Charter to Nairobi in 1950. These pioneering trade union leaders were imprisoned during the crackdown on Mau Mau. Following this crackdown, all national African political activity was banned. This ban was in place even when the first African members of the legislative council (MLCs) were elected. To manage and control African political activity, the colonial government permitted district parties starting in 1955. This effectively prevented African unity by encouraging ethnic affiliation. Trade unions led by younger Africans filled the vacuum created by the crackdown as the only organisations that could mobilise the masses when political parties were banned.\nThe Kenya Federation of Registered Trade Unions (KFRTU) was started by Aggrey Minya in 1952 but was largely ineffective. Tom Mboya was one of the young leaders who stepped into the limelight. His intelligence, discipline, oratory and organisational skills set him apart. After the colonial government declared a state of emergency on account of Mau Mau, at age 22, Mboya became the Director of Information of KAU. After KAU was banned, Mboya used the KFRTU to represent African political issues as its Secretary General at 26 years of age. The KFRTU was backed by the western leaning International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). Tom Mboya then started the Kenya Federation of Labour (KFL) in place of KFRTU, which quickly became the most active political body in Kenya, representing all the trade unions. Mboya's successes in trade unionism earned him respect and admiration. Mboya established international connections, particularly with labour leaders in the United States of America through the ICFTU. He used these connections and his international renown to counter moves by the colonial government.\nSeveral trade union leaders who were actively involved in the independence struggle through KFL would go on to join active politics becoming members of parliament and cabinet ministers. These include Arthur Aggrey Ochwada, Dennis Akumu, Clement Lubembe and Ochola Ogaye Mak'Anyengo. The trade union movement would later become a major battlefront in the proxy Cold War that would engulf Kenyan politics in the 1960s.\nConstitutional Debates and the Path to Independence.\nAfter the suppression of the Mau Mau rising, the British provided for the election of the six African members to the Legislative Council (MLC) under a weighted franchise based on education. Mboya successfully stood for office in the first election for African MLCs in 1957, beating the previously nominated incumbent, Argwings Kodhek. Daniel Arap Moi was the only previously nominated African MLC who kept his seat. Oginga Odinga was also elected and shortly afterwards nominated as the first chairman of the African elected members. Mboya's party, the Nairobi People's Convention Party (NPCP), was inspired by Kwame Nkurumah's People's Convention Party. It became the most organised and effective political party in the country. The NPCP was used to effectively mobilise the masses in Nairobi in the struggle for greater African representation on the council. The new colonial constitution of 1958 increased African representation, but African nationalists began to demand a democratic franchise on the principle of \"one man, one vote.\" However, Europeans and Asians, because of their minority position, feared the effects of universal suffrage.\nIn June 1958, Oginga Odinga called for the release of Jomo Kenyatta. This call built momentum and was taken up by the NPCP. Agitation for African suffrage and self-rule picked up in pace. One major hindrance to self-rule was the lack of African human capital. Poor education, economic development and a lack of African technocrats were a real problem. This inspired Tom Mboya to begin a programme conceptualised by a close confidante Dr. Blasio Vincent Oriedo, funded by Americans, of sending talented youth to the United States for higher education. There was no university in Kenya at the time, but colonial officials opposed the programme anyway. The next year Senator John F. Kennedy helped fund the programme, hence its popular name \u2013 The Kennedy Airlift. This scholarship program trained some 70% of the top leaders of the new nation, including the first African woman to win the Nobel Peace Prize, environmentalist Wangari Maathai and Barack Obama's father, Barack Obama Sr.\nAt a conference held in 1960 in London, agreement was reached between the African members and the British settlers of the New Kenya Group, led by Michael Blundell. However many whites rejected the New Kenya Group and condemned the London agreement, because it moved away from racial quotas and toward independence. Following the agreement a new African party, the Kenya African National Union (KANU), with the slogan \"Uhuru,\" or \"Freedom,\" was formed under the leadership of Kikuyu leader James S. Gichuru and labour leader Tom Mboya. KANU was formed in May 1960 when the Kenya African Union (KAU) merged with the Kenya Independence Movement (KIM) and Nairobi People's Convention Party (NPCP). Mboya was a major figure from 1951 until his death in 1969. He was praised as nonethnic or antitribal, and attacked as an instrument of Western capitalism. Mboya as General Secretary of the Kenya Federation of Labour and a leader in the Kenya African National Union before and after independence skilfully managed the tribal factor in Kenyan economic and political life to succeed as a Luo in a predominantly Kikuyu movement. A split in KANU produced the breakaway rival party, the Kenya African Democratic Union (KADU), led by Ronald Ngala and Masinde Muliro. In the elections of February 1961, KANU won 19 of the 33 African seats while KADU won 11 (twenty seats were reserved by quota for Europeans, Asians and Arabs). Kenyatta was finally released in August and became president of KANU in October.\nIndependence.\nIn 1962, a KANU-KADU coalition government, including both Kenyatta and Ngala, was formed. The 1962 constitution established a bicameral legislature consisting of a 117-member House of Representatives and a 41-member Senate. The country was divided into 7 semi-autonomous regions, each with its own regional assembly. The quota principle of reserved seats for non-Africans was abandoned, and open elections were held in May 1963. KADU gained control of the assemblies in the Rift Valley, Coast and Western regions. KANU won majorities in the Senate and House of Representatives, and in the assemblies in the Central, Eastern and Nyanza regions. Kenya now achieved internal self-government with Jomo Kenyatta as its first president. The British and KANU agreed, over KADU protests, to constitutional changes in October 1963 strengthening the central government thus ensuring that Kenya would be a \"de facto\" single-party state. Kenya attained independence on 12 December 1963 as the Commonwealth realm of Kenya and was declared a republic on 12 December 1964 with Jomo Kenyatta as Head of State. In 1964 constitutional changes further centralised the government and various state organs were formed. One of the key state organs was the Central Bank of Kenya which was established in 1966.\nThe British government bought out the white settlers and they mostly left Kenya. The Indian minority dominated retail business in the cities and most towns, but was deeply distrusted by the Africans. As a result, 120,000 of the 176,000 Indians kept their old British passports rather than become citizens of an independent Kenya; large numbers left Kenya, most of them headed to Britain.\nKenyatta tenure (1963\u20131978).\nOnce in power, Kenyatta swerved from radical nationalism to conservative bourgeois politics. The plantations formerly owned by white settlers were broken up and given to farmers, with the Kikuyu the favoured recipients, along with their allies the Embu and the Meru. By 1978, most of the country's wealth and power was in the hands of the organisation which grouped these three tribes: the Kikuyu-Embu-Meru Association (GEMA), together comprising 30% of the population. At the same time the Kikuyu, with Kenyatta's support, spread beyond their traditional territorial homelands and repossessed lands \"stolen by the whites\" \u2013 even when these had previously belonged to other groups. The other groups, a 70% majority, were outraged, setting up long-term ethnic animosities.\nThe minority party, the Kenya African Democratic Union (KADU), representing a coalition of small tribes that had feared dominance by larger ones, dissolved itself voluntarily in 1964 and former members joined KANU. KANU was the only party 1964\u201366 when a faction broke away as the Kenya People's Union (KPU). It was led by Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, a former vice-president and Luo elder. KPU advocated a more \"scientific\" route to socialism\u2014criticising the slow progress in land redistribution and employment opportunities\u2014as well as a realignment of foreign policy in favour of the Soviet Union. On 25 February 1965, Pio Gama Pinto, a Kenyan of Goan descent and freedom fighter who was detained during the colonial period was assassinated in what is recognised as Kenya's first political assassination. He was also Oginga Odinga's chief tactician and link to the eastern bloc. His death dealt a severe blow to the Oginga Odinga's organisational efforts.\nThe government used a variety of political and economic measures to harass the KPU and its prospective and actual members. KPU branches were unable to register, KPU meetings were prevented and civil servants and politicians suffered severe economic and political consequences for joining the KPU. A security Act was passed in Parliament in July 1966 and granted the government powers to carry out detention without trial, which was used against KPU members. In a series of dawn raids in August 1966, several KPU party members were arrested and detained without trial. They included Ochola Mak'Anyengo (the secretary general of the Kenya Petroleum Oil Workers Union), Oluande Koduol (Oginga Odinga's private secretary) and Peter Ooko (the general secretary of the East African Common Services Civil Servants Union).\nIn June 1969, Tom Mboya, a Luo member of the government considered a potential successor to Kenyatta, was assassinated. Hostility between Kikuyu and Luo was heightened, and after riots broke out in Luo country the KPU was banned. The specific riots that led to the banning of the KPU resulted in the incident referred to as the Kisumu massacre. Kenya thereby became a one-party state under KANU.\nIgnoring his suppression of the opposition and continued factionalism within KANU the imposition of one-party rule allowed Mzee (\"Old Man\") Kenyatta, who had led the country since independence, to claim he had achieved \"political stability.\" Underlying social tensions were evident, however. Kenya's very rapid population growth and considerable rural to urban migration were in larger part responsible for high unemployment and disorder in the cities. There also was much resentment by blacks at the privileged economic position held by Asians and Europeans in the country.\nAt Kenyatta's death (22 August 1978), Vice-president Daniel arap Moi became interim President. On 14 October, Moi formally became president after he was elected head of KANU and designated its sole nominee. In June 1982, the National Assembly amended the constitution, making Kenya officially a one-party state. On 1 August members of the Kenyan Air Force launched an attempted coup, which was quickly suppressed by Loyalist forces led by the Army, the General Service Unit (GSU) \u2013 paramilitary wing of the police \u2013 and later the regular police, but not without civilian casualties.\nForeign policies.\nIndependent Kenya, although officially non-aligned, adopted a pro-Western stance. Kenya worked unsuccessfully for East African union; the proposal to unite Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda did not win approval. However, the three nations did form a loose East African Community (EAC) in 1967, that maintained the customs union and some common services that they had shared under British rule. The EAC collapsed in 1977 and was officially dissolved in 1984. Kenya's relations with Somalia deteriorated over the problem of Somalis in the North Eastern Province who tried to secede and were supported by Somalia. In 1968, however, Kenya and Somalia agreed to restore normal relations, and the Somali rebellion effectively ended.\nMoi regime (1978\u20132002).\nKenyatta died in 1978 and was succeeded by Daniel Arap Moi (b. 1924, d. 2020) who ruled as President 1978\u20132002. Moi, a member of the Kalenjin ethnic group, quickly consolidated his position and governed in an authoritarian and corrupt manner. By 1986, Moi had concentrated all the power \u2013 and most of its attendant economic benefits \u2013 into the hands of his Kalenjin tribe and of a handful of allies from minority groups.\nOn 1 August 1982, lower-level air force personnel, led by Senior Private Grade-I Hezekiah Ochuka and backed by university students, attempted a coup d'\u00e9tat to oust Moi. The putsch was quickly suppressed by forces commanded by Army Commander Mahamoud Mohamed, a veteran Somali military official. In the coup's aftermath, some of Nairobi's poor Kenyans attacked and looted stores owned by Asians. Robert Ouko, the senior Luo in Moi's cabinet, was appointed to expose corruption at high levels, but was murdered a few months later. Moi's closest associate was implicated in Ouko's murder; Moi dismissed him but not before his remaining Luo support had evaporated. Germany recalled its ambassador to protest the \"increasing brutality\" of the regime and foreign donors pressed Moi to allow other parties, which was done in December 1991 through a constitutional amendment.\nOn the heels of the Garissa massacre of 1980, Kenyan troops committed the Wagalla massacre in 1984 against thousands of civilians in the North Eastern Province. An official probe into the atrocities was later ordered in 2011.\nMulti-party politics.\nAfter local and foreign pressure, in December 1991, parliament repealed the one-party section of the constitution. The first multiparty elections were held in 1992.\nThe Forum for the Restoration of Democracy (FORD) emerged as the leading opposition to KANU, and dozens of leading KANU figures switched parties. But FORD, led by Oginga Odinga (1911\u20131994), a Luo, and Kenneth Matiba, a Kikuyu, split into two ethnically based factions. In the first open presidential elections in a quarter century, in December 1992, Moi won with 37% of the vote, Matiba received 26%, Mwai Kibaki (of the mostly Kikuyu Democratic Party) 19%, and Odinga 18%. In the Assembly, KANU won 97 of the 188 seats at stake. Moi's government in 1993 agreed to economic reforms long urged by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, which restored enough aid for Kenya to service its $7.5\u00a0billion foreign debt.\nObstructing the press both before and after the 1992 elections, Moi continually maintained that multiparty politics would only promote tribal conflict. His own regime depended upon exploitation of inter-group hatreds. Under Moi, the apparatus of clientage and control was underpinned by the system of powerful provincial commissioners, each with a bureaucratic hierarchy based on chiefs (and their police) that was more powerful than the elected members of parliament. Elected local councils lost most of their power, and the provincial bosses were answerable only to the central government, which in turn was dominated by the president. The emergence of mass opposition in 1990\u201391 and demands for constitutional reform were met by rallies against pluralism. The regime leaned on the support of the Kalenjin and incited the Maasai against the Kikuyu. Government politicians denounced the Kikuyu as traitors, obstructed their registration as voters and threatened them with dispossession. In 1993 and after, mass evictions of Kikuyu took place, often with the direct involvement of army, police and game rangers. Armed clashes and many casualties, including deaths, resulted.\nFurther liberalisation in November 1997 allowed the expansion of political parties from 11 to 26. President Moi won re-election as president in the December 1997 elections, and his KANU Party narrowly retained its parliamentary majority.\nMoi ruled using a strategic mixture of ethnic favouritism, state repression and marginalisation of opposition forces. He utilised detention and torture, looted public finances and appropriated land and other property. Moi sponsored irregular army units that attacked the Luo, Luhya and Kikuyu communities, and he denied his responsibility by attributing the violence to ethnic clashes arising from land dispute. Beginning in 1998, Moi engaged in a carefully calculated strategy to manage the presidential succession in his and his party's favour. Faced with the challenge of a new, multiethnic political coalition, Moi shifted the axis of the 2002 electoral contest from ethnicity to the politics of generational conflict. The strategy backfired, ripping his party wide open and resulting in the humiliating defeat of its candidate, Kenyatta's son, in the December 2002 general elections.\nRecent history (2002 to present).\n2002 elections.\nConstitutionally barred from running in the December 2002 presidential elections, Moi unsuccessfully promoted Uhuru Kenyatta, the son of Kenya's first President, as his successor. A rainbow coalition of opposition parties routed the ruling KANU party, and its leader, Moi's former vice-president Mwai Kibaki, was elected president by a large majority.\nOn 27 December 2002, by 62% the voters overwhelmingly elected members of the National Rainbow Coalition (NaRC) to parliament and NaRC candidate Mwai Kibaki (b. 1931) to the presidency. Voters rejected the Kenya African National Union's (KANU) presidential candidate, Uhuru Kenyatta, the handpicked candidate of outgoing president Moi. International and local observers reported the 2002 elections to be generally more fair and less violent than those of both 1992 and 1997. His strong showing allowed Kibaki to choose a cabinet, to seek international support and to balance power within the NaRC.\nEconomic trends.\nKenya witnessed a spectacular economic recovery, helped by a favourable international environment. The annual rate of growth improved from \u22121.6% in 2002 to 2.6% by 2004, 3.4% in 2005, and 5.5% in 2007. However, social inequalities also increased; the economic benefits went disproportionately to the already well-off (especially to the Kikuyu); corruption reached new depths, matching some of the excesses of the Moi years. Social conditions deteriorated for ordinary Kenyans, who faced a growing wave of routine crime in urban areas; pitched battles between ethnic groups fighting for land; and a feud between the police and the Mungiki sect, which left over 120 people dead in May\u2013November 2007 alone.\n2007 elections and ethnic violence.\nOnce regarded as the world's \"most optimistic,\" Kibaki's regime quickly lost much of its power because it became too closely linked with the discredited Moi forces. The continuity between Kibaki and Moi set the stage for the self-destruction of Kibaki's National Rainbow Coalition, which was dominated by Kikuyus. The western Luo and Kalenjin groups, demanding greater autonomy, backed Raila Amolo Odinga (1945\u2013 ) and his Orange Democratic Movement (ODM).\nIn the December 2007 elections, Odinga, the candidate of the ODM, attacked the failures of the Kibaki regime. The ODM charged the Kikuyu with having grabbed everything and all the other tribes having lost; that Kibaki had betrayed his promises for change; that crime and violence were out of control, and that economic growth was not bringing any benefits to the ordinary citizen. In the December 2007 elections the ODM won majority seats in Parliament, but the presidential elections votes were marred by claims of rigging by both sides. It may never be clear who won the elections, but it was roughly 50:50 before the rigging started.\n\"Majimboism\" was a philosophy that emerged in the 1950s, meaning federalism or regionalism in Swahili, and it was intended to protect local rights, especially regarding land ownership. Today \"majimboism\" is code for certain areas of the country to be reserved for specific ethnic groups, fuelling the kind of ethnic cleansing that has swept the country since the election. Majimboism has always had a strong following in the Rift Valley, the epicenter of the recent violence, where many locals have long believed that their land was stolen by outsiders. The December 2007 election was in part a referendum on majimboism. It pitted today's majimboists, represented by Odinga, who campaigned for regionalism, against Kibaki, who stood for the status quo of a highly centralised government that has delivered considerable economic growth but has repeatedly displayed the problems of too much power concentrated in too few hands \u2013 corruption, aloofness, favouritism and its flip side, marginalisation. In the town of Londiani in the Rift Valley, Kikuyu traders settled decades ago. In February 2008, hundreds of Kalenjin raiders poured down from the nearby scruffy hills and burned a Kikuyu school. Three hundred thousand members of the Kikuyu community were displaced from Rift Valley province. Kikuyus quickly took revenge, organising into gangs armed with iron bars and table legs and hunting down Luos and Kalenjins in Kikuyu-dominated areas like Nakuru. \"We are achieving our own perverse version of majimboism,\" wrote one of Kenya's leading columnists, Macharia Gaitho.\nThe Luo population of the southwest had enjoyed an advantageous position during the late colonial and early independence periods of the 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s, particularly in terms of the prominence of its modern elite compared to those of other groups. \nHowever the Luo lost prominence due to the success of Kikuyu and related groups (Embu and Meru) in gaining and exercising political power during the Jomo Kenyatta era (1963\u20131978). While measurements of poverty and health by the early 2000s showed the Luo disadvantaged relative to other Kenyans, the growing presence of non-Luo in the professions reflected a dilution of Luo professionals due to the arrival of others rather than an absolute decline in the Luo numbers.\nDemographic trends.\nBetween 1980 and 2000 total fecundity in Kenya fell by about 40%, from some eight births per woman to around five. During the same period, fertility in Uganda declined by less than 10%. The difference was due primarily to greater contraceptive use in Kenya, though in Uganda there was also a reduction in pathological sterility. The Demographic and Health Surveys carried out every five years show that women in Kenya wanted fewer children than those in Uganda and that in Uganda there was also a greater unmet need for contraception. These differences may be attributed, in part at least, to the divergent paths of economic development followed by the two countries since independence and to the Kenya government's active promotion of family planning, which the Uganda government did not promote until 1995.\nPresidency of Uhuru Kenyatta (2013-2022).\nAfter Kibaki's tenure ended in 2013, Kenya held its first general elections after the 2010 constitution had been passed. Uhuru Kenyatta won in a disputed election result, leading to a petition by the opposition leader, Raila Odinga. The supreme court upheld the election results and Kenyatta began his term with William Ruto as deputy president. Despite this ruling, the Supreme Court and the head of the Supreme Court were seen as powerful institutions that could check the powers of the president.\nIn 2017, Kenyatta won a second term in office in another disputed election. Odinga again petitioned the results in the Supreme Court, accusing the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission of mismanagement of the elections and Kenyatta and his party of rigging. The Supreme Court overturned the election results in what became a landmark ruling in Africa and one of the very few in the world in which the results of a presidential elections were annulled. This ruling solidified the position of the Supreme Court as an independent body. Consequently, Kenya had a second round of elections for the presidential position, in which Kenyatta emerged the winner after Odinga refused to participate, citing irregularities.\nIn March 2018, a historic handshake between Kenyatta and his longtime opponent Odinga signalled a period of reconciliation followed by economic growth and increased stability. Between 2019 and 2021, Kenyatta and Odinga combined efforts to promote major changes to the Kenyan constitution, labelled the \"Building Bridges Initiative\" (BBI), saying that their efforts were to improve inclusion and overcome the country's winner-take-all election system that often resulted in post-election violence. The BBI proposal called for broad expansion of the legislative and executive branches, including the creation of a prime minister with two deputies and an official leader of the opposition, reverting to selecting cabinet ministers from among the elected Members of Parliament, establishment of up to 70 new constituencies, and addition of up to 300 unelected members of Parliament (under an \"affirmative action\" plan).\nCritics saw this as an unnecessary attempt to reward political dynasties and blunt the efforts of Deputy President Willian Ruto (Odinga's rival for the next presidency) and bloat the government at an exceptional cost to the debt-laded country. Ultimately, in May 2021, the Kenyan High Court ruled that the BBI constitutional reform effort was unconstitutional, because it was not truly a popular initiative, but rather an effort of the government. The court sharply criticized Kenyatta for the attempt, laying out grounds for his being sued, personally, or even impeached (though the Parliament, which had passed the BBI, was unlikely to do that). The ruling was seen as a major defeat for both Kenyatta (soon to leave office), and Odinga (expected to seek the presidency), but a boon to Odinga's future presidential-election rival, Ruto. On 20 August 2021, Kenya's Court of Appeal again upheld the High Court Judgment of May 2021, which was appealed by the BBI Secretariat.\nPresidency of William Ruto (2022-).\nIn August 2022, Deputy President William Ruto narrowly won the presidential election. He took 50.5% of the vote. His main rival, Raila Odinga, got 48.8% of the vote. According to the Afrobarometer survey 67.9% of Kenyan citizens participated in the last election (2022) and 17.6% did not vote in the presidential election. On 13 September 2022, William Ruto was sworn in as Kenya's fifth president.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16654", "revid": "50866488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16654", "title": "Geography of Kenya", "text": " \nThe Geography of Kenya is diverse, varying amongst its 47 counties. Kenya has a coastline on the Indian Ocean, which contains swamps of East African mangroves. Inland are broad plains and numerous hills. Kenya borders South Sudan to the northwest, Uganda to the west, Somalia to the east, Tanzania to the south, and Ethiopia to the north. Kenya currently faces border disputes with South Sudan over the Ilemi Triangle and with Somalia over Jubbaland where, if the Somalian Government gives it up, it could be a new part of Kenya, which would bring the total land area of Kenya to approximately 692,939 km2.\nCentral and Western Kenya is characterized by the Kenyan Rift Valley and central Province home to the highest mountain, Mount Kenya and Mount Elgon on the border between Kenya and Uganda. The Kakamega Forest in western Kenya is a relic of an East African rainforest. Much bigger is Mau Forest, the largest forest complex in East Africa.\n* Australia comparative: approximately the size of New South Wales\n* Canada comparative: slightly smaller than Saskatchewan\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately 2 times the size of the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: approximately twice the size of Arizona\n* EU comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Italy\nGeology.\nMuch of the western two-thirds of the country consists of the Pliocene\u2013Pleistocene volcanics deposited on Precambrian basement rocks. The southeast corner of the country is underlain by sediments of the Karoo System of Permian to Late Triassic age and a strip of Jurassic age sediments along the coast in the Mombasa area. The Anza trough is a NW\u2013SE trending Jurassic rift extending from the Indian Ocean coast to the Sudan northwest of Lake Turkana. The Anza Rift resulted from the break\u2013up of Gondwana.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Kenya varies by location, from mostly cool every day, to always warm/hot by mid afternoon. The climate along the coast is tropical. This means rainfall and temperatures are higher than inland throughout the year. At the coastal cities, Mombasa, Lamu and Malindi, the air temperature changes from cool to hot, almost every day. (\"See chart below\").\nThe further inland one is in Kenya, the more arid the climate becomes. An extremely arid climate is nearly devoid of rainfall, and temperature varies widely according to the general time of the day/night. For many areas of Kenya, the daytime temperature rises about 12\u00a0\u00b0C (corresponding to a rise of about 22\u00a0\u00b0F), almost every day.\nElevation is the major factor in temperature levels, with the higher areas, on average, about 11\u00a0\u00b0C (20\u00a0\u00b0F) cooler, day or night. The many cities over a kilometre in elevation have temperature swings from roughly . Nairobi, at , ranges from , and Kitale, at , ranges from . At night, heavy clothes or blankets are needed, in the highlands, when the temperature drops to about every night.\nAt lower altitudes, the increased temperature is like day and night, literally: like starting the morning at the highland daytime high, and then adding the heat of the day, again. Hence, the overnight low temperatures near sea level are nearly the same as the high temperatures of the elevated Kenyan highlands. However, locations along the Indian Ocean have more moderate temperatures, as a few degrees cooler in the daytime, such as at Mombasa (\"see chart below\").\nThere are slight seasonal variations in temperature, of , cooler in the winter months. Although Kenya is centred at the equator, it shares the seasons of the Southern Hemisphere: with the warmest summer months in December\u2013March and the coolest winter months in June\u2013August, again with differences in temperature varying by location within the country.\nOn the high mountains, such as Mount Kenya, Mount Elgon and Kilimanjaro, the weather can become bitterly cold for most of the year. Some snowfall occurs on the highest mountains.\nTerrain.\nKenya's terrain is composed of low plains that rise into central highlands that are, in turn, bisected by the Great Rift Valley. There is also a fertile plateau in the west of the country.\nElevation extremes.\nThe lowest point on Kenya is at sea level on the Indian Ocean. The highest point on Kenya is 5,199 meters above sea level at Mount Kenya.\nRivers.\nThe notable rivers in Kenya are the Athi-Galana-Sabaki River, which at a total length of about 390 kilometers while draining an area of about 70,000 square kilometers, is the second longest river in the country, the Tana River, the longest river in the country at a total length of just over 1000 kilometers, covering a catchment area of over 100,000 square kilometers, and the Nzoia River, which is a river, rising from Mount Elgon, which flows south.\nNatural resources.\nNatural resources that are found in Kenya include: limestone, soda ash, salt, gemstones, fluorite, zinc, diatomite, oil, titanium, gas, gold, gypsum, wildlife and hydropower.\nLand use.\n9.8% of the land is arable; permanent crops occupy 0.9% of the land, permanent pasture occupies 37.4% of the land; forest occupies 6.1% of the land. Other uses make up the rest of Kenya's land. This is as of 2011.\n1,032\u00a0km2 of Kenyan land was irrigated in 2003.\nTotal renewable water resources.\n30.7\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards.\nNatural hazards include recurring drought and flooding during the rainy seasons.\nThere is limited volcanic activity in the country. Barrier Volcano (elev. 1,032 m) last erupted in 1921. Several others have been historically active (see List of volcanoes in Kenya).\nEnvironmental issues.\nCurrent issues.\nCurrent issues that threaten the environment at the moment include water pollution from urban and industrial wastes; degradation of water quality from the increased use of pesticides and fertilisers; deforestation; water hyacinth infestation in Lake Victoria; soil erosion; desertification; and poaching.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Kenya, the points that are further north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n67"}
{"id": "16655", "revid": "49784051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16655", "title": "Demographics of Kenya", "text": " \nThe Demographics of Kenya is monitored by the Kenyan National Bureau of Statistics. Kenya is a multi-ethnic state in East Africa. Its total population was at 47,558,296 as of the 2019 census.\nA national census was conducted in 1999, although the results were never released. A new census was undertaken in 2009, but turned out to be controversial, as the questions about ethnic affiliation seemed inappropriate after the ethnic violence of the previous year. Preliminary results of the census were published in 2010.\nKenya's population was reported as 47.6 million during the 2019 census compared to 38.6 million inhabitants 2009, 30.7 million in 1999, 21.4 million in 1989, and 15.3 million in 1979. This was an increase of a factor of 2.5 over 30 years, or an average growth rate of more than 3 percent per year. The population growth rate has been reported as reduced during the 2000s, and was estimated at 2.7 percent (as of 2010), resulting in an estimate of 46.5 million in 2016. As of 2024 Kenya has 770,255 refugees and asylum seekers \nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to , the total population was in compared to 6,077,000 in 1950, and around 1,700,000 in 1900. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 42.5%, 54.9% between the ages of 15 and 65, and 2.7% was 65 years or older. Worldometers estimates the total population at 48,466,928 inhabitants, a 29th global rank.\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 24.VIII.2009):\nPopulation by Sex and Age Group (Census 24.VIII.2019) (The figure for both sexes includes intersex persons.):\nUN population projections.\nNumbers are in thousands. UN medium variant projections\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nUnited Nations estimates.\nRegistration of vital events is in Kenya not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2014 (DHS Program):\nEthnic groups.\nKenya has a very diverse population that includes most major ethnic, racial and linguistic groups found in Africa. Bantu, Cushitic and Nilotic populations together constitute around 99% of the nation's inhabitants. People from Asian or European heritage living in Kenya are estimated at around 0.3% of the population.\nBantus are the single largest population division in Kenya. Most Bantu are farmers. Some of the prominent Bantu groups in Kenya include the Kikuyu, the Kamba, the Luhya, the Kisii, the Meru, and the Mijikenda.\nIn Kenya's last colonial census of 1962, population groups residing in the territory included European, African and Asian individuals. According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, Kenya had a population of 47,564,296 by 2019. The largest native ethnic groups were the Kikuyu (8,148,668), Luhya (6,820,000), Kalenjin (6,358,113), Luo (5,066,966), Kamba (4,663,910), Somalis (2,780,502), Kisii (2,703,235), Mijikenda (2,488,691), Meru (1,975,869), Maasai (1,189,522), and Turkana (1,016,174). Foreign-rooted populations included Asians (90,527), Europeans (42,868) with Kenyan citizenship, 26,753 without, and Kenyan Arabs (59,021). The number of ethnic categories and sub-categories recorded in the census has changed significantly over time, expanding from 42 in 1969 to more than 120 in 2019.\nBantu peoples.\nBantus are the single largest population division in Kenya. The term \"Bantu\" denotes widely dispersed but related peoples that speak south-central Niger\u2013Congo languages. Originally from Cameroon-Nigeria border regions, Bantus began a millennium-long series of migrations referred to as the Bantu expansion that first brought them south into East Africa about 2,000 years ago.\nMost Bantu are farmers. Some of the prominent Bantu groups in Kenya include the Kikuyu, the Kamba, the Luhya, the Kisii, the Meru, and the Mijikenda. The Swahili people are descended from Wangozi Bantu peoples that intermarried with Arab immigrants.\nThe Kikuyu, who are one of the biggest tribes in Kenya, seem to have assimilated a significant number of Cushitic speakers. Evidence from their Y DNA shows that 18% of Kikuyu carry the E1b1b Y DNA.\nNilotic peoples.\nNilotes are the second-largest group of peoples in Kenya. They speak Nilo-Saharan languages and went south into East Africa from Western Asia and North Africa by way of South Sudan. Most Nilotes in Kenya are historically pastoralists. The Nilotes are divided into the river lake Nilotes and the highland nilotes. These divisions are related to where they occupied after they relocated to Kenya. Where the Luo are affiliated with the river lake occupancy as they can be found near Lake Victoria. The Kalenjin along others are affiliated with the highland occupancy as they are found around the highland areas of the country. The most prominent of these groups include the Luo, the Maasai, the Samburu, the Iteso, the Turkana, and the Kalenjin. Similar to the Bantu, some Nilotic systems of governance (such as Ibinda of the Nandi) bear similarities with those of their Cushitic neighbors (such as the Gada system of the Oromo).\nCushitic people.\nThe Cushitic people form a small minority of Kenya's population. They speak languages belonging to the Afroasiatic family and originally came from Ethiopia and Somalia. However, some large ethnic Somali clans are native to the area that used be known as NFD in Kenya. These people are not from Somalia but share the same ethnicity as the majority in Somalia. Most of them are herdsmen and have almost entirely adopted Islam. Cushites are concentrated in the northernmost North Eastern Province, which borders Somalia.\nThe Cushitic people are divided into two groups: the Southern Cushites and the Eastern Cushites.\nAn entrepreneurial community, they established themselves in the business sector, particularly in Eastleigh, Nairobi.\nIndians.\nAsians living in Kenya are descended from South Asian migrants. Significant Asian migration to Kenya began between 1896 and 1901 when some 32,000 indentured labourers were recruited from British India to build the Kenya-Uganda Railway. The majority of Kenyan Asians hail from the Gujarat and Punjab regions. The community grew significantly during the colonial period, and in the 1962 census Asians made up a third of the population of Nairobi and consisted of 176,613 people across the country.\nSince Kenyan independence large numbers have emigrated due to racism-related tensions with the Bantu and Nilotic majority. Most Asians are concentrated in the manufacturing sector. According to the 2019 Census, Kenyan Asians number 47,555 people, while Asians without Kenyan citizenship number 42,972 individuals. In 2017, Kenyans of Asian Heritage were officially recognised as the 44th tribe of Kenya.\nEuropeans.\nEuropeans in Kenya are primarily the descendants of British migrants during the colonial period. There is also a significant expat population of Europeans living in Kenya. Economically, all Europeans in Kenya belong to the middle- and upper-middle-class. Nowadays, only a small minority of them are landowners (livestock and game ranchers, horticulturists and farmers), with the majority working in the tertiary sector: in air transport, finance, import, and hospitality. Apart from isolated individuals such as anthropologist and conservationist Richard Leakey, F.R.S., who died in 2022, Kenyan-Europeans have completely retreated from Kenyan politics, and are no longer represented in public service and parastatals, from which the last remaining staff from colonial times retired in the 1970s. According to the 2019 Census, Kenyan Europeans number 42,868 people, while Europeans without Kenyan citizenship number 26,753 individuals. 0.3% of the population of Kenya is either from Asia or Europe.\nArabs.\nArabs form a small but historically important minority ethnic group in Kenya. They are principally concentrated along the coast in cities such as Mombasa, Malindi, Lamu, and Nairobi. A Muslim community, they primarily came from Oman and Hadhramaut in Yemen, and are engaged in trade. Arabs are locally referred to as \"Washihiri\" or, less commonly, as simply \"Shihiri\" in the Bantu Swahili language, Kenya's lingua franca. According to the 2019 Census, Kenyan Arabs number 59,021 people.\nLanguages.\nKenya's various ethnic groups typically speak their mother tongues within their own communities. The two official languages, English and Swahili, serve as the main lingua franca between the various ethnic groups. English is widely spoken in commerce, schooling and government. Peri-urban and rural dwellers are less multilingual, with many in rural areas speaking only their native languages.\nAccording to \"Ethnologue\", there are a total of 69 languages spoken in Kenya. Most belong to two broad language families: Niger-Congo (Bantu branch) and Nilo-Saharan (Nilotic branch), which are spoken by the country's Bantu and Nilotic populations, respectively. The Cushitic and Arab ethnic minorities speak languages belonging to the separate Afro-Asiatic family, with the Indian and European residents speaking languages from the Indo-European family.\nReligion.\nCIA World Factbook estimate:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "16656", "revid": "2790592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16656", "title": "Politics of Kenya", "text": " \nThe politics of Kenya take place in a framework of a presidential republic, whereby the president is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system in accordance with a new constitution passed in 2010.\nExecutive power is exercised by the executive branch of government, headed by the President, who chairs the cabinet, which is composed of people chosen from outside parliament. Legislative power is vested exclusively in Parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. In Kenyan politics, the executive wields considerable power and other institutions have limited means of checking that power.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Kenya a \"hybrid regime\" in . The Political terror scale gave the country a rating of 4 meaning that civil and political rights violations had expanded to large numbers of the population. Murders, disappearances, and torture were common parts of life.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected for a five-year term by the people. As of the 2013 March general election, the Constitution of Kenya has two requirements for any candidate to be declared winner:\nIf none of the candidates fulfills these requirements there is to be a runoff between the two contenders with the highest number of votes.\nThe Deputy President is the running mate of the candidate that wins the presidential election whilst other cabinet members will be appointed, with the approval from the National Assembly, from outside Parliament.\nBetween 2008 and 2013 Kenya was governed by a Grand coalition, established by a power-sharing agreement, signed by then President Mwai Kibaki and Prime Minister Raila Odinga of the Orange Democratic Movement. That government was semi-presidential in form, with the executive headed by a president and a prime minister, and ministers were appointed to reflect political parties' relative strength in Kenya's 10th Parliament in which Raila Odinga's party, the Orange Democratic Movement was the largest party. Under the power-sharing agreement, each of the two major parties also nominated a deputy prime minister. The post of the Prime Minister was abolished after 2013, returning Kenya to a presidential system of government.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Bicameral Parliament consists of two 'houses'; the National Assembly and the Senate.\nThe National Assembly, or \"Bunge\", has 349 members. They include: 290 members elected each elected by registered voters in their respective constituencies for a five-year term, 47 women representatives elected from each county, 12 members nominated by political parties in proportion to their share of seats won in the single-member constituencies, and the speaker, who is an ex officio member.\nThe Senate consists of 67 members: 47 members elected by registered voters from the 47 counties; 16 women nominated by political parties; a man and a woman representing youths and a man and woman representing people with disabilities. The speaker is an ex-officio member.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Kenyan judiciary is divided into Superior Courts and Subordinate Courts. The judiciary is headed by the Chief Justice who is also the president of the Supreme Court. Superior Courts consist of: the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal and the High Court. Supreme Court judges, High Court judges, and judges of the Court of Appeal (no associate judges) appointed by an independent Judicial Service Commission. The Chief Justice and his or her deputy are nominated by the President from names selected by the Judicial Service Commission and voted by the National Assembly. Subordinates Courts are Magistrates' Courts, Kadhi Courts and Courts-Martial. The current chief justice is Martha Koome. Then the Tribunal are bodies which are established by Acts of Parliament to exercise judicial or quasi-judicial functions and these supplement ordinary courts in the administration of justice but do not have penal jurisdiction.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUnder the 2010 Constitution, Kenya is divided into 47 counties (including the Cities of Nairobi and Mombasa), each comprising a whole number of Parliamentary constituencies. Each county has an elected Assembly, whose members are elected from single-member wards.\nThere are provisions for additional Assembly members to be appointed to improve the gender balance and to represent special groups such as persons with disabilities and youth. Each county is administered by an elected County Governor and https://, backed by an https://.\nPolitical conditions.\nSince independence in 1963, Kenya has maintained remarkable stability, despite changes in its political system and crises in neighboring countries. Particularly since the re-emergence of multiparty democracy, Kenyans have enjoyed an increased degree of freedom.\nA cross-party parliamentary reform initiative in the fall of 1997 revised some oppressive laws inherited from the colonial era that had been used to limit freedom of speech and assembly. This improved public freedoms and contributed to generally credible national elections in December 1997.\nIn December 2002, Kenya held democratic and open elections and elected Mwai Kibaki as their new president. The elections, which were judged free and fair by local and international observers, marked an important turning point in Kenya's democratic evolution. President Kibaki campaigned on a policy of generating economic growth, improving education, combating corruption, and implementing a new constitution, the draft of which was produced by Professor Ghai under the Moi regime. Considerable success has been achieved in the first two policy areas, the constitutional process had become mired (see below) and the fight against corruption has been a disaster.\nThere have been major scandals (including Anglo-Leasing), which the government has failed to investigate. John Githongo, then Permanent Secretary to the President on Ethics and Governance, resigned in protest, and donor nations, in particular the British, have made public criticisms of the lack of progress.\nFollowing disagreements between the partners in the then-government coalition, constitutional reform proceeded slower than anticipated. The NAK faction (allied to President Kibaki) favored a centralized presidential system, while the LDP faction\u2014which had fewer parliamentary seats in that coalition than NAK\u2014demanded a federal, parliamentary system, referred to in some circles as Majimbo.\nPrior to the 2002 election, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was agreed between NAK and LDP, which laid the basis for the two groups to contest the election under the NARC (Rainbow Alliance) banner. The MoU agreed that a new constitution would be established shortly after the election, which provided for the new role of a strong prime minister while weakening the role of the president. Raila Odinga, then leader of LDP, maintained aspirations to become prime minister. However, that draft constitution was modified by the government from what was written by Professor Ghai and amended by the Bomas committee.\nThis maintained a strong president, who controls a weaker prime minister. This led to a split between NAK and LDP, with the former campaigning for a 'Yes' vote in a 2005 referendum on the constitution and the latter a 'No'. Also supporting a 'No' vote was the majority of Uhuru Kenyatta's KANU party, the sole party of government from independence to 2002. The outcome of that referendum, in which the draft constitution was rejected, signalled a wider re-alignment before the 2007 elections, in which the No team reorganised itself as the Orange Democratic Movement with Raila Odinga as their presidential flag bearer whilst those in the Yes team ended up in several political parties including the Party of National Unity.\nInternal wrangling within that governing coalition also negatively affected other crucial areas of governance, notably the planned large-scale privatisation of government-owned enterprises. The 2007 presidential elections were largely believed to have been flawed with international observers stating that they did not meet regional or international standards. Most observers suggest that the tallying process for the presidential results was rigged to the advantage of the incumbent president, Mwai Kibaki, despite overwhelming indications that his rival and the subsequent Prime Minister of Kenya, Raila Odinga, won the election. In July 2008, exit polls commissioned by the US government were released, revealing that Odinga had won the election by a comfortable margin of 6%, well outside of the poll's 1.3% margin of error.\nThere was significant and widespread violence in Kenya\u20142007\u20132008 Kenyan crisis\u2014following the unprecedented announcement of Kibaki as the winner of the 2007 presidential elections. The violence led to the death of almost 1,000 people and the displacement of almost 600,000 people. Some researchers note it allowed the violent settlement of land disputes between ethnic groups over controversial concepts of 'ancestral homelands'.\nA diplomatic solution was achieved, as the two rivals were later united in a grand coalition government following international mediation, led by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, under a power-sharing National Accord on Reconciliation Act, entrenched in the constitution. Following the agreement, power was shared between President Mwai Kibaki and prime minister, Raila Odinga.\nSeveral steps were recommended to ensure stability and peace for the Nation during the negotiations that led to the formation of the Coalition government. One of these reforms was the famous Agenda 4 which deals with reforms in various sectors. A new constitution was identified as a key area in fulfilling Agenda 4. A draft constitution was published and Kenyans adopted it in a vote on 4 August 2010.\nIn 2013 the coalition government was rendered ineffective due to the constitution. General elections were held and the Jubilee coalition with president, Uhuru Kenyatta and Deputy President, William Samoei Ruto clinched victory. The new constitution also provided for a bicameral house, the Senate and the National Assembly. These were duly filled up with elected candidates. The nation was also divided into counties headed by governors and represented in the Senate by senators. Women in these counties were also represented by electing women Representatives. The five-year term ended on 2017 and the country went in for the elections. The President Uhuru Kenyatta and Deputy William Samoei Ruto were re-elected on 30 October 2017. This will run up to 2022 when the next elections will be conducted. The historical handshake in March 2018 between President Uhuru Kenyatta and his long-time opponent Raila Odinga meant reconciliation followed by economic growth and increased stability. William Ruto was declared the winner of the 2022 Kenyan general election On 13 September 2022, William Ruto was sworn in as Kenya's fifth president.\nIn July 2024, after weeks of anti-government protests, president Ruto dissolved the Cabinet, firing every Cabinet secretary and the Attorney General, with the exception of Prime Cabinet Secretary Musalia Mudavadi. The office of the Deputy President was not affected.\nRepresentation in Kenyan Elections\nRecent elections in Kenya have demonstrated divisions in the Kenyan population, especially among different ethnic identities. Ethnic identities, which are a type of social construct dependent upon a person's identified family background and connection to others; have largely impacted contemporary Kenyan elections. Like many other African nations, ethnic identities were fairly trivial until the colonial period, in which delineations were made so colonial authorities could categorize people. However, after Kenyan Independence in 1963, the Organization of African Unity decided to maintain the colonial borders of Kenya, leading to problems in creating a nationalist feeling among the preexisting groups. While there are more than 70 distinct ethnic groups in Kenya, scholars often separate ethnic groups based on linguistic differences. There are three groups made from these linguistic differences: Bantu, Nilotic, and Cushite. While these linguistic categories do not encompass all ethnic groups in the country, they include most ethnic majorities in Kenya. Importantly, the Kikuyu People are the largest ethnic group in Kenya, and are a part of the Bantu linguistic group. The Kikuyu represent slightly over 17% of the Kenyan population, including Kenya's first president, Jomo Kenyatta. Some other prominent majority and minority ethnic groups in Kenya include but are not limited to: Embu, Meru, Kamba, Luo, Maasai, Gosha, Somalis, Kisii, Kuria, Teso, Rendile, Samburu, Turkana, Swahili, Lukhya, and Mijkenda. Out of all of these ethnic groups, only 5 groups make up over 50% of the Kenyan population: Kikuyu, Luhya, Kalenjin, Luo, and Kamba.\nIndigenous Groups in Kenya and Government\nIn general, the designation of \"Indigenous\" in Africa is difficult to place because most people living on the continent have generational ties to somewhere on the continent. However, there is mass migration within Africa whether that be for better opportunities of socio-economic opportunities, war and conflict, environmental disasters, and a plethora of other unique reasons. Despite this, there are still many Indigenous groups in Kenya who have lived and subsisted in the country for centuries. These groups are mainly made up of hunter-gatherer groups and pastoralists. Some Indigenous hunter-gatherer groups include the Ogiek, Sengwer, Yiaku, Waata, and Aweer (Boni) people. Additionally, some Indigenous pastoralist groups include the Turkana, Rendille, Borana, Maasai, Samburu, Ilchamus, Somali, Gabra, Pokot, and Endorois. Each group has individual land claims, many of which have been disputed over the years both in the colonial and post-colonial period. Due to the contentious nature of land rights, Indigenous groups have had conflict with the government and other groups over traditional lands.\nMaasai Representation in Government and Elections\nDespite there being so many ethnic groups in Kenya, historically, there has been limited representation among different ethnicities in Kenyan government. This underrepresentation especially affects Indigenous groups such as the Maasai People. The Maasai are a group of people indigenous to Kenya and Tanzania, who have practiced pastoralism for centuries. The Maasai's traditional lands stretch from the Rift Valley lakes in Kenya down through the Serengeti plains into Tanzania. The Maasai People make up only 1.8% of the current Kenyan population. The Maasai have historically faced repression from both the Kenyan and Tanzanian governments in the form of evictions from traditional lands and a takeover of locally generated funds earned through ecotourism such as safaris. In recent years, while not unheard of, it has been uncommon for a Maasai person to hold a governmental office. However, there have been increased efforts recently by groups of Maasai to run for election. For example, Maasai man Meitamei Olol Dapash was a candidate for Kenyan senate in 2022. Prior to these efforts, Olol Dapash also ran for office in Narok North District of Kenya in 2007, 2013, and 2017. These efforts come out of grassroots movements to improve local Maasai representation and help the international community understand the history and culture of Maasailand.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16657", "revid": "50250160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16657", "title": "Economy of Kenya", "text": "The economy of Kenya is market-based with a few state enterprises. Kenya has an emerging market and is an averagely industrialised nation ahead of its East African peers. Currently a lower middle income nation, Kenya plans to be a newly industrialised nation by 2030. The major industries driving the Kenyan economy include financial services, agriculture, real estate, manufacturing, logistics, tourism, retail and energy. As of 2020, Kenya had the third largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, behind Nigeria and South Africa. Regionally, Kenya has had a stronger and more stable economy compared to its neighbouring countries within East Africa. By 2023, the country had become Africa's largest start-up hub by both funds invested and number of projects.\nThe government of Kenya is generally investment-friendly and has enacted several regulatory reforms to simplify foreign and local investment, including the creation of an export processing zone. An increasingly significant portion of Kenya's foreign financial inflows are remittances by Kenyans in the Diaspora, who work in the United States, the Middle East, Europe and Asia. According to data by the Central Bank of Kenya, remittances from Kenyans living abroad make up over 3.4 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).\nAs of September 2018, economic prospects were positive, with above 6% gross domestic product (GDP) growth expected. This growth was attributed largely to expansions in the telecommunications, transport, and construction sectors; a recovery in agriculture; and the rise of small businesses helping to pull the economy. These improvements are supported by a large pool of highly educated professional workers. There is a high level of IT literacy and innovation, especially among young Kenyans.\nIn 2020, Kenya ranked 56th in the World Bank ease of doing business rating, up from 61st in 2019 (of 190 countries). Compared to its neighbours, Kenya has a well-developed social and physical infrastructure.\nHistory.\nBetween 70 AD and 1500 AD, trade routes \u2014 spanning Africa, Asia and Europe \u2014 integrated the Kenyan coastal strip into the world economy. Foreign merchants would bring their merchandise to the Kenyan coast and leave with African goods.\nIn 1499 AD, Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, returned to Europe after discovering the sea route to India through South Africa. This new route allowed European nations to dominate the trade economy of the East African coast, with the Portuguese entrenching themselves in the 16th and 17th centuries. In the 18th century, the Portuguese were replaced in this East African economic corridor by Omani Arabs. Eventually, the British replaced the Omani Arabs. In 1895 they dominated the coastal strip; by 1920, they had followed the interior trade routes all the way to the Buganda Kingdom. To make this ancient economic trade route more profitable, the British used Indian labourers to build a railway from Mombasa at the coast to Kampala, the capital of Buganda kingdom, following old trade routes. Major towns were founded along the railway line, backed by European settler farming communities. The Indian labourers who did not return to India after railway construction ended were the first to establish shops (dukawallahs) in these towns.\nDuring the colonial period, the European settler farming community and the Indian dukawallahs established the foundations of the modern formal Kenyan economy. Prominent examples of Asian-Kenyan business owners whose businesses started as dukawallahs include Manu Chandaria and Madatally Manji. While Europeans and Indians enjoyed strong economic growth between 1920 and 1963, Africans were deprived of their land, dehumanised, and forced to work for minimal pay under extremely poor working conditions through a well-established system of racial segregation.\nKenya gained its independence in 1963. Under President Jomo Kenyatta, the Kenyan government promoted africanisation of the Kenyan economy, generating rapid economic growth through public investment, encouragement of smallholder agricultural production, and incentives for private, often foreign, industrial investments. An influential sessional paper authored by Tom Mboya and Mwai Kibaki in 1965 stressed the need for Kenya to avoid both the capitalistic economy of the West and the communism of the East. The paper argued that Kenya should instead concentrate on African socialism, while avoiding linking Kenya's economic fortunes to any country or group of countries. From 1963 to 1973, GDP grew at an annual average rate of 6.6%; during the 1970s, it grew at an average rate of 7.2%. Agricultural production grew by 4.7% annually in the same period, stimulated by redistributing estates, distributing new crop strains, and opening new areas to cultivation. However, the rate of GDP growth declined to 4.2% per year in the 1980s, and 2.2% a year in the 1990s.\nKenya's policy of import substitution, which started in 1946 with European and Asian enterprises, did not achieve the desired result of transforming Kenya's industrial base. In the late 1970s, rising oil prices began to make Kenya's manufacturing sector noncompetitive. In response, the government began a massive intervention in the private sector. Lack of export incentives, tight import controls, and foreign exchange controls made the domestic environment for investment even less attractive.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Kenya signed structural adjustment loans with the World Bank and IMF, the loans were to be given on the condition that Kenya adopts government reforms, a liberal trade and interest rate regime, and an outward-oriented industrial policy, among other reforms. The Kenyan economy performed very poorly during this era of World Bank and IMF-driven liberalisation at the height of Daniel Arap Moi administration.\nFrom 1991 to 1993, Kenya had its worst economic performance since independence. Growth in GDP stagnated, and agricultural production shrank at an annual rate of 3.9%. Inflation reached a record of 100% in August 1993, and the government's budget deficit was over 10% of GDP. As a result of these issues, bilateral and multilateral donors suspended their aid programmes in Kenya in 1991.\nIn 1993, the Kenyan government began a major programme of economic reform and liberalisation. A new minister of finance and a new governor of the central bank undertook a series of economic measures with the assistance of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The government eliminated price controls and import licensing, removed foreign exchange controls, privatised a number of publicly owned companies, reduced the number of civil servants, and introduced conservative fiscal and monetary policies. From 1994 to 1996, Kenya's real GDP growth rate averaged just over 4% a year.\nIn 1997, however, the economy entered a period of slow growth, due in part to adverse weather conditions and reduced economic activity before the general elections in December 1997. In July 1997, the Government of Kenya refused to meet earlier commitments to the IMF on governance reforms. As a result, the IMF suspended lending for three years, and the World Bank put a $90 million structural adjustment credit on hold.\nThe Kenyan government subsequently took positive steps on reform, including the establishment of the Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority in 1997. The state also implemented measures to improve the transparency of government procurement and reduce the government payroll. In July 2000, the IMF signed a $150 million Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and the World Bank followed shortly after with a $157 million Economic and Public Sector Reform credit. However, both were eventually suspended. Despite setbacks, the process of reform established Kenya as East Africa's economic powerhouse and the region's business hub.\nEconomic growth improved between 2003 and 2008, under the Mwai Kibaki administration. When Kibaki took power in 2003, he immediately established the National Debt Management Department at the treasury, reformed the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) to increase government revenue, reformed financial laws on banking, wrote off the debts of strategic public enterprises, and ensured that 30% of government tax revenue was invested in economic development projects. With these reforms, driven by the National Rainbow Coalition government, the KRA collected more tax revenue in 2004 than was anticipated. The government then initiated investments in infrastructure. By 2005, the Kenyan public debt had reduced from highs of 80% of GDP in 2002 to 27% of GDP in 2005. The financial sector greatly improved, and Equity Bank Kenya became one of the largest banks in East Africa. Economic growth improved from 2% in 2003 to 7% in 2007. In 2008, the growth slumped to 1% due to post-election violence before returning to an average of 5% between 2009 and 2013. However, in 2009, due to drought and the 2008 financial crisis, high input costs as well as a fall in demand for some of the country's exports caused the agriculture sector to contract by 2.7%.\nBetween 2013 and 2018, under the Jubilee Party government led by Uhuru Kenyatta, the GDP growth averaged above 5%. Growth in small businesses is credited with some of the improvement. Real GDP growth (annualised) was 5.7% in Q1 of 2018, 6.0% in Q2 2018 and 6.2% in Q3 2018. Despite this robust growth, concerns remained about Kenya's debt sustainability, current account deficit, fiscal consolidation and revenue growth.\nThe table below shows the GDP of Kenya http:// by the International Monetary Fund, with exchange rates for Kenyan shillings.\nVision 2030 plan.\nVision 2030 is Kenya's current blueprint for its economic future, with the goal of creating a prosperous, globally-competitive nation with a high quality of life by 2030. The plan aims to transform Kenyan industry and environment in three pillars: economic, social, and political.\nEconomic pillar.\nVision 2030 seeks economic growth averaging greater than 10% for 23 years, beginning in the year 2007. Economic areas targeted are tourism, agriculture, wholesale and retail trade, manufacturing, IT-enabled services, and financial services.\nSocial pillar.\nTo improve the quality of life for Kenyans, Vision 2030 aims to improve human and social welfare programmes, specifically education and training, health, environment, housing and urbanisation, children and social development, and youth and sports. In 2018, President Uhuru Kenyatta established the Big Four Agenda, focusing on universal healthcare, manufacturing, affordable housing and food security.\nPolitical pillar.\nThe political pillar envisions a \"democratic system that is issue-based, transparent, people-centred, results-oriented, and accountable to the public\". It targets five main areas: the rule of law under the Constitution of Kenya, electoral and political processes, democracy and public service delivery, transparency and accountability, and security, peace building, and conflict management.\nThe current Constitution of Kenya was inaugurated on 27 August 2010 to drive this pillar.\nCurrency, exchange rate, and inflation.\nKenya's currency is printed by mandate of the Central Bank of Kenya. The bank began printing banknotes in 1996. Several versions of Kenya's banknotes and coinage have been circulated since then. The most recent redesign of Kenya's currency was in 2019.\nThe exchange rate of the Kenyan Shilling between 2003 and 2010 averaged about KSh74-78 per US Dollar. Exchange Rate in the first half of 2025 averaged 128 KSh to USD. Currency values in Kenya and elsewhere are influenced by different factors in the short run and long run, and these dynamics are shaped by the country\u2019s choice of exchange rate regime, participation in monetary unions, and vulnerability to currency crises. Kenya\u2019s shilling, for example, is officially market-driven but does not float freely. The Central Bank of Kenya frequently intervenes to influence its value, using foreign currency reserves to stabilize the exchange rate\nThe average inflation between 2005 and July 2015 was 8.5%. In July 2015 Kenya's inflation rate was estimated to be 6.62%.\nGovernment finances.\nRevenue and spending.\nIn 2006, Kenyan government revenue totalled US$4.448B and its estimated expenditures totalled US$5.377B. The government budget balance as a percentage of the gross domestic product improved to \u22122.1% in 2006 from \u22125.5% in 2004.\nIn 2012, Kenya set a budget of US$14.59B with a government revenue of approximately US$12B.\nThe 2018 budget policy report set a budget of US$30B. The government revenue was approximately US$29.5B, and a deficit of US$5B was borrowed.\nIn the financial year that ended in June 2020, the Kenya Revenue Authority collected a tax revenue that amounted to approximately US$15B.\nGovernment debt.\nFrom 1982, Kenya key public debt indicators rose above critical levels, both measured as a percentage of GDP and as a percentage of government revenue.\nIn 2002, the last year of Daniel arap Moi's administration, Kenya' s public debt stood at almost 80% of GDP. In the last 10 years of the Moi regime, the government was spending 94% of all its revenue on salaries and debt servicing to the IMF, World Bank and other western countries.\nIn 2003, Mwai Kibaki's administration instituted a public debt management department within the treasury department to bring Kenya's debt down to sustainable levels.\nIn 2006, Kenya had a current account deficit of US$1.5B. This figure was a significant increase over 2005, when the current account had a deficit of US$495 million. In 2006, the current account balance as a percentage of gross domestic product was \u22124.2.\nIn 2006, Kenya's external debt totalled US$6.7B. With a GDP of US$25.83B in 2006, the public debt level stood at 27% of GDP.\nIn 2011, the national treasury noted that the debt was rising, growing to 40% of GDP in 2009 and to 54% of GDP by 2012.\nIn 2019, Kenya's debt had risen to an absolute amount of US$50B against a GDP of US$98B. The public debt level was 51% of GDP in 2019.\nIn 2021, Kenya's debt had risen to an absolute amount of US$65B against a GDP of US$101B.The public debt level was 65% of GDP in 2021.\nKenya's largest bilateral lender since 2011 has been China, and the largest multilateral lender since 1963 has been the World Bank.\nIn April 2025, Kenya secured $600 million in short-term financing from commercial banks to support road construction projects, amid persistent budgetary pressures stemming from sluggish tax revenue growth, high debt servicing costs, and increased spending obligations, including at the county level. The financing, backed by securitised collections from the national fuel levy, set at 18 Kenyan shillings (approximately $0.14) per litre, was arranged through the Kenya Roads Board to enable access to more affordable credit. According to Finance Minister John Mbadi, the funds will be directed toward paying contractors for urgent road maintenance while the government continues to pursue a larger funding arrangement, potentially a $1.5 billion privately placed bond or syndicated loan. This initiative complements broader efforts by President William Ruto\u2019s administration, which came into office in September 2022, to address infrastructure financing gaps. Separately, Kenya plans to issue Africa\u2019s first sustainability-linked bond by November 2025, targeting $500 million to support the national budget and contribute to environmental, social, and energy-related goals. This move is part of the government's strategy to manage an anticipated budget deficit of 3.9% of GDP for the fiscal year ending June 2025.\nEconomic Stimulus Programme.\nThe Kenya Economic Stimulus Programme was introduced in the 2010\u20132011 budget plan. The initiative aimed to stimulate economic activity in Kenya through investment in long-term solutions to food insecurity, rural unemployment and underdevelopment. Stated improvement objectives included regional development for equity and social stability, infrastructure, education, affordable health-care, environmental conservation, information and communications technology capacity, and access to IT.\nIntegrated Financial Management Information System.\nThe Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) was launched in 2003 as a digital platform for Kenya's financial information and services, and was later re-engineered by the Ministry of Finance to curb fraud and other malpractices. IFMIS enables integrated budget planning, being linked to planning policy objectives and budget allocation.\nFunds for the Inclusion of Informal Sector.\nThe Fund for the Inclusion of Informal Sector (FIIS) is a fund that allows businesses in the informal economy to access credit financing and other facilities, including financial and banking services.\nInvestor compensation fund.\nThe Investor Compensation Fund compensates investors who suffer losses from breaches of duty by a licensed stockbroker or dealer, up to a maximum of Sh.50,000 per investor.\nForeign economic relations.\nForeign investments in Kenya remain relatively weak considering the size of its economy and its level of development. As of 2022, Kenya's total FDI stock stood at USD 10.4 billion, accounting for a mere 9.5% of the country\u2019s GDP.\nInvestments come from China, Japan, Russia, the United States, and the United Kingdom, among others. Kenya hosts a number of foreign multinational companies and international organisations such as the United Nations Environment Programme. China's investments have been increasing, while those of western countries such as the United Kingdom has fallen significantly. Investments from multilateral agencies, particularly the World Bank and the European Development Fund, have also increased. The most active investors currently are the Chinese.\nKenya is active within regional trade blocs such as the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa and the East African Community, a partnership of Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan. The aim of the latter is to create a common market of its member states modelled on the European Union. Among the early steps toward integration is the bloc's customs union, which has eliminated duties on goods and non-tariff trade barriers among members.\nExports.\nKenya's chief exports are horticultural products and tea. In 2005, the combined value of these commodities was US$1,150 million, about 10 times the value of Kenya's third most valuable export, coffee. Kenya's other significant exports are petroleum products, fish, cement, pyrethrum, and sisal. The leading imports are crude petroleum, chemicals, manufactured goods, machinery, and transportation equipment. Africa is Kenya's largest export market, followed by the European Union.\nThe major destinations for exports are Uganda, Tanzania, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. Major suppliers are China, India, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and South Africa. Kenya's main exports to the United States are garments traded under the terms of the African Growth and Opportunity Act. Notwithstanding this, Kenya's apparel industry is struggling to hold its ground against Asian competition and runs a trade deficit with the United States. Many of Kenya's problems relating to the export of goods are believed by economists to be caused by the fact that Kenya's exports are inexpensive items that do not bring substantial amounts of money into the country.\nKenya is the dominant trade partner for Uganda (12.3% exports, 15.6% imports) and Rwanda (30.5% exports, 17.3% imports).\nBalance of trade.\nKenya typically has a substantial trade deficit. The trade balance fluctuates widely because Kenya's main exports are primary commodities subject to the effects of both world prices and weather. In 2005 Kenya's income from exports was about US$3.2 billion. The payment for imports was about US$5.7B, yielding a trade deficit of about US$2.5B.\nForeign investment policies.\nKenyan policies on foreign investment generally have been favourable since independence, with occasional tightening of restrictions to promote the africanisation of enterprises. Foreign investors have been guaranteed ownership and the right to remit dividends, royalties, and capital.\nKenya is currently the most important source of foreign direct investments in Uganda and Rwanda. Uganda and its neighbouring regions are the main export destinations for Kenyan products. Kenya has had more success in growing its economy and quality of life levels than many of its neighbours in sub-Saharan Africa.\nIndustries.\nAgriculture.\nKenya produced in 2018:\nAgriculture is the second largest contributor to Kenya's GDP, after the service sector, although only 15% of Kenya's total land area has sufficient fertility and rainfall to be farmed, and only 7 or 8% can be classified as first-class land. In 2006, almost 75% of working Kenyans made their living on the land, compared with 80% in 1980. About half of total agricultural output is non-marketed subsistence production.\nIn 2005, agriculture, including forestry and fishing, accounted for about 24% of GDP, as well as for 18% of wage employment and 50% of revenue from exports. That same year, horticulture accounted for 23% and tea for 22% of total export earnings. The principal cash crops in Kenyan agriculture are tea, horticultural produce, and coffee. Coffee has declined in importance with depressed world prices, accounting for just 5% of export receipts in 2005. The production of major food staples such as corn is subject to sharp weather-related fluctuations. Production downturns also periodically necessitate food aid. In 2004, aid was needed for 1.8 million people because of Kenya's intermittent droughts. However, the expansion of credit to the agricultural sector has enabled farmers to better deal with environmental and pricing risks.\nTea, coffee, sisal, pyrethrum, corn, and wheat are grown in the fertile highlands, one of the most successful agricultural production regions in Africa. Livestock predominates in the semi-arid savanna to the north and east. Coconuts, pineapples, cashew nuts, cotton, sugarcane, sisal, and corn are grown in the lower-lying areas.\nForestry and fishing.\nResource degradation has reduced output from forestry. In 2004, roundwood removals came to 22,162,000 cubic meters. Fisheries are of local importance around Lake Victoria and have potential at Lake Turkana. Kenya's total catch in 2004 was 128,000 metric tons. However, output from fishing has been declining because of ecological disruption. Pollution, overfishing, and the use of unauthorised fishing equipment have led to falling catches and have endangered local fish species.\nMining and minerals.\nKenya has no significant mineral endowment. The mining and quarrying sector makes a negligible contribution to the economy, accounting for less than 1% of GDP. The majority of this is contributed by the soda ash operation at Lake Magadi in south-central Kenya. Thanks largely to rising soda ash output, Kenya's mineral production in 2005 reached more than 1 million tons. One of Kenya's largest foreign-investment projects in recent years is the planned expansion of Magadi Soda. Apart from soda ash, the chief minerals produced are limestone, gold, salt, large quantities of niobium, fluorspar, and fossil fuel.\nAll unextracted minerals are government property, under the Mining Act. The Department of Mines and Geology, under the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, controls exploration and exploitation of minerals.\nIndustry and manufacturing.\nAlthough Kenya is the most industrially developed country in East Africa, manufacturing still accounts for only 14% of GDP. This represents only a slight increase since independence. The rapid expansion of the sector immediately after independence stagnated in the 1980s, hampered by shortages in hydroelectric power, high energy costs, dilapidated transport infrastructure, and the dumping of cheap imports. However, due to urbanisation, the industry and manufacturing sectors have become increasingly important to the Kenyan economy, and this has been reflected by an increasing GDP per capita. Industrial activity, concentrated around the three largest urban centres, Nairobi, Mombasa, and Kisumu, is dominated by food-processing industries such as grain milling, beer production, sugarcane crushing, and the fabrication of consumer goods. Kenya also has an oil refinery that processes imported crude petroleum into petroleum products, mainly for the domestic market. In addition, a substantial and expanding informal sector engages in small-scale manufacturing of household goods, motor-vehicle parts, and farm implements.\nKenya's inclusion among the beneficiaries of the US Government's African Growth and Opportunity Act gave a boost to manufacturing. Since the Act took effect in 2000, Kenya's clothing sales to the United States increased from US$44 million to US$270M in 2006. Other initiatives to strengthen manufacturing include favourable tax measures, including the absence of duties for capital equipment and other raw materials.\nEnergy.\nThe largest segment of Kenya's electricity supply comes from hydroelectric stations at dams along the upper Tana River, as well as the Turkwel Gorge Dam in the west. A petroleum-fired plant on the coast, geothermal facilities at Olkaria, and electricity imported from Uganda make up the balance. Kenya's installed capacity stood at 1,142 megawatts a year between 2001 and 2003. The state-owned Kenya Electricity Generating Company, established in 1997 under the name Kenya Power Company, handles the generation of electricity, while the Kenya Power and Lighting Company handles transmission and distribution. Shortfalls of electricity occur periodically when drought reduces water flow. In 1997 and 2000, for example, drought prompted severe power rationing, with economically-damaging 12-hour blackouts. Frequent outages and high costs of power remain serious obstacles to economic activity. Tax and other concessions are planned to encourage investment in hydroelectricity and in geothermal energy, which Kenya has been a pioneer in adopting.\nKenya currently imports all crude petroleum requirements, with petroleum accounting for 20% to 25% of the national import bill. Hydrocarbon reserves have been found in Kenya's semi-arid northern region of Turkana after several decades of intermittent exploration. Offshore prospecting also continues. Kenya Petroleum Refineries, a 50:50 joint venture between the government and several oil majors, operates the country's sole oil refinery in Mombasa. The refinery's production is transported via Kenya's Mombasa\u2013Nairobi pipeline. However, the refinery is currently non-operational. In 2004, oil consumption was estimated at a day.\nTourism.\nKenya's dependence on tourism has greatly reduced over the years. Tourism, both domestic and international, accounted for around 6% of Kenya\u2019s economy in 2023. In 2019, foreign tourist revenues stood at $1.76 billion, accounting for only 1.6% of Kenya's GDP and approximately 12% of all international tourism receipts in Eastern Africa.\nThe growing middle class in Kenya has also led to a significant growth in domestic tourism over the years. This steady growth in domestic tourism has defied the turmoil of elections or terror attacks. In 2014, for the first time, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics data showed that the number of Kenyans accommodated in hotel rooms was higher than that of foreign tourists, pointing to the increasing significance of domestic tourism and highlighting the need for the government to focus on promoting domestic tourism over international visitors as a way of yielding more sustainable growth in the tourism sector\nIn 2018, domestic tourists\u2019 bed occupancy accounted for 52.9% of the total bed occupancy in the country.\nKenya offers numerous large national parks in a wide variety of landscapes. Besides the coast, there are large deserts, steppes and mountains. The national parks and nature reserves contain the natural habitats of many animal species.\nFinancial services.\nKenya is East Africa's hub for financial services. The Nairobi Stock Exchange (NSE) is ranked 4th in Africa in terms of market capitalisation.\nThe banking sector in Kenya is regulated by The Central Bank Of Kenya. Kenya's banking sector is mainly dominated by local commercial banks, namely Equity Bank, Kenya Commercial Bank, NCBA Bank, Diamond Trust Bank, Cooperative Bank, and National Bank. The Kenya Commercial Bank is the largest bank in Kenya by asset size and branch network as of 2023.\nKenya enjoys the presence of a number of high-profile accounting firms. The Big Four firms, Mazars, Grant Thornton International, and PKF International actively operate within the financial system, and are often responsible for the audit of Nairobi Stock Exchange firms.\nShipbuilding.\nKenya\u2019s first commercial-sized ship to be built from scratch\u2014not only in Kenya but also in the whole of East Africa\u2014was launched in October 2023. The 1800-ton vessel, the MV Uhuru II, will ferry goods and petroleum across Lake Victoria.\nLabour.\nIn 2022, Kenya's labour force was estimated to include about 24 million workers. In recent years, much of Kenya's labour force has moved from the countryside to cities such as Nairobi, as Kenya becomes increasingly urbanised.\nThe labour force participation rate in Kenya has been constant from 1997 to 2010 for both women and men. In 1997, 65% of women were employed in some type of labour and 76% of men were employed. In 2005, 60% of women and 70% of men were in the labour force, increasing slightly to 61% of women and 72% of men in 2010.\nIn the past 20 years, many Kenyans have moved away from family farming towards wage labour, small business entrepreneurship, and informal work. In 1989, 4.5 million Kenyans out of a total working population of 7.3M worked on family farms. In 2009, only 6.5M Kenyans out of a total working population of 14.3M worked on family farms. Of these, 3.8M were women and 2.7M were men.\nAccording to the World Bank 2012 Kenya Economic Update, modern wage jobs include being an \"engineer, telecommunication specialist, cut flower worker, teacher, construction worker, housekeepers, professionals, any industrial and manufacturing job, and port and dock workers.\" In 1989, there were only 1.9M Kenyans employed in wage work. In 2009, this number increased to 5.1M, with 3.4M men and 1.3M women were employed in wage jobs.\nInformal economy (\"Jua Kali\").\nIn Kenya, the \"Jua Kali\" sector is another name for the informal economy, also described as non-farming self-employment. Jua Kali is Swahili for \"hot sun\" and refers to the idea that the workers in the informal economy work under the fierce sun. The informal sector consists of legally unrecognised and unregulated self-employment and wage employment. As a result, informal sector employment does not contribute to Kenya's GDP. Non-farm self-employment has risen from 1989 to 2009.\nThe World Bank characterises non-farm self-employment to include jobs such as \"street vendor, shop owner, dressmaker, assistant, fishmonger, caterer, etc.\" Non-farm self-employment has risen from a total of 0.9 million workers in 1989 to a total of 2.7 million in 2009. Men make up 1.4 million workers, and women workers number 1.3 million.\nAs of 2009, Kenya's informal economy accounts for about 80% of the total employment for the country. Most informal workers are self-employed, with few entrepreneurs employing others. The informal sector contributes economic activity equal to 35% of the total GDP in Kenya, and has its own informal finance structure in the form of rotating savings and credit associations. This sector provides an income mainly for those in lower socioeconomic groups.\nDrawbacks of the informal economy include the promotion of smuggling and tax evasion and the lack of social and legal protection. Most members of the informal sector have low educational attainment. Rising costs of education and uncertainty about future employment have caused many workers to enter the informal economy, due to lower entry fees as well as shorter and practical training and apprenticeships.\nHuman capital.\nKenya has one of the best human capital in Africa. According to the World Bank's 2019 Human Capital Index (HCI), which measured human capital of the next generation, Kenya ranked first in sub-Saharan Africa with an HCI score of 0.52. The index combined several key indicators, such as school enrolment, child survival, quality of learning, healthy growth and adult survival into a single index ranging between 0\u20131.\nChallenges.\nThe economy's heavy dependence on rain for its agriculture leaves it vulnerable to periods of high inflation during droughts. The agricultural sector employs nearly 33% of the total labour force.\nKenya's economic performance had for a long time been hampered by various factors: heavy dependence on a few agricultural exports vulnerable to global price fluctuations; population growth which has outstripped economic growth; prolonged droughts requiring power rationing; deteriorating infrastructure; and extreme income inequality. Some of these issues have been addressed by policies, with GDP growth increasing, population growth slowing, rapid infrastructural improvements being made and increased electrification rates with more stable power supplies.\nPoor governance and corruption also have had a negative impact on growth, making it expensive to do business in Kenya.\nDespite these challenges, two thirds of Kenyans expect living conditions to improve in the coming decades.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n This article incorporates text from a scholarly publication published under a copyright license that allows anyone to reuse, revise, remix and redistribute the materials in any form for any purpose: Ellis, Amanda; Cutura, Jozefina; Dione, Nouma; Gillson, Ian; Manuel, Clare; Thongori, Judy. 2007. Gender and Economic Growth in Kenya : Unleashing the Power of Women. Directions in Development; Private Sector Development. Washington, DC Please check the source for the exact licensing terms."}
{"id": "16658", "revid": "21857263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16658", "title": "Telecommunications in Kenya", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Kenya include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nRadio stations:\nRadios:\n3.07 million (1997).\nTelevision stations: \nTelevision sets:\n730,000 (1997).\nTelevision is the main news source in cities and towns. TV in rural areas is limited by lack of reliable electricity and radio listening dominates in rural areas, where most Kenyans live. A switchover to digital TV is under way. Satellite pay-TV is offered by the Wananchi Group, which operates Zuku TV, and by South Africa's MultiChoice. Entertainment, music and phone-ins dominate the radio scene, which includes Islamic stations and stations broadcasting in local languages.\nThe BBC World Service is available in Nairobi, Mombasa, and Kisumu.\nThe state-run Kenya Broadcasting Corporation (KBC) is funded from advertising revenue and from the government.\nTelephones.\nCalling code: +254\nInternational call prefix: 000\nMain lines:\nMobile Cellular:\nTelephone system: inadequate; fixed-line telephone system is small and inefficient; trunks are primarily microwave radio relay; business data commonly transferred by a very small aperture terminal (VSAT) system; sole fixed-line provider, Telkom Kenya, is slated for privatization; multiple providers in the mobile-cellular segment of the market fostering a boom in mobile-cellular telephone usage with teledensity reaching 65 per 100 persons (2011).\nCommunications cables: landing point for the Eastern Africa Submarine Cable System (EASSy), The East African Marine System (TEAMS), and SEACOM fiber-optic submarine cable systems (2011).\nSatellite earth stations: 4 Intelsat (2011).\nInternet.\nTop-level domain: .ke\nInternet users:\nFixed broadband: 43,013 subscriptions, 115th in the world; 0.1% of the population, 167th in the world (2012).\nWireless broadband: 954,896 subscriptions, 72nd in the world; 2.2% of the population, 124th in the world (2012).\nInternet hosts: 71,018 hosts, 88th in the world (2012).\nIPv4: 1.7 million addresses allocated, 68th in the world, less than 0.05% of the world total, 38.5 addresses per 1000 people (2012).\nInternet Service Providers:\n66 ISPs (2014).\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nKenya was rated as \"partly free\" in the 2009 and 2011 \"Freedom on the Net\" reports from Freedom House with scores of 34 and 32 which is much closer to the \"free\" rating that ends at 30 then it is to the \"not free\" rating that starts at 60. In 2012 and 2013 the rating improved to \"free\" with scores of 29 and 28.\nThe government does not employ technical filtering or any administrative censorship system to restrict access to political or other content. Citizens engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail, and are able to access a wide range of viewpoints, with the websites of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), the U.S.-based Cable News Network (CNN), and Kenya's Daily Nation newspaper the most commonly accessed. There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet, but Internet services are limited in rural areas due to lack of infrastructure.\nThe constitution protects freedom of expression and the \"freedom to communicate ideas and information.\" However, it also grants the government the authority to punish defamation, protect privileged information, and restrict state employees\u2019 \"freedom of expression in the interest of defense, public safety, public order, public morality or public health.\" In January 2009, the government passed a controversial Communications Amendment Act that established that any person who publishes, transmits, or causes to be published in electronic form obscene information commits an offense. The Act also outlines other forms of illegality associated with the use of information and communication technologies. At the end of 2010, the measure had not been used to prosecute anyone for online expression. Under the Act, the Communications Commission of Kenya (CCK), rather than the independent Media Council of Kenya, is responsible for regulating both traditional and online media. The CCK is also independent, but because the CCK has yet to make any decisions affecting the internet, its autonomy and professionalism in making determinations remain to be seen.\nIn July 2009 the government announced that all cell phone users had to provide the government with their name and identification number. This regulation applies to citizens who access the Internet through cell phone-based services as well.\nOn 18 May 2018, the Kenya Film Classification Board issued a warning stating that any video intended for public exhibition, including video published online, falls under the Films and Stage Plays Act, and that the creators of such videos must obtain a licence from the KFCB or be subject to fines or imprisonment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16659", "revid": "5424060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16659", "title": "Transport in Kenya", "text": "Transport in Kenya refers to the transportation structure in Kenya. The country has an extensive network of paved and unpaved roads.\nKenya's railway system links the nation's ports and major cities and connects Kenya with neighbouring Uganda. There are 15 airports with paved runways.\nRoads.\nAccording to the Kenya Roads Board, Kenya has of roads.\nClassification.\nThey are currently classified into the following categories:\nBus transport.\nThere are around 100,000 matatus (minibuses), which constitute the bulk of the country's public transport system.\nOnce the largest bus company in Kenya, Kenya Bus Services, ran into financial difficulties, forcing them to reduce the number of buses operated. They are currently operating minibuses within Nairobi city, although new, smaller, city buses offering passengers higher standards of comfort and safety have been introduced on some inner-city routes.\nCoast Bus, the oldest bus operator in Kenya, runs a day and night service between Nairobi and the coastal city of Mombasa. Ascott operates minivans offering shuttle service between Nairobi and Kisii; they offer snacks on board. The Guardian bus co. Ltd, a private company which runs the Guardian Bus service, operates day and night passenger bus and courier services to a number of destinations in Western Kenya.\nOther bus companies in Kenya include Modern Coast, Nyamira Express, Otange, MASH, Vanga, Simba coach, Xenon dreamline, Messina, MAslah, Amani coaches, west coaches, Horizon, 2nk sacco, Chania Comfort, chania genesis, parrot line, x calibur and Crown Bus but there are a number of other companies which offer inter-city services such as Eldoret Express,Kawere, Climax, Greenline, Western Express, Mbukinya, Kalita Coaches and Palmdam.There also number of shuttle companies operating van to western Kenya such as Sasaline, Blueline, Classic, Khukhu, Royal Rift, Transline msafiri, Transline classic, Premium shuttles, Nyanza shuttle, North Rift, Molo Line and Mash Poa.Taxedo\nRegulation and Enforcement.\nIn February 2004 the Ministry of Transport in Kenya introduced new regulations governing the operation of Matatus. These regulations (famously referred to as \"Michuki Rules\") include: the compulsory fitting of safety belts and speed governors. In addition, standing on matatus was banned. As a result of these regulations, many matatus were taken off the road, which caused great disruption to public transport, forcing many people to walk to work. Now the situation has stabilised, and the new regulations have resulted in a great reduction of the number of people killed and injured in accidents. Due to lax enforcement after the initial push, the number of deaths in road accidents had increased in recent years.\nOn 1 December 2012 the government will begin to enforce the recently amended traffic act which has significantly increased the penalties for offences. Matatu operators have protested the move through strike action.\nInternational highways.\nTwo routes in the Trans-African Highway network pass through Kenya and the capital, Nairobi:\nAirports.\nAirports \u2013 with paved runways.\n\"total:\" 16\n\"over 3,047 m:\" 5\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 2\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 2\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 6\n\"under 914 m:\" 1 (2013)\nJomo Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi, is Kenya's largest airport and serves the most destinations. \nSome international flights go to Moi International Airport in Mombasa. Kisumu Airport was upgraded to an international airport in 2011 and a second phase of expansion is under way. In 2012, US Navy Seebees built a major new tarmac runway at Wajir Airport that can take heavy aircraft.\nAirports \u2013 with unpaved runways.\n\"total:\" 181\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 14\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 107\n\"under 914 m:\" 60 (2013)\nMany airports with unpaved runways serve private purposes, such as private game parks and safari lodges, but are still serviced by airlines like AirKenya\nRailways.\n\"Total:\" \n\":\" 2,066\u00a0km\nThe former Uganda Railway, was run by the company East African Railways. It jointly served the present countries of Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. Since the dissolution of the EAR corporation in 1977, the national company Kenya Railways Corporation runs the former Uganda Railway and its branches in Kenya. The most important line in the country runs between the port of Mombasa and Nairobi, sleeping car accommodation is offered for tourists.\nIn 2006, the Rift Valley Railways Consortium led by South African companies took over the operation of the Kenyan and Ugandan railway network on a contract lasting 25 years, with the opportunity of renewal. After criticism from the Kenya Railways Corporation, RVR doubled the frequency of service, and also imposed restrictions to reduce train derailments caused by the ageing infrastructure.\nRVR run passenger trains within Kenya only, primarily from Nairobi to Mombasa but also to local towns such as Kisumu. Passenger services on these lines are offered on peak periods only. Freight services are the bulk of RVR's operations.\nIn 2008, agreements were made with Uganda about gauge standardisation.\nIn 2011, Kenya signed a memorandum of understanding with the China Road and Bridge Corporation to build the Mombasa\u2013Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway (SGR). Financing for the US$ project was finalised in May 2014, with the Exim Bank of China extending a loan for 90% of the project cost, and the remaining 10% coming from the Kenyan government. Passenger service on the SGR was inaugurated on 31 May 2017. Work to extend the SGR to Suswa is complete. The SGR program is intended to replace the old, inefficient metre-gauge railway system.\nThe first segment of the SGR, between Mombasa and Nairobi, opened passenger rail service in June 2017, and freight rail service in January 2018.\nWaterways.\nPart of the Lake Victoria system is within the boundaries of Kenya. Kenya has a major international port at Mombasa, serving both Kenya and Uganda. Kisumu on Lake Victoria is also another major port, which has ferry connections to Uganda and Tanzania.\nMerchant Marine.\n\"Total:\" 3 ships (with a volume of \u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n\"By type:\" passenger/cargo 2, petroleum tanker 1\n\"Registered in other countries:\" 6 (2006)\nPorts and harbours.\nMombasa has the only commercial port that reaches international standards. Mombasa's commercial port is called Kilindini Harbour and is run by the Kenya Ports Authority, it lies on the Indian Ocean.\nThere are plans to build another international port in Lamu to the north east of Mombasa.\nThere is an inland port at Kisumu which serves Lake Victoria. In 2015 a new ferry was delivered to Kisumu by road.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nRegulators\nThe following Kenyan state corporations are involved in the regulation of transport:"}
{"id": "16660", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16660", "title": "Kenya Defence Forces", "text": "Armed forces of Kenya\nThe Kenya Defence Forces (KDF) (, stylized as \"KENYA ARMED FORCES\" capitalized on its coat of arms) are the armed forces of the Republic of Kenya. They are made up of the Kenya Army, Kenya Navy, and Kenya Air Force. The current KDF was established, and its composition stipulated, in Article 241 of the 2010 Constitution of Kenya; it is governed by the KDF Act of 2012. Its main mission is the defence and protection of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Kenya, recruitment to the KDF is done on yearly basis. The President of Kenya is the commander-in-chief of the KDF, and the Chief of Defence Forces is the highest-ranking military officer, and the principal military adviser to the President of Kenya.\nThe Defence Forces, like many Kenyan government institutions, has been tainted by corruption. Because the military have been traditionally cloaked by the blanket of \"state security\", the corruption has been less in public view, and thus less subject to public scrutiny and notoriety. But in 2010, credible claims of corruption were made with regard to recruitment, and procurement of Armoured Personnel Carriers. The decision on the Northrop F-5 \"Tiger\" aircraft procurement have been publicly questioned. In 2015, credible allegations were made that the KDF is involved with sugar smuggling from southern Somalia into Kenya, to avoid import dues.\nThe KDF is regularly deployed in peacekeeping and warfighting missions, for example the counter-insurgency fight against al-Shabaab in Somalia since 2011.\nHistory.\nThe United Kingdom raised and maintained forces in Kenya Colony after it was established, eventually to become the King's African Rifles (KAR). The KAR fought during the two World Wars and in the Mau Mau Uprising. On the other side of the Mau Mau Uprising was the first Kenyan force raised by African themselves, the Kenya Land and Freedom Army.\nJomo Kenyatta Administration.\nKenya's independence on the midnight of 12 December 1963 was an enormous milestone. On independence, the Kenyan Parliament created the Kenya Military Forces (KMF) through the KMF Act 1963. Thus 3 KAR, 5 KAR, and 11 KAR became 3 Kenya Rifles, 5 Kenya Rifles, and 11 Kenya Rifles respectively. The new independence government retained senior British military officers as advisers and trainers to the new Kenyan army. They stayed on, administering the former KAR units as they developed more Kenyan characteristics. The Kenya Regiment composed of British settlers was disbanded.\nBetween 1963 and 1967, Kenya fought the Shifta War against Somali residents who sought union with their kin in the Somali Republic to the north-east. In late 1963, 5th Kenya Rifles was sent to the North Eastern Province as a response to the growing number of Shifta ambushes. Also dispatched were additional police and the General Service Unit. The Shifta were lightly loaded and very mobile, and could draw on substantial support from the local Kenyan-Somali population. The army and police forcibly resettled the population into \"new villages\" and conducted sweeps to destroy the Shifta beyond, including making mortar attacks on assumed Shifta positions.\nOn the evening of 24 January 1964, the failure of the Kenyan Prime Minister to appear on television, where 11th Kenya Rifles junior soldiers had been expecting a televised speech and hoping for a pay rise announcement, caused the men to mutiny. Parsons says it is possible that the speech was only broadcast on the radio in the Nakuru area where Lanet Barracks, home of the battalion, was located. Kenyatta's government held two separate courts-martial for 43 soldiers.\nIn the aftermath of the mutiny and following courts-martial, the 11th Kenya Rifles was disbanded. A new battalion, 1st Kenya Rifles, was created entirely from 340 Lanet soldiers who had been cleared of participation in the mutiny by the Kenyan Criminal Investigations Division (CID). Hornsby writes that after the mutiny, '[Kenyatta] improved conditions, announced pay rises to the military, speeded Africanisation, and instructed the intelligence services to infiltrate and watch the army for signs of disaffection.'\nDiscussions began in March 1964 between Kenya and Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations Duncan Sandys on defence, and a formal agreement was signed on 3 June 1964. All British troops would leave by 12 December 1964, the British would assist the army, resource and train a new Kenya Air Force, and create a new Kenya Navy. They would also provide RAF and Army units to support internal security in the north-east. Significant military loans would be cancelled, and much military property made over to the Kenyan Government. In return, British aircraft would be able to transit through Kenya, RN ships of the Far East Fleet and other units could visit Mombasa, communications facilities could be used until 1966, and troops could exercise in Kenya twice a year. Army training deployments have continued up until 2015, as of 2015 supervised by British Army Training Unit Kenya.\nTimothy Parsons wrote in 2002\u201303:\n'..Kenyatta did not have to worry about the political reliability of the Kenyan Army because expatriate senior British military advisors ran it along KAR lines throughout the 1960s. Following the lessons of the Lanet protects, African officers assumed operational command of all major units, but a British training team still oversaw the Kenyan Army for most of the decade. More significantly, an informal defence arrangement with Britain reassured Kenyatta that he could rely on direct British military support in the event of an army mutiny or attempted coup.'\nWithin months of British Brigadier A.J. Hardy leaving the post of Commander Kenya Army and handing over to Brigadier Joseph Ndolo on 1 December 1966, British influence was underlined with the appointment of Major General Bernard Penfold as Chief of the Defence Staff, a new position as senior officer of the entire armed forces. Ndolo succeeded Penfold as Chief of Defence Staff in 1969, but was retired on 24 June 1971 after being implicated in a coup plot allegedly organised by Joseph Owino. The service chiefs thereafter reported directly to the Minister of Defence, James Gichuru. The post of Chief of the Defence Staff was only filled again seven years later ( renamed the Chief of the General Staff - CGS) when Daniel arap Moi moved Lieutenant General Jackson Mulinge from Army Commander to CGS in November 1978. Mahamoud Mohamed succeeded Mulinge in 1986, and was CGS until 1996. Mohamed was succeeded by General Daudi Tonje, CGS 1996\u20132000.\nWomen were first recruited into the armed forces in 1971, with the establishment of the Women's Service Corps. The corps was initially made up of 150 women under Major Patricia Ineson of the British Women's Royal Army Corps, before she was replaced by Phyllis Ikua, formerly of the Kenya Prisons Service. Fatumah Ahmed joined the WSC in 1983.\nMoi Administration.\nThe South African Institute for Security Studies wrote when Moi was still in power: \"the Kenyan armed forces' reputation as a politically neutral establishment has been undermined by irrefutable evidence of tribal favouritism in the appointment of key posts. In the military (and also the Police and GSU), there is a virtual monopoly of President Moi's ethnic group, the Kalenjin, in the top brass. Of 18 military generals, at least a third are Kalenjin; of 20 brigadiers, 7 are Kalenjin\u2014an ethnic group that accounts for only a tenth of Kenya's population. This obviously works to the disadvantage, especially, of the Kikuyu and the Luo.\"\nFrom the 1990s the Kenya Army became involved in United Nations peacekeeping operations, which, Hornsby says, 'offered both experience and a source of income for the army and its soldiers.' (The United Nations reimburses troop contributing countries for each soldier contributed.) Kenya's first peacekeeping deployment was to the United Nations Iran\u2013Iraq Military Observer Group to supervise the ceasefire; then UNTAG in Namibia. From 1989 to 2001, Kenyan troops took part in UNTAG, UNOSOM, UNPROFOR, UNCRO (Croatia), UNTAES, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP in Macedonia (1996\u20131999), MONUA in Angola (1997\u20131999), and UNTAET in East Timor (1999\u20132001). In 1999\u20132000, women were integrated into the regular units of the military, and the Women's Service Corps disbanded.\nIn the early 21st century, the Ministry of State for Defence, just like that of Internal Security and Provincial Administration, is part of the presidential machinery. All but senior military officers are appointed, promoted, and, if necessary, removed by the military's personnel system. The president appoints and retires senior military officers. Under the authority of the president as Commander-in-Chief, the Minister of Defence presides over the National Defence Council. The Chief of General Staff is the tactical, operational and administrative head of the military. Under the 2010 constitution, the defence forces can no longer be deployed for combat operations within Kenya without the approval of Parliament.\nKibaki Administration.\nIn the aftermath of the national elections of December 2007 and the violence that subsequently engulfed the country, a commission of inquiry, the Waki Commission, commended its readiness and adjudged it to \"have performed its duty well.\" Nevertheless, there have been serious allegations of human rights violations, most recently while conducting counter-insurgency operations in the Mt Elgon area and also in the district of Mandera central.\nIn October 2011, following a weekend preparatory meeting between Kenyan and Somali military officials in the town of Dhobley, Kenya Army units crossed the border to begin Operation Linda Nchi attacking the Al-Shabaab insurgents in southern Somalia. Kenya had coordinated with the transitional government in Mogadishu, and with the Somali militias in the border areas, but the drive on Kismayu was run by the KDF. In early June 2012, Kenyan forces were formally integrated into AMISOM.\nAs of August 2012 Major General Maurice Oyugi was the army vice commander.\nService branches.\nThe Kenya Defence Forces is composed of the Kenya Army, Kenya Air Force and Kenya Navy.\nKenya Army.\nAs of 2006, the Kenya Army had five brigades: two infantry, one with three battalions and one with two battalions; the Kenya Army Armoured Brigade with three battalions; the Kenya Army Artillery Brigade with two battalions; and the Engineer Brigade with two battalions. In addition, the army included an air defense artillery, 20 Parachute Battalion, independent infantry, and the independent 50 Air Cavalry Battalion with 35 armed helicopters at Embakasi.\nIn February 2014, the official http:// listed the following Army formations and services:\nThe Kenya Ranger Strike Force initiative began in 2006 with a request from the Ministry of Defence; creation of KRSF highlighted extensively in KMOD White Paper on Military Cooperation for 2011\u20132016. The total U.S. investment was $40M. Leveraged IMET courses for Ranger and Ranger Instructor courses, Section 1206 funding to secure training and equipment, multiple Joint Combined Exchange and Training (JCET) events, and East African Regional Security Initiative (EARSI now PREACT) to fund training and equipment. The first class taught by all Kenya Army Ranger Instructors graduated on 18 March 2011. Kenya formed a Special Operations Regiment (Kenya) composed of 20th Parachute Battalion, 30th Special Operations Battalion and 40th Kenya Ranger Strike Force Battalion. Kabete Barracks off Waiyaki Way in Nairobi is reported to house forces which are 'special'.\nBy 2019\u20132020, the International Institute for Strategic Studies listed the army's formations as including one armoured brigade (one armoured reconnaissance battalion, two armoured battalions); one special operations battalion; one ranger battalion; one infantry brigade with three infantry battalions, and another infantry brigade with two infantry battalions; one independent infantry battalion; one air cavalry battalion [50 Air Cavalry Battalion]; one airborne battalion; one artillery brigade with two artillery battalions and a mortar battery; one air defence battalion; and one engineer brigade with two engineer battalions (IISS MB 2020, p.\u00a0483).\nKenya Air Force.\nThe Kenya Air Force was formed on 1 June 1964, soon after independence, with the assistance of the United Kingdom.\nAfter a failed coup by a group of Air Force officers on 1 August 1982, the Air Force was disbanded. Air Force activity was reconstituted and placed under tighter army control as the 82 Air Force. The Air Force regained its independent status in 1994.\nThe main airbase operating fighters is Laikipia Air Base in Nanyuki, while Moi Air Base in Eastleigh, Nairobi is the headquarters. Other bases include Wajir Air Base, Forward Operating Base (FOB) Mombasa (Moi International Airport), FOB Mandera, &amp; FOB Nyeri (mainly helicopters/small planes).\nKenya Navy.\nThe Kenya Navy is the naval branch of the Kenyan Defence Forces. The Navy was established on 12 December 1964, exactly one year after Kenya gained independence. It was preceded by the colonial Royal East African Navy.\nThe Navy operates several bases, Mtongwe base in Mombasa, Shimoni, Msambweni, Malindi, Kilifi and since 1995 another base located in Manda (part of Lamu Archipelago).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16661", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16661", "title": "Foreign relations of Kenya", "text": " \nKenya maintains relations with various countries around the world. Its closest ties are with its fellow Swahili-speaking neighbors in the African Great Lakes region. Swahili speaking neighbours mainly include countries in the East African Community such as Burundi, the DRC, Rwanda, South Sudan, Tanzania and Uganda.\nKenya's relations with other states vary. The government of Ethiopia established political links in the colonial period with Kenya's then British administration, and today it is one of several national bodies with a diplomatic presence in Nairobi. Relations with Somalia have historically been tense, although there has been some military co-ordination against insurgents.\nElsewhere, the Kenyan government has political ties with China, India, Pakistan, Russia, United Arab Emirates, and Brazil. It also maintains relations with Western countries, particularly the United Kingdom, although political and economic instabilities are often blamed on Western activities (e.g. colonialism, paternalistic engagement, and post-colonial resource exploitation).\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Kenya maintains diplomatic relations with:\nKenya and the Commonwealth of Nations.\nKenya has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1963, when it became independent. The nation became a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations in 1964.\nKenya is also a member of the UN and hosts the UN Office in Nairobi, which is the UN Headquarters in Africa. The office was established in 1996.\nInternational trips made by presidents of Kenya.\nUhuru Kenyatta.\nUhuru Kenyatta made a 119 International trips to 52 countries during his presidency. The president served two full 5-year terms and made more international official visits than any of his predecessors. Kenyatta mainly made a majority of his visits within Africa and also attended various business forums and multi-lateral international events around the world. \nWilliam Ruto.\nWilliam Ruto made his first international trip in September 2022 since he began his presidency on 13 September 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16662", "revid": "46950062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16662", "title": "Korea, North", "text": ""}
{"id": "16663", "revid": "46950062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16663", "title": "Korea, South", "text": ""}
{"id": "16664", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16664", "title": "Kingman Reef", "text": "Reef and unincorporated U.S. territory in the Pacific Ocean\nKingman Reef () is a largely submerged, uninhabited, triangle-shaped reef, geologically an atoll, east-west and north-south, in the North Pacific Ocean, roughly halfway between the Hawaiian Islands and American Samoa. It has an area of 3 hectares (0.03\u00a0km2; 7.4 acres) and is an unincorporated territory of the United States in Oceania. The reef is administered by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as the Kingman Reef National Wildlife Refuge. It was claimed by the United States in 1859 and later used briefly as a stopover for commercial Pacific flying boat routes in the 1930s going to New Zealand; however, the route was changed with a different stopover. It was administered by the Navy from 1934 to 2000 and thereafter by the Fish and Wildlife Service. It has since become a marine protected area. In the 19th century, it was noted as a maritime hazard, earning the name Hazard Rocks, and is known to have been hit once in 1876. In the 21st century, it has been noted for its marine biodiversity and remote nature. Hundreds of fish and coral species are on and around the reef.\nHistory.\nKingman Reef was discovered on June 14, 1798, by the American captain Edmund Fanning of the ship \"Betsey\". It was first described by Captain W. E. Kingman (whose name the island bears) of the ship \"Shooting Star\" on November 29, 1853. It was claimed in 1859 by the United States Guano Company, under the name \"Dangers Rock,\" along with several other islands. The claim was made under the U.S. Guano Islands Act of 1856, although there is no evidence that guano existed or was ever mined on Kingman Reef. The British steamship \"Tarta\" struck the reef in June 1874, and it was later surveyed by in 1897, establishing that Kingman Reef was the same hazard previously charted as Caldew Reef and Maria Shoal, among other names.\nOn May 10, 1922, Lorrin A. Thurston became the first person to raise the American flag on the atoll and read an annexation proclamation. The Palmyra Copra Co. intended to use Kingman as a fishing base, as demand for copra had declined after World War I and Palmyra Island lacked a suitable anchorage. Thurston formally claimed Kingman for the United States by reading the following declaration while standing on its shore:\nBe it known to all people: That on the tenth of May, A.D. 1922, the undersigned agent of the Island of Palmyra Copra Co., Ltd., landed from the motorship Palmyra doth, on this tenth day of May, A.D. 1922, take formal possession of this island, called Kingman Reef, situated in longitude 162 degrees 18' west and 6 degrees 23' north, on behalf of the United States of America and claim the same for said company. A copy of the declaration, along with a U.S. flag and clippings from \"The Honolulu Advertiser\" newspaper, were left on Kingman to document the claim.\nOn December 29, 1934, the U.S. Navy assumed jurisdiction over Kingman Reef. In 1935, the reef was visited by William T. Miller, representing the U.S. Bureau of Air Commerce.\nIn 1935, Pan American Airways wanted to expand its routes to the Pacific and include Australia and New Zealand in its \"Clipper\" air routes, with a stopover in Pago Pago, American Samoa. However, an additional stopover point was sought. It had been decided that the Kingman Reef lagoon, located north of Samoa, would be suitable for overnight stops for planes en route from the U.S. to New Zealand. A supply ship, the \"North Wind,\" was stationed at Kingman Reef to provide fuel, lodging, and meals. On March 23, 1937, the S42B Pan American Clipper II, named \"Samoan Clipper\" and piloted by Captain Ed Musick, en route from Hawaii to American Samoa, became the first flight to land in Kingman Reef's lagoon.\nDuring the next several months, Pan Am successfully used the lagoon several times as a halfway station for its flying boats (Sikorsky S-42B) when they traveled between those two points. \nHowever, a Clipper flight on January 11, 1938, ended in tragedy. Shortly after the early-morning takeoff from Pago Pago, as it was bound for New Zealand, the plane exploded. The right outboard engine had developed an oil leak, and the aircraft burst into flames while dumping fuel; there were no survivors. As a result of the tragedy, Pan Am ended flights to New Zealand via Kingman Reef and Pago Pago. It established a new route in July 1940 that used Canton Island and New Caledonia as stopovers instead.\nOn February 14, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8682 to create naval defense areas in the central Pacific territories. The proclamation established the \"Kingman Reef Naval Defensive Sea Area\", encompassing the territorial waters between the extreme high-water marks and the three-mile marine boundaries surrounding the atoll. \"Kingman Naval Airspace Reservation\" was also established to restrict access to the airspace over the naval defense sea area. Only U.S. government ships and aircraft were permitted to enter the naval defense areas at Kingman Reef unless authorized by the Secretary of the Navy.\nIn 2012, Kingman Reef Atoll Development LLC, owned by descendants of the owners of the Palmyra Copra Co., Ltd., sued the U.S. government for its designation as a national wildlife refuge. The plaintiff sought $54.5 million in compensation for losing fishing rights, ecotourism, and other economic activity. However, in 2014, the federal court ruled that any such claim had expired by 1950 at the latest.\nIn 2016, the ARRL Awards Committee of the American Radio Relay League removed Kingman Reef from its DXCC list, with the reef now considered part of the Palmyra Island / Jarvis Island DXCC Entity.\nGeography.\nIt is the northernmost of the Northern Line Islands and lies northwest of the next closest island (Palmyra Atoll), and south of Honolulu.\nThe reef encloses a lagoon up to deep in its eastern part near the northeastern spit of land. The total area within the outer rim of the reef is . There are two small strips (spits) of dry land composed of coral rubble and giant clamshells on the eastern rim with areas of having a coastline of , a short spit on the northeast side of the lagoon and a spit twice as long but thinner on its south side.\nThe highest point on the reef is less than above sea level, which is wet or awash most of the time, making Kingman Reef a maritime hazard. It has no natural resources and supports no economic activity. In the 1930s, it was used as a stopover along with Palu Palu for flying boats crossing the Pacific for commercial airline routes.\nPolitical status.\nKingman Reef has the status of an unincorporated territory of the United States, administered from Washington, D.C., by the U.S. Department of Interior. The atoll is closed to the public. For statistical purposes, Kingman Reef is grouped as part of the United States Minor Outlying Islands. In January 2009, Kingman Reef was designated a marine national monument.\nThe pre-20th century names Danger Rock, Caldew Reef, Maria Shoal, and Crane Shoal refer to this atoll, which was entirely submerged at high tide. Thomas Hale Streets described its state in the 1870s, when it had:\n... hardly, as yet, assumed the distinctive features of an island. It is entirely under water at high tide, and but a few coral heads project here and there above the surface at low water. In the course of time, however, it will undoubtedly be added to the [northern Line Islands].\nKingman Reef is considered to be a county-equivalent by the U.S. Census Bureau. With only 0.01 square miles (0.03 square kilometers) of land, Kingman Reef is the smallest county or county-equivalent by land area in the United States.\nEcology.\nKingman Reef supports a vast variety of marine life. Giant clams are abundant in the shallows, and there are approximately 38 genera and 130 species of stony corals on the reef. This is more than three times the species diversity of corals in the main Hawaiian Islands. The ecosystem of the reef and its subsequent food chain is known for the distinct quality of being primarily predator-based. Sharks comprised 74% of the top predator biomass (329 g\u00b7m\u22122) at Kingman Reef and 57% at Palmyra Atoll (97 g\u00b7m\u22122). Low shark numbers have been observed at Tabuaeran and Kiritimati.\nThe percentage of the total fish biomass on the reef is made up of 85% apex predators, creating a high level of competition for food and nutrients among local organisms \u2013 particularly sharks, jacks, and other carnivores. The threatened green sea turtles that frequent nearby Palmyra Atoll travel to Kingman Reef to forage and bask on the coral rubble spits at low tide.\nHowever, above sea level, the reef is usually barren of macroorganisms. Mainly constructed of dead and dried coral skeletons, providing only calcite as a source of nutrients, the small and narrow strips of dry land are only habitable by a handful of species for short periods. Most flora that begin to grow above water\u2014primarily coconut palms\u2014die out quickly due to the fierce tides and lack of resources necessary to sustain plant life.\nNational Wildlife Refuge.\nOn September 1, 2000, the Navy relinquished its control over Kingman Reef to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. On January 18, 2001, Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt created the Kingman Reef National Wildlife Refuge during his final days in office with Secretary's Order 3223. It is composed of the emergent coral rubble spits and all waters out to . While there are only of land, of water area is included in the Refuge. Along with six other islands, the reef was administered as part of the Pacific Remote Islands National Wildlife Refuge Complex. In January 2009, that entity was upgraded to the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument by President George W. Bush. In 2025, this was renamed \"Pacific Islands Heritage Marine National Monument\".\nAmateur radio expeditions.\nSince the early 1940s, Kingman Reef has had minimal human contact. However, amateur radio operators from around the world have occasionally visited the reef to put it \"on the air\" in what is known as a DX-pedition. In 1974, a group of amateurs using the callsign KP6KR sailed to the reef and set up a temporary radio station and antenna. Other groups visited the island in subsequent years, including 1977, 1980, 1981, 1988, and 1993.\nMore recently, 15 amateur radio operators from the \"Palmyra DX\" Group visited the reef in October 2000. Using the FCC-issued special event callsign \"K5K\", the group made more than 80,000 individual contacts with amateurs worldwide for 10 days.\nBetween November 15, 1945, and March 28, 2016, Kingman Reef was considered a discrete entity to earn awards such as the DX Century Club. A video shot by amateur radio operators traveling to the K5P DX-pedition on Palmyra in January 2016 shows Kingman Reef mostly awash, raising questions as to whether a future activation of Kingman Reef would be possible.\nOn March 28, 2016, the ARRL DXCC desk deleted Kingman Reef from the list of collectible entities effective March 29, 2016, and deeming Kingman a part of the Palmyra and Jarvis entity due to proximity of the islands and common administration of the islands by the Fish and Wildlife Service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16665", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16665", "title": "History of Kingman Reef", "text": ""}
{"id": "16674", "revid": "42030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16674", "title": "Kiribati", "text": "Country in the central Pacific \nKiribati, officially the Republic of Kiribati, is an island country in the Micronesia sub-region of Oceania in the central Pacific Ocean. The state comprises 32 atolls and other islands and one remote raised coral island, Banaba. Its total land area is dispersed over of ocean. The spread of the country's islands, from Banaba in the west to Kiritimati in the east straddles the equator and the 180th meridian. The International Date Line goes around Kiribati and swings far to the east, almost reaching 150\u00b0W. This brings Kiribati's easternmost islands, the southern Line Islands south of Hawaii, into the same day as the Gilbert Islands and places them in the most advanced time zone on Earth: .\nThe permanent population of Kiribati is over 119,000 as of the 2020 census, and more than half live on Tarawa. There is also a significant number of I-Kiribati forming a diaspora, the largest of which still growing via emigration is probably in New Zealand; historically, diasporic communities were created through over-population resettlement in the Solomon Islands on Ghizo and Wagina, and through intermarriage in the United Kingdom and United States. Another country with growing diasporic communities born of recent labour immigration is Australia.\nThe Gilberts were politically autonomous of each other, more or less, and anywhere else, until annexed as a protectorate in 1892 by the British; they had no political connection then with the Phoenix or Line islands. This annexation was ended in 1979, when Kiribati gained its independence from the United Kingdom, becoming a sovereign state in 1979. The sovereign state included the Gilberts, the Phoenix and Line islands and Banaba. The capital, Tarawa, now the most populated area, consists of a number of islets, connected by a series of causeways. These comprise about half the area of Tarawa Atoll. Prior to its independence the country exported phosphate, but the mine, on Banaba, is virtually exhausted and no longer viable. The descendants of the Banabans mostly live in exile on Rabi in Fiji but are represented in the Kiribati Parliament. \nFisheries, subsistence agriculture and the export of copra drive much of the economy, particularly on outer islands away from Tarawa. Kiribati is one of the least developed countries in the world and its government is highly dependent on fishing licence fees from foreign fleets and international capital aid to finance infrastructure and other projects. Many families rely on remittances from circular labour migrants (seafarers, agricultural workers, urban service workers). They also work for the government or for private business and non-business organisations, or run trade stores and small private cooperative-like businesses. The government now pays benefits to the unemployed on Tarawa and to the elderly.\nKiribati is a member of the Pacific Community, Commonwealth of Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States, and became a full member of the United Nations in 1999. \nAs an atoll (and other low-lying island) nation, Kiribati is acutely vulnerable to sea-level rise and climate change. This is in addition to threats from tsunamis since time-immemorial. Addressing climate change has been a central part of its international policy, as a member of the Alliance of Small Island States. In Kiribati, climate change and extreme weather events are predicted to become more frequent. Additionally, existing socio-economic and environmental pressures are intensifying.\nEtymology and pronunciation.\nThe name is pronounced , as in the Gilbertese language represents an sound. Similarly, the name of its people, the I-Kiribati, is pronounced .\nThe name \"Kiribati\" was adopted upon the country's independence in 1979. It is the Gilbertese rendition of Gilberts, the plural of the English name of the nation's main archipelago, the Gilbert Islands. It was named (French for 'Gilbert Islands') in about 1820 by Russian admiral Adam von Krusenstern and French captain Louis Duperrey, after the British captain Thomas Gilbert. Gilbert and captain John Marshall sighted some of the islands in 1788, while charting the \"outer passage\" route from Port Jackson to Canton. Both von Krusenstern's and Duperrey's maps, published in 1824, were written in French.\nIn French, the Northern Islands were until then called and Byron's Island was not part of them. In English, the archipelago, particularly the southern part, was often referred to as the \"Kingsmills\" in the 19th century, although the name \"Gilbert Islands\" was used increasingly, including in the Western Pacific Order in Council of 1877 and in the Pacific Order of 1893.\nThe name \"Gilbert\", already in the name of the British protectorate since 1892, was incorporated into the name of the entire Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony (GEIC) from 1916 and was retained after the Ellice Islands became the separate country of Tuvalu in 1976. The spelling of Gilberts in the Gilbertese language as may be found in books in Gilbertese prepared by missionaries, but with the meaning of Gilbertese (demonym and language) (see e.g., Hawaiian Board of Missionaries, 1895). The first mention as a dictionary entry of the word \"Kiribati\" as the native name of the country was written down in 1952 by Ernest Sabatier in his comprehensive . \nThe indigenous name often suggested for the Gilbert Islands proper is (see e.g., Ernest Sabatier, 1952\u20131953, or Arthur Grimble, 1989). The rendition \"Kiribati\" for Gilberts was chosen as the official name of the new independent state by the chief minister, Sir Ieremia Tabai and his cabinet, on such grounds that it was modern, and to indicate the inclusion of islands (e.g., the Phoenix and Line Islands), beyond the Tungaru (i.e., Gilbert) chain.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe area now called Kiribati has been inhabited by Austronesian peoples speaking the same Oceanic language, from north to south, including the southernmost Nui, since sometime between 3000\u00a0BC and 1300\u00a0AD. The area was not completely isolated; later, voyagers from Samoa, Tonga, and Fiji introduced some Polynesian and Melanesian cultural aspects, respectively. Intermarriage and intense navigation between the islands tended to blur cultural differences and resulted in a significant degree of cultural homogenization. Local oral historians chiefly in the form of lore keepers suggest that the area was first inhabited by a group of seafaring people from Melanesia, who were described as being dark-skinned, frizzy-haired, and short in stature. These indigenous peoples were then visited by early Austronesian seafarers from the west, a place called Matang, orally described as being tall and fair-skinned. \nAround AD 1300, a mass departure occurred from Samoa leading to the addition of Polynesian ancestry into the mix of most Gilbertese people. These Samoans later brought strong features of Polynesian languages and culture, creating clans based on their own Samoan traditions and slowly intertwining with the indigenous clans and powers already dominant in Kiribati. \nAround the 15th century, starkly contrasting systems of governance arose between the northern islands, primarily under chiefly rule (\"uea\"), and the central and southern islands, primarily under the rule of their council of elders (\"unimwaane\"). Tabiteuea could be an exception as the sole island that is known as maintaining a traditional egalitarian society. \nThe name Tabiteuea stems from the root phrase \"Tabu-te-Uea\", meaning \"chiefs are forbidden\". Civil war soon became a factor, with acquisition of land being the main form of conquest. Clans and chiefs began fighting over resources, stimulated by hatred and reignited blood feuds, which had their origins months, years, or even decades before.\nThe turmoil lasted well into the European visitation and colonial era, which led to certain islands decimating their foes with the help of guns and cannon-equipped ships that Europeans provided to some I-Kiribati leaders. \nThe typical military arms of the I-Kiribati at this time were shark tooth-embedded wooden spears, knives, and swords, and garbs of armour fashioned from dense coconut fibre. They chiefly used these instead of the gunpowder and weapons of steel available at the time, because of the strong sentimental value of the equipment handed down through generations. Ranged weapons, such as bows, slings, and javelins, were seldom used; hand-to-hand combat was a prominent skill still practised today, though seldom mentioned because of various taboos associated with it, secrecy being the primary one. Abemama's High Chief Tembinok' was the last of the dozens of expansionist chiefs of Gilbert Islands of this period, despite Abemama historically conforming to the traditional southern islands' governance of their respective \"unimwaane\". He was immortalised in Robert Louis Stevenson's book \"In the South Seas\", which delved into the high chief's character and method of rule during Stevenson's stay in Abemama. The 90th anniversary of his arrival in the Gilbert Islands was chosen to celebrate the independence of Kiribati on 12 July 1979.\nColonial era.\nChance visits by European ships occurred in the 17th and 18th centuries, while those ships attempted circumnavigations of the world, or sought sailing routes from the south to north Pacific Ocean, a passing trade, whaling the On-The-Line grounds, and labour ships associated with the coercive labour recruitment practices, known as blackbirding. This recruitment of Kanaka workers in large numbers during the 19th century, had social, economic, political, religious and cultural consequences. More than 9,000 workers were sent abroad from 1845 to 1895, most of them not returning.\nThe passing trade gave rise to European, Indian, Chinese, Samoan, and other residents from the 1830s; they included beachcombers, castaways, traders, and missionaries. Dr Hiram Bingham II of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM) arrived on Abaiang in 1857. The Roman Catholic faith was introduced on Nonouti around 1880 by 2 Gilbert islanders, Betero and Tiroi, who had become Christians in Tahiti. Father Joseph Leray, Father Edward Bontemps and Brother Conrad Weber, Roman Catholic Missionaries of the Sacred Heart arrived on Nonouti in 1888. The Protestant missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) were also active in the southern Gilberts. On 15 October 1870, Rev. Samuel James Whitmee of the LMS arrived at Arorae, and later that month he visited Tamana, Onotoa and Beru. In August 1872, George Pratt of the LMS visited the islands.\nIn 1886, an Anglo-German agreement partitioned the \"unclaimed\" central Pacific, leaving Nauru in the German sphere of influence, while Banaba (known to Europeans as Ocean Island) and the future GEIC wound up in the British sphere of influence. In 1892, local Gilbertese authorities (an \"uea\", a chief from the Northern Gilbert Group, and \"atun te boti\" or head of clan) on each of the Gilbert Islands agreed to Captain Edward Davis commanding HMS \"Royalist\" of the Royal Navy declaring them part of a British protectorate, along with the nearby Ellice Islands. They were administered by a resident commissioner based first on Makin Islands (1893\u201395), then in Betio, Tarawa (1896\u20131908) and Banaba (1908\u20131942), protectorate who was under the Western Pacific High Commission (WPHC) based in Fiji. Banaba was added to the protectorate in 1900, because of the phosphate rock of its soil (discovered in 1900). This discovery and the mining provided a significant amount of revenue, in the form of taxes and duties, to the WPHC.\nThe conduct of William Telfer Campbell, the second resident commissioner of the Gilberts and Ellice Islands of 1896 to 1908, was criticised as to his legislative, judicial and administrative management (including allegations of forced labour exacted from islanders) and became the subject of the 1909 report by Arthur Mahaffy. In 1913, an anonymous correspondent to \"The New Age\" newspaper described the maladministration of W. Telfer Campbell and challenged the impartiality of Arthur Mahaffy, because he was a former colonial official in the Gilberts. The anonymous correspondent also criticised the operations of the Pacific Phosphate Company on Banaba.\nThe islands became the crown colony of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands in 1916. The Northern Line Islands, including Christmas Island (Kiritimati), were added to the colony in 1919, and the Phoenix Islands were added in 1937 with the purpose of a Phoenix Islands Settlement Scheme. On 12 July 1940, Pan Am Airways' \"American Clipper\" landed at Canton Island for the first time during a flight from Honolulu to Auckland. Sir Arthur Grimble was a cadet administrative officer based at Tarawa (1913\u20131919) and became Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony in 1926.\nIn 1902, the Pacific Cable Board laid the first trans-Pacific telegraph cable from Bamfield, British Columbia, to Fanning Island (Tabuaeran) in the Line Islands, and from Fiji to Fanning Island, thus completing the All Red Line, a series of telegraph lines circumnavigating the globe completely within the British Empire. The location of Fanning Island, one of the closest formations to Hawaii, led to its annexation by the British Empire in 1888. Nearby candidates including Palmyra Island were not favoured due to the lack of adequate landing sites.\nThe United States eventually incorporated the Northern Line Islands into its territories, and did the same with the Phoenix Islands, which lie between Gilberts and the Line Islands, including Howland, Jarvis, and Baker islands, thus causing a territorial dispute. That was eventually resolved and they finally became part of Kiribati under the Treaty of Tarawa.\nAfter the attack on Pearl Harbor, during World War II, Butaritari and Tarawa, and others of the Northern Gilbert group, were occupied by Japan from 1941 to 1943. Betio became an airfield and supply base. The expulsion of the Japanese forces in late 1943 involved one of the bloodiest battles in US Marine Corps history. Marines landed in November 1943 and the Battle of Tarawa ensued. As the headquarters of the colony, Banaba was bombed, evacuated and occupied by Japan in 1942 and not freed until 1945, after the massacre of all but one of the Gilbertese on the island by the Japanese forces. Funafuti then hosted the provisional headquarters of the colony from 1942 to 1946, when Tarawa returned to host the headquarters.\nAt the end of 1945, most of the remaining inhabitants of Banaba, repatriated from Kosrae, Nauru and Tarawa, were relocated to Rabi Island, an island of Fiji that the British government had acquired in 1942 for this purpose.\nOn 1 January 1953, the British Western Pacific High Commissioner of the colony was transferred from Fiji to the new capital of Honiara, to the British Solomon Islands, with the Gilberts' Resident Commissioner still located in Tarawa.\nFurther military operations in the colony occurred in the late 1950s and early 1960s when Christmas Island was used by the United States and United Kingdom for nuclear weapons testing including hydrogen bombs.\nInstitutions of internal self-rule were established on Tarawa from about 1967. The Ellice Islands requested their separation from the rest of the colony in 1974 and were granted their own internal self-rule institutions. The separation entered into force on 1 January 1976. In 1978, the Ellice Islands became the independent state of Tuvalu.\nIndependence.\nThe Gilbert Islands gained independence as the Republic of Kiribati on 12 July 1979. Then, in September, the United States relinquished all claims to the sparsely inhabited Phoenix and Line Islands, in a 1979 treaty of friendship with Kiribati (ratified in 1983). Although the indigenous Gilbertese name for the Gilbert Islands proper is \"Tungaru\", the new state chose the name \"Kiribati\", the Gilbertese spelling of \"Gilberts\", because it was more modern and as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of Banaba, the Line Islands, and the Phoenix Islands. The last two archipelagoes were never initially occupied by Gilbertese until the British authorities, and later the republic's government, resettled Gilbertese there under resettlement schemes. In 1982, the first elections since independence were held. A no-confidence vote provoked another election in 1983. In the post-independence period, overcrowding has been an issue, at least in British and aid organisations' eyes. In 1988, an announcement was made that 4,700 residents of the main island group would be resettled onto less populated islands. In September 1994, Teburoro Tito from the opposition was elected president.\nIn 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the International Date Line far to the east to encompass the Line Islands group, so that the country would no longer be divided by the date line. The move, which fulfilled one of President Tito's campaign promises, was intended to allow businesses across the expansive territory to keep the same business week. This also enabled Kiribati to become the first country to see the dawn of the third millennium, an event of significance for tourism. Tito was re-elected in 1998. In 1999, Kiribati became a full member of the United Nations, 20 years after independence. In 2002, Kiribati passed a controversial law that enabled the government to shut down newspaper publishers. The legislation followed the launching of Kiribati's first successful non-government-run newspaper. President Tito was re-elected in 2003 but was removed from office in March 2003 by a no-confidence vote and replaced by a Council of State. Anote Tong of the opposition party Boutokaan Te Koaua was elected to succeed Tito in July 2003. He was re-elected in 2007 and in 2011.\nIn June 2008, Kiribati officials asked Australia and New Zealand to accept Kiribati citizens as permanent refugees. Kiribati is expected to be the first country to lose all its land territory to climate change. In June 2008, Kiribati President Anote Tong said that the country had reached \"the point of no return.\" He added, \"To plan for the day when you no longer have a country is indeed painful but I think we have to do that.\"\nIn January 2012, Anote Tong was re-elected for a third and last successive term. In early 2012, the government of Kiribati acquired the 2,200-hectare Natoavatu Estate on the second largest island of Fiji, Vanua Levu. At the time it was widely reported that the government planned to evacuate the entire population of Kiribati to Fiji. In April 2013, President Tong began urging citizens to evacuate the islands and migrate elsewhere. In May 2014, the Office of the President confirmed the purchase of some 5,460 acres of land on Vanua Levu at a cost of 9.3\u00a0million Australian dollars.\nIn March 2016, Taneti Maamau was elected and took office as the fifth President of Kiribati. In June 2020, President Maamau won re-election for a second four-year term. President Maamau was considered pro-China and he supported closer ties with Beijing. On 16 November 2021, the Kiribati government announced it would open the world's largest marine protected area to commercial fishing. The 2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis started with the suspension of all five major justices of the judiciary of Kiribati.\nIn 2020, Kiribati's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, consistent with most of the COVID-19 responses of Oceania island nations, was to impose strict limits on tourism and commercial travel. Kiribati reported that it remained essentially COVID-free (two cases) until January 2022 when the first commercial international flight in two years included 36 passengers who tested positive. In 2024, 5,085 Coronavirus Cases were reported which caused 24 deaths, while 2,703 were reported to have recovered.\nOn 29 January 2023, Kiribati confirmed its intention to rejoin the Pacific Islands Forum, ending a bitter two-year leadership split.\nPolitics.\nThe Constitution of Kiribati, promulgated 12 July 1979, provides for free and open elections in a parliamentary democratic republic.\nThe executive branch consists of a president (\"te Beretitenti\"), a vice-president and a cabinet. The president, who is also chief of the cabinet, is directly elected by the citizens, after the legislature nominates three or four persons from among its members to be candidates in the ensuing presidential election. The president is limited to serving three four-year terms, and remains a member of the assembly. The cabinet is composed of the president, vice-president, and 13 ministers (appointed by the president) who are also members of parliament.\nThe legislative branch is the unicameral \"Maneaba ni Maungatabu\" (House of Assembly). Its members are elected, including by constitutional mandate, a nominated representative of the Banaban people in Rabi Island, Fiji (Banaba, former Ocean Island), in addition to, until 2016, the attorney general, who served as an \"ex officio\" member from 1979 to 2016. Legislators serve for a four-year term.\nThe constitutional provisions governing administration of justice are similar to those in other former British colonies in that the judiciary is free from governmental interference. The judicial branch is made up of the High Court (in Betio) and the Court of Appeal. The president appoints the presiding judges.\nLocal government is through island councils with elected members. Local affairs are handled in a manner similar to town meetings in colonial America. Island councils make their own estimates of revenue and expenditure and generally are free from central government controls. There are a total of 21 inhabited islands in Kiribati. Each inhabited island has its own council. Kiribati is currently divided into 5 districts: Northern Kiribati, Central Kiribati, Southern Kiribati, South Tarawa, and Line &amp; Phoenix.\nKiribati has formal political parties but their organisation is quite informal. Ad\u00a0hoc opposition groups tend to coalesce around specific issues. There is universal suffrage at age 18. Today the main political parties are the Boutokaan Kiribati Moa Party, former \"Boutokaan te Koaua\", and Tobwaan Kiribati Party.\nForeign relations.\nKiribati maintains close relations with its Pacific neighbours, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and Fiji. The first three of these provide the bulk of the country's foreign aid. Taiwan and Japan also have specified-period licences to fish in Kiribati's waters. There are three resident diplomatic missions headquartered in Tarawa: the Embassies of the Republic of China (Taiwan) until 2019, replaced by People's Republic of China in 2020; and the High Commissions of Australia and New Zealand. Since 2022, there have been talks of opening a US Embassy. The current U.S. Embassy responsible for Kiribati is located in Suva, Fiji.\nIn November 1999, Kiribati agreed to allow Japan's National Space Development Agency to lease land on Kiritimati (formerly Christmas Island) for 20 years, on which to build a spaceport. The agreement stipulated that Japan was to pay US$840,000 per year and would also pay for any damage to roads and the environment. A Japanese-built downrange tracking station operates on Kiritimati and an abandoned airfield on the island was designated as the landing strip for a proposed reusable unmanned space shuttle called HOPE-X. HOPE-X, however, was eventually cancelled by Japan in 2003.\nAs one of the world's most vulnerable nations to the effects of global warming, Kiribati has been an active participant in international diplomatic efforts relating to climate change, most importantly the UNFCCC conferences of the parties (COP). Kiribati is a member of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), an intergovernmental organisation of low-lying coastal and small island countries.\nEstablished in 1990, the main purpose of the alliance is to consolidate the voices of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) to address global warming. AOSIS has been very active from its inception, putting forward the first draft text in the Kyoto Protocol negotiations as early as 1994.\nIn 2009, President Tong attended the Climate Vulnerable Forum (V11) in the Maldives, with 10 other countries that are vulnerable to climate change, and signed the Bandos Island declaration on 10 November 2009, pledging to show moral leadership and commence greening their economies by voluntarily committing to achieving carbon neutrality.\nIn November 2010, Kiribati hosted the Tarawa Climate Change Conference (TCCC) to support the president of Kiribati's initiative to hold a consultative forum between vulnerable states and their partners. The conference strove to create an enabling environment for multi-party negotiations under the auspices of the UNFCCC. The conference was a successor event to the Climate Vulnerable Forum. The ultimate objective of TCCC was to reduce the number and intensity of fault lines between parties to the COP process, explore elements of agreement between the parties and thereby to support Kiribati's and other parties' contribution to COP16 held in Canc\u00fan, Mexico, from 29 November to 10 December 2010.\nIn 2013, President Tong spoke of climate-change induced sea level rise as \"inevitable\". \"For our people to survive, then they will have to migrate. Either we can wait for the time when we have to move people en masse or we can prepare them\u2014beginning from now ...\" In New York in 2014, per \"The New Yorker\", President Tong told \"The New York Times\" that \"according to the projections, within this century, the water will be higher than the highest point in our lands\". In 2014, President Tong finalised the purchase of a stretch of land on Vanua Levu, one of the larger Fiji islands, 2,000\u00a0km away. A move described by Tong as an \"absolute necessity\" should the country's territory be completely submerged under water.\nIn 2013, attention was drawn to a claim of a Kiribati man of being a \"climate change refugee\" under the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (1951). However, this claim was determined by the New Zealand High Court to be untenable. The New Zealand Court of Appeal also rejected the claim in a 2014 decision.\nOn further appeal, the New Zealand Supreme Court confirmed the earlier adverse rulings against the application for refugee status, but rejected the proposition \"that environmental degradation resulting from climate change or other natural disasters could never create a pathway into the Refugee Convention or protected person jurisdiction\". In 2017, Kiribati signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nOn 20 September 2019, the government of Kiribati restored its diplomatic relationship with the People's Republic of China and simultaneously stopped its diplomatic relationship with Taiwan. China offered a 737 aircraft and ferries to Kiribati for the decision, according to Taiwan's foreign minister, Joseph Wu.\nPeace Corps.\nFrom 1973 until 2008, a total of almost 500 US Peace Corps volunteers were based on the Islands, as many as 45 in a given year. Activities included assisting in the planning, design and construction of wells, libraries, and other infrastructure, and agricultural, environmental, and community health education. In 2006, volunteer placement was significantly scaled down due to the reduction of consistent air transportation to the outer islands; it was later ended because the associated ability to provide medical care to volunteers could not be assured. In July 2022, US Vice President Harris announced plans to build a new embassy in Kiribati and Tonga and reestablish the Peace Corps presence in the region.\nLaw enforcement and military.\nLaw enforcement in Kiribati is carried out by the Kiribati Police Service, which is responsible for all law enforcement and paramilitary duties for the island nation. There are police posts located on all of the islands. The police have one patrol boat, the RKS \"Teanoai II\".\nThe main prison in Kiribati is located in Betio, named the Walter Betio Prison. There is also a prison in London on Kiritimati.\nMale homosexuality is illegal in Kiribati, with a penalty up to 14 years in prison, according to a historical British law. However, this law is not enforced. Kiribati has not yet followed the lead of the United Kingdom, following its Wolfenden report, to decriminalise acts of male homosexuality, beginning with provisions in the UK's Sexual Offences Act 1957. Female homosexuality is legal, but lesbians may face violence and discrimination. However, employment discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is prohibited.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThere are 21 inhabited islands in Kiribati. Kiribati can be geographically divided into three archipelagoes or groups of islands, which have no administrative functions. They are:\nThe original districts before independence were:\nFour of the former districts (including Tarawa) lie in the Gilbert Islands, where most of the country's population lives. Five of the Line Islands are uninhabited (Malden Island, Starbuck Island, Millennium Island, Vostok Island and Flint Island). The Phoenix Islands are uninhabited except for Kanton, and have no representation. Banaba itself is sparsely inhabited now. There is also a non-elected representative of the Banabans on Rabi Island in Fiji.\nEach of the 21 inhabited islands has its own local council that takes care of daily affairs. There is one council for each inhabited island, with two exceptions: Tarawa Atoll has three councils: Betio Town Council, Teinainano Urban Council (TUC) (for the rest of South Tarawa) and Eutan Tarawa Council (ETC) (for North Tarawa); and Tabiteuea has two councils.\nGeography.\nKiribati consists of 32 atolls and one solitary island (Banaba), extending into the eastern and western hemispheres, as well as the northern and southern hemispheres. Its extensive exclusive economic zone (EEZ) covers three, non-contiguous, traditional geographic subregions: Banaba (Melanesian-Micronesian area), the Gilbert Islands (Micronesia) and the Line and Phoenix Islands (Polynesia). The groups of islands are:\nBanaba (or Ocean Island) is a raised-coral island. It was once a rich source of phosphates, but was exhausted in mining before independence. The rest of the land in Kiribati consists of the sand and reef rock islets of atolls or coral islands, which rise only one or two meters above sea level.\nThe soil is thin and calcareous. It has a low water-holding capacity and low organic matter and nutrient content\u2014except for calcium, sodium, and magnesium. Banaba is one of the least suitable places for agriculture in the world.\nKiritimati (previously Christmas Island) in the Line Islands has the largest land area of any atoll in the world. Based on a 1995 realignment of the International Date Line, the Line Islands were the first area to enter into a new year, including the year 2000. For that reason, Caroline Island was renamed Millennium Island in 1997.\nEnvironmental issues.\nAccording to the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (previously South Pacific Regional Environment Programme), two small uninhabited Kiribati islets, Tebua Tarawa and Abanuea, disappeared underwater in 1999. The sea level at Christmas Island, in the 50 years between 1972 and 2022, has risen . The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that sea levels will rise by approximately by 2100 due to global warming and a further rise would be inevitable. It is thus likely that within a century the nation's arable land will become subject to increased soil salination and will be largely submerged.\nThe exposure of Kiribati to changes in sea levels is exacerbated by the Pacific decadal oscillation, which is a climate switch phenomenon that results in changes from periods of La Ni\u00f1a to periods of El Ni\u00f1o. This has an effect on sea levels. For example, in 2000, there was a switch from periods of downward pressure of El Ni\u00f1o on sea levels to an upward pressure of La Ni\u00f1a on sea levels, which upward pressure causes more frequent and higher high tide levels. The Perigean spring tide (often called a king tide) can result in seawater flooding low-lying areas of the islands of Kiribati.\nThe atolls and reef islands can respond to changes in sea-level. Paul Kench at the University of Auckland in New Zealand and Arthur Webb at the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission in Fiji released a study in 2010 on the dynamic response of atolls and reef islands in the central Pacific. Kiribati was mentioned in the study, and Webb and Kench found that the three major urbanised islands in Kiribati\u2014Betio, Bairiki and Nanikai\u2014increased by 30% (36 hectares), 16.3% (5.8 hectares) and 12.5% (0.8 hectares), respectively.\nThe study by Paul Kench and Arthur Webb recognises that the islands are extremely vulnerable to sea level rise, and concluded that: \"This study did not measure vertical growth of the island surface nor does it suggest there is any change in the height of the islands. Since land height has not changed the vulnerability of the greater part of the land area of each island to submergence due to sea level rise is also unchanged and these low-lying atolls remain immediately and extremely vulnerable to inundation or sea water flooding.\"\nThe Climate Change in the Pacific Report of 2011 describes Kiribati as having a low risk of cyclones. In March 2015 Kiribati experienced flooding and destruction of seawalls and coastal infrastructure as the result of Cyclone Pam, a Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu. Kiribati remains exposed to the risk that cyclones can strip the low-lying islands of their vegetation and soil.\nGradual sea-level rise also allows for coral polyp activity to raise the atolls with the sea level. However, if the increase in sea level occurs at a rate faster than coral growth, or if polyp activity is damaged by ocean acidification, then the resilience of the atolls and reef islands is less certain.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that the climate crisis has worsened human rights conditions moderately (4.8 out of 6) in Kiribati. Human rights experts reported that the climate crisis has compromised access to food and clean water, as well as women's rights, housing security and cultural integrity.\nThe Kiribati Adaptation Program (KAP), started in 2003, is a US$5.5\u00a0million initiative that was originally enacted by the national government of Kiribati with the support of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the World Bank, the United Nations Development Program, and the Japanese government. Australia later joined the coalition, donating US$1.5\u00a0million to the effort. The program aims to take place over six years, supporting measures that reduce Kiribati's vulnerability to the effects of climate change and sea level rise by raising awareness of climate change, assessing and protecting available water resources, and managing inundation.\nAt the start of the Adaptation Program, representatives from each of the inhabited atolls identified key climatic changes that had taken place over the past 20\u201340 years and proposed coping mechanisms to deal with these changes under four categories of urgency of need. The program is now focusing on the country's most vulnerable sectors in the most highly populated areas.\nInitiatives include improving water supply management in and around Tarawa; coastal management protection measures such as mangrove re-plantation and protection of public infrastructure; strengthening laws to reduce coastal erosion; and population settlement planning to reduce personal risks.\nThe government has taken specific action to ensure food security, as sea level rise, drought, and overfishing have created food and water shortages. This has involved diversifying food sources and ensuring existing resources are managed sustainably.\nThe issue of plastic pollution has also been a key challenge for Kiribati as it hurts both its marine biodiversity and its economy that relies primarily on fisheries; it also impairs prospects for a tourism industry. As a result, the government of Kiribati, more specifically the Environment and Conservation Division (ECD) which forms part of the Kiribati Government's Ministry of Environment, Lands and Agricultural Development, has made efforts to tackle this issue nationally through environment acts and state policy papers. To a further extent, it has also recognized the global nature of plastic pollution, and consequently, has promoted international cooperation and multilateral solutions. This is notably observable during the current negotiations of the Global Plastic Pollution Treaty planned to be finally drafted by the end of 2024.\nClimate.\nKiribati has a tropical rainforest climate (Af). From April to October, there are predominant northeastern winds and stable temperatures close to . From November to April, western gales bring rain.\nThe Kiribati wet season (\"te Auu-Meang\"), also known as the tropical cyclone (TC) (\"te Angibuaka\") season, starts from November to April every year. Kiribati therefore typically experiences more extreme weather events associated with tropical disturbances or tropical cyclones during \"te Auu-Meang\". Tropical cyclones rarely develop or pass along the equator where Kiribati is located, but Kiribati has historically been impacted by distant tropical cyclones. The impacts were observed while the systems were still in their development stages (Tropical Low/disturbance) or even before they reached Tropical cyclone category.\nThe fair season starts when \"Ten Rimwimata\" (Antares) appears in the sky after sunset, from May to November, when more gentle winds and currents and less rain. Then towards December, when \"Nei Auti\" (Pleiades) replaces Antares, the season of sudden westerly winds and more heavy rain discourages any far travel from island to island.\nKiribati does not experience cyclones but effects may occasionally be experienced during cyclone seasons affecting nearby Pacific Island countries such as Fiji.\nPrecipitation varies significantly between islands. For example, the annual average is 3,000\u00a0mm (120\u00a0in) in the north and 500\u00a0mm (20\u00a0in) in the south of the Gilbert Islands. Most of these islands are in the dry belt of the equatorial oceanic climatic zone and experience prolonged droughts.\nEcology.\nKiribati contains three ecosystems: Central Polynesian tropical moist forests, Eastern Micronesia tropical moist forests, and Western Polynesian tropical moist forests.\nBecause of the relatively young geological age of the islands and atolls and the high level of soil salination, the flora of Kiribati is somewhat unhealthy. The Gilbert Islands contain about 83 indigenous and 306 introduced plants, whereas the corresponding numbers for Line and Phoenix Islands are 67 and 283. None of these species are endemic, and about half of the indigenous ones have a limited distribution and have become endangered or nearly extinct due to human activities such as phosphate mining.\nCoconut, pandanus palms and breadfruit trees are the most common \"wild\" plants, whereas the five most cultivated crops but the traditional \"Babai\", \"Cyrtosperma merkusii\", are imported Chinese cabbage, pumpkin, tomato, watermelon and cucumber. Over eighty percent of the population participates in either farming or fishing.\nSeaweed farming is an important part of the economy , with two major species \"Eucheuma alvarezii\" and \"Eucheuma spinosium\" introduced to the local lagoons from the Philippines in 1977. It competes with a collection of the black-lipped pearl oyster (\"Pinctada margaritifera\") and shellfish, which are dominated by the strombid gastropod (\"Strombus luhuanus\") and Anadara cockles (\"Anadara uropigimelana\"), whereas the stocks of the giant clam (\"Tridacna gigas\") have been largely exhausted.\nKiribati has a few land mammals, none being indigenous or endemic. They include the Polynesian rat (\"Rattus exulans\"), dogs, cats and pigs. Among the 75 bird species, the Bokikokiko (\"Acrocephalus aequinoctialis\") is endemic to Kiritimati.\nThere are 600\u2013800 species of inshore and pelagic finfish, some 200 species of corals and about 1000 species of shellfish. Fishing mostly targets the family Scombridae, particularly the skipjack tuna and yellowfin tuna as well as flying fish (\"Cypselurus\" spp.).\nDogs were already accompanying the first inhabitants but were re-introduced by European settlers: they have continued to grow in numbers and are roaming in traditional packs, particularly around South Tarawa.\nEconomy.\nKiribati has few natural resources. Commercially viable phosphate deposits on Banaba were exhausted at the time of independence. Copra and fish now represent the bulk of production and exports. Kiribati has the lowest GDP of any sovereign state in Oceania, and is considered one of the least developed countries in the world.\nIn one form or another, Kiribati gets a large portion of its income from abroad. Examples include fishing licences, development assistance, workers' remittances, especially the seafarers issued from Marine Training Centre, and a few tourists. Given Kiribati's limited domestic production ability, it must import nearly all of its essential foodstuffs and manufactured items; it depends on these external sources of income for financing.\nThe economy of Kiribati benefits from international development assistance programs. The multilateral donors providing development assistance in 2009 were the European Union (A$9\u00a0million), the United Nations Development Programme (A$3.7\u00a0million), UNICEF, and the World Health Organization (A$100,000). The bilateral donors providing development assistance in 2009 were Australia (A$11\u00a0million), Japan (A$2\u00a0million), New Zealand (A$6.6\u00a0million), Taiwan (A$10.6\u00a0million), and other donors providing A$16.2\u00a0million, including technical assistance grants from the Asian Development Bank.\nThe major donors in 2010/2011 were Australia (A$15\u00a0million), Taiwan (A$11\u00a0million); New Zealand (A$6\u00a0million), the World Bank (A$4\u00a0million) and the Asian Development Bank.\nIn 1956, Gilbert and Ellice Islands established a sovereign wealth fund to act as a store of wealth for the country's earnings from phosphate mining.\nIn 2008, the Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund was valued at US$400\u00a0million. The RERF assets declined from A$637\u00a0million (420% of GDP) in 2007 to A$570.5\u00a0million (350% of GDP) in 2009 as the result of the 2008 financial crisis and exposure to failed Icelandic banks. In addition, draw-downs were made by the government of Kiribati to finance budgetary shortfalls during this period.\nIn May 2011, the IMF country report assessment of the economy of Kiribati is that \"After two years of contraction, the economy recovered in the second half of 2010 and inflation pressure dissipated. It is estimated to have grown by 1.75% for the year. Despite a weather-related drop in copra production, private sector activity appears to have picked up, especially in retail. Tourist arrivals rebounded by 20% compared to 2009, although from a very low base.\nDespite the rise in world food and fuel prices, inflation has bounced from 2008 crisis-highs into negative territory, reflecting the strong appreciation of the Australian dollar, which is used as the domestic currency, and a decline in the world price of rice. Credit growth in the overall economy declined in 2009 as economic activity stalled. But it started to pick up in the second half of 2010 as the recovery gained traction\".\nA major Australian bank, ANZ, maintains a presence on Kiribati with a number of branches and ATM units.\nOrnamental fish.\nKiribati is a major exporter of hand-caught ornamental fish. There are eight licensed operators based on Kiritimati (Christmas Island). At the end of 2005, the number of pet fish exported was 110,000. All operators have a land-based facility but fish are kept in containers on the reef until the day before the shipment. This is to reduce the running cost and the mortality of pet fish to be exported. The flame angelfish (\"Centropyge loriculus\") is the major species exported.\nTransport.\nKiribati has had two domestic airlines: Air Kiribati and Coral Sun Airways. Both airlines are based in Tarawa's Bonriki International Airport and serve destinations across the Gilbert Islands and Line Islands only: Banaba and the Phoenix Islands are not served by the domestic carriers. The Coral Sun Airways airline flies from Bonriki international airport on Tarawa to the islands of Abaiang, Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Beru, Butaritari, Kuria, Makin, Marakei, Onotoa, Nonouti, Nikunau, Tabiteuea &amp; Tamana.\nCassidy International Airport on Kiritimati has an international service provided by Fiji Airways: Nadi to Cassidy Airport and then to Honolulu.\nCommunications and media.\nWith the combination of the islands' remote location in the Central Pacific at approximately the International Date Line, and islands spanning hundreds of miles north and south of the equator, communications within the country have always been challenging. Primarily, communication is conducted by radio and print media. TV Kiribati Ltd was owned by the government and operated between 2004 and mid-2012, but could not reach all of the islands. Radio Kiribati, based on Tarawa and operated by the government's Broadcasting and Publications Authority (BPA) on 1440\u00a0kHz AM, is the only form of mass media that reaches all the major islands. Transmission hours are limited and local content in Gilbertese is supplemented by English summaries and BBC News. The BPA and a private broadcaster also operate FM stations accessible on Tarawa.\nInter-island communications for many years relied on a centralized shortwave radio network operated by Telecom Services Kiribati, Ltd (TSKL) based in each Island's Council Headquarters. Numerous issues including low availability, maintenance, privacy, and only one per island led TSKL to adopt satellite-based telephones. However, the system is more expensive and still only located at Council Headquarters.\nPrint weeklies in Gilbertese include the \"Te Uekara\" published by the government, \"Te Mauri\" published by the Kiribati Protestant Church, and the \"Kiribati Independent\", published from Auckland as well as the \"Kiribati Newstar\", published in English.\nIn December 2019, SpaceX launched the Kacific1 broadband satellite that provides 100\u00a0Mbit/s mobile and broadband service to 25 countries throughout to the Asia-Pacific region including Kiribati. Three of the satellite's 56 spot beams provide overlapping coverage of the Gilbert Islands and Tuvalu; however, the more eastern regions of the country, the Phoenix and Line Islands, are outside of the satellite's coverage.\nThe Southern Cross NEXT cable system, which entered service in July 2022, connects the US to Australia and provides service to eastern part of Kiribati (Kiritimati island) through the Kiritimati Branch with one fiber pair. The network, which is an upgrade to the existing Southern Cross Cable, also connects to Samoa, Fiji, and New Zealand.\nIn June 2021, the World Bank-backed procurement for the East Micronesian Cable system was cancelled due to security concerns. The undersea fiberoptic system, which would have originated in Guam, was \"designed to improve the communications in the island nations of Nauru, Kiribati and Federated States of Micronesia (FSM).\" In January 2023, ministers from the three Pacific island nations signed a joint communiqu\u00e9 for moving forward with the stalled project. Funded by the U.S., Japan and Australia the project is valued at $70 million. In early 2023, it was reported that Kiribati became the first Pacific island country to receive Starlink services.\nDemographics.\nThe November 2020 census showed a population of 119,940. About 90% lived in the Gilbert Islands, with 52.9% of them on South Tarawa, including Betio, the biggest township.\nUntil recently, people lived mostly in villages with populations between 50 and 3,000 on the outer islands. Most houses are made of materials obtained from coconut and pandanus trees. Frequent droughts and infertile soil hinder reliable large-scale agriculture, so the islanders have largely turned to the sea for livelihood and subsistence. Most are outrigger sailors and fishermen. Copra plantations serve as a second source of employment. In recent years, large numbers of citizens have moved to the more urban island capital of Tarawa, where Betio is the largest town and South Tarawa reunites larger towns like Bikenibeu or Teaoraereke. South Tarawa's 2024 population is now estimated at 69,710. In 1978, the population of South Tarawa was 17,921.\nEthnicity.\nThe native people of Kiribati are called I-Kiribati. Ethnically, the I-Kiribati are Oceanians, a sub-ethnicity of Austronesians. Recent archaeological evidence indicates that Austronesians originally settled the islands thousands of years ago. Around the 14th century, Fijians, Samoans, and Tongans invaded the islands, thus diversifying the ethnic range and introducing Polynesian linguistic traits. Intermarriage among all ancestral groups, however, has led to a population reasonably homogeneous in appearance and traditions.\nLanguages.\nThe people of Kiribati speak Gilbertese, an Oceanic language. English is the other official language, but is not used very often outside the island capital of Tarawa. It is more likely that some English words are mixed in their use with Gilbertese. Older generations of I-Kiribati tend to use more complicated versions of the language. Several words in Gilbertese have been adopted from European settlers, for instance, \"kamea\" is one of the Gilbertese words for dog, \"kiri\" being the Oceanic one, which has its origins in the I-Kiribati people hearing the European settlers saying \"come here\" to their dogs, and adopting that as \"kamea\".\nMany other loanwords have been adopted (like \"buun\", spoon, \"moko\", smoke, \"beeki\", pig, \"batoro\", bottle) but some typical Gilbertese words are quite common, even for Western objects (like \"wanikiba\", plane \u2013 the flying canoe, \"rebwerebwe\", motorbike \u2013 for the motor noise, \"kauniwae\", shoes \u2013 the cow for the feet).\nReligion.\nChristianity is the major religion in Kiribati, having been lately introduced by missionaries, because of its remoteness and the absence of any significant European presence until the latter half of the 19th century. The population is predominantly Roman Catholic (58.9%), with two main Protestant denominations (Kiribati Protestant Church 8.4% and Kiribati Uniting Church 21.2%) accounting for 29.6%. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (5.6%), Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith (2.1%), Seventh-day Adventist Church (2.1%), Pentecostals, Jehovah's Witnesses, and other small faiths together account for less than 2% (2020 census).\nHealth.\nThe Gilbert Islands where 90% of the Kiribati population live, boast some of the highest population densities in the Pacific, rivalling cities like Hong Kong or Singapore without any skyscrapers or other forms of conventional high-density housing. This overcrowding produces a great amount of pollution, worsening the quality and length of life. Due to insufficient sanitation and water filtration systems, worsened by the fragility of the water lens of the atolls and by climate change, only about 66% have access to clean water. Waterborne diseases grow at record levels throughout the islands. Poor sanitation has led to an increase in cases of conjunctivitis, diarrhoea, dysentery, and fungal infections. Kiribati is the country with the third highest prevalence of smoking in the world, with 54\u201357% of the population reported as smokers. Due to this and other \"lifestyle diseases\", such as type 2 diabetes, there has been a drastic spike in amputations on the islands, doubling in a few years.\nAs a consequence, the population of Kiribati has a quite low life expectancy at birth of 68.46 years. Even if this data is of only 66.9 years, provided elsewhere, Kiribati ranks last in life expectancy out of the 20 nations of Oceania. This life expectancy is 64.3 for males, and 69.5 for females and there is an infant mortality rate of 41 deaths per 1,000 live births. Tuberculosis has a small presence in the country, with 365 cases per 100,000 a year. Government expenditure on health was at US$268 per capita (PPP) in 2006. In 1990\u20132007, there were 23 physicians per 100,000 persons. Since the arrival of Cuban doctors in 2006, the infant mortality rate has decreased significantly.\nMost health problems are related to consumption of semi-raw seafood, limited food storage facilities, and bacterial contamination of fresh water supplies. In the early 2000s, between 1 and 7% of the population, depending on the island, were annually treated for food poisoning in a hospital. Modernization and cross-cultural exchange of the late 20th century brought new issues of unhealthy diet and lifestyle, heavy smoking, especially among the young, and external infections, including HIV/AIDS.\nFresh water remains a concern of Kiribati \u2013 during the dry season (Aumaiaki), water has been drilled for instead of using rain water tanks. In recent years, there has been a longer than usual Aumaikai season resulting in additional water having to be drilled from beneath the water table. This has introduced water-borne illnesses, compounding the health problems within Kiribati.\nThe Human Rights Measurement Initiative finds that Kiribati is fulfilling 77.2% of what it should be fulfilling for the right to health based on its level of income. When looking at the right to health with respect to children, Kiribati achieves 93.8% of what is expected based on its current income. In regards to the right to health amongst the adult population, the country achieves 92.2% of what is expected based on the nation's level of income. Kiribati falls into the \"very bad\" category when evaluating the right to reproductive health because the government is fulfilling only 45.5% of what the country is expected to achieve based on the resources (income) it has available.\nEducation.\nPrimary education is free and compulsory for the first nine years, beginning at age six. Mission schools are slowly being absorbed into the government primary school system. Higher education is expanding; students may seek technical, teacher or marine training, or study in other countries. Most choosing to do the latter have gone to Fiji to attend the University of the South Pacific, and those wishing to complete medical training have been sent to Australia, New Zealand or Cuba.\nThe education system is organised as follows:\nKiribati Ministry of Education is the education ministry. The government high schools are King George V and Elaine Bernacchi School, \"Tabiteuea North Senior Secondary School\", and \"Melaengi Tabai Secondary School\". Thirteen high schools are operated by Christian churches.\nThe University of the South Pacific has a campus in Teaoraereke for distant/flexible learning, but also to provide preparatory studies towards obtaining certificates, diplomas and degrees at other campus sites.\nThe other prominent schools in Kiribati are:\nCulture.\nSongs (\"te anene\") and dances (\"te mwaie\") are held in high regard.\nMusic.\nKiribati folk music is generally based on chanting or other forms of vocalising, accompanied by body percussion. Public performances in modern Kiribati are generally performed by a seated chorus, accompanied by a guitar. However, during formal performances of the standing dance (\"Te Kaimatoa\") or the hip dance (\"Te Buki\"), a wooden box is used as a percussion instrument. This box is constructed to give a hollow and reverberating tone when struck simultaneously by a chorus of men sitting around it. Traditional songs are often love-themed, but there are also competitive, religious, children's, patriotic, war and wedding songs. There are also stick dances which accompany legends and semi-historical stories. These stick dances or \"tirere\" (pronounced \"seerere\") are performed only during major festivals.\nDance.\nKiribati dance is distinguished among other Pacific island dances by its emphasis on the outstretched arms of the dancer and sudden birdlike movements of the head. The frigate bird (\"Fregata minor\") on the Kiribati flag is emblematic of this bird-like style of Kiribati dancing. Most dances are in the standing or sitting position with movement limited and staggered. Smiling whilst dancing is generally considered vulgar within the context of Kiribati dancing. This is due to its origin of not being solely as a form of entertainment but as a form of storytelling and a display of the skill, beauty and endurance of the dancer.\nCuisine.\nTraditionally, the staple diet of the I-Kiribati was the abundance of seafood and coconuts. Starch-based carbohydrate sources were not plentiful due to the hostile climate of the atolls with only the northernmost atolls being viable for constant agriculture. The national crop \"bwabwai\" was only eaten during special celebrations along with pork.\nTo complement the rather low consumption of carbohydrates in their diets, the I-Kiribati processed the sap and fruit of the abundant pandanus and coconut trees into different beverages and foods such as \"te karewe\" (fresh daily sap of the coconut tree) or \"te tuae\" (dried pandanus cake) and \"te kabubu\" (dried pandanus flour) from pandanus fruit pulp and \"te kamaimai\" (coconut sap syrup) from coconut sap.\nAfter World War II, rice became a daily staple in most households; this is still the case today. The majority of seafood\u2014in particular, fish\u2014is eaten sashimi-style with either coconut sap, soy sauce or vinegar-based dressings, often combined with chillies and onions.\nCoconut crabs and mud crabs are traditionally given to breastfeeding mothers, with the belief that the meat stimulates the production of high-quality breast milk.\nSport.\nKiribati has competed at the Commonwealth Games since 1998 and the Summer Olympics since 2004. It sent three competitors to its first Olympics, two sprinters and a weightlifter. Kiribati won its first ever Commonwealth Games medal at the 2014 Commonwealth Games, when weightlifter David Katoatau won Gold in the 105\u00a0kg Group.\nFootball is the most popular sport. Kiribati Islands Football Federation (KIFF) is an associate member of the Oceania Football Confederation, but not of world-governing body FIFA. Instead, they are member of ConIFA. The Kiribati National team has played ten matches, all of which they have lost, and all at the Pacific Games from 1979 to 2011. The Kiribati football stadium is Bairiki National Stadium, which has a capacity of 2,500.\nThe Betio Soccer Field is home to a number of local sporting teams.\nOutside perspectives.\nEdward Carlyon Eliot, who was Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands (now Kiribati and Tuvalu) from 1913 to 1920, describes this period in his autobiography \"Broken Atoms\".\nSir Arthur Grimble wrote about his time working in the British colonial service in Kiribati (then the Gilbert Islands) from 1914 to 1932 in two popular books \"A Pattern of Islands\" (1952) and \"Return to the Islands\" (1957). He also undertook academic studies of Gilbertese culture.\nJohn Smith, the last governor of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, wrote his memoir \"An Island in the Autumn\" (2011).\nJ. Maarten Troost's more recent autobiographical experiences in Tarawa are documented in his book \"The Sex Lives of Cannibals\" (2004).\nAlice Piciocchi's illustrated essay, \"Kiribati. Cronache illustrate da una terra (s)perduta\", (2016) Milan: 24 ORE Cultura, also translated into French (2018, \u00e9ditions du Rouergue), tries to write and portray a comprehensive encyclopaedic book of modern Kiribati.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16675", "revid": "7520047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16675", "title": "History of Kiribati", "text": " \nThe islands which now form the Republic of Kiribati have been inhabited variously. The Gilbert Islands may have been inhabited for three or four millennia, and certainly for several hundred years. The Phoenix and Line islands, in contrast, seem to have only been inhabited intermittently, because any intended long-lived human inhabitations have been thwarted by droughts and such like. Regarding the Gilberts, the initial Austronesian peoples\u2019 population, which remains the overwhelming majority today, was visited by Polynesian and Melanesian invaders before the first European sailors visited the islands in the 17th century. For much of the subsequent period, the islands were ruled as part of the British Empire. The country gained its independence in 1979 and has since been known as Kiribati.\nPre-history.\nFor several millennia, the islands were inhabited by Austronesian peoples who had arrived from the Solomon Islands or Vanuatu. The \"I-Kiribati\" or Gilbertese people settled what would become known as the Gilbert Islands (named for British captain Thomas Gilbert by von Krusenstern in 1820) some time in between 3000 BC and 1300 AD. Subsequent invasions by Samoans and Tongans introduced Polynesian elements to the existing Micronesian culture, and invasions by Fijians introduced Melanesian elements. Extensive intermarriage produced a population reasonably homogeneous in appearance, language and traditions.\nContact with other cultures.\nIn 1606 Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s sighted Butaritari and Makin, which he named the Buen Viaje ('good trip' in Spanish) Islands.\nCaptain John Byron passed through the islands in 1764 during his circumnavigation of the globe as captain of HMS \"Dolphin\".\nIn 1788, Captain Thomas Gilbert in and Captain John Marshall in . Messrs. Gilbert and Marshall passed close to Abemama, Kuria, Aranuka, Tarawa, Abaiang, Butaritari, and Makin without attempting to land on shore.\nFurther exploration.\nIn 1820, the islands were named the \"\u00eeles Gilbert\" (in French, Gilbert Islands) by Adam Johann von Krusenstern, a Russian admiral of the Czar after the British Captain Thomas Gilbert, who crossed the archipelago in 1788. In 1824, French captain Louis-Isidore Duperrey was the first to map the whole Gilbert Islands archipelago. He commanded \"La Coquille\" on its circumnavigation of the earth (1822\u20131825).\nTwo ships of the United States Exploring Expedition, and , under the command of Captain Hudson, surveyed the Gilbert Islands of Tabiteuea, Nonouti, Aranuka, Maiana, Abemama, Kuria, Tarawa, Marakei, Butaritari, and Makin (then called the Kingsmill Islands or Kingsmill Group in English). While in the Gilberts, they devoted considerable time to mapping and charting reefs and anchorages. Alfred Thomas Agate made drawings of men of Butaritari and Makin.\nAt one time, a subset of the northern Gilbert islands was known as Scarborough Islands and a subset of the southern Gilberts as the Kingsmill Group; in some 19th century texts, this last name of Kingsmills was applied to the entire Gilberts group.\nMissionaries.\nMissionaries began to be active in the Gilbert Islands in the 1850s. Dr Hiram Bingham II of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions (ABCFM) arrived on Abaiang in 1857. The protestant missionaries of the London Missionary Society (LMS) were active in the southern Gilberts. On 15 October 1870, Rev. Samuel James Whitmee of the LMS arrived at Arorae, and later that month he visited Tamana, Onotoa and Beru. In August 1872, George Pratt of the LMS visited the islands. The Roman Catholic faith was introduced on Nonouti around 1880 by 2 Gilbert islanders, Betero and Tiroi, who had become christians in Tahiti. Father Joseph Leray, Father Edward Bontemps and Brother Conrad Weber, Roman Catholic Missionaries of the Sacred Heart arrived on Nonouti in 1888.\nVisit of Robert Louis Stevenson to Abemama and Butaritari in 1889.\nRobert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson, and her son Lloyd Osbourne, stayed for 2 months on Abemama in 1889, which was described by Stevenson in his account of the 1889 voyage of the \"Equator\" published as \"In the South Seas\" At the time of their visit, the High Chief was Tembinok', the last of the dozens of expansionist chiefs of Gilbert Islands of this period, despite Abemama historically conforming to the traditional southern islands' governance of their respective \"unimwaane\". Tembinok' was immortalised in Stevenson's book as \"the last tyrant\", with Stevenson delved into the high chief's character and method of rule during his stay on Abemama; Tembinok' controlled the access of European traders to the atolls under his control and jealously guarded his revenue and his prerogatives as monarch. \nRobert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne also visited Butaritari from 14 July 1889 to early August. At this time Bureimoa was the ruler of Butaritari and Makin atolls, his father being Kaiea and his grandfather being Teitimararoa.\nBureimoa allowed two San Francisco trading firms to operate, Messrs. Crawford and Messrs. Wightman Brothers, with up to 12 Europeans resident on islands of the atolls. The presence of the Europeans, and the alcohol they traded to the islanders, resulted in periodic alcoholic binges that only ended with Bureimoa making tapu (forbidding) the sale of alcohol. During the 15 or so days that Stevenson spent on Butaritari the islanders were engaged in a drunken spree that threatened the safety of Stevenson and his family. Stevenson adopted the strategy of describing himself as the son of Queen Victoria so as to ensure that he would be treated as a person who should not be threatened or harmed.\nRobert Louis Stevenson, Fanny Vandegrift Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne returned to Abemama in July 1890 during their cruise on the trading steamer, \"Janet Nicoll\".\nEarly traders and trading companies.\nThe first traders resident in the Gilberts were Richard Randell and George Durant who arrived in 1846. Durant moved on to Makin, while Randell remained on Butaritari. The earliest trading companies on Butaritari were the Hamburg-based Handels-und Plantagen-Gesellschaft der S\u00fcdsee-Inseln zu Hamburg (DHPG) with Pacific headquarters in Samoa, and On Chong (Chinese traders with Australian connections via the goldfields). The Japanese trading company Nanyo Boeki Kabushiki Kaisha established operations on Butaritari. Two San Francisco trading firms, Messrs. Crawford and Messrs. Wightman Brothers, were operating on Butaritari in 1889.\nW. R. Carpenter &amp; Co. (Solomon Islands) Ltd was established in 1922. Through the 1920s On Chong experienced gradual decline in its operations as the result of low copra prices. Eventually On Chong was taken over by W. R. Carpenter &amp; Co. These traders helped Butaritari became the commercial and trading capital of the Gilbert Islands until Burns Philp, the trading company based in Sydney, Australia, moved to Tarawa, following the seat of political power.\nColonial era.\nWhalers, blackbirders, and merchant vessels arrived in great numbers in the 19th century, and the resulting upheaval fomented local tribal conflicts and introduced damaging European diseases. In an effort to restore a measure of order, the Gilbert Islands were declared as the British Protectorate by Captain Edward Davis of on 27 May 1892. The neighboring Ellice Islands (now Tuvalu) were declared a British Protectorate later in 1892. The Gilbert and Ellice Islands Protectorate was administered as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT). \nBritish Western Pacific Territories.\nThe BWPT were administered by a High Commissioner resident in Fiji until 1952, then in Honiara. \nA Resident Commissioner, Charles Swayne, was appointed in 1893 following the protectorate on the Gilbert group and on the Ellice group becoming formal and effective in 1892. The protectorate's headquarters was established on Tarawa in 1896, where Resident Commissioner William Telfer Campbell presided from 1896 until 1908. The headquarters were then moved to Ocean Island (now Banaba), and continued upon the transition to a Crown Colony. This move in headquarters arose from the operations of the Pacific Phosphate Company resulting in good shipping connections to Ocean Island, and in any case the role of the British colonial authorities emphasised the procurement of labour for the mining and shipping of phosphate and keeping order among the workers.\nOcean Island (now Banaba) was included in the protectorate in 1900 and then in the colony in 1916. In the same year, Fanning Island and Washington Island were included in it together with the islands of the Union Islands (now Tokelau).\nIn 1916, the administration of the BWTP changed as the islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916. But the new colony remained under the jurisdiction of BWTP until 1971.\nGilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.\nThe islands became a Crown Colony on 12 January 1916 by the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Order in Council, 1915. Christmas Island was included in the colony in 1919 although it was contested by the U.S. under the Guano Islands Act of 1856. The Union Islands were unofficially transferred to New Zealand administration in 1926 and officially in 1948. The Phoenix Islands were added in 1937 and the five islands of the Central and Southern Line Islands were added in 1972.\nThe Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony continued to be administered by a Resident Commissioner. One very famous colonial officer in the colony was Sir Arthur Grimble (1888\u20131956), at first as a cadet officer in 1914, under Edward Carlyon Eliot who was Resident Commissioner of the BWPT then the colony from 1913 to 1920. This period is described in Eliot's book \"Broken Atoms\" (autobiographical reminiscences) (Pub. G. Bles, London, 1938) and in Sir Arthur Grimble's \"A Pattern of Islands\" (Pub. John Murray, London, 1952). Arthur Grimble became the Resident Commissioner of the colony in 1926. In 1930 Grimble, issued revised laws, \"Regulations for the good Order and Cleanliness of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands\", which replaced laws created during the BWPT.\nOcean Island remained the headquarters of the colony until the British evacuation in 1942 because of the Japanese occupation of the Gilbert Islands. After World War II, the colony headquarters was re-established on Tarawa, first on Betio islet (then occupied by American forces following the Battle for Tarawa) and subsequently on Bairiki.\nWorld War II.\nJapan seized part of the islands during World War II to form part of their island defenses. On 20 November 1943, Allied forces threw themselves against Japanese positions at Tarawa and Makin in the Gilberts, resulting in some of the bloodiest fighting of the Pacific campaign. The Battle of Tarawa and the Battle of Makin (in fact Butaritari) were a major turning point in the war for the Allies, which battles were the implementation of \"Operation Galvanic\".\nSelf-determination.\nTransition to self-determination.\nThe formation of the United Nations Organisation after World War II resulted in the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization committing to a process of decolonisation; as a consequence the British colonies in the Pacific started on a path to self-determination.\nAs a consequence of the 1974 Ellice Islands self-determination referendum, separation occurred in two stages. The Tuvaluan Order 1975 made by the Privy Council, which took effect on 1 October 1975, recognised Tuvalu as a separate British dependency with its own government. The second stage occurred on 1 January 1976 when separate administrations were created out of the civil service of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony.\nIndependence for Kiribati.\nThe Gilberts obtained internal self-government in 1977 and held general elections in February 1978 which saw Ieremia Tabai elected Chief Minister at only age 27. Kiribati attained independence as a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations on 12 July 1979 by the Kiribati Independence Order 1979 made by the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.\nAlthough the indigenous Gilbertese language name for the Gilbert Islands proper is \"Tungaru\", the new state chose the name \"Kiribati,\" the Gilbertese rendition of \"Gilberts,\" as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of islands which were never considered part of the Gilberts chain. The United States gave up its claims to 14 islands of the Line and Phoenix chains (previously asserted under the Guano Islands Act) in the 1979 Treaty of Tarawa.\nIndependence.\nFollowing independence, the Kiribati head of state was 29-year-old Ieremia Tabai. Tabai served three terms as \"Beretitenti\" (President), from 1979 to 1991. Tabai was the youngest head of state in the Commonwealth of Nations.\nIn 1994, Teburoro Tito was elected \"Beretitenti\". He was reelected in 1998 and 2002 but was ousted in a no-confidence vote in March 2003, and having served the maximum three terms, he is barred by the constitution from running for another term. Tito's temporary replacement was Tion Otang, the Council of State chairman. In 2003, a new presidential election was held, in which two brothers, Anote and Harry Tong, were the two main candidates (a third candidate, Banuera Berina, won just 9.1% of the vote.\nAnote Tong, a London School of Economics graduate, won on 4 July 2003, and was sworn in as President soon afterward. He was re-elected in 2007 and in 2012 for a third term. \nIn March 2016, Taneti Maamau was elected as the new President of Kiribati. He was the fifth president since the country became independent in 1979. In June 2020, President Maamau won re-election for second four-year term. President Maamau was considered pro-China and he supported closer ties with Beijing.\nThe Banaba issue.\nAn emotional issue has been the protracted bid by the residents of Banaba to secede and have their island placed under the protection of Fiji. Because Banaba was devastated by phosphate mining, the vast majority of Banabans was deported to the island of Rabi in the Fiji Islands in the 1940s where they now number some 5,000 and enjoy full Fijian citizenship. The Kiribati government has responded by including several special provisions in the Constitution, such as the designation of a Banaban seat in the legislature and the return of land previously acquired by the government for phosphate mining. Only around 300 people remain on Banaba. Despite being part of Kiribati, Banaba's municipal administration is by the Rabi Council of Leaders and Elders, which is based on Rabi Island, in Fiji. In 2006, Teitirake Corrie, the Rabi Island Council's representative to the Parliament of Kiribati, called for Banaba to secede from Kiribati and join Fiji.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nWhen the COVID-19 pandemic began in early 2020, Kiribati closed off its borders, to the extent that citizens living abroad were prevented from returning. The nation remained free of the infection and in late 2021, as the case rate seemed to be declining in many countries, the government considered relaxing restrictions. By that time, 33 percent of the nation's residents had been fully vaccinated against infection. In January 2022, a group of Kiribati citizens who had been living and travelling abroad as missionaries for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints when the pandemic began returned to Kiribati on a chartered plane. Despite negative tests for the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 before and after arrival, and a quarantine period, 36 of the 54 passengers tested positive soon after their arrival. Within a few days, the viral infection had spread to more than 180 members of the community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16676", "revid": "50484152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16676", "title": "Geography of Kiribati", "text": " \nKiribati consists of 32 atolls and one island in an expanse of ocean equivalent in size to the contiguous United States. The islands are scattered such that Kiribati has territory located in each of the four hemispheres. The islands of Kiribati lie roughly halfway between Hawaii and Australia in the Micronesian and Polynesian regions of the South Pacific. The three main island groupings are the Gilbert Islands, Phoenix Islands, and Line Islands. On 1 January 1995 Kiribati moved the International Date Line to include its easternmost islands and make it the same day throughout the country.\nGeography.\nKiribati includes Kiritimati (Christmas Atoll; in the Line Islands), the largest coral atoll (in terms of land area, not dimensions) in the world, and Banaba (Ocean Island), one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific.\nKiribati straddles the equator in the Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Australia. On 1 January 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the International Date Line from the middle of the country to include its easternmost islands and make it the same day throughout the country.\nArea.\nThe total land area mass total . It includes three island groups - Gilbert Islands, Line Islands, Phoenix Islands. Most of the land on these islands is less than two metres above sea level. Including the amount of water, the total water and land area is 2485 square miles. A 1989 United Nations report identified Kiribati as one of the countries that could completely disappear in the 21st century if steps are not taken to address global climate change.\nThe coastline of the islands total 1,143\u00a0km (710\u00a0mi) in length. Kiribati has the 12th largest exclusive economic zone of (200 nautical miles). The islands are relatively flat and very spread out. The highest point, on Banaba Island, is 265 feet above sea level.\nClimate.\nDue to its location, Kiribati exhibits a maritime climate. Temperatures range between 26 and 32\u00a0\u00b0C year-round, with the water temperature sitting on a comfortable year-round 28-29\u00a0\u00b0C. The dry season is from December to March while the wet season last from February to May and from September to November. In the driest years, the islands have received 150mm of rainfall while its wettest years have seen upwards of 4000mm.\nLand use.\nThe amount of arable land is at 2.5%. Crop usage stands at about 40% of the available land. A few trees exist and occupy 10% of the land. About 50% of the land is used for housing and commercial use.\nNatural environment.\nEcoregions.\nKiribati is part of three terrestrial ecoregions:\nNatural resources.\nMuch of the natural resources have been exhausted before its 1979 independence. On the island of Banaba, the British mined guano for phosphorus, until exhaustion of supply, an event that was before independence.\nNatural hazards.\nCyclones can occur any time, but usually November to March; occasional tornadoes; low level of some of the islands make them very sensitive to changes in sea level. The Climate Change in the Pacific Report (2011) describes Kiribati as having a low risk of cyclones; however in March 2015 Kiribati experienced flooding and destruction of seawalls and coastal infrastructure as the result of Cyclone Pam, a Category 5 cyclone that devastated Vanuatu.\nPollution.\nThe island of Banaba has suffered greatly from the after effects of the massive phosphorus mining. Most of the population were forced to evacuate to the island country of Fiji due to its effects. In addition, the atoll near the island of Tarawa is vulnerable to the effects of solid waste disposal. A report by the United Nations say the wildlife from the region are endangered. The islands are very sensitive to the damaging effects.\nInternational conventions.\nThe country signed the Convention on Diversity on 6 August 1994.\nIt also signed conventions on the Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection.\nProtected area.\nThe Phoenix Islands Protected Area constitutes 11.34% of Kiribati's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) with a size of . This is the second largest marine protected area (MPA) in the Pacific Ocean.\nAdditional notes.\n21 of the 33 islands are inhabited.\nBanaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the Pacific Ocean.\nKiribati is the only country in the world whose land exists in all four hemispheres.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Kiribati, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16677", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16677", "title": "Demographics of Kiribati", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Kiribati include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations, and other metrics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPopulation structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (census 07.XI.2015): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (census 07.XI.2020) (provisional): \nVital statistics.\nVital statistic registration is incomplete.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16678", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16678", "title": "Politics of Kiribati", "text": " \nPolitics of Kiribati takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the \"Beretitenti\", President of Kiribati, is both the head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government, Beretitenti, and his cabinet, all MPs. Legislative power is exercised by the House of Assembly. The Judiciary of Kiribati is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nThe Constitution of Kiribati, promulgated at independence on 12 July 1979, establishes the Republic of Kiribati as a sovereign democratic republic and guarantees the fundamental rights of its citizens and residents.\nExecutive branch.\nAfter each general election, the new-elected \"Maneaba ni Maungatabu\" (House of Assembly) nominates not less than three nor more than four of its own members to stand as candidates for President (\"Beretitenti\"). The voting public then elects the Beretitenti from among these candidates. On 22 June 2020, for the first election ever since 1979 Independence, two candidates only have been nominated \u2014 unless Section 32(2) of the Constitution writes \u201cnot less than 3\u201d. On 17 June 2020, Judgment of Sir John Muria, the Chief Justice on Civil Case 56, allowed this reading of the Constitution. The elected Beretitenti appoints a \"Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti\" (vice-president) and up to ten other Cabinet Ministers from among the members of the Maneaba. \nCabinet.\nThe Cabinet is the top decision-making body in Kiribati, through which all functions of the government get their authority. Parliament can undo Cabinet decisions through a vote of no confidence, triggering a new election.\nThe current Cabinet consists of the following Ministers:\nThe first nine ministers sworn in on 2 July 2020 at the State House in Bairiki (South Tarawa) and include Dr Teuea Toatu, Willie Tokataake, Ruateki Tekaiara, Ribanataake Awira, Dr Tinte Itinteang, Boutu Bateriki, Booti Nauan, Martin Moreti and Taabeta Teakaiao.\nThe remaining four ministers who are stranded in the outer islands, at their respective island, which include Alexander Teabo, Tarakabu Martin, Tekeeua Tarati and Mikarite Temari, have been sworn later.\nAttorneys-General of Kiribati.\nIn Kiribati, the Attorney-General is defined by section 42 of the Constitution as \"the principal legal adviser to the Government.\" The Constitution specifies: \"No person shall be qualified to hold or to act in the office of Attorney-General unless he is qualified to practise in Kiribati as an advocate in the High Court.\"\nThe Attorney-General of Kiribati was also until October 2016 a member of Cabinet of Kiribati and a member of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu as an ex-officio member of parliament. According to a 2005 source, the Attorney-General \"is designated by the Republic of Kiribati as the Central Authority who shall have the responsibility and power to receive requests for mutual legal assistance.\"\nLegislative branch.\nIn a Westminster system, the unicameral House of Assembly (\"Maneaba ni Maungatabu\") has 45 members: 44 elected in single-seat and multi-seat constituencies; one appointed member from the Banaban community on Rabi Island in Fiji. The Attorney general was no longer an \"ex officio\" member. The elected members of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu serve four-year terms. The Speaker of the Maneaba ni Maungatabu is elected by the members of the Maneaba from outside of its membership. The total number of the Legisters is forty four from the island in Kiribati and one representative nominated from Rabi Council representing the people in Rabi island in Fiji. \nAll citizens of Kiribati are eligible to vote at the age of 18.\nJudiciary.\nThe Chapter VI of the Constitution of 1979 describes the Judiciary of Kiribati.\nThe judicial system consists of magistrates' courts, the High Court and the Kiribati Court of Appeal. The Beretitenti (President), acting in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission, makes all judicial appointments, and amongst them, the Chief Justice, the main judge of the High Court. The High Court is in Betio. Sir John Muria was the Chief Justice of Kiribati until his replacement by Bill Hastings in August 2021, after a 8 months vacancy. On 30 June 2022, Hastings was abruptly suspended from his office during the 2022 Kiribati constitutional crisis.\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London, England has jurisdiction only if a case involves constitutional rights. Appeals are taken directly to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council itself.\nThe Court of Appeal of Kiribati is otherwise the supreme court in Kiribati.\nThe People's Lawyer of Kiribati.\nThe People's Lawyer of Kiribati represents disadvantaged residents and those who are unable to access legal representation. Accordingly, the office represents clients in \"Land, Civil and Criminal Matters and act for them in the Magistrates and High Court as well as the Court of Appeal.\" The position had long been filled by expatriate lawyers who were volunteering from either Australia or New Zealand with the \"role...funded by the Australian Government through [the] Australian Volunteers International.\" In 2015, the role of The People's Lawyer changed in that it was now filled by a Kiribati citizen: Raweita Beniata (male lawyer; 2015- ).\nPolitical conditions.\nPolitical parties have existed since 1965 but are more similar to informal coalitions in behaviour. They do not have official platforms or party structures. Most candidates formally present themselves as independents, then they joined one party at the first meeting of the House. The website of the House of Assembly explains that in this way:\n\"There [were] four political parties in Kiribati, Boutokaan Te Koaua (BTK), Maurin Kiribati Party (MKP), Maneaban Te Mauri Party (MMP) and Kiribati Tabomoa Party. The parties are loose groupings rather than disciplined blocks, with little or no structure. Members may change allegiance on a number of occasions during their tenure. It is also common for members to vote according to the special interests of their electorate on certain issues.\"\nKiribati Tabomoa Party (\"National Progressive Party\") and Christian Democratic Party merged into Maneaban Te Mauri (MMP, \"Protect the Maneaba\") in 2003, which later merged with Kiribati Independent Party into Karikirakean Te I-Kiribati (KTK, \"United Coalition Party\") in 2010, which later merged with Maurin Kiribati Party (MKP) to form Tobwaan Kiribati Party (TKP), the only one facing \"Boutokaan Te Koaua\" (BTK, \"Pillars of Truth\").\nA major source of conflict has been the protracted bid by the residents of Banaba Island to secede and have their island placed under the protection of Fiji. The government's attempts to placate the Banabans include several special provisions in the constitution, such as the designation of a Banaban seat in the legislature and the return of land previously acquired by the government for phosphate mining.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nThere is no solid tradition of formally organized political parties in Kiribati, even if the 2 first political parties were founded in 1965; they more closely resemble factions or interest groups with no formal platforms: "}
{"id": "16680", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16680", "title": "Telecommunications in Kiribati", "text": ""}
{"id": "16681", "revid": "1386540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16681", "title": "Transport in Kiribati", "text": "The following article outlines transport in Kiribati.\nRoadways.\nThere are 670\u00a0km of highways in Kiribati (1996 est.) of which 27\u00a0km are paved in South Tarawa (2001). The longest stretch of road travels from South Tarawa to North Tarawa.\nThere are no railways.\nWater transport.\nPorts and harbours include Banaba, Betio, English Harbor, and Kanton. There is a small network of canals, totaling 5\u00a0km, in the Line Islands.\nThe Merchant marine includes the ships of the Kiribati JMR Group that operates the Coral Sea Shipping Line, which has three ships: \"Coral Sea number 1\", \"Coral Sea number 2\" and \"Coral Sea number 3\". One merchant ship connects, from time to time, the Line Islands (Kiritimati, Fanning and Washington) and makes stops en route at the Phoenix Islands.\nAir travel.\n2 small aeroplanes fly out of the Gilbert Islands, except for Banaba. Beginning in January 2009, Kiribati has two domestic airlines: Air Kiribati and Coral Sun Airways. Both airlines are based in Tarawa's Bonriki International Airport and serve destinations across the Gilbert Islands only. Neither the Phoenix nor Line Islands are served by the domestic carriers. The only served airport by any airline is Cassidy International Airport on Kiritimati. Fiji's national carrier Fiji Airways provides an international service from Fiji's main airport, Nadi International Airport to Cassidy Airport as well as to Bonriki Airport. Fiji Airways currently flies a twice weekly flight from Nadi International Airport to Bonriki, Kiribati.\nAirports.\nAs of 2010, there are 23 airports in Kiribati, of which 4 have paved runways, the only international ones being Bonriki International Airport and Cassidy International Airport. Bonriki International Airport is currently undergoing an upgrade program to bring airport security up to IATA standards - this includes the construction of a fence around the entire perimeter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16682", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16682", "title": "Military of Kiribati", "text": ""}
{"id": "16683", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16683", "title": "Foreign relations of Kiribati", "text": " \nKiribati is a full member of the Commonwealth, the IMF and the World Bank, and became a full member of the United Nations in 1999. Kiribati hosted the Thirty-First Pacific Islands Forum in October 2000. Kiribati has Least Developed Country Status and its interests rarely extend beyond the region. Through accession to the Lom\u00e9 Convention, then Cotonou Agreement, Kiribati is also a member of the African Caribbean and Pacific Group. Kiribati maintains good relations with most countries and has particularly close ties to Pacific neighbours Japan, Australia, South Korea and New Zealand. Kiribati briefly suspended its relations with France in 1995 over that country's decision to renew nuclear testing in the South Pacific.\nKiribati established diplomatic relations with Taiwan in November 2003, but cut off all relations in September 2019 when Kiribati switched diplomatic recognition to Beijing. Taiwan's foreign minister stated that Kiribati had \"unrealistic\" expectations from China and ordered the embassy to evacuate.\nRegional relations.\nKiribati maintains strong regional ties in the Pacific. Until recently it was a full member of the Pacific Islands Forum, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, the South Pacific Tourism Organisation, the Pacific Regional Environment Programme and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community. Kiribati is one of the eight signatories of the Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Interest which collectively controls 25\u201330% of the world's tuna supply and approximately 60% of the western and central Pacific tuna supply https://. In 1985, Kiribati was one of the nine initial endorsers of the Treaty of Rarotonga creating the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty.\nExtra-regional relations.\nKiribati was admitted to the Commonwealth of Nations in 1979 upon its independence, and to the United Nations in 1999.\nAdditionally outside the region, Kiribati is a member or participant of the ACP (Lom\u00e9 Convention), the Asian Development Bank, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the IMF, International Maritime Organization, International Olympic Committee, International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Universal Postal Union and the World Meteorological Organization. Finally, while Kiribati is not a member of the World Trade Organization, it does retain observer status.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Kiribati maintains diplomatic relations with:\nAid &amp; Development.\nKiribati receives development aid from the European Union, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Canada, USA, the Asian Development Bank, UN agencies and (until 2019) Taiwan. In recent years it has accounted for 20\u201325% of Kiribati's GDP. Recent projects and notable inputs by the EU have included telecommunications (improvement of telephone exchanges and provision of radio and navigation equipment), the development of seaweed as an export crop, solar energy systems for the outer islands, the upgrading of the Control Tower and fire fighting services at Tarawa's Bonriki International Airport, outer island social development, health services and extensive support for the Kiribati Vocational Training Programme. Additionally, Cuba provides doctors, as well as scholarships for I-Kiribati medical students.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16685", "revid": "45853341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16685", "title": "History of Kuwait", "text": "Kuwait is a sovereign state in Western Asia located at the head of the Arabian Gulf. The geographical region of Kuwait has been occupied by humans since antiquity, particularly due to its strategic location at the head of the Persian Gulf. In the pre-oil era, Kuwait was a regional trade port. In the modern era, Kuwait is best known for the Gulf War (1990\u20131991).\nAntiquity.\nMesopotamia.\nFollowing the post-glacial flooding of the Persian Gulf basin, debris from the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river formed a substantial delta, creating most of the land in present-day Kuwait and establishing the present coastlines. One of the earliest evidence of human habitation in Kuwait dates back to 8000 BC where Mesolithic tools were found in Burgan. \nDuring the Ubaid period (6500 BC), Kuwait was the central site of interaction between the peoples of Mesopotamia and Neolithic Eastern Arabia, including Bahra 1 and site H3 in Subiya. The Neolithic inhabitants of Kuwait were among the world's earliest maritime traders. One of the world's earliest reed-boats was discovered at site H3 dating back to the Ubaid period. Other Neolithic sites in Kuwait are located in Khiran and Sulaibikhat.\nMesopotamians first settled in the Kuwaiti island of Failaka in 2000 B.C. Traders from the Sumerian city of Ur inhabited Failaka and ran a mercantile business. The island had many Mesopotamian-style buildings typical of those found in Iraq dating from around 2000 B.C.\nFrom 4000 BC until 2000 BC, the bay of Kuwait was home to the Dilmun civilization. At its peak, Dilmun may have included Al-Shadadiya, Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Failaka.\nDespite the scholarly consensus that ancient Dilmun encompasses three modern locations - the eastern littoral of Arabia from the vicinity of modern Kuwait to Bahrain; the island of Bahrain; the island of Failaka of Kuwait - few researchers have taken into account the radically different geography of the basin represented by the Persian Gulf before its reflooding as sea levels rose about 6000 BCE. \nDuring the Dilmun era (from ca. 3000 BC), Failaka was known as \"Agarum\", the land of Enzak, a great god in the Dilmun civilization according to Sumerian cuneiform texts found on the island. During the Neo-Babylonian Period, Enzak was identified with Nabu, the ancient Mesopotamian patron god of literacy, the rational arts, scribes and wisdom. As part of Dilmun, Failaka became a hub for the civilization from the end of the 3rd to the middle of the 1st millennium BC. \nAfter the Dilmun civilization, Failaka was inhabited by the Kassites of Mesopotamia, and was formally under the control of the Kassite dynasty of Babylon. Studies indicate traces of human settlement can be found on Failaka dating back to as early as the end of the 3rd millennium BC, and extending until the 20th century AD. Many of the artifacts found in Falaika are linked to Mesopotamian civilizations and seem to show that Failaka was gradually drawn toward the civilization based in Antioch.\nUnder Nebuchadnezzar II, the bay of Kuwait was under Babylonian control. Cuneiform documents found in Failaka indicate the presence of Babylonians in the island's population. Babylonian Kings were present in Failaka during the Neo-Babylonian Empire period, Nabonidus had a governor in Failaka and Nebuchadnezzar II had a palace and temple in Falaika. Failaka also contained temples dedicated to the worship of Shamash, the Mesopotamian sun god in the Babylonian pantheon.\nMost of present-day Kuwait is still archaeologically unexplored. Although there is no scholarly consensus, several archaeologists and geologists have proposed that Kuwait was likely the original location of the Pishon River which watered the Garden of Eden. Juris Zarins argued that the Garden of Eden was situated at the head of the Persian Gulf (present-day Kuwait), where the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers run into the sea, from his research on this area using information from many different sources, including LANDSAT images from space. His suggestion about the Pishon River was supported by James A. Sauer of the American Center of Oriental Research. Sauer made an argument from geology and history that Pishon River was the now-defunct Kuwait River. With the aid of satellite photos, Farouk El-Baz traced the dry channel from Kuwait up the Wadi al-Batin.\nAfter an apparent abandonment of about seven centuries, the bay of Kuwait was repopulated during the Achaemenid period (c. 550\u2012330 BC). In 4th century BC, the ancient Greeks colonized the bay of Kuwait under Alexander the Great, the ancient Greeks named mainland Kuwait \"Larissa\" and Failaka was named \"Ikaros\".\nAccording to Strabo and Arrian, Alexander the Great named Failaka \"Ikaros\" because it resembled the Aegean island of that name in size and shape. Various elements of Greek mythology were mixed with the local cults in Failaka. \"Ikaros\" was also the name of a prominent city situated in Failaka.\nAccording to another account, having returned from his Indian campaign to Persia, Alexander the Great ordered the island to be called Icarus, after the Icarus island in the Aegean Sea. This was likely a Hellenization of the local name Akar (Aramaic 'KR), derived from the ancient bronze-age toponym Agarum. Another suggestion is that the name Ikaros was influenced by the local \u00c9-kara temple, dedicated to the Babylonian sun-god Shamash. That both Failaka and the Aegean Icarus housed bull cults would have made the identification tempting all the more.\nDuring Hellenistic times, there was a temple of Artemis on the island. The wild animals on the island were dedicated to goddess and no one should harm them. Strabo wrote that on the island there was a temple of Apollo and an oracle of Artemis (Tauropolus) (\u03bc\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd \u03a4\u03b1\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03bf\u03c5). The island is also mentioned by Stephanus of Byzantium and Ptolemaeus.\nRemains of the settlement include a large Hellenistic fort and two Greek temples. Failaka was also a trading post (emporion) of the kingdom of Characene. Archaeological remains of Greek colonization were also discovered in Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Subiya. At the Hellenistic fortress in Failaka, pigs represented 20 percent of the total population, but no pig remains were found in nearby Akkaz.\nNearchos was likely the first Greek to have explored Failaka. The island was further visited and inspected by Archias, Androsthenes of Thasos, and Hiero during three exploration expeditions ordered by Alexander the Great during 324 BC. Failaka might have been fortified and settled during the days of Seleucus I or Antiochos I.\nAt the time of Alexander the Great, the mouth of the Euphrates River was located in northern Kuwait. The Euphrates river flowed directly into the Persian Gulf via Khor Subiya which was a river channel at the time. Failaka was located 15 kilometers from the mouth of the Euphrates river. By the first century BC, the Khor Subiya river channel dried out completely.\nDuring the Achaemenid period (c. 550\u2012330 BC), the bay of Kuwait was repopulated. Failaka was under the control of the Achaemenid Empire as evidenced by the archaeological discovery of Achaemenid strata. There are Aramaic inscriptions that testify Achaemenid presence.\nIn 127 BC, Kuwait was part of the Parthian Empire and the kingdom of Characene was established around Teredon in present-day Kuwait. Characene was centered in the region encompassing southern Mesopotamia, Characene coins were discovered in Akkaz, Umm an Namil, and Failaka. A busy Parthian era Characene commercial station existed in Kuwait.\nThe earliest recorded mention of Kuwait was in 150 AD in the geographical treatise \"Geography\" by Greek scholar Ptolemy. Ptolemy mentioned the Bay of Kuwait as \"Hieros Kolpos\" (\"Sacer Sinus\" in the Latin versions).\nIn 224 AD, Kuwait became part of the Sassanid Empire. At the time of the Sassanid Empire, Kuwait was known as \"Meshan\", which was an alternative name of the kingdom of Characene.\nLate Sassanian settlements were discovered in Failaka.\nAkkaz was a Partho-Sassanian site; the Sassanid religion's tower of silence was discovered in northern Akkaz.\nIn Bubiyan, there is archaeological evidence of Sassanian periods of human presence as evidenced by the recent discovery of torpedo-jar pottery sherds on several prominent beach ridges.\nIn 636 AD, the Battle of Chains between the Sassanid Empire and Rashidun Caliphate was fought in Kuwait near Kazma. At the time, Kuwait was under the control of the Sassanid Empire. The Battle of Chains was the first battle of the Rashidun Caliphate in which the Muslim army sought to extend its frontiers.\nAs a result of Rashidun victory in 636 AD, the bay of Kuwait was home to the city of Kazma (also known as \"Kadhima\" or \"K\u0101zimah\") in the early Islamic era. Medieval Arabic sources contain multiple references to the bay of Kuwait in the early Islamic period. The city functioned as a trade port and resting place for pilgrims on their way from Iraq to Hejaz. The city was controlled by the kingdom of Al-Hirah in Iraq. In the early Islamic period, the bay of Kuwait was known for being a fertile area.\nKazma was mainly a stop for caravans coming from Persia and Mesopotamia en route to the Arabian Peninsula. The poet Al-Farazdaq was born in Kazma. Al-Farazdaq is recognized as one of the greatest classical poets of the Arabs.\nEarly to late Islamic settlements were discovered in Subiya, Akkaz, Kharaib al-Dasht, Umm al-Aish, Al-Rawdatain, Al Qusur, Umm an Namil, Miskan, and Kuwait's side of Wadi al-Batin.\nThere is archaeological evidence of early Islamic periods of human presence in Bubiyan.\nChristian Nestorian settlements flourished in the bay of Kuwait from the 5th century until the 9th century. Excavations have revealed several farms, villages and two large churches dating from the 5th and 6th century. Archaeologists are currently excavating nearby sites to understand the extent of the settlements that flourished in the eighth and ninth centuries A.D. An old island tradition is that a community grew up around a Christian mystic and hermit. The small farms and villages were eventually abandoned. Remains of Byzantine era Nestorian churches were found in Akkaz and Al-Qusur. Pottery at the Al-Qusur site can be dated from as early as the first half of the 7th century through the 9th century.\nPre-oil history.\nIn 1521, Kuwait was under Portuguese control. In the late 16th century, the Portuguese built a defensive settlement in Kuwait. In the early to mid 1700s, Kuwait City was a small fishing village. Administratively, it was a sheikhdom, ruled by local sheikhs from Bani Khalid clan. Sometime in the mid 1700s, the Bani Utbah settled in Kuwait. Sometime after the death of the Bani Khalid's leader Barrak Bin Urair and the fall of the Bani Khalid Emirate, the Utub were able to wrest control of Kuwait as a result of successive matrimonial alliances.\nThe man chosen was a Sabah, Sabah I bin Jaber. Sabah diplomacy may have also been important with neighbouring clans, especially as Bani Khalid power declined. This selection is usually dated to 1752. \nEarly growth (1760\u20131899).\nEconomy.\nIn the latter half of the eighteenth century, Kuwait gradually became a principal commercial center for the transit of goods between India, Muscat, Baghdad, Persia, and Arabia. By the late-1700s, Kuwait had already established itself as a trading route from the Persian Gulf to Aleppo. During the Persian siege of Basra in 1775\u20131779, Iraqi merchants took refuge in Kuwait and were partly instrumental in the expansion of Kuwait's boatbuilding and trading activities. As a result, Kuwait's maritime commerce boomed.\nBetween the years 1775 and 1779, the Indian trade routes with Baghdad, Aleppo, Smyrna and Constantinople were diverted to Kuwait. The East India Company was diverted to Kuwait in 1792. The East India Company secured the sea routes between Kuwait, India and the east coasts of Africa. After the Persians withdrew from Basra in 1779, Kuwait continued to attract trade away from Basra. The flight of many of Basra's leading merchants to Kuwait continued to play a significant role in Basra's commercial stagnation well into the 1850s.\nRegional geopolitical turbulence helped foster economic prosperity in Kuwait in the second half of the 18th century. Kuwait became prosperous due to Basra's instability in the late 18th century. In the late 18th century, Kuwait partly functioned as a haven for Basra's merchants fleeing Ottoman government persecution. \nIn 1776, Sabah I died and was succeeded by his youngest son, Abdullah. Shortly before Sabah's death, in 1766, the al-Khalifa and, soon after, the al-Jalahima, left Kuwait en masse for Zubarah in Qatar. Domestically, the al-Khalifa and al-Jalahima had been among the top contenders for power. Their emigration left the Sabahs in undisputed control, and by the end of Abdullah I's long rule (1776\u20131814), Sabah rule was secure, and the political hierarchy in Kuwait was well established, the merchants deferring to direct orders from the Shaikh. By the 19th century, not only was the ruling Sabah much stronger than a desert Shaikh but also capable of naming his son successor. This influence was not just internal but enabled the al-Sabah to conduct foreign diplomacy. They soon established good relations with the British East India Company in 1775.\nKuwait was the center of boat building in the Persian Gulf region. Kuwaiti ship vessels were renowned throughout the Indian Ocean. Its sailors developed a positive reputation in the Persian Gulf. In the 19th century, Kuwait became significant in the horse trade, horses were regularly shipped by the way of sailing boats from Kuwait. In the mid 19th century, it was estimated that Kuwait was exporting an average of 800 horses to India annually.\nAssassination of Muhammad Bin Sabah.\nIn the 1870s, Ottoman officials were reasserting their presence in the Persian Gulf, with a military intervention in 1871\u2014which was not effectively pursued\u2014where family rivalries in Kuwait were breeding chaos. The Ottomans were bankrupt and when the European banks took control of the Ottoman budget in 1881, additional income was required from Kuwait. Midhat Pasha, the governor of Iraq, demanded that Kuwait submit financially to Ottoman rule. The al-Sabah found diplomatic allies in the British Foreign Office. However, under Abdullah II Al-Sabah, Kuwait pursued a general pro-Ottoman foreign policy, formally taking the title of Ottoman provincial governor, this relationship with the Ottoman Empire did result in Ottoman interference with Kuwaiti laws and selection or rulers. \nIn May 1896, Shaikh Muhammad Al-Sabah was assassinated by his half-brother, Mubarak, who, in early 1897, was recognized, by the Ottoman sultan, as the \"qaimmaqam\" (provincial sub-governor) of Kuwait.\nMubarak the Great.\nMubarak's seizure of the throne via murder left his brother's former allies as a threat to his rule, especially as his opponents gained the backing of the Ottomans. In July, Mubarak invited the British to deploy gunboats along the Kuwaiti coast. Britain saw Mubarak's desire for an alliance as an opportunity to counteract German influence in the region and so agreed. This led to what is known as the First Kuwaiti Crisis, in which the Ottomans demanded that the British stop interfering with their empire. In the end, the Ottoman Empire backed down, rather than go to war.\nIn January 1899, Mubarak signed an agreement with the British which pledged that Kuwait would never cede any territory nor receive agents or representatives of any foreign power without the British Government's consent. In essence, this policy gave Britain control of Kuwait's foreign policy. The treaty also gave Britain responsibility for Kuwait's national security. In return, Britain agreed to grant an annual subsidy of 15,000 Indian rupees (\u00a31,500) to the ruling family. In 1911, Mubarak raised taxes. Therefore, three wealthy business men Ibrahim Al-Mudhaf, Helal Al-Mutairi, and Shamlan Ali bin Saif Al-Roumi (brother of Hussain Ali bin Saif Al-Roumi), led a protest against Mubarak by making Bahrain their main trade point, which negatively affected the Kuwaiti economy. However, Mubarak went to Bahrain and apologized for raising taxes and the three business men returned to Kuwait. In 1915, Mubarak the Great died and was succeeded by his son Jaber II Al-Sabah, who reigned for just over one year until his death in early 1917. His brother Sheikh Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah succeeded him.\nDuring the reign of Mubarak, Kuwait was dubbed the \"Marseille of the Persian Gulf\" because its economic vitality attracted a large variety of people. The population was cosmopolitan and ethnically diverse, including Arabs, Persians, Africans, Jews, and Armenians. Kuwait was known for its religious tolerance.\nIn the first decades of the twentieth century, Kuwait had a well-established elite: wealthy trading families who were linked by marriage and shared economic interests. The elite were long-settled, urban, Sunni families, the majority of which claim descent from the original 30 Bani Utubi families. The wealthiest families were trade merchants who acquired their wealth from long-distance commerce, shipbuilding and pearling. They were a cosmopolitan elite, they traveled extensively to India, Africa and Europe. The elite educated their sons abroad more than other Gulf Arab elite. Western visitors noted that Kuwait's elite used European office systems, typewriters and followed European culture with curiosity. The richest families were involved in general trade. The merchant families of Al-Ghanim and Al-Hamad were estimated to be worth millions before the 1940s.\nAnglo-Ottoman convention (1913).\nInformal negotiations began on 29 July 1911 in a British memorandum sent to the Ottoman Government. By this time, it seemed likely that the terminus for the German funded and engineered Berlin\u2013Baghdad railway would be situated in Kuwait. Kuwait had been under Ottoman administration since 1871 and in 1875 was included in the Basra Vilayet. Although the sheikhdom now fell under the Empire\u2019s jurisdiction, no Ottoman official was stationed in Kuwait. Influence over Kuwait was crucial to British foreign policy in the Persian Gulf with regard to commerce and strategic interests concerning India. \nIn the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1913, the British concurred with the Ottoman Empire in defining Kuwait as an autonomous kaza of the Ottoman Empire and that the Shaikhs of Kuwait were not independent leaders, but rather \"qaimmaqams\" (provincial sub-governors) of the Ottoman government.\nThe convention ruled that Sheikh Mubarak had authority over an area extending out to a radius of 80\u00a0km, from the capital. This region was marked by a red circle and included the islands of Auhah, Bubiyan, Failaka, Kubbar, Mashian, and Warbah. A green circle designated an area extending out an additional 100\u00a0km, in radius, within which the \"qaimmaqam\" was authorized to collect tribute and taxes from the natives.\nWorld War I disrupted elements of Kuwait's politics, society, economy and trans-regional networks.\nMesopotamian Campaign (1914).\nOn 6 November 1914, British offensive action began with the naval bombardment of the old fort at Fao in Iraq, located at the point where the Shatt-al-Arab meets the Persian Gulf. At the Fao Landing, the British Indian Expeditionary Force D (IEF D), comprising the 6th (Poona) Division led by Lieutenant General Arthur Barrett with Sir Percy Cox as Political Officer, was opposed by 350 Ottoman troops and 4 guns. After a sharp engagement, the fort was overrun. By mid-November the Poona Division was fully ashore and began moving towards the city of Basra.\nThe same month, the ruler of Kuwait, Sheikh Mubarak Al-Sabah, contributed to the Allied war effort by sending forces to attack Ottoman troops at Umm Qasr, Safwan, Bubiyan, and Basra. In exchange the British government recognised Kuwait as an \"independent government under British protection.\" There is no report on the exact size and nature of Mubarak's attack, though Ottoman forces did retreat from those positions weeks later. Mubarak soon removed the Ottoman symbol from the Kuwaiti flag and replaced it with \"Kuwait\" written in Arabic script. Mubarak's participation and previous exploits in obstructing the completion of the Baghdad railway helped the British safeguard the Persian Gulf by preventing Ottoman and German reinforcement. He refused to rent any storage facilities to the Germans.\nKuwait\u2013Najd War (1919\u201321).\nThe Kuwait-Najd War erupted in the aftermath of World War I, when the Ottoman Empire was defeated and the British invalidated the Anglo-Ottoman Convention. The power vacuum, left by the fall of the Ottomans, sharpened the conflict between Kuwait and Najd (Ikhwan). The war resulted in sporadic border clashes throughout 1919\u201320.\nHowever, Kuwait immensely declined in regional economic importance, mainly due to various trade blockades and the world economic depression. The Great Depression negatively impacted Kuwait's economy starting in the late 1920s. International trading was one of Kuwait's main sources of income before oil. Kuwaiti merchants were mostly intermediary merchants. As a result of European decline of demand for goods from India and Africa, the economy of Kuwait suffered. The decline in international trade resulted in an increase in gold smuggling by Kuwaiti ships to India. Some Kuwaiti merchant families became rich due to gold smuggling to India.\nKuwait's pearling industry also collapsed as a result of the worldwide economic depression. At its height, Kuwait's pearling industry led the world's luxury market, regularly sending out between 750 and 800 ship vessels to meet the European elite's need for luxuries pearls. During the economic depression, luxuries like pearls were in little demand. The Japanese invention of cultured pearls also contributed to the collapse of Kuwait's pearling industry.\nBattle of Jahra.\nThe Battle of Jahra was a battle during the Kuwait-Najd War. The battle took place in Al Jahra, west of Kuwait City on 10 October 1920 between Salim Al-Mubarak Al-Sabah ruler of Kuwait and Ikhwan Wahhabi followers of Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia, king of Saudi Arabia.\nA force of 4,000 Saudi Ikhwan, led by Faisal Al-Dawish, attacked the Kuwait Red Fort at Al-Jahra, defended by 2,000 Kuwaiti men. The Kuwaitis were largely outnumbered by the Ikhwan of Najd.\nSheikh Khaz'al turns down the throne of Kuwait.\nWhen Percy Cox was informed of the border clashes in Kuwait, he sent a letter to Mohammerah Sheikh Khaz\u02bdal Ibn Jabir offering the Kuwaiti throne to either him or one of his heirs, thinking Khaz'al would be a more competent ruler the Al Sabah family. Khaz'al, who considered the Al Sabah as his own family, replied \"Do you expect me to allow the stepping down of Al Mubarak from the throne of Kuwait? Do you think I can accept this?\" He then asked: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...even so, do you think that you have come to me with something new? Al Mubarak's position as ruler of Kuwait means that I am the true ruler of Kuwait. So there is no difference between myself and them, for they are like the dearest of my children and you are aware of this. Had someone else come to me with this offer, I would have complained about them to you. So how do you come to me with this offer when you are well aware that myself and Al Mubarak are one soul and one house, what affects them affects me, whether good or evil.\nIbn Saud imposed a tight trade blockade against Kuwait from the years 1923 until 1937. The goal of the Saudi economic and military attacks on Kuwait was to annex as much of Kuwait's territory as possible. \nThe Uqair protocol.\nThe British High Commissioner in Baghdad, Percy Cox, imposed the Uqair Protocol of 1922 which defined the boundaries between Iraq, Kuwait and Nejd. In April 1923, Shaikh Ahmad al-Sabah wrote the British Political Agent in Kuwait, Major John More, \"I still do not know what the border between Iraq and Kuwait is, I shall be glad if you will kindly give me this information.\" More, upon learning that al-Sabah claimed the outer green line of the Anglo-Ottoman Convention (4 April), would relay the information to Sir Percy.\nOn 19 April, Sir Percy stated that the British government recognized the outer line of the convention as the border between Iraq and Kuwait. This decision limited Iraq's access to the Persian Gulf at 58\u00a0km of mostly marshy and swampy coastline. As this would make it difficult for Iraq to become a naval power (the territory did not include any deepwater harbours), the Iraqi King Faisal I (whom the British installed as a puppet king in Iraq) did not agree to the plan. However, as his country was under British mandate, he had little say in the matter. Iraq and Kuwait would formally ratify the border in August. The border was re-recognized in 1932.\nAttempts by Faisal I to build an Iraqi railway to Kuwait and port facilities on the Gulf were rejected by Britain. These and other similar British colonial policies made Kuwait a focus of the Arab national movement in Iraq, and a symbol of Iraqi humiliation at the hands of the British.\nKuwait's border was revisited by a memorandum sent by the British high commissioner for Iraq in 1923, which became the basis for Kuwait's northern border. In Iraq's 1932 application to the League of Nations it included information about its borders, including its border with Kuwait, where it accepted the boundary established in 1923.\nAfter the Uqair conference, Kuwait was still subjected to a Saudi economic blockade and intermittent Saudi raiding. Some merchant families left Kuwait in the early 1930s due to the prevalence of economic hardship. At the time of the discovery of oil in 1937, most of Kuwait's inhabitants were impoverished. Merchants had the most economic power. Al Sabah family rule remained limited until well into the 1930s because the merchants, owing to their financial power, were the primary sources of income in Kuwait. The inauguration of the oil era freed the rulers from their financial dependency on merchant wealth.\nBefore Mary Bruins Allison visited Kuwait in 1934, Kuwait had already lost its prominence in long-distance trade. During World War I, the British Empire imposed a trade blockade against Kuwait because Kuwait's ruler supported the Ottoman Empire. The British economic blockade heavily damaged Kuwait's economy.\nIn 1937, Freya Stark wrote about the extent of poverty in Kuwait at the time:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Poverty has settled in Kuwait more heavily since my last visit five years ago, both by sea, where the pearl trade continues to decline, and by land, where the blockade established by Saudi Arabia now harms the merchants.\nAl Sabah became Kuwait's dynastic monarchy in 1938. One tradition has it that political power went to the Sabahs as part of an explicit agreement; merchant families focused on the trade while the House of Sabah and other notable Kuwaiti families provided protection of the city housed within Kuwait's wall. \nModern era.\nIndependence and early state-building (1946\u201389).\nBetween 1946 and 1982, Kuwait experienced a period of prosperity driven by oil and its liberal cultural atmosphere; this period is called the \"golden era\". In 1946, crude oil was exported for the first time. In 1950, a major public-work programme allowed Kuwaitis to enjoy a modern standard of living. By 1952, the country became the largest oil exporter in the Persian Gulf. This massive growth attracted many foreign workers, especially from Palestine, Egypt, Iran, and India.\nIn June 1961, Kuwait became independent with the end of the British protectorate and the sheikh Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah became an Emir. Under the terms of the newly drafted constitution, Kuwait held its first parliamentary elections in 1963. Kuwait was the first Arab state in the Persian Gulf to establish a constitution and parliament.\nAlthough Kuwait formally gained independence in 1961, Iraq initially refused to recognize the country's independence by maintaining that Kuwait is part of Iraq, albeit Iraq later briefly backed down following a show of force by Britain and Arab League support of Kuwait's independence. The short-lived Operation Vantage crisis evolved in July 1961, as the Iraqi government threatened to invade Kuwait and the invasion was finally averted following plans by the Arab League to form an international Arab force against the potential Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. As a result of Operation Vantage, the Arab League took over the border security of Kuwait and the British had withdrawn their forces by 19 October. Iraqi prime minister Abd al-Karim Qasim was killed in a coup in 1963 but, although Iraq recognised Kuwaiti independence and the military threat was perceived to be reduced, Britain continued to monitor the situation and kept forces available to protect Kuwait until 1971. There had been no Iraqi military action against Kuwait at the time: this was attributed to the political and military situation within Iraq which continued to be unstable. A treaty of friendship between Iraq and Kuwait was signed in 1963 by which Iraq recognised the 1932 border of Kuwait. The Kuwait-Iraq 1973 Sanita border skirmish evolved on 20 March 1973, when Iraqi army units occupied El-Samitah near the Kuwaiti border, which evoked an international crisis.\nOn 6 February 1974, Palestinian militants occupied the Japanese embassy in Kuwait, taking the ambassador and ten others hostage. The militants' motive was to support the Japanese Red Army members and Palestinian militants who were holding hostages on a Singaporean ferry in what is known as the \"Laju\" incident. Ultimately, the hostages were released, and the guerrillas allowed to fly to Aden. This was the first time Palestinian guerrillas struck in Kuwait as the Al Sabah ruling family, headed by Sheikh Sabah Al-Salim Al-Sabah, funded the Palestinian resistance movement. Kuwait had been a regular endpoint for Palestinian plane hijacking in the past and had considered itself safe.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Kuwait was the most developed country in the region. Kuwait was first Middle East country to diversify its revenue away from oil exports, establishing the Kuwait Investment Authority as the world's first sovereign wealth fund. From the 1970s onward, Kuwait scored highest of all Arab countries on the Human Development Index, and Kuwait University, founded in 1966, attracted students from neighboring countries. Kuwait's theatre industry was renowned throughout the Arab world.\nAt the time, Kuwait's press was described as one of the freest in the world. Kuwait was the pioneer in the literary renaissance in the Arab region. In 1958, \"Al Arabi\" magazine was first published, the magazine went on to become the most popular magazine in the Arab world. Additionally, Kuwait became a haven for writers and journalists in the region, and many, like the Iraqi poet Ahmed Matar, moved to Kuwait for its strong freedom of expression laws, which surpassed those of any other country in the region.\nKuwaiti society embraced liberal and Western attitudes throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Most Kuwaiti women did not wear the hijab in the 1960s and 1970s. At Kuwait University, mini-skirts were more common than the hijab. \nOil and the social structure of Kuwait were closely interlinked. According to an authoritative of the region such a structure resembled a form of \"new slavery\" with a \"viciously reactionary character\". 90 per cent of the capital generated from oil for investment abroad was concentrated in the hands of eighteen families. The manual as well as a significant section of the managerial workforce was predominantly foreign, mainly Palestinians who were denied Kuwaiti citizenship. Major investment was made into developing new architectural projects reflecting a new liberal economy whilst advancing passive cooling and attempts at weaving in local styles and decoration.\nIn August 1976, in reaction to heightened assembly opposition to his policies, the emir suspended four articles of the constitution concerned with political and civil rights (freedom of the press and dissolution of the legislature) and the assembly itself. In 1980, however, the suspended articles of the constitution were reinstated along with the National Assembly. In 1982 the government submitted sixteen constitutional amendments that, among other things, would have allowed the emir to declare martial law for an extended period and would have increased both the size of the legislature and the length of terms of office. In May 1983, the proposals were formally dropped after several months of debate. Nonetheless, the issue of constitutional revisions continued as a topic of discussion in both the National Assembly and the palace.\nIn the early 1980s, Kuwait experienced a major economic crisis after the Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash and decrease in oil price.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Kuwait ardently supported Iraq. As a result, there were various pro-Iran terror attacks across Kuwait, including the 1983 bombings, the attempted assassination of Emir Jaber in May 1985, the 1985 Kuwait City bombings, and the hijacking of several Kuwait Airways planes. Kuwait's economy and scientific research sector significantly suffered due to the pro-Iran terror attacks.\nIn 1986, the constitution was again suspended, along with the National Assembly. As with the previous suspension, popular opposition to this move emerged; indeed, the prodemocracy movement of 1989-90 took its name, the Constitutional Movement, from the demand for a return to constitutional life.\nAfter the Iran\u2013Iraq War ended, Kuwait declined an Iraqi request to forgive its US$65 billion debt. An economic rivalry between the two countries ensued after Kuwait increased its oil production by 40 percent.\nThe Iraq\u2013Kuwait dispute also involved historical claims to Kuwait's territory. Kuwait had been a part of the Ottoman Empire's province of Basra, something that Iraq said made Kuwait rightful Iraqi territory. Kuwait's ruling dynasty, the Al Sabah family, had concluded a protectorate agreement in 1899 that assigned responsibility for Kuwait's foreign affairs to the United Kingdom. The UK drew the border between Kuwait and Iraq in 1922, making Iraq almost entirely landlocked by limiting its access to the Persian Gulf coastline. Kuwait rejected Iraq's attempts to secure further coastline provisions in the region. Iraq accused Kuwait of exceeding its OPEC quotas for oil production. In order for the cartel to maintain its desired price of $18 per barrel, discipline was required. Kuwait was consistently overproducing; in part to repair infrastructure losses caused by the Iran\u2013Iraq War attacks on Kuwait and to pay for the losses of economic scandals. The result was a slump in the oil price\u00a0\u2013 as low as \u00a0\u2013 with a resulting loss of $7\u00a0billion a year to Iraq, equal to its 1989 balance of payments deficit. Resulting revenues struggled to support the government's basic costs, let alone repair Iraq's damaged infrastructure. Iraq looked for more discipline, with little success. The Iraqi government described it as a form of economic warfare, which it claimed was aggravated by Kuwait slant-drilling across the border into Iraq's Rumaila oil field. At the same time, Saddam looked for closer ties with those Arab states that had supported Iraq in the war. This move was supported by the US, who believed that Iraqi ties with pro-Western Gulf states would help bring and maintain Iraq inside the US' sphere of influence.\nIn 1989, it appeared that Iraq\u2013Kuwait relations, strong during the war, would be maintained. A pact of non-interference and non-aggression was signed between the countries, followed by a Kuwaiti-Iraqi deal for Iraq to supply Kuwait with water for drinking and irrigation, although a request for Kuwait to lease Iraq Umm Qasr was rejected. GCC-backed development projects were hampered by Iraq's large debts, even with the demobilization of 200,000 soldiers. Iraq also looked to increase arms production so as to become an exporter, although the success of these projects was also restrained by Iraq's obligations; in Iraq, resentment to OPEC's controls mounted.\nIraq's relations with its other Arab neighbors were degraded by mounting violence in Iraq against expatriate groups, who were well-employed during the war, by unemployed Iraqis, among them demobilized soldiers. These events drew little notice outside the Arab world because of fast-moving events directly related to the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe. However, the US did begin to condemn Iraq's human rights record, including the well-known use of torture. The UK also condemned the execution of Farzad Bazoft, a journalist working for the British newspaper \"The Observer\". Following Saddam's declaration that \"binary chemical weapons\" would be used on Israel if it used military force against Iraq, Washington halted part of its funding. A UN mission to the Israeli-occupied territories, where riots had resulted in Palestinian deaths, was vetoed by the US, making Iraq deeply skeptical of US foreign policy aims in the region, combined with the reliance of the US on Middle Eastern energy reserves.\nGulf War (1990\u201391).\nTensions increased further in summer 1990, after Iraq complained to OPEC claiming that Kuwait was stealing its oil from a field near the border by slant drilling of the Rumaila field. In early July 1990, Iraq complained about Kuwait's behavior, such as not respecting their quota, and openly threatened to take military action. On the 23rd, the CIA reported that Iraq had moved 30,000 troops to the Iraq-Kuwait border, and the US naval fleet in the Persian Gulf was placed on alert. Saddam believed an anti-Iraq conspiracy was developing\u00a0\u2013 Kuwait had begun talks with Iran, and Iraq's rival Syria had arranged a visit to Egypt. Upon review by the Secretary of Defense, it was found that Syria indeed planned a strike against Iraq in the coming days. Saddam immediately used funding to incorporate central intelligence into Syria and ultimately prevented the impending air strike. On 15 July 1990, Saddam's government laid out its combined objections to the Arab League, including that policy moves were costing Iraq $1\u00a0billion a year, that Kuwait was still using the Rumaila oil field, that loans made by the UAE and Kuwait could not be considered debts to its \"Arab brothers\". He threatened force against Kuwait and the UAE, saying: \"The policies of some Arab rulers are American\u00a0... They are inspired by America to undermine Arab interests and security.\" The US sent aerial refuelling planes and combat ships to the Persian Gulf in response to these threats. Discussions in Jeddah mediated on the Arab League's behalf by Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak, were held on 31 July and led Mubarak to believe that a peaceful course could be established.\nOn the 25th, Saddam met with April Glaspie, the US Ambassador to Iraq, in Baghdad. The Iraqi leader attacked American policy with regards to Kuwait and the UAE:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGlaspie replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSaddam stated that he would attempt last-ditch negotiations with the Kuwaitis but Iraq \"would not accept death\".\nAccording to Glaspie's own account, she stated in reference to the precise border between Kuwait and Iraq. Glaspie similarly believed that war was not imminent.\nThe invasion of Kuwait and annexation by Iraq took place on 2 August 1990. The initial casus belli was claimed to be support for a Kuwaiti rebellion against the Al Sabah family.\nAn Iraqi-backed Kuwaiti puppet leader named Alaa Hussein Ali was installed as head of the \"Provisional Government of Free Kuwait.\" Iraq annexed Kuwait on 8 August. The war was traumatic to both countries.\nKuwaiti civilians founded a local armed resistance movement following the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The Kuwaiti resistance's casualty rate far exceeded that of the coalition military forces and Western hostages. The resistance predominantly consisted of ordinary citizens who lacked any form of training and supervision.\nThe underground resistance was punished by summary executions and torture. Almost all Kuwaitis at the time lost some family member. In addition, half the population, including native and foreign-born fled Kuwait to escape persecution.\nGeorge H. W. Bush condemned the invasion, and led efforts to drive out the Iraqi forces. Authorized by the United Nations Security Council, an American-led coalition of 34 nations fought the Gulf War to liberate Kuwait. Aerial bombardments began on 17 January 1991, and after several weeks a U.S.-led United Nations (UN) coalition began a ground assault on 23 February 1991 that achieved a complete removal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait in four days.\nControversies.\nOil spill.\nOn 23 January 1991, Iraq dumped of crude oil into the Persian Gulf, causing the largest offshore oil spill in history at that time. It was reported as a deliberate natural resources attack to keep US Marines from coming ashore (\"Missouri\" and \"Wisconsin\" had shelled Failaka Island during the war to reinforce the idea that there would be an amphibious assault attempt). About 30\u201340% of this came from allied raids on Iraqi coastal targets.\nThe land based Kuwait oil spill surpassed the Lakeview Gusher, which spilled nine million barrels in 1910, as the largest oil spill in recorded history.\nKuwaiti oil fires.\nThe Kuwaiti oil fires were caused by the Iraqi military setting fire to 700 oil wells as part of a scorched earth policy while retreating from Kuwait in 1991 after conquering the country but being driven out by coalition forces. The fires started in January and February 1991, and the last one was extinguished by November.\nThe resulting fires burned uncontrollably because of the dangers of sending in firefighting crews. Land mines had been placed in areas around the oil wells, and a military cleaning of the areas was necessary before the fires could be put out. Somewhere around of oil were lost each day. Eventually, privately contracted crews extinguished the fires, at a total cost of US$1.5\u00a0billion to Kuwait. By that time, however, the fires had burned for approximately 10 months, causing widespread pollution in Kuwait.\nThe Kuwaiti Oil Minister estimated between twenty-five and fifty million barrels of unburned oil from damaged facilities pooled to create approximately 300 oil lakes, that contaminated around 40 million tons of sand and earth. The mixture of desert sand, unignited oil spilled and soot generated by the burning oil wells formed layers of hard \"tarcrete\", which covered nearly five percent of Kuwait's land mass.\nCleaning efforts were led by the Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research and the Arab Oil Co., who tested a number of technologies including the use of petroleum-degrading bacteria on the oil lakes.\nVegetation in most of the contaminated areas adjoining the oil lakes began recovering by the mid-1990s, but the dry climate has also partially solidified some of the lakes. Over time the oil has continued to sink into the sand, with potential consequences for Kuwait's small groundwater resources.\nHighway of Death.\nOn the night of 26\u201327 February 1991, several Iraqi forces began leaving Kuwait on the main highway north of Al Jahra in a column of some 1,400 vehicles. A patrolling E-8 Joint STARS aircraft observed the retreating forces and relayed the information to the DDM-8 air operations center in Saudi Arabia. These vehicles and the retreating soldiers were subsequently attacked by two A-10 aircraft, resulting in a 60\u00a0km stretch of highway strewn with debris\u2014the Highway of Death. \"New York Times\" reporter Maureen Dowd wrote, \"With the Iraqi leader facing military defeat, Mr. Bush decided that he would rather gamble on a violent and potentially unpopular ground war than risk the alternative: an imperfect settlement hammered out by the Soviets and Iraqis that world opinion might accept as tolerable.\"\nChuck Horner, Commander of US and allied air operations, has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[By February 26], the Iraqis totally lost heart and started to evacuate occupied Kuwait, but airpower halted the caravan of Iraqi Army and plunderers fleeing toward Basra. This event was later called by the media \"The Highway of Death.\" There were certainly a lot of dead vehicles, but not so many dead Iraqis. They'd already learned to scamper off into the desert when our aircraft started to attack. Nevertheless, some people back home wrongly chose to believe we were cruelly and unusually punishing our already whipped foes.\nBy February 27, talk had turned toward terminating the hostilities. Kuwait was free. We were not interested in governing Iraq. So the question became \"How do we stop the killing.\"\nNayriah testimony.\nThe Nayirah testimony was a false testimony given before the United States Congressional Human Rights Caucus in October 1990 by a 15-year-old girl who was publicly identified by only her first name, Nayirah. The testimony was widely publicized in the American media and was cited numerous times by United States senators and President George H. W. Bush in their rationale to back Kuwait in the Gulf War. In 1992, it was revealed that Nayirah's last name was Al-\u1e62aba\u1e25 () and that she was the daughter of Saud bin Nasir Al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti ambassador to the United States. Furthermore, it was revealed that her testimony was organized as part of the Citizens for a Free Kuwait public relations campaign, which was run by the American public relations firm Hill &amp; Knowlton for the Kuwaiti government. Following this, al-Sabah's testimony has come to be regarded as a classic example of modern atrocity propaganda.\nIn her emotional testimony, Nayirah claimed that after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait she had witnessed Iraqi soldiers take babies out of incubators in a Kuwaiti hospital, take the incubators, and leave the babies to die.\nHer story was initially corroborated by Amnesty International, a British NGO, which published several independent reports about the killings and testimony from evacuees. Following the liberation of Kuwait, reporters were given access to the country. An ABC report found that \"patients, including premature babies, did die, when many of Kuwait's nurses and doctors ... fled\" but Iraqi troops \"almost certainly had not stolen hospital incubators and left hundreds of Kuwaiti babies to die.\" Amnesty International reacted by issuing a correction, with executive director John Healey subsequently accusing the Bush administration of \"opportunistic manipulation of the international human rights movement\".\nPalestinian exodus from Kuwait.\nSignificant demographic changes occurred in Kuwait as a result of the Gulf War. During the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait, 200,000 Palestinians voluntarily fled Kuwait due to various reasons (fear or persecution, food shortages, medical care difficulties, financial shortages, fear of arrest and mistreatment at roadblocks by Iraqis). After the Gulf War in 1991, nearly 200,000 Palestinians fled Kuwait, partly due to economic burdens, regulations on residence and fear of abuse by Kuwaiti security forces.\nPrior to the Gulf War, Palestinians numbered 400,000 of Kuwait's population of 2.2 million. The Palestinians who fled Kuwait were mostly Jordanian citizens. In 2012, relations resumed and 80,000 Palestinians resided in Kuwait.\nAftermath of Gulf War liberation (1991\u20132006).\nImmediately after liberation in 1991, the United Nations, under Security Council Resolution 687, demarcated the Iraq-Kuwait boundary on the basis of the 1932 and the 1963 agreements between the two states. In November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait, which had been further spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 773 (1992) and 833 (1993).\nCriticism of the Al Sabah family in Kuwait became more pronounced following the country's return to sovereignty in 1991. The Al Sabah family were criticized for their actions during the Iraqi occupation. They were the first to flee Kuwait during the invasion. In early 1992, many press restrictions were lifted in Kuwait. After the October 1992 election, the National Assembly exercised a constitutional right to review all emiri decrees promulgated while the assembly was in dissolution. It has been suggested that the United States significantly pressured Kuwait to implement a more \"democratic\" political system as a condition for the country's liberation in 1991.\nThe United Nations Security Council has passed nearly 60 resolutions on Iraq and Kuwait since Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The most relevant to this issue is Resolution 678, passed on 29 November 1990. It authorizes \"member states co-operating with the Government of Kuwait ... to use all necessary means\" to (1) implement Security Council Resolution 660 and other resolutions calling for the end of Iraq's occupation of Kuwait and withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwaiti territory and (2) \"restore international peace and security in the area\". Resolution 678 has not been rescinded or nullified by succeeding resolutions and Iraq was not alleged after 1991 to invade Kuwait or to threaten to do so.\nIn March 2003, Kuwait became the springboard for the US-led invasion of Iraq. In preparation for the invasion, 100,000 U.S. troops assembled in Kuwait by 18 February.\nPolitical crisis and economic turmoil (2006\u2013present).\nFrom 2006 onwards, Kuwait has suffered from chronic political deadlocks and longstanding periods of cabinet reshuffles and dissolutions. This has significantly hampered investment and economic reforms in Kuwait, making the country's economy much more dependent on oil.\nOn 15 January 2006, Emir Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmed died and his crown prince, Sheikh Saad Al-Abdullah of the Salem branch was named Emir. On 23 January 2006, the assembly unanimously voted in favor of Sheikh Saad Al-Abdullah abdicating in favor of Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed, citing his illness with a form of dementia. Instead of naming a successor from the Salem branch as per convention, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed named his half-brother Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmed as crown prince and his nephew Sheikh Nasser Al-Mohammed as prime minister.\nIn August 2011, supporters of Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah \"discovered\" documents that incriminated up to one-third of Kuwaiti politicians in what quickly became the largest political corruption scandal in Kuwaiti history. By October 2011, 16 Kuwaiti politicians were alleged to have received payments of $350m in return for their support of government policy.\nIn December 2013, allies of Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad claimed to possess tapes purportedly showing that Sheikh Nasser Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah and Jassem Al-Kharafi were discussing plans to topple the Kuwaiti government. Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad appeared on local channel Al-Watan TV describing his claims.\nIn March 2014, David S. Cohen, then Under Secretary of the Treasury for Terrorism and Financial Intelligence, accused Kuwait of funding terrorism. Since the end of the Gulf War in 1991, accusations of Kuwait funding terrorism have been very common and come from a wide variety of sources including intelligence reports, Western government officials, scholarly research, and renowned journalists. From 2014 to 2015, Kuwait was frequently described as the world's biggest source of terrorism funding, particularly for ISIS and Al-Qaeda.\nIn April 2014, the Kuwaiti government imposed a total media blackout to ban any reporting or discussion on the issue. In March 2015, Kuwait's public prosecutor dropped all investigations into the alleged coup plot and Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad read a public apology on Kuwait state television renouncing the coup allegations. Since then, \"numerous associates of his have been targeted and detained by the Kuwaiti authorities on various charges,\" most notably members of the so-called \"Fintas Group\" that had allegedly been the original circulators of the fake coup video.\nOn 26 June 2015, a suicide bombing took place at a Shia Muslim mosque in Kuwait. The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant claimed responsibility for the attack. Twenty-seven people were killed and 227 people were wounded. In the aftermath, a lawsuit was filed accusing the Kuwaiti government of negligence and direct responsibility for the terror attack.\nIn December 2015, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad was convicted of \"disrespect to the public prosecutor and attributing a remark to the country's ruler without a special permission from the emir's court,\" issuing a suspended six-month prison sentence and a fine of 1,000 Kuwaiti Dinar. In January 2016, the Kuwaiti appeals court overturned the prior ruling and cleared Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad of all charges.\nIn November 2018, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad, along with four other defendants, were charged in Switzerland with forgery related to the fake coup video. Shortly thereafter, Sheikh Ahmad Al-Fahad temporarily stepped aside from his role at the International Olympic Committee, pending an ethics committee hearing into the allegations.\nIn June 2019, government official Fahad Al Rajaan and his spouse were given life sentences in absentia by the Kuwait criminal court; personal property was confiscated, and they were ordered to repay $82 million, as well as being fined \"twice that amount.\nIn November 2019, former deputy prime minister and minister of interior Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah Al Sabah was dismissed from office after minister of defense Sheikh Nasser Sabah Al Ahmed Al Sabah filed a complaint with the Kuwaiti Attorney General alleging embezzlement of 240 million Kuwaiti dinars ($794.5 million) of Kuwait government funds had taken place during Khaled's tenure as minister of defense.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated Kuwait's economic crisis. Kuwait's economy faced a budget deficit of $46 billion in 2020. Kuwait was downgraded by S&amp;P Global Ratings two times in less than two years because of declining oil revenue and delayed fiscal reforms.\nIn July 2020, the US Department of Justice filed an asset forfeiture claim against The Mountain Beverly Hills and other real property in the United States, alleging a group of three Kuwaiti officials, including Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah, set up unauthorized accounts in the name of the country's Military Attache Office in London, known as the 'Army Fund.' They allegedly funded the accounts with over $100m of Kuwaiti public money and used it for their own purposes.\nIn September 2020, Kuwait's Crown Prince Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah became the 16th Emir of Kuwait and the successor to Emir Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, who died at the age of 91. In October 2020, Sheikh Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah was appointed as the Crown Prince.\nSince January 2021, Kuwait has been experiencing its worst political crisis in many decades. Kuwait is also facing a looming debt crisis according to various media sources. Kuwait is widely considered the region's most oil-dependent country with the least amount of economic diversification. According to the World Economic Forum, Kuwait is the least economically developed Gulf country. Kuwait has the weakest infrastructure in the entire GCC region.\nIn March 2021, the Kuwaiti ministerial court ordered the detention of Sheikh Khaled Al Jarrah, who was then arrested and imprisoned.\nOn April 13, 2021, a Kuwaiti court ordered the detention of former prime minister Sheikh Jaber Al-Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah on corruption charges related to the 'Army Fund.' He is the first former Kuwaiti prime minister to face pre-trial detention over graft charges. The crimes allegedly took place during Jaber Al-Sabah's 2001\u201311 term as defense minister.\nIn August 2021, Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad attended court in Switzerland alongside three of the other four defendants. In September 2021, the Swiss court convicted Sheikh Ahmed Al-Fahad of forgery along with the four other defendants. He denied wrongdoing and plans to appeal. \nIn December 2023, Sheikh Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah was appointed as 17th Emir of Kuwait after the death of Nawaf Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16686", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16686", "title": "Geography of Kuwait", "text": " \nKuwait is a country in West Asia, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iraq and Saudi Arabia. Kuwait is located at the far northwestern corner of the Persian Gulf. Kuwait is 17,820 square kilometres in size. At its most distant points, it is about north to south, and east to west. Kuwait has 10 islands. Kuwait's area consists mostly of desert.\nBoundaries and geographic features.\nAs previously mentioned, Kuwait borders the Persian Gulf with of coast. Within its territory are ten islands, two of which, Bubiyan (the largest) and Warbah, are strategically important.\nKuwait's most prominent geographic feature is Kuwait Bay (Jun al Kuwayt), which indents the shoreline for about forty kilometers, providing natural protection for the port of Kuwait, and accounts for nearly one third of the country's shoreline.\nTo the north and northwest, there is the historically contested border between Kuwait and Iraq. Although the Iraqi government, which had first asserted a claim to rule Kuwait in 1938, recognized the borders with Kuwait in 1963 (based on agreements made earlier in the century), it continued to press Kuwait for control over Bubiyan and Warbah islands through the 1960s and 1970s.\nTo the south and southwest, Kuwait shares a 250-km border with Saudi Arabia. The boundary between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia was set by the Treaty of Al Uqayr in 1922, which also established the Saudi\u2013Kuwaiti neutral zone of 5,700 square kilometers between the two nations. In 1966, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia agreed to divide the neutral zone; the partitioning agreement making each country responsible for administration in its portion was signed in December 1969. The resources in the area, now known as the Divided Zone, are not affected by the agreement. The oil from onshore and offshore fields continues to be shared equally between the two countries.\nIn August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait and, shortly thereafter, formally incorporated the entire country into Iraq. Under United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolution 687, after the restoration of Kuwaiti sovereignty in 1991, a UN commission undertook formal demarcation of the borders on the basis of those agreed to in 1963. The boundary was demarcated in 1992. Iraq initially refused to accept the commission's findings but ultimately accepted them in November 1994.\nClimate.\nKuwait has an arid climate. Rainfall in the nation varies from a year. Actual rainfall has ranged from a year to as much as . In summer, average daily high temperatures range from ; the highest ever temperature recorded in Kuwait was at Mitribah on 21 July 2016 which is the highest recorded temperature in Asia and also the third highest in the world. The summers are relentlessly long, punctuated mainly by dramatic dust storms in June and July when northwesterly winds cover the cities in sand. In late summer, which is more humid, there are occasional sharp, brief thunderstorms.\nBy November summer is over, and colder winter weather sets in, dropping temperatures to as low as at night; daytime temperatures are in the upper 20s \u00b0C (upper 70s to low 80s \u00b0F). Frost rarely occurs; rain is more common and falls mostly in the spring.\nKuwait's winter is colder than in other Persian Gulf countries, such as Bahrain, Qatar or United Arab Emirates. Kuwait experiences colder weather because it is situated farther north, and because of cold winds blowing from upper Iraq and Iran.\nNature reserves.\nAt present, there are five protected areas in Kuwait recognized by the IUCN. In response to Kuwait becoming the 169th signatory of the Ramsar Convention, Bubiyan Island's Mubarak al-Kabeer reserve was designated as the country's first Wetland of International Importance. The 50,948\u00a0ha reserve consists of small lagoons and shallow salt marshes and is important as a stop-over for migrating birds on two migration routes. The reserve is home to the world's largest breeding colony of crab-plover.\nBiodiversity.\nCurrently, 444 species of birds have been recorded in Kuwait, 18 species of which breed in the country. Due to its location at the head of the Persian Gulf near the mouth of the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river, Kuwait is situated at the crossroads of many major bird migration routes and between two and three million birds pass each year. Kuwait's marine and littoral ecosystems contain the bulk of the country's biodiversity heritage. The marshes in northern Kuwait and Jahra have become increasingly important as a refuge for passage migrants.\nTwenty eight species of mammal are found in Kuwait; animals such as gerboa, desert rabbits and hedgehogs are common in the desert. Among the endangered mammalian species are the red fox and wild cat. Forty reptile species have been recorded although none are endemic to Kuwait.\nKuwait, Oman and Yemen are the only locations where the endangered smoothtooth blacktip shark is confirmed as occurring.\nKuwaiti islands are important breeding areas for four species of tern and the socotra cormorant. Kubbar Island has been recognised an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because it supports a breeding colony of white-cheeked terns.\nGeology and aquifers.\nThe land was formed in a recent geologic era. In the south, limestone rises in a long, north-oriented dome that lies beneath the surface. It is within and below this formation that the principal oil fields, Kuwait's most important natural resource, are located. In the west and north, layers of sand, gravel, silt, and clay overlie the limestone to a depth of more than 210 meters. The upper portions of these beds are part of a mass of sediment deposited by a great wadi whose most recent channel was the Wadi al Batin, the broad shallow valley forming the western boundary of the country.\nOn the western side of the Al Rawdatayn geological formation, a freshwater aquifer was discovered in 1960 and became Kuwait's principal water source. The supply is insufficient to support extensive irrigation, but it is tapped to supplement the distilled water supply that fills most of the country's needs. The only other exploited aquifer lies in the permeable zone in the top of the limestone of the Ash Shuaybah field south and east of the city of Kuwait. Unlike water from the Al Rawdatayn aquifer, water from the Ash Shuaybah aquifer is brackish. Millions of liters a day of this water are pumped for commercial and household purposes.\nWater and marshes.\nKuwait is part of the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system basin. Several Tigris\u2013Euphrates confluences form parts of the Kuwait\u2013Iraq border. Bubiyan Island is part of the Shatt al-Arab delta. Kuwait is partially part of the Mesopotamian Marshes. Kuwait does not currently have any permanent rivers within its territory. However, Kuwait does have several wadis, the most notable of which is Wadi al-Batin which forms the border between Kuwait and Iraq. Kuwait also has several river-like marine channels around Bubiyan Island, most notably Khawr Abd Allah which is now an estuary, but once was the point where the Shatt al-Arab emptied into the Persian Gulf. Khawr Abd Allah is located in southern Iraq and northern Kuwait, the Iraq-Kuwait border divides the lower portion of the estuary, but adjacent to the port of Umm Qasr the estuary becomes wholly Iraqi. It forms the northeast coastline of Bubiyan Island and the north coastline of Warbah Island.\nKuwait relies on water desalination as a primary source of fresh water for drinking and domestic purposes. There are currently more than six desalination plants. Kuwait was the first country in the world to use desalination to supply water for large-scale domestic use. The history of desalination in Kuwait dates back to 1951 when the first distillation plant was commissioned.\nKuwait's fresh water resources are limited to groundwater, desalinated seawater, and treated wastewater effluents. There are three major municipal wastewater treatment plants. Most water demand is currently satisfied through seawater desalination plants. Sewage disposal is handled by a national sewage network that covers 98% of facilities in the country.\nHuman geography.\nThe bulk of the Kuwaiti population lives in the coastal capital of the city of Kuwait. Smaller populations inhabit the nearby city of Al Jahrah, smaller desert and coastal towns, and, prior to the Persian Gulf War, some of the several nearby gulf islands, notably Faylakah.\n* Total: 17,818 km\u00b2\n* Land: 17,818 km\u00b2\n* Water: 0 km\u00b2\n Slightly smaller than Fiji\n* Total: 475 km\n* Border countries: Iraq 254 km, Saudi Arabia 221 km\n 499 km\n* Territorial sea: \n* Lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m\n* Highest prominence: Mutla Ridge 142 m\n* Highest point: unnamed site without prominence in the Jahra Governorate at 291 m\n Petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas\n* Arable land: 0.6%\n* Permanent crops: 0.3%\n* Permanent pasture: 7.6%\n* Forest: 0.4%\n* Other: 91.1% (2011)\n 86 km\u00b2 (2007)\n 0.02 km3 (2011)\n* Total: 0.91 km3/yr (47%/2%/51%)\n* Per capita: 441.2 m3/yr (2005)\n Sudden cloudbursts are common from October to April \u2013 they bring heavy rain which can damage roads and houses; sandstorms and dust storms occur throughout the year, but are most common between March and August\n Limited natural fresh water resources; some of world's largest and most sophisticated desalination facilities provide much of the water; air and water pollution; desertification\n* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "16687", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16687", "title": "Demographics of Kuwait", "text": " \nThis is a demography of the population of Kuwait ().\nExpatriates account for around 60% of Kuwait's total population, with Kuwaitis constituting 38%-42% of the total population. The government and some Kuwaiti citizens consider the proportion of expatriates (which has been relatively stable since the mid-1970s) to be a problem, and in 2016 the number of deportations increased. Most were deported for outstaying their residency permits but others also for traffic offences.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\nThe biggest population difficulty in Kuwait involves the Bedoon, stateless people. According to Human Rights Watch in 1995, Kuwait has produced 300,000 stateless Bedoon. Kuwait has the largest number of stateless people in the entire region. The statelessness challenge for the Bedoon in Kuwait is largely sectarian.\nAccording to recent statistics provided by the Central Statistics Bureau, as of January 2024, Kuwait's population reached 4.91 million, an increase of 119,700 from the previous year's 4.79 million. The number of Kuwaiti citizens rose by 28,700 to reach a total of 1.545 million. Specifically, the number of male citizens increased to 758,700, and female citizens reached 787,000. Concurrently, the expatriate population also increased by 90,990, totaling 3.36 million. Amongst the expatriates, the male population reached 2.26 million and the female population 1.1 million.\nStructure of the population.\nStructure of the population (Estimates) (1.01.2020):\nSource:\nGovernorates.\nKuwait consists of six governorates: Hawalli, Asimah, Farwaniyah, Jahra, Ahmadi and Mubarak Al-Kabeer. Most people in Kuwait live in the governorates of Hawalli, Asimah, and Farwaniyah.\nSource: \nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nBy continent.\nSource:\nBy nationality.\nThe following is a firm containing estimations from countries' embassies:\nKuwaiti 41.4%, Arab expat 21.4%, Asian (mostly South Asian) 35.3%, African 1%, other 0.7% (includes European, North American, South American, and Australian) (2018 est.) \nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16688", "revid": "49178977", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16688", "title": "Government of Kuwait", "text": "Political system in Kuwait\nKuwait is an emirate. The Emir of Kuwait, a hereditary monarch from the Al Sabah ruling family appoints the prime minister (who is always a royal) and other members of government, as well as members of judicial, police and financial institutions. \nExecutive branch.\nThe Constitution of Kuwait was approved and promulgated on 17 November 1962. \nGovernment.\nThe prime minister chooses the cabinet of ministers, which form the government. The prime minister is a member of the ruling family and is appointed by the Emir.\nEmir.\nCurrent Emir: Mishal Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah &lt;br&gt;\nCurrent Crown Prince: Sabah Al-Khalid Al-Sabah\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary in Kuwait is not independent of the government, the Emir appoints all the judges and many judges are foreign nationals from Egypt. In each administrative district of Kuwait, there is a Summary Court (also called Courts of First Instance which are composed of one or more divisions, like a Traffic Court or an Administrative Court); then there is Court of Appeals; Cassation Court, and lastly - a Constitutional Court which interprets the constitution and deals with disputes related to the constitutionality of laws. Kuwait has a civil law legal system.\nLegislative branch.\nLegislative power is exercised by the Emir. He issues laws and policies via decrees. \nThe National Assembly was formerly the legislature, established in 1963. Its predecessor, the 1938 National Assembly was formally dissolved in 1939 after \"one member, Sulaiman al-Adasani, in possession of a letter, signed by other Assembly members, addressed to Iraq's King Ghazi, requesting Kuwait's immediate incorporation into Iraq\". This demand came after the merchant members of the Assembly attempted to extract oil money from Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, a suggestion refused by him and upon which he instigated a crackdown which arrested the Assembly members in 1939. The National Assembly had up to 50 MPs. \nGulf War.\nDuring the 1990-1991 Gulf War, Saddam Hussein attempted to make Kuwait the 19th province of Iraq (known as Kuwait Governorate). During the Iraqi occupation, Ali Hassan al-Majid became the governor and took over what was left of the original government.\nVIP Flight.\nThe State of Kuwait operates several VIP jets used mainly by the Emir of Kuwait:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16689", "revid": "50746841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16689", "title": "Economy of Kuwait", "text": "Kuwait has a petroleum-based economy that is classified as emerging and high-income. By various per-capita measures of economic output, Kuwait is one of the wealthiest countries in the world. Kuwait advocates since it's independence for a state-led capitalist economy system.\nEnergy.\nPetroleum and natural gas.\nIn 1934, the Emir of Kuwait granted an oil concession to the Kuwait Oil Co. (KOC), jointly owned by the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (later British Petroleum Company) and Gulf Oil Corporation In 1976, the Kuwaiti Government nationalized KOC.\nThe Kuwait Petroleum Corporation (KPC), an integrated international oil company, is the parent company of the government's operations in the petroleum sector, and includes Kuwait Oil Company, which produced oil and gas; Kuwait National Petroleum Co., refining and domestic sales; Petrochemical Industries Co., producing ammonia and urea; Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Co., with several concessions in developing countries; Kuwait Oil Tanker Co.; and Santa Fe International Corp. The latter, purchased outright in 1982, gives KPC a worldwide presence in the petroleum industry.\nKPC also has purchased from Gulf Oil Co. refineries and associated service stations in the Benelux nations and Scandinavia, as well as storage facilities and a network of service stations in Italy. In 1987, KPC bought a 19% share in British Petroleum, which was later reduced to 10%. KPC markets its products in Europe under the brand Q8 and is interested in the markets of the United States and Japan.\nKuwait has about of recoverable oil reserves. Estimated capacity, before the war, was about . During the Iraqi occupation, Kuwait's oil-producing capacity was reduced to practically nothing. However, tremendous recovery and improvements have been made since. Oil production was by the end of 1992, and pre-war capacity was restored in 1993. Kuwait's production capacity is estimated to be . Kuwait plans to increase its capacity to by 2005.\nAs part of Kuwait Vision 2035, Kuwait aims to position itself as a global hub for the petrochemical industry. Al Zour Refinery is the largest refinery in the Middle East. Al Zour Refinery is a Kuwait-China cooperation project under the Belt and Road Initiative.\nRenewable energy.\nAs part of Kuwait Vision 2035, Kuwait inaugurated its largest renewable energy park, Shagaya Renewable Energy Park, which includes concentrated solar power, solar photovoltaic, and wind power plants. The park consists of four phases with a target capacity of 4,000 MW. It is set to be one of the largest renewable energy parks in the world.\nSteel manufacturing.\nSteel manufacturing is Kuwait's second biggest industry. United Steel Industrial Company (KWT Steel) is Kuwait's main steel manufacturing company, the company caters to all of Kuwait's domestic market demands (particularly construction). Kuwait is self-sufficient in steel.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2016, Kuwait's food self-sufficiency ratio was 49.5% in vegetables, 38.7% in meat, 12.4% in dairy, 24.9% in fruits, and 0.4% in cereals. 8.5% of Kuwait's entire territory consists of agricultural land, while arable land covers 0.6% of Kuwait's entire territory. Historically, Jahra was a predominantly agricultural area. There are currently various farms in Jahra.\nIn 2017, agriculture (including fisheries) accounted for almost 0.4 percent of the gross domestic product. Around 4 percent of the economically active population works in agriculture, almost all foreigners. The majority of farm owners are investors. The total agricultural land covered 1,521\u00a0km2 in 2014.\nThe agriculture industry is hampered by the limited water and arable land. The government has experimented in growing food through hydroponics and carefully managed farms. However, most of the soil which was suitable for farming in south central Kuwait was destroyed when Iraqi troops set fire to oil wells in the area and created vast \"oil lakes\". Fish and shrimp are plentiful in territorial waters, and largescale commercial fishing has been undertaken locally and in the Indian Ocean.\nFinance.\nKuwait has a leading position in the financial industry in the GCC. The Emir has promoted the idea that Kuwait should focus its energies, in terms of economic development, on the financial industry.\nThe historical preeminence of Kuwait (among the Gulf monarchies) in finance dates back to the founding of the National Bank of Kuwait in 1952. The bank was the first local publicly traded corporation in the Gulf. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, an alternative stock market, trading in shares of Gulf companies, emerged in Kuwait, the Souk Al-Manakh. At its peak, its market capitalization was the third highest in the world, behind only the U.S. and Japan, and ahead of the UK and France.\nKuwait has a large wealth-management industry. Kuwaiti investment companies administer more assets than those of any other GCC country, save the much larger Saudi Arabia. The Kuwait Financial Centre, in a rough calculation, estimated that Kuwaiti firms accounted for over one-third of the total assets under management in the GCC.\nThe relative strength of Kuwait in the financial industry extends to its stock market. For many years, the total valuation of all companies listed on the Kuwaiti exchange far exceeded the value of those on any other GCC bourse, except Saudi Arabia. In 2011, financial and banking companies made up more than half of the market capitalization of the Kuwaiti bourse; among all the Gulf states, the market capitalization of Kuwaiti financial-sector firms was, in total, behind only that of Saudi Arabia. In recent years, Kuwaiti investment companies have invested large percentages of their assets abroad, and their foreign assets have become substantially larger than their domestic assets.\nKuwait is a major source of foreign economic assistance to other states through the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, an autonomous state institution created in 1961 on the pattern of Western and international development agencies. Over the years aid was annually provided to Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, as well as the Palestine Liberation Organization. In 1974, the fund's lending mandate was expanded to include all developing countries in the world.\nReserve funds.\nThe Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA) is Kuwait's sovereign wealth fund specializing in foreign investment. The KIA is the world's oldest sovereign wealth fund. Since 1953, the Kuwaiti government has directed investments into Europe, the United States and the Asia\u2013Pacific. In 2021, the holdings were valued at around $700 billion in assets. It was the 3rd largest sovereign wealth fund in the world.\nThe KIA manages two funds: the General Reserve Fund (GRF) and Future Generations Fund (FGF). The GRF is the main treasurer for the government. It receives all state revenues and all national expenditures are paid out of this fund. The KIA does not disclose its financial assets in public, but it is estimated that the KIA has $410 billion in assets as of February 2014.\nThe KIA was the main source of capital for the Kuwaiti government during the Gulf War. The Kuwaiti government relied on the KIA to pay for coalition expenses and postwar reconstruction. The KIA was worth $100 billion prior to 1990, KIA funds were depleted to $40\u2013$50 billion after the Gulf War.\nIn July 2023, Kuwait plans to create a new sovereign fund, Ciyada, in partnership with the Kuwait Investment Authority (KIA). While the value of the fund has not been specified, the KIA, which currently manages over $800 billion in assets, will play a significant role in studying and implementing the proposed fund. The aim is to develop the local economy, attract foreign investment, and finance major projects to promote economic diversification in Kuwait.\nThe Future Generations Fund (FGF) was created in 1976 by transferring 50% from the general reserve fund at that time. The FGF is a saving funds for future generations. 25% of all state revenues are annually transferred to the fund.\nAll of the FGF is invested abroad, with an estimated 75% invested in the US and Europe and the rest in emerging markets, mainly China and India.\nHealth.\nKuwait has a state-funded healthcare system, which provides treatment without charge to Kuwaiti nationals. There are outpatient clinics in every residential area in Kuwait. A public insurance scheme exists to provide reduced cost healthcare to expatriates. Private healthcare providers also run medical facilities in the country, available to members of their insurance schemes. As part of Kuwait Vision 2035, many new hospitals have opened. In the years leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, Kuwait invested in its health care system at a rate that was proportionally higher than most other GCC countries. As a result, the public hospital sector significantly increased its capacity. Kuwait currently has 20 public hospitals. The new Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Hospital is considered the largest hospital in the Middle East. Kuwait also has 16 private hospitals.\nEntrepreneurship.\nIn the past five years, there has been a significant rise in entrepreneurship and small business creation in Kuwait. The informal sector is also on the rise, mainly due to the popularity of Instagram businesses. In 2020, Kuwait ranked fourth in the MENA region in startup funding after the UAE, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.\nMany Kuwaiti entrepreneurs use the Instagram-based business model.\nTourism.\nIn 2020, Kuwait's domestic travel and tourism spending reached $6.1 billion (up from $1.6 billion in 2019) with family tourism a rapidly growing segment. The WTTC named Kuwait as one of the world's fastest-growing countries in travel and tourism GDP in 2019, with 11.6% year-on-year growth. In 2016, the tourism industry generated nearly $500\u00a0million in revenue. In 2015, tourism accounted for 1.5 percent of the GDP.\nIn 2023, there was a rise in the spending of Kuwaiti citizens on tourism and travel, recorded to be 4.39 billion dinars, marking an increase of 9.2% from the 4 billion dinars recorded in 2022. The surge in tourism expenditures is largely attributable to the introduction of new travel destinations, expanded offerings from airlines catering to family travel, and an increase in interest in events like the Riyadh Season and other festivities. The first quarter of 2023 saw the highest spending (1.36 billion dinars), followed by the second (1.01 billion dinars), third (1.15 billion dinars), and the fourth (870 million dinars), making it the year with the highest spending on travel by Kuwaiti citizens since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, spending by foreign tourists in Kuwait increased by approximately 60%, reaching 533.3 million dinars by the end of 2023, up from 332.6 million dinars in 2022.\nThe Amiri Diwan recently inaugurated the new Kuwait National Cultural District (KNCD), which comprises Sheikh Abdullah Al Salem Cultural Centre, Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre, Al Shaheed Park, and Al Salam Palace. With a capital cost of more than US$1\u00a0billion, the project is one of the largest cultural investments in the world. In November 2016, the Sheikh Jaber Al Ahmad Cultural Centre opened. It is the largest cultural centre and opera house in the Middle East. The Kuwait National Cultural District is a member of the Global Cultural Districts Network. The annual \"Hala Febrayer\" festival attracts tourists from neighboring GCC countries, and includes a variety of events including music concerts, parades, and carnivals. The festival is a month-long commemoration of the liberation of Kuwait, and runs from 1 to 28 February. Liberation Day itself is celebrated on 26 February.\nScience and technology.\nAccording to the United States Patent and Trademark Office, Kuwait registered 448 patents as of 31 December 2015, In the early to mid 2010s, Kuwait registered the largest number of scientific publications and patents per capita regionally. The Kuwaiti government has implemented various programs to foster innovation resulting in patent rights. The WIPO Global Innovation Index found that Kuwait ranks 71st over 139 (for its innovation efficiency ratio (which shows how much innovation output a country is getting for its inputs).\nKuwait was the first country in the region to implement 5G technology. Kuwait is among the world's leading countries in 5G penetration. The Chinese company Huawei has a $1.7 billion investment license in Kuwait to develop the country's ICT sector in line with the Kuwait Vision 2035 strategy.\nSpace.\nKuwait has an emerging space industry driven by the private sector.\nKuwait's Orbital Space in collaboration with the Space Challenges Program and EnduroSat introduced an international initiative called \"Code in Space\". The initiative allows students from around the world to send and execute their own code in space. The code is transmitted from a satellite ground station to a cubesat (nanosatellite) orbiting Earth above sea level. The code is then executed by the satellite's onboard computer and tested under real space environment conditions. The nanosatellite is called \"QMR-KWT\" (Arabic: \u0642\u0645\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0643\u0648\u064a\u062a) which means \"Moon of Kuwait\", translated from Arabic.\nQMR-KWT launched to space on 30 June 2021 on SpaceX Falcon 9 Block 5 rocket and was part of the payload of a satellite carrier called ION SCV Dauntless David by D-Orbit. It was deployed into its final orbit (Sun-synchronous orbit) on 16 July 2021. QMR-KWT is Kuwait's first satellite.\nSeven years after the launch of the world's first communications satellite, Telstar 1, Kuwait in October 1969 inaugurated the first satellite ground station in the Middle East, \"Um Alaish\". The Um Alaish satellite station complex housed several satellite ground stations including Um Alaish 1 (1969), Um Alaish 2 (1977), and Um Alaish 3 (1981). It provided satellite communication services in Kuwait until 1990 when it was destroyed by the Iraqi armed forces during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. In 2019, Kuwait's Orbital Space established an amateur satellite ground station to provide free access to signals from satellites in orbit passing over Kuwait. The station was named Um Alaish 4 to continue the legacy of \"Um Alaish\" satellite station. Um Alaish 4 is member of FUNcube distributed ground station network and the Satellite Networked Open Ground Station project (SatNOGS).\nThe Kuwait Space Rocket (KSR) is a Kuwaiti project to build and launch the first suborbital liquid bi-propellant rocket in Arabia. The project is divided into two phases with two separate vehicles: an initial testing phase with KSR-1 as a test vehicle capable of reaching an altitude of and a more expansive suborbital test phase with the KSR-2 planned to fly to an altitude of .\nKuwait's Orbital Space in collaboration with the Kuwait Scientific Center (TSCK) introduced for the first time in Kuwait the opportunity for students to send a science experiment to space. The objectives of this initiative was to allow students to learn about (a) how science space missions are done; (b) microgravity (weightlessness) environment; (c) how to do science like a real scientist. This opportunity was made possible through Orbital Space agreement with DreamUp PBC and Nanoracks LLC, which are collaborating with NASA under a Space Act Agreement. The students' experiment was named \"Kuwait\u2019s Experiment: E.coli Consuming Carbon Dioxide to Combat Climate Change\". The experiment was launched on SpaceX CRS-21 (SpX-21) spaceflight to the International Space Station (ISS) on 6 December 2020. Astronauts Shannon Walker (member of the ISS Expedition 64) conducted the experiment on behalf of the students.\nIn July 2021, Kuwait University announced that it is launching a national satellite project as part of state-led efforts to pioneer the country's sustainable space sector.\nTransport.\nKuwait has a modern network of highways. Roadways extended , of which is paved. There are more than 2 million passenger cars, and 500,000 commercial taxis, buses, and trucks in use. On major highways the maximum speed is . Since there is no railway system in the country, most people travel by automobiles.\nThe country's public transportation network consists almost entirely of bus routes. The state owned Kuwait Public Transportation Company was established in 1962. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait as well as longer distance services to other Gulf states. The main private bus company is CityBus, which operates about 20 routes across the country. Another private bus company, Kuwait Gulf Link Public Transport Services, was started in 2006. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait and longer distance services to neighbouring Arab countries.\nThere are two airports in Kuwait. Kuwait International Airport serves as the principal hub for international air travel. State-owned Kuwait Airways is the largest airline in the country. A portion of the airport complex is designated as Al Mubarak Air Base, which contains the headquarters of the Kuwait Air Force, as well as the Kuwait Air Force Museum. In 2004, the first private airline of Kuwait, Jazeera Airways, was launched. In 2005, the second private airline, Wataniya Airways was founded.\nKuwait has one of the largest shipping industries in the region. The Kuwait Ports Public Authority manages and operates ports across Kuwait. The country's principal commercial seaports are Shuwaikh and Shuaiba which handled combined cargo of 753,334 TEU in 2006. Mina Al-Ahmadi, the largest port in the country, handles most of Kuwait's oil exports. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port in Bubiyan Island is currently under construction. The port is expected to handle 2 million TEU when operations start.\nMacro-economic.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1995\u20132024.\nIn 2019, Kuwait's main export products were mineral fuels including oil (89.1% of total exports), aircraft and spacecraft (4.3%), organic chemicals (3.2%), plastics (1.2%), iron and steel (0.2%), gems and precious metals (0.1%), machinery including computers (0.1%), aluminum (0.1%), copper (0.1%), and salt, sulphur, stone and cement (0.1%). Kuwait was the world's biggest exporter of sulfonated, nitrated and nitrosated hydrocarbons in 2019. Kuwait was ranked 63rd out of 157 countries in the 2019 Economic Complexity Index (ECI). Iraq was Kuwait's leading export market in 2019 and food/agricultural products accounted for 94.2% of total export commodities.\nAccording to data from the Civil Service Commission (CSC), the level of joblessness amongst the Kuwaiti population continues to rise annually as of 2024. This is predominately due to a surplus of graduates in fields that lack demand within the workforce, as well as a discrepancy between labor market requirements and the skills obtained through certain specializations. Additional issues contributing to the unemployment rate include a lack of emphasis on the private sector and insufficient coordination among related authorities. Until substantial changes are made regarding the quality of educational outputs, the number of graduates in less required fields is likely to keep rising, further exacerbating unemployment issues. Statistics from the Central Statistics Bureau as of November 19, 2023 indicate that there are 8,727 unemployed Kuwaitis, including 4,177 males (approximately 48 percent) and 4,550 females (approximately 52 percent).\nAccording to recent statistics released by the Central Statistics Bureau, the population of Kuwait rose to 4.91 million on January 1, 2024 \u2014 an increase of 119,700 from 2024's 4.79 million population. The number of Kuwaiti citizens increased by 28,700, totaling 1.545 million, an increase from the 1.517 million figure from the start of 2023. Notably, the number of male citizens reached 758,700 and female citizens rose to 787,000 in January 2024. Additionally, the expatriate population witnessed a rise by 90,990, reaching 3.36 million, among which the male expatriates accounted for 2.26 million and female expatriates stood at 1.1 million in the same period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16690", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16690", "title": "Telecommunications in Kuwait", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Kuwait provides information about the telephone, Internet, radio, and television infrastructure in Kuwait.\nInfrastructure.\nTelephones.\nTelephones - main lines in use:\n514,700 (2011), 510,300 (2005)\nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n4.9 million (2011), 2.7 million (2007)\nTelephone system:\nBroadcast media.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 6, FM 11, shortwave 1 (1998)\nRadios:\n1.175 million (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n13 (plus several satellite channels) (1997)\nTelevisions:\n875,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\n5 (2011)\nWhich are: Fasttelco, Gulfnet, KEMS, Mada, and Qualitynet\nInternet users:\n1,925,956 or 74.2% of the population (2011), 700,000 (2005)\nTop-level domain: .kw\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16691", "revid": "47342368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16691", "title": "Transport in Kuwait", "text": " \nAs a small country, local transport in Kuwait is largely road-based with one car for every 2.25 people. Bus services make up Kuwait's entire public transport network. There are seven airports in Kuwait, the largest of which and solely allocated for civil use is Kuwait International Airport. The Gulf Railway is currently under planning in Kuwait. Kuwait has several maritime ports along the coast of the Persian Gulf, the largest port is Mubarak Al Kabeer Port which is currently under construction.\nDuring the First Gulf War, a lot of Kuwait's infrastructure was damaged or destroyed.\nRoad transport.\nAs a nation with one car per 2.25 people, Kuwait relies heavily on its road network for transportation. The total length of paved and unpaved roads was 6,524\u00a0km in 2009. Traffic congestion is common throughout the day, particularly in Kuwait City.\nThe country's public transport network consists entirely of bus routes. The state-owned Kuwait Public Transportation Company was established in 1962. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait. The main private bus company is CityBus, which operates about 28 routes across the country. Another private bus company, Kuwait Gulf Link Public Transport Services, was started in 2006. It runs local bus routes across Kuwait and longer distance services to neighbouring Arab countries.\nPorts and harbors.\nKuwait lies on the Persian Gulf and ports include: Ash Shu'aybah, Ash Shuwaykh, Kuwait, Mina' 'Abd Allah, Mina' al Ahmadi, Mina' Su'ud, and Mubarak Al Kabeer Port.\nMubarak Al Kabeer Port.\nUnder China's Belt and Road Initiative, the Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is part of the first phase of the Silk City project. As of 2021, the Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is currently under construction. In September 2020, it was reported that the port was 53% complete. In March 2021, it was announced that Kuwait and Pakistan will develop linkages between Pakistan's Gwadar Port and Mubarak Al Kabeer Port. In April 2021, the port's first phase was completed (4 berths). As part of Mubarak Al Kabeer Port's development, Bubiyan Island will contain power plants and substations. A 5,000-megawatt power plant has already been built in Subiya, the Subiya power plant is the largest power plant in Kuwait. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port is among Kuwait's largest infrastructure projects in 2021. There is a current road project connecting Mubarak Al Kabeer Port's first phase to the existing road network in Bubiyan Island. Mubarak Al Kabeer Port's fire stations are currently under development. The port is set to be environmentally sustainable.\nMerchant marine.\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n38 ships (1000 GT or over) 2,294,233 GT/3,730,776 DWT \n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\nbulk carrier 2, cargo 1, container 6, liquefied gas 5, livestock carrier 4, petroleum tanker 20 \n&lt;br&gt;\"foreign-owned:\" 1 (Iran 1) \n&lt;br&gt;\"registered in other countries:\" 29 (Bahrain 3, Comoros 1, Liberia 1, Libya 1, Panama 2, Qatar 7, Saudi Arabia 6, UAE 8) (2005)\nAirports.\nOverview.\nThere are seven airports, the largest of which and solely allocated for civil use is Kuwait International Airport. Kuwait International Airport recently inaugurated two new terminals to cater to Kuwait-based airlines. Moreover, the largest Kuwait International Airport terminal (Terminal 2) is currently under construction and will expand the airport's overall capacity by 25\u201350 million passengers per year. The new terminal is environmentally sustainable. It is one of the world's largest environment friendly airport projects.\nKuwait-based Airlines.\nThis is a list of airlines currently operating in Kuwait.\nRailways.\nGulf Railway.\nKuwait City will form one terminus of the Gulf Railway, a railway network which will run from Kuwait to Oman, via cities across the Persian Gulf. As of 2021, the Gulf Railway project is currently under construction in Kuwait.\nMubarak Al Kabeer Port in Bubiyan Island is part of the Gulf Railway.\nMetro.\nThe Kuwait Metropolitan Rapid Transit System Project was a planned four-line metro network covering 160\u00a0km with 69 stations. The project was meant to solve the increasing congestion to the country's roads. The project was eventually cancelled in 2023, citing financial burden.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "16692", "revid": "50550835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16692", "title": "Kuwait Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Kuwait\nThe Kuwait Armed Forces () are the military forces of the State of Kuwait. They consist of the Kuwait Air Force, the Kuwait Army, the Kuwait Navy &amp; the Kuwait National Guard. The governing bodies are the Kuwait Ministry of Defense, the Kuwait Ministry of Interior, and the Kuwait Fire Service Directorate. The Emir of Kuwait is the commander-in-chief of all defense forces while the Crown Prince is the deputy commander.\nThe early military structured organization which first dealt with security and the military following the engagements of Kuwait Army's infantry and cavalry protecting the three mounted defensive walls (third defensive wall mounted in 1920) of Kuwait prior and following to The Great War, was the Directorate of Public Security Force, formed during the Interwar period and mainly after World War II. The Directorate of Public Security Force already included the partnership integration of the Kuwait Army and Directorate of Police as independent forces following the formation of the first cabinet on June 17, 1962, after the independence. In 1953, the Kuwait Army split from the Directorate of Public Security Force; the latter merged with the Directorate of Police in 1959, giving formation to the newly established Kuwait Ministry of Interior. The Ministry of Interior includes the Kuwait Coast Guard and has several military commanders, designated by government protocol as assistant ministers undersecretaries, each reporting to the Minister of Interior who is designated by protocol as Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait.\nUpon splitting from the Directorate of Public Security Force in 1953, the Kuwait Army acted as the de facto command leadership of the available armed forces since establishment. The Kuwait Army was created in 1949, thirteen years before the ministry and partly mainly at the time composed almost entirely of land force components with the Kuwait Air Force being created in 1953. With the creation of the Kuwait Armed Forces in 1963, the Kuwait Ministry of Defense eventually became and is the governing body of the Kuwait Armed Forces, which includes the Kuwait Land Force, the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade, the Kuwait Military Police Authority, the Kuwait Emiri Guard Authority, the Kuwait Air Force, the Kuwait Naval Force, the Kuwait Military Fire Service Directorate and others. Each armed force at disposition of the respective combat commander, reports to the Chief of General Staff of the Kuwait Armed Forces who later reports to the Minister of Defense, designated also by protocol as Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait.\nThe Kuwait National Guard, however, is an independent combat institution from the Ministry of Defense and Interior and acts independently under the guidance, discretion and disposition of the respective leadership, supporting the Military of the State of Kuwait as needed and required. The Kuwait Fire Service Directorate, is also an independent public fire fighting body with military ranks and ribbons identifications.\nOrganization.\nThe three main military arms of Kuwait are the Kuwait Land Force, the Kuwait Air Force, and the Kuwait Naval Force, which includes the Kuwait Commando Marine Units. In addition, there are other independent and ancillary military formations. The independent formations include the Kuwait Emiri Guard, which is an independent combat force dating back to the eighteenth century (as the Rulers own Guards); and the 25th Commando Brigade, an independent commando combat brigade. Ancillary formations include the Kuwait Military Police and the Kuwait Military Fire Service Directorate.\nThe Kuwait National Guard, considered a combat formation, is independent of the Kuwait Armed Forces (and the Kuwait Ministry of Interior, which maintains several formations of its own, including the Kuwait Land Border Force and the Kuwait Coast Guard) and is the main internal and border protection security force.\nAccording to the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies, in 2007, the Kuwait Land Force had around 11,000 personnel, the Kuwait Air Force 2,500, and the Kuwait Navy 10 patrol and coastal craft, and there were 23,000 reservists for all services not including uniformed men and women of the Ministry of Interior and military of the Fire Service Directorate. There were 6,600 paramilitary Kuwait National Guard forces. It was considered that, although the Military of the State of Kuwait remained small per speculated policies and analysis, training and military readiness were taken seriously and were effective at the brigade and squadron level. The combat operational doctrine is different amongst the various combat forces forming and is highly dependent on operational capabilities and general manning formations within sizes and types of equipment packing.\nHistory.\nIn 1950 Emir Abdullah Al-Salim Al-Sabah ordered the capabilities of the Armed Forces to be developed to deal with external threats. Accordingly, Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah was appointed Commander General of the Kuwait Public Security Force, the newly designated Kuwait Army and the initial forming of the Armed services.\nIn 1951 the Bren Gun entered into service with the Kuwait Public Security Department, followed in 1952 by the Daimler Armoured Car, both primarily with the Army (future land force).\nIn 1953 the border and security force was named the Kuwait Army and split from the Directorate of Public Security Force, and the latter merged with the Directorate of Police to form the preliminaries of the Ministry of Interior. Members of the previous forces became members either of the army or merged with police forces and the Directorate of Public Security Force within the Interior Ministry. The Kuwait Army was headed by Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah who had recently returned from military training in the United Kingdom and reported to Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah.\nIn 1953 Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah established the first Kuwait Flying Club. The flying club was part of the Civil Aviation Directorate and graduated the first batch of Kuwaiti pilots in 1954; these later attended advanced training in the United Kingdom.\nIn 1954, Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah was appointed Deputy head commander of the Kuwait Army, reporting to Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah. During that same year, Saleh Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah returned from the United Kingdom and was assigned as commanding officer at headquarters. Also in 1954 eight Auster aircraft entered into service with the Kuwait Flying Club for purposes of preliminary training.\nIn 1956, the Kuwait Army officially moved to headquarters and was equipped with artillery for the first time. Also during the same year, a new training center was established for the Kuwait Army.\nDemolition of Kuwait City 3rd Defensive Wall, and formation of the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nThe Kuwait Army split from the Directorate of Public Security Force in 1953; subsequently, the latter merged with Directorate of Police to form Directorate of Public Security and Police in 1959; following the demolition of the third defensive wall of Kuwait in 1957 through a ministerial decree for the expansion of Kuwait City; which later formed the Kuwait Ministry of Interior including the Kuwait Police. The Army was the first branch of what became the Armed Forces formed mainly of land force components. In the same year, the Army signed on the procurement of the Centurion tank, and two de Havilland DH.104 Dove monoplanes entered into service in the newly formed Air Force.\nIn 1958 Kuwaiti officers were sent to the Military Academies in Egypt and Iraq to train, and the Kuwait Army underwent its first alert following the coup of Abdul Karim Qasim. In 1959 the Kuwait Army set up its first mechanized combat brigade, the Kuwait 6th Mechanized Brigade, known later as the Kuwait 6th Liberation Mechanized Brigade, following the liberation of Kuwait during the Gulf War.\nOperation Vantage 1961.\nAfter 62 years as a British protectorate, Kuwait declared independence in 1961. Iraq immediately claimed that Kuwait was actually an Iraqi province, and threatened to invade to implement the claim. Britain flew troops into the newly independent country to forestall Iraq, an operation called Operation Vantage.\nIn 1961, Field Marshal Abdullah Mubarak Al-Sabah, the Commander General of the Army was followed by the leadership of Brigadier General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah and his deputy Colonel Saleh Mohammed Al-Sabah who stepped in to take part in Operation Vantage along with the already active Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade as the Army was put on their second alert phase.\nAlso during the same year, the Kuwait Flying Club was separated from the Civilian Aviation Directorate and the Kuwait Air Force was officially enacted. Also in 1961, the Universal Carrier was retired from the Kuwait Army.\nOver the following years and through combat experiences; Kuwait built a small effective military force including a land force, navy, air force, national guard, existing police force and fire service directorate.\nIn 1962 the Kuwait Army activated both the Kuwait 35th Shaheed Armored Brigade and the Kuwait 15th Mubarak Armored Brigade which were considered the second and third functioning armored brigades in service.\nDuring that same year, the Kuwait Army held the first military parade in recognition of the independence of Kuwait, and the BAC Jet Provost entered into service with the Kuwaiti Air Force. Also in 1962, the Kuwait Police became an integral component of the Kuwait Ministry of Interior.\nEstablishment of the General Chief of Staff Headquarters (1963).\nIn 1963, an organizational Amiri Decree was issued, enacting officially Chief of General Staff Headquarters of the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nSimilarly, an Amiri Decree was issued to appoint Major General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah to the position of Chief of General Staff of the newly formed Kuwait Armed Forces. During the same year, the subsonic British Hawker Hunter jet aircraft and the de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou transport aircraft entered into service with the Kuwait Air Force.\nIn 1965 Brigadier General Saleh Al-Mohammed Al-Sabah was appointed as the first Deputy Chief of General Staff of the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nSix-Day War (1967) and War of Attrition (1967\u20131970).\nIn 1966, the headquarters of the Kuwait Military Hospital was opened. In 1967, the Chief of General Staff Major General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah appointed his deputy Brigadier General Saleh Mohammed Al-Sabah as acting commander of a hand-picked brigade from the Kuwait Armed Forces, mainly the elite of the Kuwait Army. Attached also to the elite brigade was Sheikh Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah as acting commander by delegation of the 2nd Commando Battalion of the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade. In 1967 several Arab nations were at war with the State of Israel in the Six-Day War. Kuwait did not openly participate, but a contingent from the Army took part in fighting in the central sector; Kuwaiti participation was too small to have any significant impact; nevertheless, going from the principle of Arab solidarity, the various combat operational unit assets of the Kuwait Army exercised their principle of solidarity and completed their mission. The assembled Yarmouk Brigade participated on the Egyptian Front, the first Kuwaiti military unit to fight outside the territory of Kuwait.\nOn June 6, 1967, the Kuwait National Guard was established under the leadership of Sheikh Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah. On July 1, the War of Attrition against the State of Israel commenced while the Yarmouk brigade was engaged on the Egyptian Front. In 1968, Kuwaiti military authorities established the Kuwait Military Academy.\nIn 1969, the Kuwait Armed Forces placed the English Electric Lightning supersonic jet fighter aircraft and the Bell 206 and Bell 204/205 (mainly the 205) helicopters into service with the Kuwaiti Air Force.\nIn 1970, the Kuwait Armed Forces suffered seventeen fatalities in fighting against Israeli forces in Egypt. One man was killed in April and sixteen more were killed in June. During the same year, the Kuwait Air Force placed BAC Strikemaster light attack jets into service and the following year took delivery of Lockheed C-130 Hercules transport aircraft.\nIn 1972, the Kuwait Army introduced the Vickers MBT main battle tank series, and the Kuwait Armed Forces trained Egyptian pilots and technicians through the Kuwait Air Force on the English Electric Lightning.\nDouble-fronted wars: 1973 Samita border skirmish and October War.\nIn 1973, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into their third alert phase with the beginning of the 1973 Samita border skirmish which led to a significant change in the operational capabilities of the Armed Forces.\nAlso in 1973, the leadership of the Armed Forces found itself battle readying on two fronts. While components of the Armed Forces were readying to fight following the skirmish on the Kuwaiti border, Kuwait sent a token force to participate on the West Bank of the Jordan River alongside the Iraqi Armed Forces on the Egyptian and Syrian fronts during the 1973 October War against the State of Israel (also known as the Yom Kippur war), being especially heavily combat engaged on the Syrian front. As in 1967, Kuwaiti participation was too small to have any significant impact; nevertheless as in 1967, the various combat operational unit assets forming, exercised their Arab principle of solidarity and completed their mission. During 1973 the Kuwait Armed Forces officially enacted the Kuwait Naval Armed Service; mainly the Kuwait Navy.\nIn 1973 the leadership of the Armed Forces led a double fronted war with and against the same forming Arab belligerent for the State of Kuwait. The leadership led the Kuwait Armed Forces brigades through their combat commanders engaged on both Syrian and Egyptian fronts during the war against Israel with and alongside the Iraqi Armed Forces while simultaneously part leading and engaging the remainder of the Kuwaiti forces on the Kuwaiti border due to the effects of the 1973 Sanita combat engagement.\nOne year later in 1974 and as a result of unpredictable conflicting crises, authorities enacted a new plan to expand the Kuwait Armed Forces even further. During the same year, Kuwait Armed Forces introduced the A\u00e9rospatiale Gazelle and Puma series helicopters to the Kuwait Air Force.\nState of Kuwait Embassy protection and general support to Halt the Lebanese Civil War (1975\u20131990).\nWith the outbreak of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975, units of the Kuwait 25th Commando Brigade were sent to Lebanon to protect mainly the State of Kuwait Embassy mission in Beirut. On another hand, a United Nations multinational peace deterrence force was formed by the United Kingdom, United States, France and Italy. The United Kingdom's contingents of the Multinational Force in Lebanon included Her Majesty's 1st The Queen's Dragoon Guards. United States formations featured contingents of the U.S. Navy including the United States Marine Corps, Air Force and Army. France's components included the French Air Force, French Army, French Navy including A\u00e9ronavale and French Regular and Foreign paratrooper regiments, companies, units including the 1st Parachute Hussard Regiment, the 17th Parachute Engineer Regiment, the 35th Parachute Artillery Regiment, the 2nd Foreign Parachute Regiment, others along with the 1st Foreign Regiment, the 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment and the 2nd Foreign Infantry Regiment of the French Foreign Legion. The Multinational Force in Lebanon also included Italian paratroopers from the Folgore Brigade, infantry units from the Bersaglieri regiments and Italian Marines of the San Marco Battalion.\nIn the parallel diplomatic couloir of the United Nations peace initiative force and mainly at the level of leading Arab international diplomacy and humanitarianism; the State of Kuwait support participated in bringing the Lebanese Civil War to a halt (1975\u20131990).\nA mission for this purpose was led by Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, then Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait, during the reign of Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.\nDuring 1975, Kuwait defense authorities enacted the establishment of the first Kuwait naval base. During the same year, Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the delivery of the MIM-23 Hawk surface-to-air missile system and merged the Air Defense component to the Kuwait Air Force. The de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou was retired from service.\nIn 1976, the Kuwait Armed Forces took delivery of Dassault Mirage F1s to be operated by the Kuwait Air Force. During the same year, the Kuwait Air Force retired the Bell 206 and Bell 204/205 from service.\nIn 1977, the Kuwait Armed Forces initiated the first drill training with the United States Armed Forces. During the same year, authorities enacted the Ahmed Al Jaber Air Base, officially opened in 1979, and Ali Al Salem Air Base, officially opened in 1980. During the year of 1977, the Kuwait Armed Forces retired several equipment operated by the Air Force and Army and gained one new operating equipment. The English Electric Lightning and Hawker Hunter were retired by the Kuwait Air Force and Douglas A-4 Skyhawks were introduced; while the Centurion Tanks were given to Somalia by the Army, as deliveries of Chieftain MBT started to arrive.\nCreation of the Kuwait Naval Force (1978).\nIn 1978, the Kuwait Navy was created and designated as the sea-based component of the Kuwait Armed Forces. During the same period, the Kuwait Army entered into service the M113 armored personnel carrier, the 9K52 Luna-M short-range artillery rocket system and the M109 howitzer.\nIran\u2013Iraq War (1980\u20131988).\nIn 1980, the Iran\u2013Iraq War broke out and the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into their fourth alert phase. During the same year, the Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the procurement of naval warships for the Kuwait Navy.\nFirst joint Kuwait-Saudi Arabian air drills (1983).\nIn 1983, the Kuwait Armed Forces carried out the first air joint training with the Royal Saudi Air Force using Douglas A-4 Skyhawks.\nIn 1984, the Kuwait Armed Forces enter the short-range tactical surface-to-air missile system 9K33 Osa in service to be operated by the Kuwait Air Force. During the same year, the ordered naval warships arrived and were directly commissioned by the Kuwait Naval Force.\nOfficial enacting of the Land Force of the Kuwait Armed Forces (1988).\nIn 1988, the Kuwait Land Force was officially designated as the land component of the Kuwait Armed Forces. The Kuwait Armed Forces were removed from their alert phase with the ending of the Iran-Iraq War. The eight-year fourth alert phase was the longest in the Armed Forces' history. With the ending of the Iran-Iraq War, the Kuwait Army adopted the BMP-2 infantry combat vehicle.\nIn 1989, the Kuwait Armed Forces signed on the delivery of F/A-18 Hornets and launched the opening of the new Kuwaiti Military Hospital.\nIraqi invasion and aftermath (1990).\nOn 2 August 1990, Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait. The larger Iraqi army brushed aside resistance by the 20,000-strong Kuwait Armed Forces with heavy casualties; after two days, Kuwait had been fully conquered. There were some instances of especially heroic resistance, particularly by combat aircraft pilots. Kuwaiti Forces, principally the Kuwait 35th Shaheed (Martyr) Armored Brigade of the Kuwait Army, engaged in the Battle of the Bridges near Al Jahra under Colonel Salem Masoud Al-Sorour, and the Kuwait Emiri Guards were engaged in the Battle of Dasman Palace with the Emir's half-brother Sheikh Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah.\nIraqi forces seized most of the heavy military equipment of the Kuwaiti military and used it against the coalition forces. This included the entire navy, which was sunk by coalition forces; tanks and armoured personnel carriers were also seized. While the Iraqis were required to return seized equipment after their defeat, most of it was damaged beyond repair. Only the air force escaped destruction, as many of its aircraft had escaped to Saudi Arabia.\nGulf War and Operation Desert Storm (1990\u20131991).\nIn the same year, Kuwait was part of a U.S.-led military coalition formed in response to the invasion which expelled Iraq from Kuwait in what became known as the Gulf War or First Persian Gulf War. Operation Desert Storm was launched by the coalition. Douglas A-4 Skyhawks of the Kuwait Air Force destroyed several Iraqi Naval ships trying to infiltrate into Bubiyan Island. The Kuwait Armed Forces commissioned and entered into service the M-84 battle tank during the attack on Iraqi forces in Saudi Arabia.\nAfter the four-week air campaign, coalition forces launched the ground offensive. They quickly penetrated deep into Iraq, with the Legion taking the Al Salman Airport, meeting little resistance. The war ended after a hundred hours of fighting on the ground, which resulted in very light casualties for the Legion.\nAftermath.\nU.S. President George H. W. Bush condemned the invasion and led efforts to drive out the Iraqi forces. Authorized by the United Nations Security Council, an American-led coalition of 34 nations led by Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. fought the Gulf War to liberate Kuwait. Following several weeks of aerial bombardment, a U.S.-led United Nations (UN) coalition began a ground assault on 23 February 1991 that completely removed Iraqi forces from Kuwait in four days. After liberation, the UN, under Security Council Resolution 687, demarcated the Iraq-Kuwait boundary on the basis of the 1932 and the 1963 agreements between the two states. In November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait, which had been further spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 773 (1992) and 833 (1993).\nThere was an exodus of Palestinian from Kuwait during and after the Gulf War. During the Iraqi occupation more than 200,000 Palestinians fled Kuwait due to harassment, intimidation by Iraqi security forces, and being dismissed from their employment due to Iraqi influence. After the Gulf War, the Kuwaiti authorities forcibly pressured nearly 200,000 Palestinians to leave Kuwait in 1991. This was in response to the alignment of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and the PLO with Iraqi dictator and invader of Kuwait Saddam Hussein.\nThe Palestinians who fled Kuwait were Jordanians naturalized citizens.\nAfter the liberation, Kuwait became a close military partner of the United States, Britain and France.\nKuwait entered into a ten-year defense cooperation agreement with the United States in September 1991, and later with the United Kingdom and France. The defense cooperation with the United States, the United Kingdom and France is done at the training level in the foreign country and the joint military exercise level on Kuwaiti soil.\nThe agreement with the United States also includes port access, military equipment storage, and joint training and exercises. The agreement did not officially provide for the stationing of United States service personnel in Kuwait, as the 1,500 US personnel remaining after the Gulf War were scheduled to leave within a few months.\nIn 1992, the Kuwait Armed Forces initiated joint structuring of its various Armed Forces. In the same year, F/A-18 Hornet aircraft were delivered and entered official service with the Kuwaiti Air Force.\nOctober 1994 crisis with Iraq.\nIn 1994, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered their fifth alert phase with the beginning of the Iraq disarmament crisis in October, and the Kuwait Air Force signed on the delivery of Starburst missile systems.\nIn 1995, the Desert Warrior tracked armoured vehicle and the BM-30 Smerch System entered into service with the Kuwait Army.\nIn 1996, the M1A2 Abrams main battle tank and the BMP-3 infantry fighting vehicle entered Kuwaiti service. During the same year, the Mubarak al-Abdullah Joint Command and Staff College (), named in memory of Lieutenant General Mubarak Abdullah Al-Jaber Al-Sabah (1934\u20131987), opened.\nOperation Desert Strike (1996).\nFollowing Operation Desert Strike in 1996, Kuwait agreed to a United States Battalion Task Force to be permanently stationed in Kuwait. These US Army Intrinsic Action (later called Operation Desert Spring on 1 October 1999) rotations and US Marine Corps EAGER MACE rotations conducted combined training with the Kuwait Land Forces and other coalition partners. In addition, US Special Operations Forces conducted Iris Gold rotations to train and assist other Kuwaiti military units.\nIn 1997, the Kuwait Armed Forces entered into service the MIM-104 Patriot surface-to-air missile (SAM) system with the Kuwait Air Force.\nOperation Desert Fox (1998).\nIn 1998, the Kuwait Armed Forces made an organizational change in command between the Chief of General Staff and his various assistants through the chains of command. During the same year, the Kuwait Armed Forces enter into their sixth alert phase with the December 1998 bombing of Iraq (code-named Operation Desert Fox) between the United States, the United Kingdom and Iraq.\n50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Army (1999).\nIn 1999, during the reign of Sheikh Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the General Staff Headquarters of the Kuwait Army commemorated the 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee of the Kuwait Armed Forces under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait, and the directives of the Chief of the General Staff. Newly ordered armored Naval warships were received and directly commissioned by the Kuwait Navy and Coast Guard.\nGlobal war on terror (2001\u2013present).\nAfter the war on terror began with military campaigns following the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, Kuwait was declared one of fifteen major non-NATO allies of the United States by US President George W. Bush.\nDuring the Iraq War, the Military of Kuwait played an important role in supporting the logistical operations of the United States Armed Forces engaged in military operations in Iraq.\n50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Air Force (2003).\nIn May 2003, the Kuwait Air Force commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait.\n50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Emiri Guard (2011).\nIn June 2011, the Kuwait Emiri Guard commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, and the Emir of Kuwait.\n50th Anniversary of the Kuwait Naval Force (2011).\nIn November 2011, the Kuwait Naval Force commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait.\n2015 intervention in Yemen.\nThe Military of Kuwait went on alert as a result of the 2015 Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen by a coalition of forces of Arab countries including Kuwait, which contributed aircraft of the Kuwaiti Air Force. The military, National Guard, Kuwait Police, and Fire Service Directorate activated defense plans to strengthen internal security measures. Defense measures also included intensifying security around oil installations in Kuwait and abroad.\n50th Anniversary of the Kuwait National Guard (2017).\nIn June 2017, the Kuwait National Guard commemorated their 50th Anniversary Golden jubilee under the leadership of the Commander-in-chief, the Emir of Kuwait, and directives of Sheikh Salem Al-Ali Al-Sabah.\nOrder of battle.\nKuwait Naval Force.\nThe Kuwait Navy Force is the main sea deterring force with naval warships sailors. The navy includes the Kuwait Marine Corps and units of the Kuwait Commando Marine Units.\nKuwait Air Force.\nAccording to Jane's World's Air Forces the operational doctrine of the Kuwaiti Air Force is to provide air support to ground forces as part of a coalition, rather than alone. It is made up of 2,500 people organized into two fighter/ground attack squadrons, two fixed-wing transport squadrons, two helicopter squadrons, a utility squadron and a training/attack helicopter squadron. Although comparatively small in size, it is well equipped and trained, with Kuwaiti pilots averaging 210 flying hours per year. It does not constitute any offensive threat, but can support ground forces in defensive operations.\nKuwait Land Force.\nThe Kuwait Land Force consists of active-duty personnel organized into three armored brigades, two mechanized infantry brigades, a mechanized reconnaissance brigade, an artillery brigade, a combat engineering brigade, a reserve brigade, and various other commands. The brigades are small by western standards, roughly the equivalent of small regiments or large battalions. They are \"cadre forces\", kept up to 80 percent of full strength, with the balance made up of reserves in case of war.\nAlthough the threat from Iraq was replaced by the war on terror, forces structure has remained largely unchanged since 2000.\nKuwait Emiri Guard.\nThe Kuwait Emiri Guard is an independent combat authority in the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nKuwait 25th Commando Brigade.\nThe 25th Commando Brigade is an independent commando combat brigade part of the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nKuwait Commando Marine Units.\nThe Kuwait Commando Marine Units are independent commando combat units part of the Kuwait Navy in the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nKuwait Military Police.\nThe Kuwaiti Military Police is an independent combat authority in the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nKuwait National Guard.\nThe Kuwait National Guard, considered a combat institution, is an independent body from the Kuwait Armed Forces and is a main internal and border combating security force.\nKuwait Ministry of Interior.\nThe Kuwaiti Ministry of Interior is the governing body of the Kuwait Police, considered an institution, is an independent corps from the Kuwait Armed Forces and is an internal, coastal and border security force with combating and non-combatant elements.\nKuwait Land Border Force.\nThe Kuwait Land Border Force of the interior is a border component of the Kuwait Police.\nKuwait Coast Guard.\nThe Kuwait Coast Guard is a sea-based component of the Kuwait Police.\nKuwait Military Fire Service Directorate.\nThe Kuwait military fire service are the military firefighters of the Kuwait Armed Forces.\nKuwait Fire Service Directorate.\nThe Kuwait Fire Service Directorate are the public firefighters with military ranks and ribbon identifications.\nRelationship with the United States Armed Forces.\nAn analysis of the U.S.-Kuwaiti strategic relationship after the Iraqi invasion was published in 2007 by the U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute.\nForces.\nThe United States of America has thousands of troops stationed in Kuwait as part of a defence agreement. The largest part is the US Army Central Command (ARCENT), part of the United States Central Command (USCENTCOM).\nActive US Forces facilities:\nInactive US Forces facilities:\nEquipment.\nThe United States has provided military and defence technical assistance to Kuwait from both Foreign Military Sales (FMS) and commercial sources, with all transactions made by direct cash sale. The US Office of Military Cooperation in Kuwait is attached to the American Embassy and manages the FMS program. US military sales to Kuwait total US$5.5 billion since 2004. Principal US military systems purchased by the Kuwait Defence Forces as of 2014[ [update]] are the Patriot missile system, F-18 Hornet fighters, and the M1A2 Main Battle Tank.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16693", "revid": "50713834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16693", "title": "Foreign relations of Kuwait", "text": "Since its independence in 1961, Kuwait has maintained strong international relations with most countries, especially nations within the Arab world. Its vast oil reserves give it a prominent voice at the global economic forums and organizations like the OPEC. Kuwait is also a major ally of ASEAN, a regional ally of China, and a major non-NATO ally of the United States.\nInternational disputes.\nIn November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1992), and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah Island islands; ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim islands are disputed by Saudi Arabia. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia continue to negatotiate a joint maritime boundary with Iran; no maritime boundary exists with Iraq in the Persian Gulf.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Kuwait maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAsia.\nKuwait, is a member of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, which includes, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman. These countries, have solid, and unbreakable bilateral relations. Citizens of these countries, may enter other GCC, country with their national ID. GCC citizens are allowed to reside at any other GCC, nation an unlimited period of time. They also follow the same economic plan, and give each other military, and Intelligence support. They also have similar, educational, social, plans. The GCC countries, discuss their foreign policies, as they try to maintain similar foreign policies. These six monarchies are also known as the oil-rich countries of the Middle East.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16695", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16695", "title": "History of Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nThe history of the Kyrgyz people and the land now called Kyrgyzstan goes back more than 3,000 years. Although geographically isolated by its mountainous location, it had an important role as part of the historical Silk Road trade route. Turkic nomads, who trace their ancestry to many Turkic states such as the First and Second Turkic Khaganates, have inhabited the country throughout its history. In the 13th century, Kyrgyzstan was conquered by the Mongols; subsequently it regained independence but was invaded by Kalmyks, Manchus, and Uzbeks. In 1876, it became part of the Russian Empire, remaining in the USSR as the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic after the Russian Revolution. Following Mikhail Gorbachev's democratic reforms in the USSR, in 1990 pro-independence candidate Askar Akayev was elected president of the SSR. On 31 August 1991, Kyrgyzstan declared independence from Moscow, and a democratic government was subsequently established.\nEarly history.\nStone implements found in the Tian Shan mountains indicate the presence of early humans in what is now Kyrgyzstan as many as 200,000 to 300,000 years ago. The first written records of a civilization in the area occupied by Kyrgyzstan appear in Chinese chronicles beginning about 2000 BC.\nOrigins of the Kyrgyz people.\nThe Yenisei Kirghiz lived in the upper Yenisey River valley, central Siberia. Chinese sources of the 2nd century BC and Muslim sources of the 7th\u201312th centuries AD describe the Kyrgyz as red-haired with fair complexion and green (blue) eyes. First appearing in Chinese \"Records of the Grand Historian\" as Gekun or Jiankun (\u9b32\u6606 or \u9694\u6606), and later as part of the Tiele tribes, they came under the rule of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and Uyghurs.\nThe early Kyrgyz state reached its greatest expansion after defeating the Uyghur Khaganate in 840 AD. Then Kyrgyz quickly moved as far as the Tian Shan range and maintained their dominance over this territory for about 200 years. In the 12th century, however, the Kyrgyz domination had shrunk to the Altay Range and the Sayan Mountains as a result of the rising Mongol expansion. With the rise of the Mongol Empire in the 13th century, the Kyrgyz migrated south. Plano Carpin, an envoy of the Papal states, and William Rubruck, an envoy of France, all wrote about their life under the Mongols. Various Turkic peoples ruled them until 1685, when they came under the control of the Oirats (Dzungars).\n63% of the modern Kyrgyz men carry Haplogroup R1a1 (Y-DNA), comparable to the prevalence of the haplogroup among the Tajiks (64%).\nEarly medieval times.\nThe first Turks to form a state in the territory of Central Asia (including Kyrgyzstan) were G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks or K\u00f6k-T\u00fcrks. Known in medieval Chinese sources as Tujue (\u7a81\u53a5 t\u00fa ju\u00e9). the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks under the leadership of Bumin/Tuman Khan/Khaghan (d.\u00a0552) of Ashina tribe or dynasty and his sons established the first known Turkic state in 551 in the general area of territory that had earlier been occupied by the Xiongnu, and expanded rapidly to rule wide territories in Central Asia. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks split into two rival Khanates, of which the western one disintegrated in 744.\nThe first kingdom to emerge from the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Khaganate was the Buddhist Uyghur Empire that flourished in the territory encompassing most of Central Asia from 744 to 840.\nAfter the Uyghur empire disintegrated, a branch of the Uyghurs migrated to oasis settlements in the Tarim Basin and Gansu, such as Gaochang (Karakhoja) and Hami City (Kumul), and set up a confederation of decentralized Buddhist states called Kara-Khoja. Others, mainly closely related to the Uyghurs (the Karluks), occupying the western Tarim Basin, Ferghana Valley, Jungaria and parts of modern Kazakhstan bordering the Muslim Turco-Tajik Khwarazm Sultanate, converted to Islam no later than the 10th century and built a federation with Muslim institutions called Kara-Khanlik, whose princely dynasties are called Karakhanids by most historians. Its capital, Balasagun flourished as a cultural and economic centre.\nThe Islamized Karluk princely clan, the Balasagunlu Ashinalar (or the Karakhanids) gravitated toward the Persian Islamic cultural zone after their political autonomy and suzerainty over Central Asia was secured during the 9\u201310th century.\nAs they became increasingly Persianized they settled in the more Indo-Iranian sedentary centers such as Kashgaria, and became detached from the nomadic traditions of fellow Karluks, many of whom retained cultural elements of the Uyghur Khanate.\nThe principality was significantly weakened by the early 12th century and the territory of modern Kyrgyzstan was conquered by the Mongolic Khitan people. The Kara-Khitan Khanate (; 1124\u20131218), also known as Western Liao, was established by Yel\u00fc Dashi (\u8036\u5f8b\u5927\u77f3) who led around 100,000 Khitan remnants after escaping the Jurchen conquest of their native country, the Khitan dynasty.\nThe Khitay conquest of Central Asia can thus be seen as an internecine struggle within the Karluk nomadic tribe, played out as dynastic conflict between the conquering Buddhist Khitay elites and the defending Kara-Khanid princes. This conflict resulted in the subjugation of the latter by the former and in the subjugation of the Muslim Karluks by their kin.\nMongol domination.\nThe Mongol invasion of Central Asia in the 13th century devastated the territory of Kyrgyzstan, costing its people their independence and written language. The son of Genghis Khan, Juche, conquered the Kyrgyz tribes of the Yenisey region, who by this time had become disunited. At the same time, the area of present-day Kyrgyzstan was an essential link in the Silk Road, as attested by several Church of the East gravestones. For the next 200 years, the Kyrgyz remained under the Golden Horde, Chagatai Khanate and the Oirats as well as Dzungars that succeeded that regime. Freedom was regained in 1510, but Kyrgyz tribes were overrun in the seventeenth century by the Kalmyks, in the mid-eighteenth century by the Manchus, and in the early nineteenth century by the Uzbeks.\nThe Mongol Empire (1206-1294/1368) was the largest contiguous empire and the second-largest empire overall in world history. It emerged from the unification of Mongol and Turkic tribes in modern-day Mongolia, and grew through invasion, after Genghis Khan had been proclaimed ruler of all Mongols in 1206. The Mongol Empire began to split following the succession war in 1260\u20131264, with the Golden Horde and the Chagatai Khanate being de facto independent and refusing to accept Kublai Khan (1260\u20131294) as Khagan. By Kublai's death, the Mongol Empire had already fractured into four separate khanates or empires, each pursuing its interests and objectives. The kagans of the Yuan dynasty assumed the role of Chinese emperors and fixed their capital at Khanbaliq (modern-day Beijing) from the old Mongol capital Karakorum. Although other khanates accepted them as their titular suzerains and sent tributes and some support after the peace treaty in 1304, the three western khanates were virtually independent and continued developing as sovereign states. \nEventually the Mongol rule in China fell in 1368 and was replaced by the Ming dynasty though the Genghisid Borjigin dynasty survived in Mongolia until the 17th century. Temujin, the son of a Mongol chieftain, who suffered a difficult childhood, united the nomadic, previously ever-rivaling Mongol-Turkic tribes under his rule through political manipulation and military might. In 1203\u20131205, the Mongols under Temujin destroyed all the remaining rival tribes (Kereyd, Merkits) and brought them under his sway. In 1206, Temujin was crowned as the Kagan of the Yekhe Mongol Ulus (Great Mongol Nation) at a Kurultai (general assembly) and assumed the title \"Chingis Khan\" (or more commonly known as \"Genghis Khan\" probably meaning Universal ruler) instead of the old tribal tities such as Gur Khan or Tayang Khan. This event essentially marked the start of the Mongol Empire under the leadership of Genghis Khan (1206\u20131227). Genghis Khan appointed his loyal friends as the heads of army units and households. He also divided his nation into (each with 10 people), (100), (1000) and (10,000) of decimal organization. \nGenghis Khan rewarded those loyal to him and placed them in high positions. He proclaimed new law of the empire Yassa and codified everything related to the nomads' everyday life and political affairs at the time. For example, he forbade hunting animals during breeding time, selling women, stealing other's properties, and fighting between the Mongols by his law. He quickly came into conflict with the Jin dynasty of the Jurchens and the Western Xia of the Tanguts in northern China. Under the provocation of the Muslim Khwarezmid Empire, he moved into Central Asia as well, devastating Transoxiana and eastern Persia, and then raiding into Kievan Rus' and the Caucasus. Before his death, Genghis divided his empire among his sons and immediate family, but as custom made clear, it remained the joint property of the entire imperial family who, along with the Mongol aristocracy, constituted the ruling class. \nIn 1207 Kyrgyz possessions on the Yenisei, in Tuva and Altai were entered into part of Mongol Empire. But in 1273\u20131293 Kyrgyz rulers restored their independence after repeated rebellions Kyrgyz tribes against Mongols power in 1217, 1218, 1273\u20131280. In 1218 the east Turkestan and Semirechie were conquered by Mongols. His third son, Ugedei, inherited Genghis Khan's empire. The designated Great Khan personally controlled the lands east of Lake Balkhash as far as Mongolia. Tolui, the youngest, the keeper of the hearth, was granted the northern Mongolian homeland. Chagatai, the second son, received Transoxania, between the Amur-Darya and Syr-Darya rivers in modern Uzbekistan, and the area around Kashgar. He made his capital at Almalik near Kulja in northwestern China. Apart from problems of lineage and inheritance, the Mongol Empire was endangered by the great cultural and ethnic divide between the Mongols themselves and their mostly Islamic Turkic subjects. * In 1269, during the common meeting of khans of Chagatai and Ugedei uluses, Khaidu (1269- 1301) was officially chosen to be a Khan. His lands extended from Altai to Amur-Darya, including the territory of what is now Kyrgyzstan and Eastern Turkestan (an extensive region of central Asia between Siberia in the north and Tibet, India, Afghanistan, and Iran in the south: former\u0142y divided into West (Russian) Turkestan (also called Soviet Central Asia), comprising present-day Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan and the South part of Kazakhstan, and East Turkestan consisting of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (Chinese).\nTimurids and Uzbeks.\nThe Kyrgyz in the north were never totally subjugated by Timurlane. However, his conquests and influence had a unifying role in the southern region. In the 15th century, a tribe of Uzbeks, originally from the Golden horde, arrived in this region.\nFirst Statehood.\nDuring the 19th century, the Northern Kyrgyz tribes were in a confederation ruled by one khan, the first khan, Ormon Khan, initiated the formation of a state called the Kara-Kyrgyz Khanate, governing the Kyrgyz people independently from their former overlord, the Kokands. \nAfter Ormon's death, the khanate was ruled by his son Umetaaly. In a hostile situation against the expanding Russian Empire, the khanate was annexed in 1867.\nRussian Empire: 1876\u20131917.\nIn 1775, Atake Tynay Biy Uulu, one of the leaders of Sarybagysh tribe, established first diplomatic ties with the Russian Empire by sending his envoys to Catherine the Great in Saint Petersburg. In the early 19th century, the territory of Kyrgyzstan came under the control of the Khanate of Kokand, but the territory was occupied and formally annexed by the Russian Empire in 1876. The Russian takeover instigated numerous revolts against tsarist authority, and many Kyrgyz opted to move into the Pamir Mountains and into Afghanistan. The suppression of the 1916 rebellion in Central Asia, triggered by the Russian imposition of the military draft on the Kyrgyz and other Central Asian peoples, caused many Kyrgyz to flee to China.\nThe Soviet Era: 1917\u20131991.\nSoviet power was initially established in the region in 1918, and in 1924, the Kara-Kyrgyz Autonomous Oblast was created within the Russian SFSR. (The term Kara-Kyrgyz was used until the mid-1920s by the Russians to distinguish them from the Kazakhs, who were also referred to as Kyrgyz.) In 1926, it became the Kirghiz Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. On 5 December 1936, the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic (SSR) was established as a Union Republic of the USSR.\nDuring the 1920s, Kyrgyzstan saw considerable cultural, educational, and social change. Economic and social development also was notable. Literacy increased, and a standard literary language was introduced. The Kyrgyz language belongs to the Kipchak Turkic group of languages. In 1924, an Arabic-based Kyrgyz alphabet was introduced, which was replaced by Latin script in 1928. In 1941 Cyrillic script was adopted. Many aspects of the Kyrgyz national culture were retained despite suppression of nationalist activity under Joseph Stalin, who controlled the Soviet Union from the late 1920s until 1953.\nModern Kyrgyz religious affiliation is eclectically Muslim for a majority of the population. Typical Kyrgyz families vary in their devotion to Islam.\nRussian and Kyrgyz cultures differ about family, religious identity, and social structure. Kyrgyzstan is a country in transition. The current social dilemma is one that has emerged from the controlling body mainly relying on classic Russian ethnicities, to Kyrgyz or Turkic ethnic groups shaping and forming the infrastructure of Kyrgyzstan. This has resulted in a measurable degree of instability and chaos associated with a social transition.\nThe ancestral Kyrgyz social structure was dominated by nomadic traditions, governing political philosophies, and socialization. As classical Russian ethnic groups were injected into the Soviet Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the urbanization process began and was mainly authored by the Russian communities placed within the Soviet Republic, mostly by policies created by the communist party. It is unclear why these policies were created; it is only clear that they forced Russians of certain descent to populate the Republic.\nPerestroika and Glasnost. Towards independence: 1985\u20131991.\nOn 11 March 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev was chosen by the Politburo as the new General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev immediately launched his new liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika, although they had little immediate impact on the political climate in Kyrgyzstan. On 2 November 1985 Gorbachev replaced Turdakun Usubaliyev the First Secretary of the Communist Party of Kirghizia, who had been in power for 24 years, with Absamat Masaliyev. The republic's press was permitted to adopt a more liberal stance and to establish a new publication, \"Literaturny Kyrgyzstan\", by the Union of Writers. Unofficial political groups were forbidden, but several groups that emerged in 1989 to deal with an acute housing crisis were permitted to function.\nGorbachev's policy of separating Party and State began to impact at the Soviet Republic level in early 1991 when each SSR held competitive elections to their respective legislative Supreme Soviets, shortly after the CPSU had given up its 'leading role'. This meant that real local power moved from the position of Communist Party Leader to that of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, the official Head of State of the SSR. Between January and April 1990, each of the Communist Party leaders of the five states of Soviet Central Asia assumed the position of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet in their respective SSRs without any difficulty from the still weak opposition forces in the region.\nIn Kirghizia the 1990 elections were held on 25 February, with a second round on 7 April. As the Communists were the only political party contesting the elections it is not surprising that they received 90% of the vote. Absamat Masaliyev the Communist leader was voted by the new Parliament as Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Kirghizia on 10 April 1990.\nHowever events quickly began to slip from the Communists control. On 1 May 1990 the opposition groups held their first big demonstration in Frunze in competition with the officially sanctioned May Day celebrations, and on 25\u201326 May 1990 the opposition groups formed the Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement as a bloc of several anti-Communist political parties, movements and nongovernment organizations. Then on 4 June 1990, ethnic tensions between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz surfaced in an area of the Osh Region where Uzbeks form a majority of the population. Violent confrontations ensued, and a state of emergency and curfew were introduced. Order was not restored until August 1990.\nThe Kyrgyzstan Democratic Movement swiftly developed into a significant political force with growing support in parliament. On 27 October 1990 in an upset victory, Askar Akayev, the president of the Kyrgyz Academy of Sciences and reformist Communist Party member, was elected to the newly created presidency defeating Communist Party leader Absamat Masaliyev. Kirghizia was the only one of the five states of Soviet Central Asia that voted their established Communist leadership out of power in 1990.\nPriority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty.\nOn 15 December 1990, the Supreme Soviet voted to change the republic's name to the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. In January 1991, Akayev introduced new government structures and appointed a government consisting mainly of younger, reform-oriented politicians. On 5 February 1991, the capital's name, Frunze, was changed to Bishkek.\nDespite these moves toward independence, economic realities seemed to work against secession from the Soviet Union In a referendum on the preservation of the USSR, in March 1991, 88.7% of the voters approved a proposal to remain part of the union as a \"renewed federation.\"\nSoviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union.\nOn 19 August 1991, when the State Emergency Committee assumed power in Moscow, there was an attempt to depose Akayev in Kyrgyzstan. After the coup collapsed the following week, Akayev and Vice President German Kuznetsov announced their resignations from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), and the entire politburo and secretariat resigned. This was followed by the Supreme Soviet vote declaring independence from the Soviet Union on 31 August 1991, becoming the first of the five Republics of Soviet Central Asia to break away.\nIndependence and the Akayev presidency: 1991\u20132005.\nKyrgyz was announced as the state language in September 1991. In October 1991, Akayev ran unopposed and was elected President of the new independent republic by direct ballot, receiving 95% of the votes cast. \nOn 18 October 1991, in the St. George Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace Mikhail Gorbachev and the leaders of eight Union republics (excluding Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan) signed the Treaty on the Economic Community. According to the text, even before the disintegration of the Soviet Union and regardless of the fate of the Soviet Union, an economic community is being created by independent states in order to form a single market and conduct a coordinated economic policy as an essential condition for overcoming the crisis, preserving a single currency and free movement of goods and services. The treaty was signed by the heads of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and the president of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics\nMikhail Gorbachev, but was not ratified and implemented.\nIndependent country and the Commonwealth.\nPost-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.\nOn 21 December 1991, Kyrgyzstan formally entered the new Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).\nAs in many former Soviet republics, after Kyrgyzstan regained independence in August 1991 many individuals, organizations, and political parties sought to reestablish (and, to a certain extent, to create from scratch) a Kyrgyz national cultural identity; often one that included a backlash against Russians.\nIn 1993, allegations of corruption against Akayev's closest political associates blossomed into a major scandal. One of those accused of improprieties was Prime Minister Tursunbek Chyngyshev, who was dismissed for ethical reasons in December. Following Chyngyshev's dismissal, Akayev dismissed the government and called upon the last communist premier, Apas Djumagulov, to form a new one. In January 1994, Akayev initiated a referendum asking for a renewed mandate to complete his term of office. He received 96.2% of the vote.\nA new constitution was passed by the parliament in May 1993 and the Republic of Kyrgyzstan was renamed the Kyrgyz Republic. In 1994, however, the parliament failed to produce a quorum for its last scheduled session prior to the expiration of its term in February 1995. President Akayev was widely accused of having manipulated a boycott by a majority of the parliamentarians. Akayev, in turn, asserted that the communists had caused a political crisis by preventing the legislature from fulfilling its role. Akayev scheduled an October 1994 referendum, overwhelmingly approved by voters, which proposed two amendments to the constitution\u2014one that would allow the constitution to be amended by means of a referendum, and the other creating a new bicameral parliament called the \"Jogorku Kenesh\".\nElections for the two legislative chambers\u2014a 35-seat full-time assembly and a 70-seat part-time assembly\u2014were held in February 1995 after campaigns considered remarkably free and open by most international observers, although the election-day proceedings were marred by widespread irregularities. Independent candidates won most of the seats, suggesting that personalities prevailed over ideologies. The new parliament convened its initial session in March 1995. One of its first orders of business was the approval of the precise constitutional language on the role of the legislature.\nOn 24 December 1995, President Akayev was reelected for another 5-year term with wide support (75% of vote) over two opposing candidates. He used government resources and state-owned media to carry out his campaign. Three (out of six) candidates were de-registered shortly before the election.\nA February 1996 referendum\u2014in violation of the constitution and the law on referendums\u2014amended the constitution to give President Akayev more power. Although the changes gave the president the power to dissolve parliament, it also more clearly defined the parliament's powers. Since that time, the parliament has demonstrated real independence from the executive branch.\nAn October 1998 referendum approved constitutional changes, including increasing the number of deputies in the lower house, reducing the number of deputies in the upper house, providing for 25% of lower house deputies to be elected by party lists, rolling back parliamentary immunity, introducing private property, prohibiting adoption of laws restricting freedom of speech and mass media, and reforming the state budget.\nTwo rounds of parliamentary elections were held on 20 February 2000, and 12 March 2000. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the elections failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections and hence were invalid. Questionable judicial proceedings against opposition candidates and parties limited the choice of candidates available to Kyrgyz voters, while state-controlled media only reported favorably on official candidates. Government officials put pressure on independent media outlets that favored the opposition. The presidential election that followed later in 2000 also was marred by irregularities and was not declared free and fair by international observers. In December 2001, through a constitutional amendment, the Russian language was given official status.\nThe OSCE found that the parliamentary elections held on 27 February and 13 March 2005 failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections; however, there were improvements over the 2000 elections, notably the use of indelible ink, transparent ballot boxes, and generally good access by election observers.\nTulip Revolution: 2005.\nSporadic protests against perceived manipulation and fraud during the elections of 27 February 2005, erupted into widespread calls for the government to resign, which started in the southern provinces. On 24, 15 March 000 pro-opposition demonstrators in Bishkek called for the resignation of the President and his regime. Protesters seized the main government building, and Akayev hurriedly fled the country, first to neighboring Kazakhstan and then to Moscow. Initially refusing to resign and denouncing the events as a coup, he subsequently resigned his office on 4 April.\nBakiyev presidency: 2005\u20132010.\nKurmanbek Bakiyev won the 10 July ballot for the presidential election with 89% of the vote with a 53% turnout. Bakiyev's term in office was marred by the murder of several prominent politicians, prison riots, economic ills and battles for control of lucrative businesses. In 2006, Bakiyev faced a political crisis as thousands of people participated in a series of protests in Bishkek. He was accused of not following through with his promises to limit presidential power, give more authority to parliament and the prime minister, and eradicate corruption and crime. Bakiyev claimed that the opposition was plotting a coup against him.\nIn April 2007, the opposition held protests demanding Bakiyev's resignation, with a large protest beginning on 11 April in Bishkek. Bakiyev signed constitutional amendments to reduce his own power on 10 April, but the protest went ahead, with protesters saying that they would remain until he resigned. Clashes broke out between protesters and police on 19 April, after which the protests ended.\nBakiyev was re-elected in the 2009 presidential election. After the re-election in 2009, some people in Kyrgyzstan said that he would now deal with political and economic reform. Others were skeptical. The Eurasian Daily Monitor wrote on 10 September that his style resembled other leaders such as Vladimir Putin and Nursultan Nazarbayev. However, he lacked resources and Kyrgyz people were anxious about the risk of renewed power shortages and blackouts like in the winter 2008\u20132009.\nDuring the winter of 2010 Kyrgyzstan has suffered from rolling blackouts and cutoffs occurring regularly while energy prices have risen.\nRevolution 2010.\nThe arrest of an opposition figure on 6 April 2010 in the town of Talas led opposition supporters to protest. The protestors took control of a governmental building, demanding a new government. Riot police were sent from Bishkek, and managed to temporarily regain control of the building. Later the same day several more opposition figures were arrested, while the government claimed to have regained control of the situation. The following day, however, hundreds of opposition supporters gathered in Bishkek and marched on the government headquarters. Security personnel attempted to disperse the protestors with the use of stun grenades and live rounds, at the cost of dozens of lives. The protests continued, however, resulting in the flight of President Bakiyev to his southern stronghold of Jalal-Abad, and the freeing later the same day of the arrested opposition figures. A new government was formed under opposition leader Roza Otunbayeva, while Bakiyev remained for several days in southern Kyrgyzstan, before fleeing to Belarus, where he was given asylum by President Lukashenko. The new interim government held consultations on a new constitution, intended to increase the powers of the parliament and reduce those of the president. A referendum was held on the resulting document on 27 June 2010, and was approved by over 90% of voters, with a turnout of 72%. Elections were subsequently held on 10 October 2010. These elections resulted in five parties reaching the 5% threshold necessary to enter parliament.\nAtambayev presidency: 2011-to 2017.\nAlmazbek Atambayev ran in 2011 to succeed Roza Otunbayeva as President of Kyrgyzstan. On election day, 30 October 2011, he won in a landslide, defeating Adakhan Madumarov from the Butun Kyrgyzstan party and Kamchybek Tashiev from the Ata-Zhurt party with 63% of the vote, and with about 60% of the eligible Kyrgyz population voting.\nIn 2011 soon after becoming president, Atambayev travelled to Turkey and signed an agreement with the Turkish President agreeing to increase trade from $300 million in 2011 to $1 billion by 2015, with Turkey also agreeing to attract Turkish investment to Kyrgyzstan to the amount of $450 million within the next few years.\nAtambayev has repeatedly presented himself as a pro-Russian politician. He positively supports Kyrgyzstan's Membership of the Russian led Eurasian Customs Union and secured the withdrawal of the American military base from the country in 2014. He has spoken of the need for closer economic relations with Russia, which temporarily employs about 500,000 citizens of Kyrgyzstan; however, he also expressed his wish to achieve greater economic and energy independence from it.\nJeenbekov presidency: 2017\u20132020.\nSooronbay Jeenbekov was sworn in as president on 24 November 2017 at the Ala Archa State Residence. In the hours since assuming office, he made his first decree to confer the title of Hero of the Kyrgyz Republic to his predecessor. The following May, he conducted his first foreign visit after assuming the presidency was to Russia where he met with Vladimir Putin. In April 2018, Jeenbekov fired Prime Minister Sapar Isakov and his entire government following a vote of no confidence from Supreme Council.\nIn his first year, Jeenbekov participated in 30 international meetings, where he signed a total of 77 bilateral agreements and 414 multilateral documents. That same year, he ordered the foreign ministry to establish diplomatic relations with four foreign countries. The draft of a new co-operation agreement with the United States is currently being reconciled.\nSince Jeenbekov took power, he has had a somewhat adversarial relationship with former President Atambayev, who strongly backed Jeenbekov against his opponent \u00d6m\u00fcrbek Babanov during the 2017 election, even referring to comparing himself as an \"older brother\" to Jeenbekov when referring to their relationship. Despite this, a rift grew between the two politicians as Atambayev became more involved in politics, eventually rising to the Chairmanship of the Social Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan, of which Jeenbekov is a member of. While in this post, he criticized Jeenbekov for his handling many controversies and state emergencies, including the Bishkek power plant failure and his refusal to force his brother to resign from parliament. In early April 2018, Jeenbekov dismissed two high-ranking officials in the State Committee for National Security (GKNB) who are considered to be close to Atambayev, which was seen as an apparent jab at Atambayev and his former government. Jeenbekov has on many occasions accused Atambayev of indirectly trying to influence his presidency, saying in November 2018 that he has attempted to turn him into \"a puppet leader through some third individuals\" Even with the accusations, he denies any type of rivalry with the former president, saying the following month that he \"does not consider anyone a rival\".\nOctober 2020 protests.\nMass protests began on 5 October 2020 in response to the parliamentary election that was perceived by protestors as unfair. In the early morning of 6 October 2020, the protesters reclaimed control of the Ala-Too Square in central Bishkek. They also managed to seize the White House and Supreme Council buildings nearby, throwing paper from windows and setting them on fire, also entering the President's offices. A protestor died and 590 others were injured. Protestors freed former president Almazbek Atambayev and opposition politician Sadyr Japarov from prison.\nOn 6 October, following the protests, the electoral authorities in the country annulled the results of the parliamentary elections. Likely due to pressure from the protest, Prime Minister Kubatbek Boronov resigned, citing parliamentary deputy Myktybek Abdyldayev as the new speaker. Following the resignation of Prime Minister Boronov, former lawmaker Sadyr Japarov was appointed to replace him. Opposition parties rejected the legitimacy of Japarov's status and instead put forward their own candidate for prime minister, Tilek Toktogaziyev. Japarov claimed that he was already the \"legitimate prime minister\" and that he was appointed by \"the parliament's majority.\"\nPresident Sooronbay Jeenbekov resigned on 15 October 2020, leading Japarov to declare himself as acting president. Despite the Kyrgyzstan Constitution stating that the speaker of the Supreme Council should succeed the role, Kanatbek Isaev refused to assume office, resulting in Japarov becoming the acting president.\nJaparov presidency: 2021\u2013present.\nSadyr Japarov resigned his post of prime minister to run for the presidency in January 2021. He successfully defeated Adakhan Madumarov in a landslide win and assumed office on 28 January 2021.\nA constitutional referendum was held in Kyrgyzstan on 11 April 2021. The draft new constitution adopted by the referendum replaces the parliamentary system with a presidential one, with presidents limited to two five year terms instead of a single six-year term.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16696", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16696", "title": "Geography of Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nKyrgyzstan is a landlocked nation in Central Asia, with an area of 199,951 km\u00b2. The national territory extends about from east to west and from north to south.\nKyrgyzstan is bordered on the east and southeast by China, on the north by Kazakhstan, on the west by Uzbekistan, and on the south by Tajikistan. The borders with Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the Fergana Valley are rather complicated. One consequence of the Stalinist division of Central Asia into five republics is that many ethnic Kyrgyz people do not live in Kyrgyzstan. Three enclaves, legally part of the territory of Kyrgyzstan but geographically removed by several kilometers, have been established, two in Uzbekistan and one in Tajikistan.\nThe terrain of Kyrgyzstan is dominated by the Tian Shan and Pamir mountain systems, which together occupy about 65% of national territory. The Alay range portion of the Tian Shan system dominates the southwestern crescent of the country, and, to the east, the main Tian Shan range runs along the boundary between southern Kyrgyzstan and China before extending farther east into China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. Kyrgyzstan's average elevation is , ranging from at Peak Jengish Chokusu to in the Fergana Valley near Osh. Almost 90% of the country lies more than above sea level.\nTopography and drainage.\nThe mountains of Kyrgyzstan are geologically young, so that the physical terrain is marked by sharply uplifted peaks separated by deep valleys. There is also considerable glaciation, with the largest glacier being the Engilchek Glacier. Kyrgyzstan's 6,500 distinct glaciers are estimated to hold about of water and cover 8,048 square kilometers (5,000 square miles) or 4.2% of Kyrgyzstan. Only around the Ch\u00fcy, Talas, and Fergana valleys is there relatively flat land suitable for large-scale agriculture.\nBecause the high peaks function as moisture catchers, Kyrgyzstan is relatively well watered by the streams that descend from them. None of the rivers of Kyrgyzstan are navigable, however. The majority are small, rapid, runoff streams. Most of Kyrgyzstan's rivers are tributaries of the Syr Darya, which has its headwaters in the western Tian Shan along the Chinese border. Another large runoff system forms the Chu (Ch\u00fcy), which arises in northern Kyrgyzstan, then flows northwest and disappears into the deserts of southern Kazakhstan. Ysyk-K\u00f6l is the second largest body of water in Central Asia, after the Aral Sea, but the saline lake has been shrinking steadily, and its mineral content has been rising gradually. Kyrgyzstan has a total of about 2,000 lakes with a total surface area of , mostly located at altitudes of 3,000 to 4,000 meters. Only the largest three, however, occupy more than each. The second- and third-largest lakes, Song-K\u00f6l and Chatyr-K\u00f6l (the latter of which also is saline), are located in the Naryn River Basin.\nNatural disasters have been frequent and varied. Overgrazing and deforestation of steep mountain slopes have increased the occurrence of mudslides and avalanches, which occasionally have swallowed entire villages. In August 1992, a severe earthquake left several thousand people homeless in the southwestern city of Jalal-Abad.\nClimate.\nThe country's climate is influenced chiefly by the mountains, Kyrgyzstan's position near the middle of the Eurasian landmass, and the absence of any body of water large enough to influence weather patterns. Those factors create a distinctly continental climate that has significant local variations. Although the mountains tend to collect clouds and block sunlight (reducing some narrow valleys at certain times of year to no more than three or four hours of sunlight per day), the country is generally sunny, receiving as much as 2,900 hours of sunlight per year in some areas. The same conditions also affect temperatures, which can vary significantly from place to place. In January the warmest average temperature () occurs around the southern city of Osh, and around Ysyk-K\u00f6l. The latter, which has a volume of , does not freeze in winter. Indeed, its name means \"hot lake\" in Kyrgyz. The coldest temperatures are in mountain valleys. There, readings can fall to or lower; the record is . The average temperature for July similarly varies from in the Fergana Valley, where the record high is , to a low of on the highest mountain peaks. Precipitation varies from per year in the mountains above the Fergana Valley to less than per year on the west bank of Ysyk-K\u00f6l.\nEnvironmental issues.\nKyrgyzstan has been spared many of the enormous environmental problems faced by its Central Asian neighbors, primarily because its designated roles in the Soviet system involved neither heavy industry nor large-scale cotton production. Also, the economic downturn of the early 1990s reduced some of the more serious effects of industrial and agricultural policy. Nevertheless, Kyrgyzstan has serious problems because of inefficient use and pollution of water resources, land degradation, and improper agricultural practices. The country is prone to earthquakes, and major flooding occurs during the snow melt.\nWater resources.\nThe Kyrgyz Republic is the only Central Asian state where water resources are fully generated within its own territory. The water originates from the often glacier covered mountain ranges and its abundance is a vital component for agriculture and the production of hydro\u2010electric power. The mountainous Kyrgyz Republic is an essential \"water tower\" for irrigated arable farming on arid plain territories. In addition, the impressive glacierized mountain landscape implies a considerable potential for tourism.\nAlthough Kyrgyzstan has abundant water running through it, its water supply is determined by a post-Soviet sharing agreement among the five Central Asian republics. As in the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan has the right to 25% of the water that originates in its territory, but the new agreement allows Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan unlimited use of the water that flows into them from Kyrgyzstan, with no compensation for the nation at the source. Kyrgyzstan uses the entire amount to which the agreement entitles it, but utilization is skewed heavily in favor of agricultural irrigation. During the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan shared their abundant water resources with Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan during summer, and these three nations shared oil and gas with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan in winter. According to the International Crisis Group, the skewed system that is currently in place could cause irreversible regional destabilization, and needs to be dealt with by international actors to avoid a crisis in Central Asia. In 1994 agriculture accounted for about 88% of total water consumption, compared with 8% by industry and 4% by municipal water distribution systems. According to World Bank experts, Kyrgyzstan has an adequate supply of high-quality water for future use, provided the resource is prudently managed. However, in Central Asia water problems are on the rise. The Kyrgyz Republic exports water to irrigate the neighbouring states Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. To prevent conflicts, water allocation and use, and in particular the role of agriculture as major water user, have become very important questions in the development discourse in recent years, and will continue to be in the future.\nIrrigation is extremely wasteful of water because the distribution infrastructure is old and poorly maintained. In 1993 only an estimated 5% of required maintenance expenditures was allocated. , an estimated 70% of the nation's water supply network is in need of repair or replacement. The quality of drinking water from this aging system is poorly monitored\u2014the water management staff has been cut drastically because of inadequate funds. Further, there is no money to buy new water disinfection equipment when it is needed. Some aquifers near industrial and mining centers have been contaminated by heavy metals, oils, and sanitary wastes. In addition, many localities rely on surface sources, making users vulnerable to agricultural runoff and livestock waste, which seep gradually downward from the surface. The areas of lowest water quality are the heavily populated regions of the Chui Valley and Osh and Jalal-Abad Regions, and areas along the rivers flowing into Ysyk-K\u00f6l.\nIn towns, wastewater collection provides about 70% of the water supply. Although towns have biological treatment equipment, as much as 50% of such equipment is rated as ineffective. The major sources of toxic waste in the water supply are the mercury mining combine at Haidarkan; the antimony mine at Kadamzai; the Kadzyi Sai uranium mine, which ceased extraction in 1967 but which continues to leach toxic materials into nearby Ysyk K\u00f6l; the Kara-Balta Uranium Recovery Plant; the Min Kush deposit of mine tailings; and the Kyrgyz Mining and Metallurgy Plant at Orlovka.\nLand management.\nThe most important problems in land use are soil erosion and salinization in improperly irrigated farmland. An estimated 60% of Kyrgyzstan's land is affected by topsoil loss, and 6% by salinization, both problems with more serious long-term than short-term effects. In 1994 the size of livestock herds averaged twice the carrying capacity of pasturage land, continuing the serious overgrazing problem and consequent soil erosion that began when the herds were at their peak in the late 1980s. Uncertain land tenure and overall financial insecurity have caused many private farmers to concentrate their capital in the traditional form\u2014livestock\u2014thus subjecting new land to the overgrazing problem.\nThe inherent land shortage in Kyrgyzstan is exacerbated by the flooding of agricultural areas for hydroelectric projects. The creation of Toktogul Reservoir on the Naryn River, for example, involved the flooding of 130\u00a0km2 of fertile land. Such projects have the additional effect of constricting downstream water supply; Toktogul deprives the lower reaches of the Syr Darya in Uzbekistan and the Aral Sea Basin of substantial amounts of water. Because the Naryn Basin, where many hydroelectric projects are located, is very active seismically, flooding is also a danger should a dam be broken by an earthquake.\ncurrent environmental issues.\nNuclear waste left behind by the Soviet Union in many open-air pits in hazardous locations. Water pollution; many people get their water directly from contaminated streams and wells; as a result, water-borne diseases are prevalent; increasing soil salinity from faulty irrigation practices. Illegal hunting of very rare species such as the snow leopard and the Marco Polo sheep.\ninternational agreements about the environment.\n\"party to:\" Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands.\nAral Sea.\nIn response to the internationally recognized environmental crisis of the rapid desiccation of the Aral Sea, the five states sharing the Aral Sea Basin (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan) are developing a strategy to end the crisis. The World Bank and agencies of the United Nations (UN) have developed an Aral Sea Program, the first stage of which is funded by the five countries and external donors. That stage has seven areas of focus, one of which\u2014land and water management in the upper watersheds\u2014is of primary concern to Kyrgyzstan. Among the conditions detrimental to the Aral Sea's environment are erosion from deforestation and overgrazing, contamination from poorly managed irrigation systems, and uncontrolled waste from mining and municipal effluents. Kyrgyzstan's National Environmental Action Plan (NEAP) has addressed these problems as part of its first-phase priorities in cooperation with the Aral Sea Program.\nEnvironmental policy making.\nThe NEAP, adopted in 1994, is the basic blueprint for environmental protection. The plan focuses on solving a small number of critical problems, collecting reliable information to aid in that process, and integrating environmental measures with economic and social development strategy. The initial planning period is to end in 1997. The main targets of that phase are inefficient water resource management, land degradation, overexploitation of forest reserves, loss of biodiversity, and pollution from inefficient mining and refining practices.\nBecause of severe budget constraints, most of the funds for NEAP operations come from international sources, including official institutions such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank and numerous international nongovernmental organizations. Implementation is guided by a committee of state ministers and by a NEAP Expert Working Group, both established in 1994 by executive order. A NEAP office in Bishkek was set up with funds from Switzerland.\nThe main environmental protection agency of the Kyrgyzstan government is the State Committee on Environmental Protection, still known by its Soviet-era acronym, Goskompriroda. Established by the old regime in 1988, the agency's post-Soviet responsibilities have been described in a series of decrees beginning in 1991. In 1994 the state committee had a central office in Bishkek, one branch in each of the seven regions, and a total staff of about 150 persons. Because of poorly defined lines of responsibility, administrative conflicts often occur between local and national authorities of Goskompriroda and between Goskompriroda and a second national agency, the Hydrometeorological Administration (Gidromet), which is the main monitoring agency for air, water, and soil quality. In general, the vertical hierarchy structure, a relic of Soviet times, has led to poor coordination and duplication of effort among environmental protection agencies.\nSpecially protected areas.\nA number of protected nature areas have been designated by the government of the republic. As of the end of 2004, they included:\n*total: 198,951\u00a0km\u00b2\n**\"country rank in the world:\" 85th\n*land: 191,801\u00a0km\u00b2\n*water: 8,150\u00a0km\u00b2\n* Australia comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: slightly less than half the size of Newfoundland and Labrador\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately 1 times the size of England\n* United States comparative: approximately the size of South Dakota\n* EU comparative: slightly less than the size of Italy\n*total: 5,473\u00a0km\n*border countries: the People's Republic of China 1,063\u00a0km, Kazakhstan 1,212\u00a0km, Tajikistan 984\u00a0km, Uzbekistan 1,314\u00a0km\n*lowest point: Kara-Darya 132 m\n*highest point: Peak Jengish Chokusu 7,439 m\nResources and land use.\nTerrain: peaks of Tian Shan and associated valleys and basins encompass entire nation\nNatural resources: abundant hydropower; significant deposits of gold and rare earth metals; locally exploitable coal, petroleum, and natural gas; other deposits of nepheline, mercury, bismuth, lead, and zinc.\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\" 6.7%\n\"permanent crops:\" 0.4%\n\"permanent pasture:\" 48.3%\n\"forest:\" 5.1%\n\"other:\" 93.24% (2011)\n\"note:\"\nKyrgyzstan has the world's largest natural growth walnut forest, Arslanbob, located in Jalal-Abad Region with an enormous variety of different genetic characteristics. It is believed that most of the world's walnut varieties derive from the original species still found here.\nIrrigated land: 10,210\u00a0km\u00b2 (2005)\nTotal renewable water resources: 23.62\u00a0km3 (2011)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16697", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16697", "title": "Demographics of Kyrgyzstan", "text": "The Demographics of Kyrgyzstan is about the demographic features of the population of Kyrgyzstan, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. The name Kyrgyz, both for the people and the country, means \"forty tribes\", a reference to the epic hero Manas who unified forty tribes against the Oirats, as symbolized by the 40-ray sun on the flag of Kyrgyzstan.\nKyrgyzstan is one of the few post-Soviet countries in which the rural population's share of 58.29% exceeds the urban population's share of 41.71% as of 2024.\nOverview.\nKyrgyzstan's population increased from 2.1 million to 4.8 million between the censuses of 1959 and 1999. Official estimates set the population at 6,389,500 in 2019. Of those, 34.4% are under the age of 15 and 6.2% are over the age of 65. The country is rural: only about one-third of Kyrgyzstan's population live in urban areas. The average population density is .\nThe nation's largest ethnic group are the Kyrgyz, a Turkic people, which comprise 73.2% of the population (2018 census). Other ethnic groups include Russians (5.8%) concentrated in the north and Uzbeks (14.5%) living in the south. Small but noticeable minorities include Dungans (1.1%), Uyghurs (1.1%), Tajiks (0.9%), Kazakhs (0.7%) and Ukrainians (0.5%), and other smaller ethnic minorities (1.7%). Of the formerly sizable Volga German community, exiled here by Joseph Stalin from their earlier homes in the Volga German Republic, most have returned to Germany, and only a few small groups remain. A small percentage of the population are also Koreans, who are the descendants of the Koreans deported in 1937 from the Soviet Far East to Central Asia.\nKyrgyzstan has undergone a pronounced change in its ethnic composition since independence. The percentage of ethnic Kyrgyz increased from around 50% in 1979 to nearly 73% in 2018, while the percentage of Slavic ethnic groups (Russians, Ukrainians) dropped from 35% to about 6%.\nThe Kyrgyz have historically been semi-nomadic herders, living in round tents called yurts and tending sheep, horses and yaks. This nomadic tradition continues to function seasonally (see transhumance) as herding families return to the high mountain pasture (or \"jailoo\") in the summer. The retention of this nomadic heritage and the freedoms that it implies continue to affect the political atmosphere in the country.\nPopulation size and structure.\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Data refer to annual average population.):\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nRegistered births and deaths.\nStatistics are taken from the United Nations Demographic Yearbook, the National Statistical Committee of the Republic of Kyrgyzstan, the Demographic Annual of the Kyrgyz Republic, and Demoskop Weekly.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nTotal fertility rate.\nDuring the Soviet era, fertility in Kyrgyzstan was high (TFR 4 or higher). After independence there was a rapid decrease to 2.4 at the beginning of the 21st century, but the TFR had increased to 3 or higher as of 2010. Since 2020, there is a decrease to 2.8 in 2022.\nThe differences between nationalities in the number of children are significant: Uzbeks (3.0 children), Tajiks (3.0 children), Turks (2.9), Kyrgyz (2.9), Dungans (2.8), Russians (1.7), Koreans (1.7), Germans (1.8), Ukrainians (2.1), Tatars (2.1), Kazakhs (2.3) and Uyghurs (2.5). The TFR for Russians, Ukrainians, Germans, and Koreans in Kyrgyzstan are considerably higher than in their home countries.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the 2022 census, the ethnic composition of the population was as follows: Kyrgyz 77.8%, Uzbeks 14.2%, Russians 3.8%, Dungans 1.0%, Uyghurs 0.5%, other 2.7%, including Tajiks 0.9%, Kazakhs 0.4% and Turks 0.3%. Most Russians, Ukrainians, Tatars, Germans, and Koreans lived in northeast, especially around the city of Karakol. Most of the Dungans and Uyghurs are found along the Chinese border. Most of the Tajiks and Uzbeks live in and around Fergana valley. \nThe table shows the ethnic composition of Kyrgyzstan's population according to all population censuses between 1926 and 2022. Due to emigration (and low fertility rates), there has been a sharp decline in the European ethnic groups (Russians, Ukrainians, Germans) and also Tatars since independence (as captured in the 1989, 1999, 2009 and 2022 censuses).\nLanguages.\nLanguages spoken at home in Kygyzstan according to World Values Survey in 2020:\nIn the capital city Bishkek; 55.6% of the population speaks Russian at home, whereas Kyrgyz is the second with 43.6% according to the same survey.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSunni Islam is the predominant religious denomination in Kyrgyzstan. The country has a significant Christian minority which Russian Orthodox is the main denomination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16698", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16698", "title": "Politics of Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nThe politics of Kyrgyzstan, officially known as the Kyrgyz Republic, takes place in the framework of a presidential system representative democratic republic, whereby the President is head of state and the Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers is head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Kyrgyzstan an \"authoritarian regime\" in .\nUnlike one of its neighbors \u2013\u00a0 Turkmenistan \u2013 Kyrgyzstan has had a more pluralistic political system since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Kyrgyzstan has swung between authoritarian and democratic forms of government. Three authoritarian presidents have been ousted from office since 2005 due to popular protests.\nPolitical history.\nIn the first years of Kyrgyzstan's full independence, President Askar Akayev appeared wholeheartedly committed to the reform process. However, despite the backing of major Western donors, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Kyrgyzstan had consequential economic difficulties from the outset. These came mainly as a result of the breakup of the Soviet trade bloc, which impeded the Republic's smooth transfer to a free-market economy.\nIn 1993, allegations of corruption against Akayev's closest political associates blossomed into a major scandal. One of those accused of improprieties was Vice President Feliks Kulov, who resigned for ethical reasons in December. Following Kulov's resignation, Akayev dismissed the government and called upon the last communist premier, Apas Djumagulov, to form a new one. In January 1994, Akayev initiated a referendum asking for a renewed mandate to complete his term of office. He received 96.2% of the vote.\nA new Constitution was passed by the Parliament in May 1993. In 1994, however, the Parliament failed to produce a quorum for its last scheduled session prior to the expiration of its term (February 1995). President Akayev was widely accused of having manipulated a boycott by a majority of the parliamentarians. Akayev, in turn, asserted that the communists had caused a political crisis by preventing the legislature from fulfilling its role. Akayev scheduled an October 1994 referendum, overwhelmingly approved by voters, that proposed two amendments to the Constitution, one that would allow the Constitution to be amended by means of a referendum, and the other creating a new bicameral parliament called the \"Jogorku Ke\u0146esh\".\nElections for the two legislative chambers \u2013 a 35-seat full-time assembly and a 70-seat part-time assembly \u2013 were held in February 1995 after campaigns considered remarkably free and open by most international observers, although the election-day proceedings were marred by widespread irregularities. Independent candidates won most of the seats, suggesting that personalities prevailed over ideologies. The new Parliament convened its initial session in March 1995. One of its first orders of business was the approval of the precise constitutional language on the role of the legislature.\nKyrgyzstan's independent political parties competed in the 1996 parliamentary elections. A February 1996 referendum \u2013 in violation of the Constitution and the law on referendums \u2013 amended the Constitution to give President Akayev more power. It also removed the clause that parliamentarians be directly elected by universal suffrage. Although the changes gave the President the power to dissolve Parliament, it also more clearly defined Parliament's powers. Since that time, Parliament has demonstrated real independence from the executive branch.\nAn October 1998 referendum approved constitutional changes, including increasing the number of deputies in the upper house, reducing the number of deputies in the lower house, rolling back Parliamentary immunity, reforming land tender rules, and reforming the state budget.\nTwo rounds of Parliamentary elections were held on 20 February 2000 and 12 March 2000. With the full backing of the United States, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) reported that the elections failed to comply with commitments to free and fair elections and hence were invalid. Questionable judicial proceedings against opposition candidates and parties limited the choice of candidates available to Kyrgyz voters, while state-controlled media reported favorably on official candidates only and government officials put pressure on independent media outlets that favored the opposition.\nIn 2002 Azimbek Beknazarov, a leading opposition figure, was imprisoned by the local authorities, in what many believe to be politically motivated circumstances. This led to protests resulting in clashes with police forces, culminating in the death of five people in Jalal-Abad.\nAs May approached the authorities further extended their hold on power, imprisoning the vocal former presidential ally, Feliks Kulov, to ten years for alleged \"abuses of office\". During the same month the entire government resigned, accepting blame for the loss of life during the protests earlier in the year. A new government led by Nikolay Tanayev was then formed.\nIn November the President faced yet more protests, as the opposition announced it would march on the capital and demand his resignation. The police reacted by arresting large amounts of demonstrators, further adding to international disapproval at the authoritarian nature of Akayev's government.\nBy June 2003, the lower house of Parliament announced that President Akayev and two other leaders of Kyrgyzstan, from the Soviet era, would be given lifetime immunity from prosecution, raising the prospect of Akayev finally stepping down.\nIn 2005, following disputed results of the 2005 parliamentary elections, Kyrgyzstan was thrown into a state of political turmoil, with different parties claiming that they were the legitimate government. On 10 July 2005 interim President and opposition People's Movement leader Kurmanbek Bakiyev won the presidential election in a landslide victory. (See: Tulip Revolution).\nIn 2006, Bakiyev faced a political crisis as thousands of people demonstrated in a series of protests in Bishkek. They accused him of reneging on promised constitutional reforms limiting presidential power and giving more authority to the parliament and cabinet. They also accused him of failing to eradicate corruption, crime, and poverty. Bakiyev in turn accused the opposition of plotting a coup against him. Several parliamentarians had been killed during the political unrest.\nPresidential elections, originally expected in 2010, were rescheduled for 23 July 2009. President Bakiyev was widely expected to retain his mandate, while the opposition United People's Movement (OND) announced on 20 April 2009 that it would field a single candidate \u2013 Social Democratic Party leader Almaz Atambayev. The election turnout was reported at 79.3%. As of 00:45 local time in Kyrgyzstan on 25 July 2009 (with 2058 of 2330 polling districts reporting), Bakiyev had won the election with 83.8% of the vote.\nIn assessing the election, the OSCE stated that Bakiyev had gained an \"unfair advantage\" and that media bias \"did not allow voters to make an informed choice.\" Additionally, they found that the election was \"marred by many problems and irregularities\", citing ballot stuffing and problems with the counting of votes. On polling day Atambayev withdrew his candidacy claiming widespread fraud, stating \"due to massive, unprecedented violations, we consider these elections illegitimate and a new election should be held.\" An opposition rally of 1,000 people in Balykchy on election day was broken up by riot police.\nThe arrest of an opposition figure on 6 April 2010 in the town of Talas led opposition supporters to protest. The protestors took control of a governmental building, demanding a new government. Riot police were sent from Bishkek, and managed to temporarily regain control of the building. Later the same day several more opposition figures were arrested, while the government claimed to have regained control of the situation. The following day, however, hundreds of opposition supporters gathered in Bishkek and marched on the government headquarters. Security personnel attempted to disperse the protestors with the use of stun grenades and live rounds, at the cost of dozens of lives. The protests continued, however, resulting in the flight of President Bakiyev to his southern stronghold of Jalal-Abad, and the freeing later the same day of the arrested opposition figures. A new government was formed under opposition leader Roza Otunbayeva, while Bakiyev remained for several days in southern Kyrgyzstan, before fleeing to Belarus, where he was given asylum by President Lukashenko. The new interim government held consultations on a new constitution, intended to increase the powers of the parliament and reduce those of the president. A referendum was held on the resulting document on 27 June 2010, and was approved by over 90% of voters, with a turnout of 72%. Elections were subsequently held on 10 October 2010. These elections resulted in five parties reaching the 5% threshold necessary to enter parliament.\nPresidential elections were held in 2011, resulting in the victory of Almazbek Atambayev. In 2017, he endorsed Prime minister Sooronbay Jeenbekov for president, who won that year's presidential contest. After Atambayev retired from presidency, he began criticizing Jeenbekov and their relations worsened over time. Soon Atambayev was accused of corruption by the Jeenbekov administration. Clashes grew between security forces and Atambayev supporters, exacerbating political turmoil. Political insurgency in Kyrgyzstan amplified following controversy about the conduct of October 2020 Kyrgyz parliamentary election, where only four parties met the 7% threshold to achieve parliamentary representation, three of whom were closely aligned with the government. Opposition supporters claimed that these elections were tainted by vote buying and many other forms of irregularities. The protests resulted in en masse resignation of government officials. In October 2020, President Sooronbay Jeenbekov resigned after protests caused by irregularities in parliamentary elections on 4 October 2020. In January 2021, Sadyr Japarov was elected as the new president after winning the presidential election by landslide.\nIn April 2021, the majority of voters approved in the constitutional referendum a new constitution that would give new powers to the president, strengthening significantly the presidency.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two five-year terms. The chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers is appointed by the president and approved by the Supreme Council.\nCabinet of Ministers.\nAkylbek Japarov Government.\nSince 13 October 2021:\nLegislative branch.\nIn the Soviet era, Kyrgyzstan had a unicameral legislature which was replaced in 1995 by the bicameral Supreme Council (\"Joghorku Kene\u0161\"). The Supreme Council consisted of the Assembly of People's Representatives (45 seats; members were elected by popular vote from single member constituencies) and the Legislative Assembly (60 seats; 45 members of which were elected by popular vote from single member constituencies, and 15 of which were from national party lists on a proportional basis with a 5% threshold). All legislative terms were five years.\nIn 2005, as part of the 2005 election process and in accordance with a 2003 referendum, the Parliament again became unicameral. The Legislative Assembly (\"Myizam Chygaruu Jyiyny\") had 75 members, elected for five-year terms from single-seat constituencies.\nHowever, because of the political unrest, a new constitutional referendum was held on 21 October 2007 which approved a new electoral system, enlarged the parliament to 90 members and introducing party-list voting. Party-list voting is a proportional representation system of voting, where candidates are selected from central party lists rather than locally elected. Early parliamentary elections were held on 16 December 2007.\nJudicial branch.\nAlthough the constitution provides for an independent judiciary, Kyrgyzstan's court system is widely seen as under the influence of the prosecutor's office. Low salaries make the bribery of judges commonplace. Most cases originate in local courts; they then can move via the appeals process to municipal or regional courts, with the Supreme Court the final court of appeals. Property and family law disputes and low-level criminal cases are heard by traditional elders' courts, which are loosely supervised by the prosecutor's office. Economic disputes and military cases are heard in specialized courts. The constitutional amendments of 2003 expanded the scope of the Supreme Court in civil, criminal, and administrative proceedings. Many protections of Western jurisprudence are not present in Kyrgyzstan's system, which retains many features of the Soviet system. The right to counsel and the presumption of innocence of the accused are guaranteed by law but often not practiced. There is no trial by jury. Reform legislation under consideration in 2006 would establish a jury system and bolster the independence of the judicial branch.\nThe Prosecutor General's Office of Kyrgyzstan oversees the enforcement of the Kyrgyz legal system and the activities of law enforcement agencies and the sentencing of criminals in concert with the judiciary.\nAdministrative divisions.\nKyrgyzstan is divided into seven Regions (oblustar, singular \u2013 oblus) and two region-level cities* (shaar):\n\"note:\" administrative center names in parentheses\nInternational organization participation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16699", "revid": "37615422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16699", "title": "Economy of Kyrgyzstan", "text": "The economy of Kyrgyzstan is market-oriented, driven by trade, light manufacturing, mining, and agriculture. Since the early 1990s, it has embraced a more open and business-friendly approach than its Central Asian peers. Strategically located along key overland routes from China to Europe and West Asia, it functions as a major transit and re-export hub. With abundant natural resources and untapped potential in hydropower and tourism, the country is poised for sustainable growth.\nSince 2020, Kyrgyzstan has achieved greater political stability after years of turmoil, with Sadyr Japarov's leadership marking a pivotal shift. This stability, together with settled border issues, has supported positive economic outcomes. The country sustained strong annual GDP growth of 9% in each of the years 2022, 2023, and 2024. These developments underscore Kyrgyzstan's growing strategic importance in Central Asia and its emerging role in regional trade and infrastructure networks. The government has launched several major infrastructure projects, notably the Kambar-Ata 1 Hydropower Plant and the China\u2013Kyrgyzstan\u2013Uzbekistan railway \u2014 a key component of the Belt and Road Initiative \u2014 both of which will transform the country's economic landscape.\nKyrgyzstan's long-term growth is supported by favorable demographics: the population has grown by 2% annually over the past decade, reaching 7.3 million in 2025. Limited domestic employment opportunities continue to drive labor migration, primarily to Russia. On the positive side, the economy's reliance on remittances \u2014 now around 14.6% of GDP \u2014 has declined significantly from a peak of 33%, indicating growing internal resilience.\nMacroeconomic trends.\nKyrgyzstan demonstrated strong macroeconomic performance since 2022. The country maintained a fiscal surplus for two consecutive years, in 2023 and 2024, reflecting prudent public financial management and stronger-than-expected revenue collection. Higher budget revenues stemmed from increased taxes and customs duties due to rising imports, higher gold prices, and improved tax administration. Government expenditures rose to 34% of GDP in 2024, up from 33% in 2023, driven by higher spending on healthcare, public sector wages, and pensions.\nIn the first quarter of 2025, Kyrgyzstan reported a significant fiscal surplus of $528 million, driven by a 84% year-over-year increase in budget revenues. The surplus is expected to support the financing of the public housing program and contribute to reducing external debt.\nIn recent years, Kyrgyz economy has been affected by inflationary pressures stemming from global supply chain disruptions triggered by the Russia-Ukraine war. Nevertheless, inflation remained relatively contained, supported by a stable som and prudent monetary policy from the National Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic. It declined from 10.8% in 2023 to 5% in 2024, before edging up to 6.9% by March 2025. The National Bank has maintained the policy rate at 9% since May 2024. Banking sector capital adequacy and liquidity ratios remained strong at 22.3% and 78.8%, well above requirements.\nThe currency strengthened by 2.3% against the US dollar in 2024, while the real effective exchange rate appreciated by 3.6%. Purchases of domestically mined gold and the conversion of nonmonetary gold on the National Bank's balance sheet to reserves increased gross reserves by a substantial 57.2% to $5.1 billion at the end of 2024, cover for 4.2 months of projected imports, up from 2.4 months in 2023. As of September 3, 2025, international reserves reached $7 billion \u2014 an increase of 38% since the start of the year \u2014 covering 5.7 months of imports, comfortably above international benchmarks.\nPublic debt.\nKyrgyzstan's total public debt stood at $6.6 billion as of 31 December 2024, representing 37.6% of GDP for the year, down from 42% in 2023. Total external public debt amounted to $4.5 billion, or 25% of GDP, funded primarily by official bilateral and multilateral creditors at concessional rates and with long maturities. This significantly limits the potential for nonresident capital flight in an adverse scenario, thereby mitigating external vulnerabilities.\nKyrgyzstan's largest external creditors are Export\u2013Import Bank of China ($1.65 billion or 36% of gross external debt), Asian Development Bank (16%), World Bank (16%), the IMF (8%), the Eurasian Development Bank (6%). The average weighted interest rate on external public debt was 1.57% per annum.\nForeign trade.\nKyrgyzstan's trade landscape has evolved significantly in recent years, marked by substantial growth in exports and a notable shift in trade partnerships. In 2024, Kyrgyzstan's total exports reached $3.8 billion, representing a 13% increase compared to 2023. The nation's principal exports include gold, coal, copper ores, textiles, foodstuffs, vehicles and automotive parts, and electronics. Gold remains Kyrgyzstan's dominant export commodity, with the state-owned Kumtor gold mine serving as a key source of foreign exchange and budget revenue.\nKyrgyzstan's principal imports include refined petroleum, iron and steel products, vehicles and automotive parts, electronics, chemical products, and a broad range of foodstuffs. In 2024, total imports reached $12 billion, with a significant portion of these goods being re-exported.\nKyrgyzstan's current account deficit for 2024 is estimated at 30.7% of GDP. However, the IMF attributes approximately 23 percentage points of GDP to unrecorded re-exports of goods, primarily related to transit trade within the EAEU. After adjusting for these flows, the underlying current account deficit is estimated to be closer to 8% of GDP.\nA significant development in Kyrgyzstan's export profile is the surge in fuel exports to Afghanistan. In the first quarter of the year, Kyrgyzstan exported more than 40 million liters of gasoline and fuel oil to Afghanistan, a more than 100-fold increase compared to the same period in 2024. Beyond fuel, Kyrgyzstan's exports to Afghanistan include a range of goods, such as agricultural products (like dried legumes and flour), construction materials (like cement and metal structures).\nTransit trade.\nKyrgyzstan historically occupied an important position on the Great Silk Road, the ancient trade route connecting China and the Mediterranean. Goods and caravans passed through the region, blending diverse cultures and traditions. In the modern era, Kyrgyzstan became the first Central Asian country to join the World Trade Organization (WTO), gaining membership in 1998. Since 2015, it has also been a member of Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU). This dual membership enables Kyrgyzstan to function as a strategic transit hub in Eurasian trade.\nThe country act as a re-export platform, particularly for goods from China, T\u00fcrkiye, South Korea and the UAE, which are imported at low WTO tariffs and re-exported to other EAEU countries \u2014 primarily Russia and Kazakhstan \u2014 without additional duties or customs checks. Kyrgyzstan's lower external tariff regime allows goods to enter the EAEU more cheaply than through other member states.\nThis role has grown in importance since 2022, as Western sanctions on Russia spurred a surge in parallel imports via Kyrgyz territory. The result has been strong economic growth and improved fiscal performance. From 2021-2024, the Kyrgyzstan's goods imports more than doubled \u2014 from $5.2 billion to $12 billion \u2014 driven almost entirely by imports of passenger cars, smartphones, and household electrical appliances. China accounts for nearly 60% of this increase, while European countries contribute around 8%. Most of these goods are likely re-exported to Russia and other EAEU members, with limited domestic use.\nBecause Kyrgyzstan and Russia share customs-free zone under the EAEU, trade statistics do not fully capture Kyrgyzstan's exports to EAEU partners, as no conventional customs declarations are required. This makes it difficult to quantify re-exports. Nevertheless, the re-export model supports a wide range of sectors within the Kyrgyz economy, including logistics, warehousing, transportation, customs brokerage, and wholesale trade.\nIn August 2024, the Kyrgyz government established the \"Trading Company of the Kyrgyz Republic\" to monitor trade involving Kyrgyz companies whose goods do not physically enter the country. This strategic step reflects broader efforts to regulate trade and financial flows, amid heightened scrutiny over re-export activities and international sanctions compliance.\nIndustries.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture remains a significant part of the economy, employing a large portion of the workforce and having represented 12.4%, 11.0% and 8.6% of GDP in 2022, 2023 and 2024, respectively. Key agricultural products include wool, milk, cotton, tobacco, and fruits.\nSubsistence farming increased in the early 2000s. After sharp declines in the early 1990s, agricultural production by the early 2000s was approaching 1991 levels. Grain production in the lower valleys and livestock grazing on upland pastures constitute the largest share of the agricultural workforce. Farmers are shifting toward grain cultivation and away from cotton and tobacco. Other important products include dairy, poultry, hay, animal feed, potatoes, vegetables, and sugar beets.\nKyrgyzstan's major agricultural crop production in 2024:\nKyrgyzstan is now largely food self-sufficient, particularly in dairy, eggs, sugar, vegetables, potatoes, and meat. Despite ongoing growth in domestic production of grain, vegetable oil, fruits, and berries, Kyrgyzstan remains reliant on imports for approximately 50% of its consumption of these commodities.\nForestry.\nOnly 4% of Kyrgyzstan is classified as forested. All of that area is state-owned, and none is classified as available for wood supply. The main commercial product of the forests is walnuts. The Arslanbob walnut forest is the largest natural walnut forest in the world, located in the Jalal-Abad Region of Kyrgyzstan, on the western slopes of the Fergana and Chatkal mountain ranges. Covering approximately 11,000 hectares of dense walnut groves, the broader forest zone, which includes other tree species, extends over 600,000 to 700,000 hectares. Each mature tree can yield 150 to 400 kilograms of walnuts annually. Kyrgyzstan is a major regional exporter of walnuts, with significant shipments to Russia, Iran, and Turkey. In some years, up to 25% of Russia's walnut imports come from Kyrgyzstan.\nFishery.\nKyrgyzstan's aquaculture industry has rebounded strongly since its collapse in 2003, growing from just 12 metric tons to over 20,000 tons by 2022. Total fish production reached 33,600 tons in 2023, with exports exceeding 5,500 tons, signaling expanding regional market opportunities. This growth is driven by investments in technology, sustainable farming of cold-water species, and the country's rich freshwater resources. Kyrgyzstan is increasingly positioned as a key freshwater fish exporter in Central Asia, enhancing both its economy and food security.\nMining and minerals.\nMining \u2014 particularly gold extraction \u2014 plays a central role in the Kyrgyz economy. The state-owned Kumtor gold mine is one of the largest gold deposits in the region. Beyond gold, Kyrgyzstan is rich in critical raw materials essential for modern technologies, including substantial reserves of antimony \u2014 a key mineral for the electronics and defense industries.\nPromising new gold projects at Jerooy, Taldy\u2013Bulak, and recent discoveries like Tokhtonysay highlight the country's strong potential for expanding gold production.\nKyrgyzaltyn, the state-owned mining agency, manages all mines, often partnering with foreign investors to bring expertise and capital, supporting modernization and growth.\nAlthough uranium and antimony production have declined since Soviet times, Kyrgyzstan's extensive coal reserves\u2014estimated at 2.5 billion tons\u2014offer significant opportunities to boost domestic energy supply, with the Kara Keche coal deposit poised to increase annual coal output substantially.\nWhile oil and natural gas production remain limited, the country's rich mineral base positions it well for tapping into critical raw materials essential for emerging technologies and the green energy transition. Exploration efforts targeting rare earth elements and industrial metals are gaining momentum, signaling promising prospects for future development.\nManufacturing.\nFollowing the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kyrgyzstan's manufacturing sector experienced a sharp decline due to disrupted supply chains and the loss of traditional markets. However, since the early 2020s, the sector has shown signs of recovery and structural transformation, remaining a key contributor to the economy by accounting for approximately 12.6% of GDP in both 2023 and 2024, slightly down from 13.6% in 2022.\nMetallurgy is the main component of the manufacturing sector, particularly through gold production, which is a major export commodity. Metallurgy accounted for approximately 21% of the manufacturing sector in 2024. Production of food products (beverages) and tobacco, which is focused on processing agricultural products into consumer goods, accounted for approximately 19.4% of the manufacturing sector in 2024. Textile production, production of wearing apparel and footwear, leather and other leather goods, which is focused on garment manufacturing, accounted for approximately 4.5% of the manufacturing sector in 2024. Production of rubber and plastics items and other non-metallic mineral products, which comprises producing a variety of goods for domestic and regional markets, represented approximately 10.5% of the manufacturing sector in 2024. Production of refined petroleum products accounted for approximately 8.5% of the manufacturing sector in 2024.\nRenewed investment in mining, energy, and light manufacturing, supported by state programs like the \"100 Industrial Enterprises\" initiative has driven a revival in Kyrgyzstan's manufacturing sector. Growth has been particularly strong in mining (especially gold and coal), electricity generation, small-scale hydropower, and light industries like textiles and food processing. Automotive assembly and domestic production of construction materials are also emerging as growth areas.\nConstruction.\nThe construction sector in Kyrgyzstan has been a significant contributor to the nation's economy in recent years, demonstrating consistent growth and playing a pivotal role in overall economic development. The construction sector's growth has been driven by both public and private investments in infrastructure projects, residential housing, and commercial developments. Government initiatives aimed at improving transportation networks, energy infrastructure, and urban development have significantly strengthened the sector. The construction sector provides jobs to a substantial portion of the workforce. Its expansion has had a multiplier effect on related industries, including manufacturing, services, and real estate, thereby contributing to broader economic growth.\nConstruction accounted for 9.3%, 7.3%, 7.1%, 7.3% and 8.3% of Kyrgyzstan's GDP in 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, respectively. In 2024, the sector grew by 39.7% in real terms compared to 2023, driven by an increase in construction and reconstruction of facilities in mining, provision (supply) of electricity, gas, steam, water supply and treatment, waste treatment, hotels and restaurants.\nHousing construction has also seen significant expansion, driven by population growth, urbanization, and remittance-fueled demand. Rising domestic production of construction materials and increased private investment have contributed to this boom, turning housing construction into one of the key engines of non-extractive economic activity.\nEnergy.\nOver 90% of Kyrgyzstan's electricity generation relies on hydropower, primarily from large cascade plants on the Naryn River. However, the country has historically exploited less than 15% of its estimated hydroelectric potential of approximately 140\u202fTWh annually. As of 2024, hydropower accounted for around 90% of all electricity production, with small hydroelectric plants contributing approximately 156 million\u202fkWh alongside 12.77 billion\u202fkWh from large hydro facilities.\nKyrgyzstan has limited domestic fossil fuel reserves and heavily depends on natural gas imports from Uzbekistan. Thermal (coal- and gas-fired) plants supplied 1.76 billion\u202fkWh in 2024, while hydropower produced 12.77\u202fbillion\u202fkWh; the country imported 3.6\u202fbillion\u202fkWh to meet rising demand of 18.3\u202fbillion\u202fkWh.\nThe country's infrastructure is aging: the national grid includes over 45,000\u202fkm of transmission lines, largely built during Soviet-era expansion.\nKyrgyzstan is actively expanding both large and small hydropower projects. The proposed Kambar-Ata-1 project \u2014 a 1,860\u202fMW dam on the Naryn River\u2014 has received roadmap support from Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan and secured at least US\u202f$18.6\u202fmillion in World Bank development funding by mid-2024. When operational (expected by 2028), it is projected to generate 5.6\u202fbillion\u202fkWh annually, enabling year-round domestic supply, seasonal export capacity, and support for the CASA-1000 transmission corridor.\nSmall hydropower capacity is also scaling up: private plants are expected to reach 400\u2013500\u202fMW by 2027\u20132028, adding roughly 600\u202fmillion\u202fkWh annually. The country is also beginning to diversify its energy mix with solar and wind: a 200\u202fMW solar plant near Tokmok is expected by 2025, and additional solar (400\u202fMW) and wind (100\u202fMW) projects are in development as of 2024.\nHydropower remains the backbone of Kyrgyzstan's energy sector, with ongoing diversification and modernization efforts aimed at reducing energy losses, enhancing self-sufficiency, and boosting exports to neighboring countries.\nServices.\nKyrgyzstan's tourism sector, centred on the scenic Issyk-Kul Lake and mountain trekking, has seen impressive growth over the past two decades. From attracting around 450,000 tourists annually in the early 2000s, the country welcomed over 8.6 million visitors in 2024. This rapid growth has boosted tourism service exports to nearly $480 million in the first half of 2024 alone.\nVisitors primarily come from neighboring Central Asian countries like Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and Russia, but there is a growing number of tourists from Gulf countries, China, South Korea, T\u00fcrkiye, and Europe. Despite earlier challenges related to limited investment, the sector is benefiting from improved infrastructure, easier visa regulations, and targeted government promotion.\nThe financial sector in Kyrgyzstan plays a critical role in supporting economic diversification. Banks and microfinance institutions provide much-needed credit and financial services to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and rural entrepreneurs. Microfinance, in particular, has expanded rapidly, increasing financial inclusion and empowering grassroots economic activity.\nInvestment climate.\nSince gaining independence, Kyrgyzstan has undertaken gradual reforms to improve its investment climate, emphasizing legal guarantees, market openness, and political stability. The country has adopted a liberal \"https://\", which provides protections such as non-discrimination, safeguards against expropriation, and the right to repatriate profits. The creation of the \"Investment Promotion Agency\" and the \"Business Ombudsman\" office has further enhanced investor confidence.\nKyrgyzstan is also a member of the Eurasian Economic Union, providing investors access to a larger regional market. It has signed over 30 bilateral investment treaties, including with the United States, China, and several EU countries.\nAccording to the World Bank Doing Business Report, Kyrgyzstan ranked 80th globally in 2020, performing especially well in areas such as starting a business (42nd), registering property (7th), and getting credit (15th).\nForeign direct investment (FDI) inflows amounted to $1 billion in 2024.\nKey sectors and outlook.\nPromising areas for investment include hydropower, logistics, agriculture, textiles, and information technology. As part of its commitments under the Paris Agreement, Kyrgyzstan has also opened its energy sector to green and low-carbon investment. Political stability in recent years has supported sustained reforms and economic diversification. The EBRD notes ongoing efforts in infrastructure, urban development, and tax modernization as key drivers of investor interest.\nWhile challenges remain \u2014 such as limited judicial independence and financial sector vulnerabilities \u2014 the overall investment climate continues to improve, reflecting Kyrgyzstan's efforts to align with global standards and attract long-term capital.\nPolitical stability.\nPolitical stability in Kyrgyzstan has shown notable improvement since the early 2020s, following a period characterized by recurring unrest and rapid leadership turnover. The 2020 political upheaval, which culminated in Sadyr Japarov assuming power, marked a turning point in the country's governance trajectory. Since then, the government has undertaken measures to consolidate state authority and address regional tensions.\nIn 2022, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan signed agreements finalizing the delimitation of their shared border, and in 2025, a similar accord was reached with Tajikistan, ending long-standing disputes in the Fergana Valley. These agreements resolved territorial claims that had periodically sparked violence and disrupted trade.\nImproved political stability and the resolution of border disputes have had notable economic implications. The removal of barriers in the Fergana Valley has facilitated cross-border trade and reduced transport disruptions, while enhanced security has encouraged investment in regional infrastructure such as road links, customs facilities, and logistics hubs. According to the World Bank, political predictability and reduced regional tensions have supported modest growth in foreign direct investment, particularly in mining, hydropower, and transportation.\nLabour migration.\nLabour migration is a significant economic factor for Kyrgyzstan, with Russia being the main destination due to shared language, cultural ties, and membership in the EAEU. Kyrgyz migrants benefit from easier access and better work opportunities compared to migrants from Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, largely because of their proficiency in Russian and the advantages provided by EAEU membership. Other destinations include T\u00fcrkiye, South Korea, and the UAE, though in smaller numbers.\nMigrants from Kyrgyzstan mainly work in construction, trade, and services abroad, particularly in Russia, sending remittances that have historically accounted for around 30% of the country's GDP. These inflows have played a critical role in supporting household incomes and reducing poverty. However, dependence on external labor markets exposes the country to risks from foreign policy shifts and economic downturns. Encouragingly, reliance on labor migration and remittances has been gradually declining due to domestic economic development and income diversification. Remittances now account for approximately 14.6% of GDP down from a peak of 33%, reflecting growing internal economic resilience.\nPoverty.\nIn 2024, the poverty rate at the $3.65-per-day threshold fell to 4.4%, down from 7.1% in 2023, supported by lower inflation and robust economic growth. However, rising urban poverty is a concern: by 2022/23, urban poverty levels had surpassed those in rural areas. According to the L2KGZ survey, 50% of respondents identified jobs as the top economic challenge, while real household incomes stagnated in the latter half of 2024.\nUnited Nations World Food Programme (WFP) reports that approximately 30% of Kyrgyzstan's population lives in poverty, with an additional 10% at risk of falling below the poverty line. The WFP highlights vulnerability to both internal and external shocks, including high dependence on food imports, reduced remittances due to changing labor migration policies; particularly in Russia; and climate-related challenges such as drought and glacier melt. Food prices remain around 50% higher than pre-pandemic levels, leaving 36% of the population unable to afford a nutritious diet, while 72% of households resort to coping mechanisms to cover basic needs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16700", "revid": "40368991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16700", "title": "Telecommunications in Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Kyrgyzstan include fixed and mobile telephones and the Internet.\nCommunications policy.\nThe long-term goal of the government's information and communications technology strategy is for the telecommunications sector to contribute 5 percent to gross domestic product by 2010. The June 2006 launch of the KazSat communications satellite from Kazakhstan was expected to reduce the dependence of all the Central Asian countries on European and U.S. telecommunications satellites. Launch of a second KazSat is planned for 2009.\nTelephones.\nIn the early 2000s, Kyrgyzstan used international investment support to restructure its telecommunications system, which had 7.7 telephone lines per 100 inhabitants in 2002 and 1,100,000 cellular phones in use in 2007. As part of the upgrading process, the government has attempted to sell a majority interest in the state-owned telecommunications company, Kyrgyztelecom, to foreign bidders. Companies from Russia, Sweden, and Turkey have been possible buyers. However, in 2005 an estimated 100,000 applicants were waiting for telephone line installation.\nSince the mid-2010s, mobile communication in Kyrgyzstan has experienced accelerated growth, driven by the introduction of the 4G LTE standard. Mobile network operators have actively expanded coverage, including in remote and hard-to-reach areas, despite the country's mountainous terrain. As of the mid-2020s, mobile networks cover more than 99% of the populated territory of Kyrgyzstan.\nInternet.\nIn the early 2000s, Internet use has expanded rapidly. Between 1999 and 2005, the number of Internet subscribers increased from 3,000 to 263,000. In 2004 some 12,300 Internet hosts were in operation. The country code top level domain is .kg.\nVariable upload/download speeds through xDSL are available through state telephone company http:// (up to 8\u00a0Mbit/s downlink) and private ISPs (up to 10\u00a0Mbit/s downlink). There is typically a monthly cap on the amount of data transferred, with separate caps depending on whether the data stays within Kyrgyzstan or travels beyond the border. Broadband internet access with unlimited international traffic is rarely offered by ISPs to the market at significantly higher price. This is probably due to the lack of country's telecommunications bandwidth capacity.\nISPs provide internet access through satellite backbone communication lines linked to Russia, Germany, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. There is a major telecommunications project under construction - The Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber Optic Line, connecting Shanghai, China and Frankfurt, Germany, with the capacity of 622\u00a0Mbit/s, where Kyrgyzstan has completed its part. Completion of this project might affect broadband internet prices in Kyrgyzstan.\nThere are several ISPs that provide broadband internet access using different technologies such as xDSL, ISDN, Leased Line, and Ethernet. ISPs in Kyrgyzstan include Kyrgyz Telecom, Elcat, Asiainfo, Transfer Ltd, Totel, Megaline, Aknet, Intranet, Saima Telecom, My4G, Rikonet, AlaTV, ExNET, and IPSWICH.\nSince the early 2020s, Kyrgyzstan has seen rapid development in the internet sector, accompanied by the expansion of communication channels and modernization of infrastructure. Most internet providers have moved away from data-capped plans, offering users unlimited internet access. In some cases, connection speeds reach up to 1 Gbps. Since 2020, large-scale deployment of fiber-optic lines has been underway across the country, covering both urban areas and remote settlements, contributing to the expansion of high-speed internet coverage nationwide.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nListed as engaged in selective Internet filtering in the political and social areas and as little or no evidence of filtering in the conflict/security and Internet tools areas by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) in December 2010.\nAccess to the Internet in Kyrgyzstan has deteriorated as heightened political tensions have led to more frequent instances of second- and third-generation controls. The government has become more sensitive to the Internet's influence on domestic politics and enacted laws that increase its authority to regulate the sector.\nLiberalisation of the telecommunications market in Kyrgyzstan has made the Internet affordable for the majority of the population. However, Kyrgyzstan is an effectively cyberlocked country dependent on purchasing bandwidth from Kazakhstan and Russia. The increasingly authoritarian regime in Kazakhstan is shifting toward more restrictive Internet controls, which is leading to instances of \"upstream filtering\" affecting ISPs in Kyrgyzstan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16701", "revid": "1318752709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16701", "title": "Transport in Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nTransport in Kyrgyzstan is severely constrained by the country's alpine topography. Roads have to snake up steep valleys, cross passes of altitude and more, and are subject to frequent mud slides and snow avalanches. Winter travel is close to impossible in many of the more remote and high-altitude regions. Additional problems are because many roads and railway lines built during the Soviet period are today intersected by international boundaries, requiring time-consuming border formalities to cross where they are not completely closed. The horse is still a much used transport option, especially in rural and inaccessible areas, as it does not depend on imported fuel.\nRailways.\nThe Kyrgyz Railway is currently responsible for railway development and maintenance in the country. The Ch\u00fcy Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the south were endpoints of the Soviet Union's rail system in Central Asia. Following the emergence of independent post-Soviet states, the rail lines which were built without regard for administrative boundaries have been cut by borders, and traffic is therefore severely curtailed. The small bits of rail lines within Kyrgyzstan, about 370\u00a0km of broad gauge in total, have little economic value in the absence of the former bulk traffic over long distances to and from such centers as Tashkent, Almaty and the cities of Russia.\nIn 2022, construction began on a new 186\u00a0km extension of the existing railway from Balykchy to Karakeche, primarily meant to carry coal from mines at Karakeche to Bishkek. In June 2023, a railway between Balykchy and Bishkek was officially opened.\nPresident Japarov announced the planned construction of a 523\u00a0km China\u2013Kyrgyzstan\u2013Uzbekistan Railway (CKU) in 2022. This project had already been proposed and stalled a number of times since the 2000s, possibly due to Russian and Kazakh opposition at the time. The CKU Railway would comprise in China, in Kyrgyzstan and in Uzbekistan. The railway, conceived as part of China's Belt and Road Initiative, is planned to lead from Kashgar through the Torugart Pass to Jalal-Abad, and further on to the Uzbek city of Andijan. An inaugural ceremony was held in Jalal-Abad in December 2024 and construction is set to begin in July 2025.\nHighways.\nWith support from the Asian Development Bank, a major road linking the north and southwest from Bishkek to Osh has recently been completed. This considerably eases communication between the two major population centers of the country\u2014the Ch\u00fcy Valley in the north and the Fergana Valley in the South. An offshoot of this road branches off across a 3,500 meter pass into the Talas Valley in the northwest. Plans are now being formulated to build a major road from Osh into the People's Republic of China.\nIn 2024, the total length of the road network in Kyrgyzstan was approximately 34,000\u00a0km. Of them, 18,810\u00a0km were public roads directly subordinated to the Ministry of Transport and Communications, and 15,190\u00a0km - other roads (village, agricultural, industrial etc.). By their status the roads of the Ministry of Transport and Communications are classified as:\nBy nature of surface there can be distinguished:\nFrequent bus and, more commonly, minibus service connects country's major cities. Minibuses provide public transit in cities and between cities to neighboring villages.\nThe condition of the road network is generally bad, though repairs have been made recently. Usually, only the main roads of population centres are illuminated, and drain lids might be missing on both streets and sidewalks. The roads are often not plowed during winters. Fuel stations are rare outside Bishkek and Osh.\nPipelines.\nThe limitations of Kyrgyzstan's pipeline system are a major impediment to fuel distribution. In 2006 the country had 367 kilometers of natural gas pipeline and 16 kilometers of oil pipeline, after adding 167 kilometers of natural gas pipeline in 2003.\nPorts and waterways.\nKyrgyzstan's only port is Balykchy, a fishing town on Issyk Kul Lake. None of Kyrgyzstan's rivers are navigable, and the country has no canals.\nWater transport exists only on Issyk Kul Lake, and has drastically shrunk since the end of the Soviet Union.\nAirports.\nAt the end of the Soviet period there were about 50 airports and airstrips in Kyrgyzstan, many of them built primarily to serve military purposes in this border region so close to China. Only a few of them remain in service today.\nThere are four airports with international flights, namely in Bishkek, Osh, Tamchy and Karakol.\nAirports with paved runways.\n\"total:\" 21\n\"over 3,047 m:\" 1 (Bishkek-Manas)\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 3 (Osh, Kant and Tokmok)\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 11 (Jalal-Abad, Karakol International, Kerben, Kazarman, Isfana, Batken, Naryn, Talas, Issyk-Kul International, Kyzyl-Kiya and Cholpon-Ata)\n\"under 914 m:\" 6 (Tamga, Toktogul, Kanysh-Kiya, Pokrovka, Aravan and Sakaldy) (2012)\nAirports with unpaved runways (mostly disused).\n\"total:\" 29\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 3\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 5\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 6 (Gulcha, Daroot-Korgon, Ala-Buka, At-Bashy, Suzak and Chatkal)\n\"under 914 m:\" 15 (2012)"}
{"id": "16702", "revid": "39566278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16702", "title": "Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic", "text": "Military of Kyrgyzstan\nThe Armed Forces of the Kyrgyz Republic is the national military of Kyrgyzstan. It was originally formed from the former Soviet forces of the Turkestan Military District stationed in newly independent Kyrgyzstan. It consists of the Ground Forces, the Air Force and the National Guard. Affiliated security forces to the armed forces included the Internal Troops, the State Committee for National Security and the Border Troops.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe Armed Forces were formed on 29 May 1992 when President of the Kyrgyz SSR Askar Akayev signed a decree which effectively consolidated all the formations and units of the Soviet Army deployed in the territory of the new republic under the jurisdiction of Bishkek and not Moscow. Until 1988, these troops were part of the Central Asian Military District. 29 May is today celebrated as the Day of the Armed Forces. In 1993, the State Defense Committee was renamed to the Ministry of Defense on the basis of the headquarters of the 17th Army Corps. In 1998, the 1st Koy Tash, 2nd Osh, and 3rd Balykchinsk Infantry Brigades were created on the basis of the 8th Guards Motor Rifle Division. In August 1999, the Batken Conflict occurred in southwestern Kyrgyzstan, during which militants of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) made incursions of into Uzbek and Kyrgyz territory from their camps in Tajikistan.\n21st century.\nIn 2006, the Air Force and Air Defense Forces were combined to form the Kyrgyz Air Force. The same year, the term of service was reduced from 18 to 12 months (1 year). In February 2014, the Armed Forces General Staff was expanded to have complete control over the military apparatus, with the ministry of defense becoming a state defense committee which plays a smaller and more administrative role. Despite this arrangement, many former military/security officials such as Taalaibek Omuraliev and Adyl Kurbanov were in favor of returning the military to its former organization.\nFollowing the inauguration of President Sadyr Japarov in early February 2021, the Ministry of Defense was reestablished following a 7-year hiatus. After signing the new Constitution of Kyrgyzstan in May 2021, President Japarov called for reform in the military, particularly the need to \"organize the army according to the principle of special units, fully trained and technologically equipped to conduct military operations in mountainous conditions.\" He also at the same time called for the creation of \"people\u2019s guards\", which according to him, will provide mobilization readiness amongst the population living in border areas.\nArmy.\nFor much of the Soviet period, since 1967, the 8th Guards 'Panfilov' Motor Rifle Division was the main military force in the country. In 1967 the division had been moved to Bishkek from the Baltic Military District, where it had previously been based. It was only disbanded in January 2003. However, in 2011 reports said the division had been reformed with its headquarters in Tokmak.\nThe Army of Kyrgyzstan includes the 1st Motor Rifle Brigade (Mountain) at Osh, a brigade at Koy-Tash, in the Bishkek area, the 25th Special Forces Brigade, independent battalions at Karakol and Naryn, a brigade at Balykchi, and other units.\nTwo Groups of Forces, the Southern, and more recently the Northern, have been active during Kyrgyzstan's history. In 2004, the Northern Group of Forces was reported as consisting of the Balykchynsky brigade, the brigade deployed in suburb of Bishkek, separate battalions in Karakol and Naryn, and other army units.\nThe Army controls the Combat Training Center and Training Center \"Ala-Too\".\nAir Force.\nKyrgyzstan's air arm was inherited from the central Soviet air force training school. This presented the nation a fleet of nearly 70 L-39s, dismantled MiG-21's and several Mi-8's and Mi-24's. However, only a few L-39s and the helicopters are capable of flight. All Kyrgyz military aircraft are reportedly based at Kant, alongside the Russian 999th Air Base.\nBecause of expense and military doctrine, Kyrgyzstan has not developed its air capability; a large number of the MiG-21 interceptors that it borrowed from Russia were returned in 1993, although a number of former Soviet air bases remain available. In 1996 about 100 decommissioned MiG-21s remained in Kyrgyzstan, as of 2017 only 29 MiG-21s are in working order, in service along with ninety-six L-39 trainers and sixty-five helicopters. The air defense forces have received aid from Russia, which has sent military advisory units to establish a defense system. The Russians also help patrol Kyrgyz airspace as part of the Joint CIS Air Defence System. Presently Kyrgyzstan has twenty-six SA-2 and SA-3 surface-to-air missiles in its air defense arsenal. In 2002 the Kyrgyzstan government allowed the United States to use Manas air base for support operations in the war on terror. This agreement lasted until June 2014.\nNational Guard.\nThe National Guard of Kyrgyzstan was founded on December 6, 1991, and took their first oath July 20 the following year. In 2014, the Internal Troops were absorbed into the National Guard as a result of the ongoing military reforms. This would remain this way until September 2018 when they were separated once again.\nForeign military presence and international cooperation.\nIn terms of foreign presence, the U.S.-led Operation Enduring Freedom coalition used the Manas Air Base (Bishkek's international airport) until June 2014. In response, Russia set up the 999th Air Base at Kant to counter the American military presence in the former Soviet state. Moscow is believed to have promised Bishkek $1.1 billion for modernizing its army. Agreements to this effect were reached during the visits to Bishkek by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov in August and President Vladimir Putin in September 2012. As of fall 2023, Russia supplies various military equipment and also begins to form a joint air defense system. Since May 1992, Kyrgyzstan has been a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization. In addition, its leaders work within the framework of the Council of Ministers of Defense of the CIS. Kyrgyzstan hosted the Second CIS Military Sports Games in 2017 in Balykchy. The games included various competition in shooting, fighting, etc. On 16 July 2018, the opening of the Kyrgyz-Indian Mountain Training Center took place in Balykchy at the Edelweiss Training Center, built with funds allocated by the Government of India.\nThe personnel of the armed forces also take part in UN peacekeeping missions. Currently, Kyrgyz forces are serving in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, East Timor, Ethiopia and Kosovo.\nPersonnel.\nMilitary education.\nThe main military educational institutions include:\nKyrgyzstan has an agreement with the Russian Federation, according to which Kyrgyz soldiers are trained in military academies in Russia. The training of officers is carried out in the military educational institutions of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Republic of Turkey and the People's Republic of China.\nTraining centers.\nThe Center for Advanced Training of Officers and NCOs of the Defense Ministry was opened in early 2007. It was designed to offer one-month professional training courses. In 2005, the NCO Training School of the Combined Arms Training Center of the Armed Forces was opened at the base of the 2nd Independent Motorized Rifle Brigade. In 2013, the border guard opened classes at more than 100 secondary schools. The Edelweiss Training Center operates in the Issyk-Kul Region.\nHigh schools.\nThe Kyrgyz State National Military Lyceum and MVD High School are secondary schools that trains middle-tier commanders in the armed forces.\nKyrgyz State Medical Academy Faculty.\nThe Military Faculty of Kyrgyz State Medical Academy was created in the beginning of the Second World War, specifically in October 1941 when there was a shortage of medical personnel in the medical service. Originally it was the Sanitary Department of Defence, and in 1942 it was renamed to the Department of Military and Health Training, and has since 1944 been known as the Department of Military Medical Training. It currently engages in the military training of students of medical, pediatric, dental, sanitary and pharmaceutical departments of the armed forces.\nConscription.\nKyrgyz Armed Forces have inherited conscription from the Armed Forces of USSR. The length of conscription was reduced to 12 months from initial 18 in 2006. Today, Kyrgyz Armed Forces employ a policy of reducing the service period for university graduates to 9 months. Alternative service exists, however, it is only offered to conscripts who belong to certain religious groups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16703", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16703", "title": "Foreign relations of Kyrgyzstan", "text": " \nKyrgyzstan has close relations with other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, particularly Kazakhstan and Russia, given the historical legacy of the Soviet Union. It also has close relations with Turkey as well, given their shared heritage as Turkic languages.\nWhile Kyrgyzstan was initially determined to stay in the ruble zone, the stringent conditions set forth by the Russian Government prompted Kyrgyzstan to introduce its own currency, the som, in May 1993. Kyrgyzstan's withdrawal from the ruble zone was done with little prior notification and initially caused tensions in the region. Both Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan temporarily suspended trade, and Uzbekistan even introduced restrictions tantamount to economic sanctions. Both nations feared an influx of rubles and an increase in inflation. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan's hostility toward Kyrgyzstan was short-lived, and the three nations signed an agreement in January 1994 creating an economic union. This led to the relaxation of border restrictions between the nations the following month. Kyrgyzstan also has contributed to the CIS peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan.\nTurkey has sought to capitalize on its cultural and ethnic links to the region and has found Kyrgyzstan receptive to cultivating bilateral relations. The Kyrgyz Republic also has experienced a dramatic increase in trade with the People's Republic of China, its southern neighbor. Kyrgyzstan has been active in furthering regional cooperation, such as joint military exercises with Uzbek and Kazakh troops.\nIn January 1999, a new OSCE office opened in Bishkek; on February 18, 2000, the OSCE announced that an additional office would open in Osh to assist Bishkek in carrying out its work. Kyrgyzstan is a member of the OSCE, the CIS, and the United Nations.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Kyrgyzstan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nIllegal drug trade.\nKyrgyzstan is a limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly for CIS consumption. There is a limited government eradication program. Kyrgyzstan is used increasingly as a transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia and Western Europe from Southwest Asia. In 2020, with the assistance of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) Program Office in Kyrgyzstan, the Analytical Center of the Counter Narcotic Service of the Ministry of Interior of the Kyrgyz Republic was established to combat drug trafficking.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16705", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16705", "title": "Kool Keith", "text": "American rapper and producer\nKeith Matthew Thornton (born October 7, 1963), known professionally as Kool Keith, is an American rapper and record producer known for his surreal, abstract, and often profane or incomprehensible lyrics. Kool Keith has recorded prolifically both as a solo artist and in group collaborations. Kool Keith is generally considered to be one of hip-hop's most eccentric and unusual personalities.\nKool Keith was a cofounding member of Ultramagnetic MCs, whose debut \"Critical Beatdown\" was released in 1988. After two more albums with the group, \"Funk Your Head Up\" and \"The Four Horsemen\", Kool Keith released his critically acclaimed solo debut album, \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\", under the name Dr. Octagon in 1996. Subsequently he independently released a series of further hip hop albums, including \"Sex Style\", \"First Come, First Served\" (as Dr. Dooom), and most recently \"Keith\".\nAfter releasing only one album on a major label, \"Black Elvis/Lost in Space\", Kool Keith subsequently returned to independently releasing music, producing further efforts as a solo artist and in collaboration with groups such as Analog Brothers, Masters of Illusion, Thee Undatakerz and Project Polaroid. Kool Keith has also made guest appearances in collaboration with Peeping Tom and Yeah Yeah Yeahs. He was also featured on the short track DDT on Jurassic 5's album \"Power in Numbers\".\nThe Prodigy's hit \"Smack My Bitch Up\" was based on a sample of Kool Keith's voice saying \"Change my pitch up. Smack my bitch up\" on \"Give The Drummer Some\" by Ultramagnetic MCs.\nHistory.\nUltramagnetic MCs (1984\u20131993).\nThornton began his career with the group Ultramagnetic MCs under the pseudonym Kool Keith in 1984. Four years later, their release of the album \"Critical Beatdown\" was critically acclaimed and later became recognized as widely influential for its innovative production, complex rhymes, and chopped sampling. Just after its release, Thornton was reportedly institutionalized in Bellevue Hospital Center. However, he later said that the idea that he was institutionalized came from a flippant remark made during an interview, and he never expected the story to become so well known.\nUltramagnetic MCs would release two more albums (1992's \"Funk Your Head Up\" and 1993's \"The Four Horsemen\") with little commercial success due to West Coast hip hop's changing landscape. They went on hiatus for years, leading Thorton to embark on a solo career.\nDr. Octagon debuts (1995\u20131996).\nThornton released his first notable solo single, \"Earth People\", in 1995, under the name Dr. Octagon. This was followed by the release of the concept album \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\" the following year. The album's production by Dan the Automator and Kutmasta Kurt, with scratching by DJ Qbert was acclaimed by critics, and the album was released nationally by DreamWorks Records in 1997, after an initial release on the smaller Bulk Recordings label (as, simply, \"Dr. Octagon\") a year prior. \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\" was considered a departure from old school hip hop to abstract hip hop, with surrealistic, horror, science-fiction, and sexual themes. DreamWorks also issued an instrumental version of the album, titled \"Instrumentalyst (Octagon Beats)\".\nFurther releases (1996\u20132001).\nIn 1996, Thornton collaborated with Tim Dog for the single \"The Industry is Wack\", performing under the name Ultra\u2014the album \"Big Time\" soon followed. The following year, Thornton released the sophomore album, \"Sex Style\", under the name Kool Keith. Thornton described this dirty rap concept album as \"pornocore\", filled with sexual metaphors to diss other rappers. An instrumental version was also released. This year, a collaborative album with Godfather Don titled \"Cenobites\" was released as an LP.\nIn 1999, he released the album \"First Come, First Served\" under the name Dr. Dooom, in which the album's main character killed off Dr. Octagon on the album's opening track. The same year, on August 10, 1999, Thornton released \"Black Elvis/Lost in Space\", under the major record labels Ruffhouse and Columbia. It peaked at Number 10 on the \"Billboard\" Heatseekers chart, Number 74 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and Number 180 on the \"Billboard\" 200, Despite standing out as Thornton's most commercially successful project to date, he was disappointed with the album's delays and promotional efforts, even though a promotional video was made for the lead single, \"Livin' Astro\", which aired on a few episodes of the MTV show \"Amp\" in early 2000. Its sequel, \"Black Elvis 2\", was released in 2023.\nOn June 5, 2001, Thornton released the album \"Spankmaster\" on TVT and Gothom Records. It peaked at Number 16 on the \"Billboard\" Heatseekers chart, Number 11 on the Top Independent Albums chart and Number 48 on the Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. The album has yet to be on streaming.\nCollaborations (2000\u20132004).\nOn July 25, 2000, Thornton released the album \"Matthew\". It peaked at Number 47 on the \"Billboard\" Heatseekers chart. The following month, Thornton collaborated with Ice-T, Marc Live, Black Silver and Pimp Rex for the album \"Pimp to Eat\", under the group name Analog Brothers, with Keith performing as Keith Korg and Ice-T as Ice Oscillator. The album was re-released by Mello Music Group on streaming, CD, and LP in 2016. Masters of Illusion, a collaboration with KutMasta Kurt and Motion Man, followed a few months later.\nThornton, Marc Live and H-Bomb formed the group KHM, releasing the album \"Game\" on November 19, 2002. They later changed their name to \"Clayborne Family\" by the release of their second album two years later. That year (2004) also saw the release of \"Kool Keith Presents Thee Undatakerz\" (with Reverend Tom (Kool Keith) Al Bury-U (BIG NONAME), M-Balmer and The Funeral Director) and \"Diesel Truckers\", another collaboration with KutMasta Kurt.\nSecond Dr. Octagon album (2002\u20132004).\nIn 2002, Thornton began recording \"The Resurrection of Dr. Octagon\" with producer Fanatik J, signing a contract with CMH Records to release the album, which was eventually completed without much input from Thornton, due to a falling out over contractual terms.\nOn October 12, 2004, Real Talk Entertainment issued the album \"Dr. Octagon Part 2\". The album was discontinued by court order. On June 27, \"The Return of Dr. Octagon\" was released by OCD International, an imprint of CMH, advertised as the official follow-up to \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\". Some critics felt that it was not as good as its predecessor. Thornton stated that he liked the album, but felt that it hurt his reputation as a musician. In August, Thornton performed under the Dr. Octagon billing, but did not acknowledge the release of the OCD album.\nFurther collaborations and solo albums (2006\u2013present).\nOn April 25, 2006, Thornton released the album \"Nogatco Rd.\" under the name Mr. Nogatco, and \"Project Polaroid\", a collaboration with TomC3. \"The Return of Dr. Octagon\", the sequel to \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\", was released two months later, as well as a Dr. Dooom sequel titled \"Dr. Dooom 2\" being released two years later.\nIn 2007, Ultramagnetic MCs released the reunion album \"The Best Kept Secret\". In 2009, Kool Keith released the concept album \"Tashan Dorrsett\"; a follow-up, \"The Legend of Tashan Dorrsett\", followed two years later. In 2012, Kool Keith performed at the Gathering of the Juggalos. He has stated that he is considering retiring from music. In 2013, Keith appeared as Dr. Octagon on the Yeah Yeah Yeahs song \"Buried Alive\", from their album \"Mosquito\". In 2015, Keith released \"Time? Astonishing!\" with producer L'Orange and began the start of his relationship with Mello Music Group. Since then, Keith also re-issued his group album with the Analog Brothers (Ice-T, Pimp Rex, Marc Live, Silver Synth) \"Pimp To Eat\" with Mello Music. Kool Keith's recent solo album \"Feature Magnetic\" was dropped on September 16, 2016 and it features MF DOOM, Slug from Atmosphere, Dirt Nasty and many others. Artwork for the \"Feature Magnetic\" album was produced by Marc Santo.\nIn 2018, Keith collaborated once again with Dan the Automator and DJ Qbert for another Dr. Octagon album. \"\" was released on streaming services on April 6, 2018, with the physical release scheduled for Record Store Day, April 21, 2018. The Record Store Day release includes both vinyl and CD copies. Using his Deltron persona, Del the Funky Homosapien guests on \"3030 Meets the Doc, Pt. 1\". NPR offered a first look at the album on March 29, 2018. Kool Keith appears on \"Western\" by the bluegrass-rap group Gangstagrass, performing as himself. Throughout five years, Thornton released \"Controller of Trap\", \"Keith\", \"Computer Technology\", \"Saks 5th Ave\", \"Space Goretex\" (with Thetan), \"Keith's Salon\", \"Subatomic\" (with Del the Funky Homosapien), \"Serpent\" (with Real Bad Man), and \"Black Elvis 2\".\nThornton's fan site refers to his discography of roughly fifty album releases, most of which have been commercially released. Singles such as \"Spectrum\" continue to appear online under the artist's name, on sites such as SoundCloud and Spotify.\nLyrical and performance style.\nThornton's lyrics are often abstract, surreal, and filled with non-sequiturs, extreme violence, exaggerated braggadocio, and profane shock humor. For example, \"Technical Difficulties,\" from the album \"Dr. Octagonecologyst\", contains the following lyrics: \"Intestines, investments, hide money in your stomach / Who can stop Pepto-Bismol? Only a Gremlin eatin' in Larry Parker like Gizmo.\" In \"Extravagant Traveler\" from Matthew, he boasts: \"Saut\u00e9ed fish and shrimp / the Dallas Mavericks want me as a bald-headed five-foot-eight guard with a ninety-five inch vertical / Vince Carter respects my legs, ask Shawn Kemp,\" whereas on \"Miami Mike\" from \"Saks Fifth Avenue\" he proclaims, \"I watch you take a shower in my 747 flying over your house / I used to live in the Twin Towers by myself.\" Thornton is also known for an explicit style focusing on sexual themes, which Thornton has referred to as \"pornocore\". In a 2007 interview, Thornton claims to have \"invented horrorcore\".\nAlter egos.\nKool Keith is known for his many alter egos. As of 2012, Kool Keith had at least 58 such alter egos: these include well-known aliases such as Dr. Octagon, Dr. Dooom, and Black Elvis, which appeared on albums bearing their names; and the more obscure, such as firearms dealer \"Crazy Lou\" and \"Exotron Geiger Counter One Gamma Plus Sequencer,\" as he introduced himself in an appearance on Marley Marl's radio show \"In Control\". Some of Kool Keith's monikers have only existed on album artwork, such as \"Mr. Green\" and \"Elvin Presley.\"\nIn reference to his relationship between himself and his various stage personalities, Keith has said, \"I don't even feel like I'm a human being anymore\".\nDiscography.\nSolo albums\nCollaborative albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16706", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16706", "title": "Kokturks", "text": ""}
{"id": "16707", "revid": "50717193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16707", "title": "Kurt Cobain", "text": "American rock musician (1967\u20131994)\nKurt Donald Cobain (February 20, 1967 \u2013 c.\u2009April 5, 1994) was an American musician. He was the lead vocalist, guitarist, primary songwriter, and a founding member of the grunge band Nirvana. Through his angsty songwriting and anti-establishment persona, he widened the thematic conventions of mainstream rock music. He was heralded as a spokesman of Generation X, and is widely recognized as one of the most influential rock musicians.\nCobain formed Nirvana with Krist Novoselic and Aaron Burckhard in 1987, establishing themselves as part of the Seattle-area music scene that later became known as grunge. Burckhard was replaced by Chad Channing before the band released their debut album \"Bleach\" (1989) on Sub Pop, after which Channing was in turn replaced by Dave Grohl. With this final lineup, the band signed with DGC and found commercial success with the single \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" from their critically acclaimed second album \"Nevermind\" (1991). Cobain wrote many other hit Nirvana songs such as \"Come as You Are\", \"Lithium\", \"In Bloom\", \"Heart-Shaped Box\", \"All Apologies\", \"About a Girl\", \"Aneurysm\", \"You Know You're Right\" and \"Something in the Way\". Although he was hailed as the voice of his generation following Nirvana's sudden success, he was uncomfortable with this role.\nDuring his final years, Cobain struggled with a heroin addiction, stomach pain, and chronic depression. He also struggled with the personal and professional pressures of fame, and was often in the spotlight for his tumultuous marriage to fellow musician Courtney Love, with whom he had a daughter named Frances. In March 1994, he overdosed on a combination of champagne and Rohypnol, subsequently undergoing an intervention and detox program. On April 8, 1994, he was found dead in the greenhouse of his Seattle home at the age of 27, with police concluding that he had died around three days earlier from a self-inflicted shotgun wound to the head.\nCobain was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, alongside Nirvana bandmates Novoselic and Grohl, in their first year of eligibility in 2014. \"Rolling Stone\" included him on its lists of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time, 100 Greatest Guitarists, and 100 Greatest Singers of All Time. He was ranked 7th by MTV in the \"22 Greatest Voices in Music\", and was placed 20th by \"Hit Parader\" on their 2006 list of the \"100 Greatest Metal Singers of All Time\".\nEarly life.\nKurt Donald Cobain was born at Grays Harbor Hospital in Aberdeen, Washington, on February 20, 1967, the son of waitress Wendy Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Fradenburg; 1947\u20132021) and car mechanic Donald Leland Cobain (born 1946). His parents married in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, on July 31, 1965. Cobain had Dutch, English, French, German, Irish, and Scottish ancestry. The Cobain surname comes from his Irish ancestors, who emigrated in 1875 from Carrickmore, a village near Omagh in County Tyrone in Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. Researchers found that they were shoemakers, originally surnamed Cobane, and were Ulster Scots people who came from the Inishatieve area of Carrickmore. They first settled in Canada, where they lived in Cornwall, Ontario, before moving to Washington. Cobain mistakenly believed that his Irish ancestors came from County Cork. His younger sister, Kimberly, was born on April 24, 1970.\nCobain's family had a musical background. His maternal uncle, Chuck Fradenburg, played in a band called the Beachcombers; his aunt, Mari Earle, played guitar and performed in bands throughout Grays Harbor County; and his great-uncle, Delbert, had a career as an Irish tenor, making an appearance in the 1930 film \"King of Jazz\". Cobain was described as a happy and excitable child, who also exhibited sensitivity and care. His talent as an artist was evident from an early age, as he would draw his favorite characters from films and cartoons, such as the Creature from the Black Lagoon and Donald Duck, in his bedroom. He was encouraged by his grandmother, Iris Cobain, a professional artist. Cobain developed an interest in music at a young age. According to his aunt Mari, he began singing at the age of two. At age four, he started playing the piano and singing, writing a song about a trip to a park. He listened to artists including Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), and, from a young age, would sing songs including Arlo Guthrie's \"Motorcycle Song\", the Beatles' \"Hey Jude\", Terry Jacks' \"Seasons in the Sun\", and the theme song to the \"Monkees\" television show.\nWhen Cobain was nine years old, his parents divorced. He later said the divorce had a profound effect on his life, and his mother noted that his personality changed dramatically; Cobain became defiant and withdrawn. In a 1993 interview, he said he felt \"ashamed\" of his parents as a child and had desperately wanted to have a \"typical family ... I wanted that security, so I resented my parents for quite a few years because of that.\" His parents found new partners after the divorce. Although his father had promised not to remarry, he married Jenny Westeby, to Cobain's dismay. Cobain, his father, Westeby, and her two children, Mindy and James, moved into a new household. Cobain liked Westeby at first, as she gave him the maternal attention he desired. In January 1979, Westeby gave birth to a boy, Chad Cobain. This new family, which Cobain insisted was not his real one, was in stark contrast to the attention Cobain was used to receiving as an only boy, and he became resentful of his stepmother. Cobain's mother dated a man who was abusive; Cobain witnessed the domestic violence inflicted upon her, with one incident resulting in her being hospitalized with a broken arm. His mother refused to press charges, remaining committed to the relationship.\nCobain behaved insolently toward adults during this period and began bullying another boy at school. His father and Westeby took him to a therapist who concluded that he would benefit from a single-family environment. Both sides of the family unsuccessfully attempted to reunite his parents. On June 28, 1979, Cobain's mother granted full custody to his father. Cobain's teenage rebellion quickly became overwhelming for his father who placed him in the care of family and friends. While living with the born-again Christian family of his friend Jesse Reed, Cobain became a devout Christian and attended church services regularly. He later renounced Christianity, engaging in what were described as \"anti-God\" rants. Cobain claimed that \"Lithium\" was about his experience while living with the Reed family. He also stated in a 1992 interview that it was a fictionalized account of a man who \"turned to religion as a last resort to keep himself alive\" after the death of his girlfriend, \"to keep him from suicide\". However, spirituality remained an important part of Cobain's personal life and beliefs.\nAlthough uninterested in sports, Cobain was enrolled in a junior high school wrestling team at the insistence of his father. He was a skilled wrestler but despised the experience. Because of the ridicule he endured from his teammates and coach, he allowed himself to be pinned in an attempt to sadden his father. Later, his father enlisted him in a Little League Baseball team, where Cobain would intentionally strike out to avoid playing. Cobain befriended a gay student at school and was bullied by peers who concluded that he was gay. In an interview, he said that he liked being associated with a gay identity because he did not like people, and when they thought he was gay they left him alone. He said, \"I started being really proud of the fact that I was gay even though I wasn't.\" Cobain backed away in an occasion where this friend tried to kiss him, explaining to his friend that he was not gay, though they remained friends. According to Cobain, he used to spray paint \"God Is Gay\" on pickup trucks in the Aberdeen area. Police records show that Cobain was arrested for spray painting the phrase \"ain't got no how watchamacallit\" on vehicles.\nCobain often drew during classes. When given a caricature assignment for an art course, Cobain drew Michael Jackson but was told by the teacher that the image was inappropriate for a school hallway. He then drew an image of then-President Ronald Reagan that was seen as \"unflattering\". Through art and electronics classes, Cobain met Buzz Osborne, singer and guitarist of the Melvins, who became his friend and introduced him to punk rock and hardcore music. As attested to by several of Cobain's classmates and family members, the first concert he attended was Sammy Hagar and Quarterflash, held at the Seattle Center Coliseum in 1983. Cobain, however, claimed that the first live show he attended was the Melvins, when they played a free concert outside the Thriftway supermarket where Osborne worked. Cobain wrote in his journals of this experience, as well as in interviews, singling out the impact it had on him. As a teenager living in Montesano, Washington, Cobain eventually found escape through the thriving Pacific Northwest punk scene, going to punk rock shows in Seattle.\nDuring his second year in high school, Cobain began living with his mother in Aberdeen. Two weeks prior to graduation, he dropped out of Aberdeen High School upon realizing that he did not have enough credits to graduate. His mother gave him an ultimatum: find employment or leave. After one week, Cobain found his clothes and other belongings packed away in boxes. Feeling banished, Cobain stayed with friends, occasionally sneaking back into his mother's basement. Cobain also claimed that during periods of homelessness, he lived under a bridge over the Wishkah River, an experience that inspired the song \"Something in the Way\". Though family and friends cast doubt of this claim, with his future bandmate Krist Novoselic later saying, \"He hung out there, but you couldn't live on those muddy banks, with the tides coming up and down. That was his own revisionism.\" In late 1986, Cobain moved into an apartment, paying his rent by working at the Polynesian Resort, a themed resort on the Pacific coast at Ocean Shores, Washington approximately west of Aberdeen. During this period, he traveled frequently to Olympia, Washington, to go to rock concerts. During his visits to Olympia, Cobain formed a relationship with Tracy Marander. Their relationship was close but strained by financial problems and Cobain's absence when touring. Marander supported the couple by working at the cafeteria of the Boeing plant in Auburn, Washington, often stealing food. Cobain spent most of his time sleeping into the late evening, watching television, and concentrating on art projects.\nMarander's insistence that he get a job caused arguments that influenced Cobain to write the song \"About a Girl\", which appeared on Nirvana's debut album, \"Bleach\". Marander is credited with having taken the cover photo for the album, as well as the front and back cover photos of their Blew single. She did not become aware that Cobain wrote \"About a Girl\" about her until years after his death. Soon after his separation from Marander, Cobain began dating Tobi Vail, an influential punk zinester of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill who embraced the DIY ethos. After meeting Vail, Cobain vomited, overwhelmed with anxiety caused by his infatuation with her. This event inspired the lyric \"love you so much it makes me sick\" in the song \"Aneurysm\". While Cobain regarded Vail as his female counterpart, his relationship with her waned; he desired the maternal comfort of a traditional relationship, which Vail regarded as sexist within a countercultural punk rock community. Vail's lovers were described by her friend Alice Wheeler as \"fashion accessories\". Cobain wrote many of his songs about Vail.\nCareer.\nEarly musical projects.\nOn his 14th birthday, February 20, 1981, Cobain's uncle offered him the choice of either a bike or a used guitar; Cobain chose the guitar. Soon, he was trying to play Led Zeppelin's song \"Stairway to Heaven\". He also learned how to play \"Louie Louie\", Queen's \"Another One Bites the Dust\", and the Cars' \"My Best Friend's Girl\", before he began working on his own songs. Cobain played left-handed, despite being forced to write right-handed.\nIn early 1985, Cobain formed Fecal Matter after he had dropped out of Aberdeen High School. One of \"several joke bands\" that arose from the circle of friends associated with the Melvins, it initially featured Cobain singing and playing guitar, Melvins drummer Dale Crover playing bass, and Greg Hokanson playing drums, but for most of its brief incarnation Fecal Matter was just the duo of Cobain and Crover (who later played on Nirvana's \"Bleach\" in addition to his Melvins output and other projects). They spent several months rehearsing original material and covers, including songs by the Ramones, Led Zeppelin, and Jimi Hendrix.\nNirvana.\nDuring high school, Cobain rarely found anyone with whom he could play music. While hanging out at the Melvins' practice space, he met Krist Novoselic, a fellow devotee of punk rock. Novoselic's mother owned a hair salon, and the pair occasionally practiced in the upstairs room of the salon. A few years later, Cobain tried to convince Novoselic to form a band with him by lending him a copy of a home demo recorded by Fecal Matter. After months of asking, Novoselic agreed to join Cobain, forming the beginnings of Nirvana. Religion appeared to remain a significant muse to Cobain during this time as he often used Christian imagery in his work and developed an interest in Jainism and Buddhist philosophy.\nCobain became disenchanted after early touring because of the band's inability to draw substantial crowds and the difficulty in supporting themselves financially. During their first few years playing together, Novoselic and Cobain were hosts to a succession of drummers. Eventually, the band settled on Chad Channing with whom Nirvana recorded the album \"Bleach\", released on Sub Pop Records in 1989. Cobain, however, became dissatisfied with Channing's style and subsequently fired him. He and Novoselic eventually hired Dave Grohl to replace Channing. Grohl helped the band record their 1991 major-label debut, \"Nevermind\". With \"Nevermind\"'s lead single, \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\", Nirvana quickly entered the mainstream, popularizing a subgenre of alternative rock called \"grunge\". Since their debut, Nirvana has sold over 28\u00a0million albums in the United States alone and over 75\u00a0million worldwide. The success of \"Nevermind\" provided numerous Seattle bands, such as Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Soundgarden, access to wider audiences. As a result, alternative rock became a dominant genre on radio and music television in the U.S. during the first half of the 1990s. Nirvana was considered the \"flagship band of Generation X\", and Cobain found himself reluctantly anointed by the media as the generation's \"spokesman\". He resented this characterization since he believed his artistic message had been misinterpreted by the public.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen you're in the public eye, you have no choice but to be raped over and over again \u2013 they'll take every ounce of blood out of you until you're exhausted. ... I'm looking forward to the future. It will only be another year and then everyone will forget about it.\n\u2014Kurt Cobain on the overwhelming media attention after \"Nevermind\", 1992\nCobain struggled to reconcile the massive success of Nirvana with his underground roots and vision. He also felt persecuted by the media, comparing himself to Frances Farmer whom he named a song after. He began to harbor resentment against people who claimed to be fans of the band yet refused to acknowledge, or misinterpreted, the band's social and political views. A vocal opponent of sexism, racism, sexual assault, and homophobia, he was publicly proud that Nirvana had played at a gay rights benefit concert that was held to oppose Oregon's 1992 Ballot Measure 9, which would have directed Oregon schools to teach that homosexuality was \"abnormal, wrong, unnatural and perverse\". Cobain was a vocal supporter of the pro-choice movement, and Nirvana was involved in L7's Rock for Choice campaign. He received death threats from a small number of anti-abortion activists for participating in the pro-choice campaign, with one activist threatening to shoot Cobain as soon as he stepped on a stage.\nOther collaborations.\nIn 1989, members of Nirvana and fellow American alternative rock band Screaming Trees formed a side project known as the Jury. The band featured Cobain on vocals and guitar, Mark Lanegan on vocals, Krist Novoselic on bass, and Mark Pickerel on drums. Over two days of recording sessions, on August 20 and 28, 1989, the band recorded four songs also performed by Lead Belly; \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night?\", an instrumental version of \"Grey Goose\", \"Ain't It a Shame\", and \"They Hung Him on a Cross\", the latter of which featured Cobain performing solo. Cobain was inspired to record the songs after receiving a copy of \"Lead Belly's Last Sessions\" from friend Slim Moon; after hearing it, he \"felt a connection to Leadbelly's almost physical expressions of longing and desire.\"\nIn 1990, Cobain and his girlfriend, Tobi Vail of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill, collaborated on a musical project called Bathtub is Real in which they both sang and played guitar and drums. They recorded their songs on a four-track tape machine that belonged to Vail's father. In Everett True's 2009 book \"Nirvana: The Biography\", Vail is quoted as saying that Cobain \"would play the songs he was writing, I would play the songs I was writing and we'd record them on my dad's four-track. Sometimes I'd sing on the songs he was writing and play drums on them ... He was really into the fact that I was creative and into music. I don't think he'd ever played music with a girl before. He was super-inspiring and fun to play with.\" The musician Slim Moon described their sound as \"like the minimal quiet pop songs that Olympia is known for. Both of them sang; it was really good.\"\nIn 1992, Cobain contacted William S. Burroughs about a possible collaboration. Burroughs responded by sending him a recording of \"The Junky's Christmas\" (which he recorded in his studio in Lawrence, Kansas). Two months later at a studio in Seattle, Cobain added guitar backing based on \"Silent Night\" and \"To Anacreon in Heaven\". The two would meet shortly later in Lawrence, Kansas and produce \"The 'Priest' They Called Him\", a spoken word version of \"The Junky's Christmas\".\nMusical influences.\nThe Beatles were an early and lasting influence on Cobain; his aunt Mari remembers him singing \"Hey Jude\" at the age of two. \"My aunts would give me Beatles records\", Cobain told Jon Savage in 1993, \"so for the most part [I listened to] the Beatles [as a child], and if I was lucky, I'd be able to buy a single.\" Cobain expressed a particular fondness for John Lennon, whom he called his \"idol\" in his posthumously released journals, and he said that he wrote the song \"About a Girl\", from Nirvana's 1989 debut album \"Bleach\", after spending three hours listening to \"Meet the Beatles!\".\nCobain was also a fan of 1970s hard rock and heavy metal bands, including Led Zeppelin, AC/DC, Black Sabbath, Aerosmith, Queen, and Kiss. Nirvana occasionally played cover songs by these bands, including Led Zeppelin's \"Heartbreaker\", \"Moby Dick\" and \"Immigrant Song\", Black Sabbath's \"Hand of Doom\", and Kiss' \"Do You Love Me?\" and wrote the \"Incesticide\" song \"Aero Zeppelin\" as a tribute to Led Zeppelin and Aerosmith. Recollecting touring with his band, Cobain stated, \"I used to take a nap in the van and listen to Queen. Over and over again and drain the battery on the van. We'd be stuck with a dead battery because I'd listened to Queen too much\".\nHe was introduced to punk rock and hardcore music by his Aberdeen classmate Buzz Osborne, lead singer and guitarist of the Melvins, who taught Cobain about punk by loaning him records and old copies of the Detroit-based magazine \"Creem\". Punk rock proved to be a profound influence on a teenaged Cobain's attitude and artistic style. His first punk rock album was \"Sandinista!\" by the Clash, but he became a bigger fan of fellow 1970s British punk band the Sex Pistols, describing them as \"one million times more important than the Clash\" in his journals. He quickly discovered contemporary American hardcore bands like Black Flag, Bad Brains, Millions of Dead Cops and Flipper. The Melvins themselves were a major early musical influence on Cobain; his admiration for them led him to drive their van on tour and help them to carry their equipment. He and Novoselic watched hundreds of Melvins rehearsals and \"learned almost everything from them\", as stated by Cobain. The Melvins' heavy, grungey sound was mimicked by Nirvana on many songs from \"Bleach\"; in an early interview given by Nirvana, Cobain stated that their biggest fear was to be perceived as a \"Melvins rip-off\". After their commercial success, the members of Nirvana would constantly talk about the Melvins' importance to them in the press.\nCobain was an admirer of Jimi Hendrix, and said in reference to the growing media attention on the Seattle scene at the time, \"I mean, we had Jimi Hendrix. Heck. What more do we want?\". In a 1993 interview Cobain called Hendrix \"a great musician and a great composer,\" and noted that, \"I have great respect for him.\"\nCobain was also a fan of protopunk acts like the Stooges, whose 1973 album \"Raw Power\" he listed as his favorite of all time in his journals.\nThe 1980s American alternative rock band Pixies were instrumental in helping an adult Cobain develop his own songwriting style. In a 1992 interview with \"Melody Maker\", Cobain said that hearing their 1988 debut album, \"Surfer Rosa\", \"convinced him to abandon his more Black Flag-influenced songwriting in favor of the Iggy Pop/Aerosmith-type songwriting that appeared on \"Nevermind\". In a 1993 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", he said that \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" was his attempt at \"trying to rip off the Pixies. I have to admit it. When I heard the Pixies for the first time, I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band\u2014or at least a Pixies cover band. We used their sense of dynamics, being soft and quiet and then loud and hard\".\nCobain's appreciation of early alternative rock bands also extended to Sonic Youth and R.E.M., both of which the members of Nirvana befriended and looked up to for advice. It was under recommendation from Sonic Youth's Kim Gordon that Nirvana signed to DGC in 1990, and both bands did a two-week tour of Europe in the summer of 1991, as documented in the 1992 documentary, \"\". In 1993, Cobain said of R.E.M.: \"If I could write just a couple of songs as good as what they've written... I don't know how that band does what they do. God, they're the greatest. They've dealt with their success like saints, and they keep delivering great music\".\nAfter attaining mainstream success, Cobain became a devoted champion of lesser known indie bands, covering songs by the Vaselines, Meat Puppets, Wipers and Fang onstage and/or in the studio, wearing Daniel Johnston T-shirts during photo shoots, having the K Records logo tattooed on his forearm, and enlisting bands like Butthole Surfers, Shonen Knife, Chokebore and Half Japanese along for the \"In Utero\" tour in late 1993 and early 1994. Cobain even invited his favorite musicians to perform with him: ex-Germs guitarist Pat Smear joined the band in 1993, and the Meat Puppets appeared onstage during Nirvana's 1993 \"MTV Unplugged\" appearance to perform three songs from their second album, \"Meat Puppets II\".\nNirvana's \"Unplugged\" set includes renditions of \"The Man Who Sold the World\", by David Bowie, and the American folk song, \"Where Did You Sleep Last Night\", as adapted by Lead Belly. Cobain introduced the latter by calling Lead Belly his favorite performer, and in a 1993 interview revealed he had been introduced to him from reading the American author William S. Burroughs, saying: \"I remember [Burroughs] saying in an interview, 'These new rock'n'roll kids should just throw away their guitars and listen to something with real soul, like Leadbelly.' I'd never heard about Leadbelly before so I bought a couple of records, and now he turns out to be my absolute favorite of all time in music. I absolutely love it more than any rock'n'roll I ever heard.\" The album \"MTV Unplugged in New York\" was released posthumously in 1994. It has drawn comparisons to R.E.M.'s 1992 release, \"Automatic for the People\". In 1993, Cobain had predicted that the next Nirvana album would be \"pretty ethereal, acoustic, like R.E.M.'s last album\".\n\"Yeah, he talked a lot about what direction he was heading in\", Cobain's friend, R.E.M.'s lead singer Michael Stipe, told \"Newsweek\" in 1994. \"I mean, I know what the next Nirvana recording was going to sound like. It was going to be very quiet and acoustic, with lots of stringed instruments. It was going to be an amazing fucking record, and I'm a little bit angry at him for killing himself. He and I were going to record a trial run of the album, a demo tape. It was all set up. He had a plane ticket. He had a car picking him up. And at the last minute he called and said, 'I can't come.'\" Stipe was chosen as the godfather of Cobain's and Courtney Love's daughter, Frances Bean Cobain.\nArtistry.\nAccording to Grohl, Cobain believed that music comes first and lyrics second; he focused primarily on the melodies. He complained when fans and rock journalists attempted to decipher his singing and extract meaning from his lyrics, writing: \"Why in the hell do journalists insist on coming up with a second-rate Freudian evaluation of my lyrics, when 90 percent of the time they've transcribed them incorrectly?\" Though Cobain insisted on the subjectivity and unimportance of his lyrics, he labored and procrastinated in writing them, often changing the content and order of lyrics during performances. Cobain would describe his own lyrics as \"a big pile of contradictions. They're split down the middle between very sincere opinions that I have and sarcastic opinions and feelings that I have and sarcastic and hopeful, humorous rebuttals toward clich\u00e9 bohemian ideals that have been exhausted for years.\"\nCobain originally wanted \"Nevermind\" to be divided into two sides: a \"Boy\" side, for the songs written about the experiences of his early life and childhood, and a \"Girl\" side, for the songs written about his dysfunctional relationship with Vail. Charles R. Cross wrote, \"In the four months following their break-up, Kurt would write a half dozen of his most memorable songs, all of them about Tobi Vail.\" Though Cobain wrote \"Lithium\" before meeting Vail, he wrote the lyrics to reference her. Cobain said in an interview with \"Musician\" that he wrote about \"some of my very personal experiences, like breaking up with girlfriends and having bad relationships, feeling that death void that the person in the song is feeling. Very lonely, sick.\" While Cobain regarded \"In Utero\" as \"for the most part very impersonal\", its lyrics deal with his parents' divorce, his newfound fame and the public image and perception of himself and Courtney Love on \"Serve the Servants\", with his enamored relationship with Love conveyed through lyrical themes of pregnancy and the female anatomy on \"Heart-Shaped Box.\"\nCobain was affected enough to write \"Polly\" from \"Nevermind\" after reading a newspaper story of an incident in 1987, when a 14-year-old girl was kidnapped after attending a punk rock show, then raped and tortured with a blowtorch. She escaped after gaining the trust of her captor Gerald Friend through flirting with him. After seeing Nirvana perform, Bob Dylan cited \"Polly\" as the best of Nirvana's songs, and said of Cobain, \"the kid has heart\". Patrick S\u00fcskind's novel \"Perfume: The Story of a Murderer\" inspired Cobain to write the song \"Scentless Apprentice\" from \"In Utero\". The book is a historical horror novel about a perfumer's apprentice born with no body odor of his own but with a highly developed sense of smell, and who attempts to create the \"ultimate perfume\" by killing virginal women and taking their scent.\nCobain immersed himself in artistic projects throughout his life, as much so as he did in songwriting. The sentiments of his artwork followed the same subjects of his lyrics, often expressed through a dark and macabre sense of humor. Noted were his fascination with physiology, his own rare medical conditions, and the human anatomy. According to Novoselic, \"Kurt said that he never liked literal things. He liked cryptic things. He would cut out pictures of meat from grocery-store fliers, then paste these orchids on them ... And all this stuff on [\"In Utero\"] about the body\u2014there was something about anatomy. He really liked that. You look at his art\u2014there are these people, and they're all weird, like mutants. And dolls\u2014creepy dolls.\"\nCobain contributed backing guitar for a spoken word recording of beat poet William S. Burroughs' entitled \"The \"Priest\" They Called Him\". Cobain regarded Burroughs as a hero. During Nirvana's European tour Cobain kept a copy of Burroughs' \"Naked Lunch\", purchased from a London bookstall. Cobain met with Burroughs at his home in Lawrence, Kansas in October 1993. Burroughs expressed no surprise at Cobain's death: \"It wasn't an act of will for Kurt to kill himself. As far as I was concerned, he was dead already.\"\nEquipment.\nIn a \"Guitar World\" retrospective, Cobain's guitar tone was deemed \"one of the most iconic\" in the history of the electric guitar, while noting that rather than relying on expensive or vintage items, Cobain used \"an eccentric cache of budget models, low-end imports and pawn shop prizes.\" Cobain stated in a 1992 interview, \"Junk is always best,\" but denied this was a punk statement and claimed it was a necessity, as he had trouble finding high quality left-handed guitars.\nCobain's first guitar was a used electric guitar from Sears that he received on his 14th birthday. He took guitar lessons long enough to learn AC/DC's \"Back in Black\" and began playing with local kids. Cobain found the guitar smashed after leaving it in a locker, but he was able to purchase new equipment, including a Peavey amp, by recovering and selling his stepfather's gun collection, which his mother had dumped in a river after discovering his infidelity. Upon forming what would be Nirvana, Cobain was playing a Fender Champ amplifier and a right-handed Univox Hi-Flier guitar he flipped over and strung for left-handed playing.\nFor the recording of \"Bleach\", Cobain needed to borrow a Fender Twin Reverb due to his main amplifier, a solid-state Randall, being repaired at the time, but as the Twin Reverb's speakers were blown, he was forced to pair it with an external cabinet featuring two 12\" speakers. He used a Boss DS-1 for distortion, while playing Hi-Flier guitars, which cost him $ each. Nirvana embarked on their first American tour in 1989, at the start of which Cobain played an Epiphone ET270; however, he destroyed the guitar onstage during a show, a subsequent habit that forced label Sub Pop to have to call local pawn shops looking for replacement guitars. Cobain's first acoustic guitar, a Stella 12-string, cost him $. Cobain strung it with six (or sometimes five) strings, and while the guitar's tuners had to be held together with duct tape, it sounded good enough that the guitar was later used to record the \"Nevermind\" tracks \"Polly\" and \"Something in the Way.\"\nDespite receiving a $ advance upon signing with Geffen Records, Cobain retained a preference for inexpensive gear. He became a fan of Japanese-made Fender guitars ahead of recording \"Nevermind\", due to their slim necks and wide availability in left-handed orientation. These included several Stratocasters fitted with humbucker pickups in the bridge positions, as well as a 1965 Jaguar with DiMarzio pickups and a 1969 Competition Mustang, the latter of which Cobain cited as his favorite, despite noting, \"They're cheap and totally inefficient, and they sound like crap and are very small.\" For the album, Cobain used a rackmount system featuring a Mesa/Boogie Studio preamp, a Crown power amp, and Marshall cabinets. He also used a Vox AC30 and a Fender Bassman. Producer Butch Vig preferred to avoid pedals, but allowed Cobain to use his Boss DS-1, which Cobain considered a key part of his sound, as well as an Electro-Harmonix Big Muff fuzz pedal and a Small Clone chorus, which can be heard on songs like \"Smells Like Teen Spirit,\" \"Come As You Are,\" and \"Aneurysm.\"\nCobain used his '69 Mustang, '65 Jaguar, a custom Jaguar/Mustang, and a Hi-Flier for the \"In Utero\" recording sessions. To tour behind the album, Cobain placed an order for 10 Mustangs split between Fiesta Red and Sonic Blue. As the Fender Custom Shop was new, the guitars were to be shipped out two at a time over a period of months. By the time of his death, Cobain had received six of the guitars. The remaining four, waiting to be shipped, were instead sold as regular stock at Japanese music stores without informing buyers the guitars had been made for Cobain.\nFor Nirvana's \"Unplugged\" performance, Cobain played a righthanded 1959 Martin D-18E acoustic guitar modified for left-handed playing. The guitar became the most expensive ever sold when it fetched over $ at auction in 2020. Cobain's 1969 Competition Mustang, which he also played in the \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" music video, sold at a 2022 auction to Jim Irsay, owner of the Indianapolis Colts, for $, with an original estimate of $.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and family.\nThere are differing accounts of exactly when and how Cobain first met Courtney Love. In his 1993 authorized biography of Nirvana, Michael Azerrad cites a January 21, 1989, Dharma Bums gig in Portland where Nirvana played as support, while the Charles R. Cross 2001 Cobain biography has Love and Cobain meeting at the same Satyricon nightclub venue in Portland but a different Nirvana show, January 12, 1990, when both still led ardent underground rock bands. Love made advances soon after they met, but Cobain was evasive. Early in their interactions, Cobain broke off dates and ignored Love's advances because he was unsure if he wanted a relationship. Cobain noted, \"I was determined to be a bachelor for a few months [...] But I knew that I liked Courtney so much right away that it was a really hard struggle to stay away from her for so many months.\" Everett True, who was an associate of both Cobain and Love, disputes those versions of events in his 2006 book, claiming that he himself introduced the couple on May 17, 1991.\nCobain was already aware of Love through her role in the 1987 film \"Straight to Hell\". According to True, the pair were formally introduced at an L7 and Butthole Surfers concert in Los Angeles in May 1991. In the weeks that followed, after learning from Grohl that Cobain shared mutual interests with her, Love began pursuing Cobain. In late 1991, the two were often together and bonded through drug use.\nOn February 24, 1992, a few days after the conclusion of Nirvana's \"Pacific Rim\" tour, Cobain and Love were married on Waikiki Beach in Hawaii. Love wore a satin and lace dress once owned by Frances Farmer, and Cobain donned a Guatemalan purse and wore green pajamas, because he had been \"too lazy to put on a tux.\" Eight people were in attendance at the ceremony, including Grohl, but not Novoselic. Love said she was warned by the Sonic Youth bassist Kim Gordon that marrying Cobain would \"destroy her life\"; Love responded: \"'Whatever! I love him, and I want to be with him!' ... It wasn't his fault. He wasn't trying to do that.\"\nThe couple's daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, was born August 18, 1992. A sonogram was included in the artwork for Nirvana's single, \"Lithium.\" In a 1992 \"Vanity Fair\" article\",\" Love admitted to a drug binge with Cobain in the early weeks of her pregnancy. At the time, she claimed that \"Vanity Fair\" had misquoted her. Love later admitted to using heroin before knowing she was pregnant. The couple were asked by the press if Frances was addicted to drugs at birth. The Los Angeles County Department of Children's Services visited the Cobain's days after Love gave birth and later took them to court, stating that their drug usage made them unfit parents. Frances was removed from her parents' care for a \"short period of time\" in the first few weeks of her life.\nSexuality.\nIn October 1992, when asked, \"Well, are you gay?\" by \"Monk Magazine\", Cobain replied, \"If I wasn't attracted to Courtney, I'd be a bisexual.\" In another interview, he described identifying with the gay community in \"The Advocate\", stating, \"I'm definitely gay in spirit and I probably could be bisexual\" and \"if I wouldn't have found Courtney, I probably would have carried on with a bisexual lifestyle\", but also that he was \"more sexually attracted to women\". He described himself as being \"feminine\" in childhood, and often wore dresses and other stereotypically feminine clothing. Some of his song lyrics, as well as phrases he would use to vandalize vehicles and a bank, included \"God is gay\", \"Jesus is gay\", \"HOMOSEXUAL SEX RULES\", and \"Everyone is gay\". One of his personal journals states, \"I am not gay, although I wish I were, just to piss off homophobes.\"\nCobain advocated for LGBTQ+ rights, including traveling to Oregon to perform at a benefit opposing the 1992 Oregon Ballot Measure 9, and supported local bands with LGBTQ+ members. He reported having felt \"different\" from the age of seven, and was a frequent target of homophobic bullying in his school due to his having a \"gay friend\". Cobain was interviewed by two gay magazines, \"Out\" and \"The Advocate\"; the 1993 interview with \"The Advocate\" being described as \"the only [interview] the band's lead singer says he plans to do for \"Incesticide\"\", an album whose liner notes included a statement decrying homophobia, racism and misogyny:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If any of you in any way hate homosexuals, people of different color, or women, please do this one favor for us\u2014leave us the fuck alone! Don't come to our shows and don't buy our records.\nHealth and addiction.\nAt school Cobain was diagnosed with attention deficit disorder and was prescribed Ritalin. Throughout most of his life, Cobain had chronic bronchitis and intense physical pain due to an undiagnosed chronic stomach condition. In an interview with Jon Savage in 1993 he said, \"Every time I've had an endoscope, they find a red irritation in my stomach. But it's psychosomatic, it's all from anger. And screaming\". He then goes on to mention that he, \"had minor scoliosis in junior high\". According to \"The Telegraph\", Cobain had depression. In 1993, he told Michael Azerrad that he had narcolepsy and manic depression. His cousin brought attention to the family history of suicide, mental illness and alcoholism, noting that two of her uncles had died by suicide with guns.\nAccording to Cross, Cobain suffered a mental breakdown midway through Nirvana's show in Rome on November 27, 1989. After smashing his guitar, he climbed a 30\u00a0ft speaker stack and shouted, \"I'm going to kill myself!\". Eventually he climbed down and took the following day off, sightseeing with Sub Pop manager, Bruce Pavitt. Cobain completed the remaining five European tour dates and returned to the USA.\nHe first drank alcohol in 7th grade (c. 12 yrs) and he often drank to excess throughout his life. His first drug experience was with cannabis in 1980, at age 13. He regularly used the drug during adulthood. Cobain also had a period of consuming \"notable\" amounts of LSD, as observed by Marander, and had been involved in solvent abuse as a teenager. Novoselic said he was \"really into getting fucked up: drugs, acid, any kind of drug\". He occasionally experimented with methamphetamine and cocaine when the band were on tour. One example was when Novoselic and Cobain took cocaine after their gig in New York on July 18, 1989. Cobain first took heroin in 1986, administered to him by a dealer in Tacoma, Washington, who had previously supplied him with oxycodone and aspirin. Cobain used heroin sporadically for several years; by the end of 1991, his use had developed into addiction. Cobain claimed that he was \"determined to get a habit\" as a way to self-medicate his stomach condition. \"It started with three days in a row of doing heroin and I don't have a stomach pain. That was such a relief,\" he said. However, his long-time friend Buzz Osborne disputes this, saying that his stomach pain was more likely caused by his heroin use: \"He made it up for sympathy and so he could use it as an excuse to stay loaded. Of course he was vomiting\u2014that's what people on heroin do, they vomit. It's called 'vomiting with a smile on your face'.\" Cobain told Novoselic in 1990 that he had used heroin and he spoke to Grohl about it in January 1991.\nCobain's heroin use began to affect Nirvana's \"Nevermind\" tour. During a 1992 photoshoot with Michael Lavine, before their first \"Saturday Night Live\" performance on January 11, he fell asleep several times, having used heroin beforehand. Cobain told biographer Michael Azerrad: \"They're not going to be able to tell me to stop. So I really didn't care. Obviously to them it was like practicing witchcraft or something. They didn't know anything about it so they thought that any second, I was going to die.\"\nThe morning after the band's performance on \"Saturday Night Live\" in 1992, Cobain experienced his first near-death overdose after injecting heroin; Love resuscitated him.\nOn May 2, 1993 Cobain overdosed at his home in Seattle and Love called the paramedics. He was taken to Harborview Medical Center, but was discharged the same day.\nPrior to a performance at the New Music Seminar in New York City on July 23, 1993, Cobain suffered another overdose. Rather than calling for an ambulance, Love injected Cobain with naloxone to resuscitate him. Cobain proceeded to perform with Nirvana, giving the public no indication that anything had happened.\nBy March 1994, Love had \"seen Kurt close to death from heroin overdoses on more than a dozen occasions,\" according to Cross.\nDeath.\nFollowing a tour stop at Terminal Eins in Munich, Germany, on March\u00a01, 1994, Cobain was diagnosed with bronchitis and severe laryngitis. He flew to Rome the next day for medical treatment, and was joined there by his wife, Courtney Love, on March\u00a03. The next morning, Love awoke to find that Cobain had overdosed on a combination of champagne and Rohypnol at the Westin Excelsior. Cobain was rushed to the hospital and was unconscious for the rest of the day. Dave Grohl mentioned in his memoir that he received a phone call at this time saying Cobain had died. However, a few minutes later he was called again and told that the singer was hospitalized but stable. Love later said that the incident was Cobain's first suicide attempt. After five days, Cobain was released and returned to Seattle.\nOn March 18, 1994, Love phoned the Seattle police informing them that Cobain was suicidal and had locked himself in a room with a gun. Police arrived and confiscated several guns and a bottle of pills from Cobain, who insisted that he was not suicidal but had locked himself in the room.\nLove arranged an intervention regarding Cobain's drug use on March\u00a025, 1994. The ten people involved included musician friends, record company executives, and one of Cobain's closest friends, Dylan Carlson. Cobain reacted with anger, insulting and heaping scorn on the participants, and locked himself in the upstairs bedroom. However, by the end of the day, Cobain agreed to undergo a detox program, and he entered a residential facility in Los Angeles for a few days on March\u00a030, 1994. The same day he left for Los Angeles, Cobain asked his friend, Dylan Carlson, to buy a shotgun for him saying it was for \"self-protection\". This weapon is the one Cobain used in his suicide.\nMultiple times in the previous months Cobain had called the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\", wanting to speak to its film critic, William Arnold. Arnold was the author of \"Shadowland\", a 1978 book on the psychiatric commitment of Frances Farmer which Cobain had read in high school and was the source of his identification with the actress. Gillian Gaar maintains that one of Cobain\u2019s last songs, \"Frances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle\", is essentially a musical adaptation of \"Shadowland\".\nOnly vaguely aware of who Cobain was, and put off by the rambling messages he left, Arnold did not return his calls. Sometime in late March Cobain tried once again to connect with the author, unsuccessfully. What he wanted to talk about, and why he felt such urgency about it, remains a mystery. In a later column, Arnold expressed profound regret for avoiding Cobain and speculated that he probably felt he was reliving Farmer\u2019s tragedy and was just reaching out to someone who might understand what he was going through. \u00a0 \nOn the evening of April 1, 1994, Cobain escaped the facility and flew to Seattle. On the flight, he sat near Duff McKagan of Guns N' Roses. Despite Cobain's animosity towards Guns N' Roses, Cobain \"seemed happy\" to see McKagan. McKagan later said that he knew from \"all of [his] instincts that something was wrong\". Most of Cobain's friends and family were unaware of his whereabouts. On April 6, amid rumors of Nirvana breaking up, the band pulled out of the 1994 Lollapalooza festival.\nOn April 8, Cobain's body was discovered at his Lake Washington Boulevard home by an electrician, who had arrived to install a security system. A suicide note was found, addressed to Cobain's childhood imaginary friend Boddah, which stated that Cobain had not \"felt the excitement of listening to as well as creating music, along with really writing ... for too many years now\". Cobain's body had been there for days; the coroner's report estimated he died on April\u00a05, 1994, at the age of 27.\nAftermath.\nA public vigil was held on April\u00a010, at a park at Seattle Center, drawing approximately 7,000 mourners. Prerecorded messages by Novoselic and Love were played at the memorial. Love read portions of the suicide note to the crowd, crying and chastising Cobain. Near the end of the vigil, Love distributed some of Cobain's clothing to those who remained. Grohl said that the news of Cobain's death was \"probably the worst thing that has happened to me in my life. I remember the day after that I woke up and I was heartbroken that he was gone. I just felt like, 'Okay, so I get to wake up today and have another day and he doesn't.'\"\n\"Billboard,\" reporting from Seattle on April\u00a023, stated that within a few hours of Cobain's death being confirmed on April\u00a08, the only remaining Nirvana titles at Park Ave Records on Queen Anne Avenue were two \"Heart-Shaped Box\" import CD singles. A marketing director at the three-store Cellophane Square chain said that \"all three stores sold about a few hundred CDs, singles, and vinyl by the morning of April\u00a09\". A buyer at Tower Records on Mercer Street said: \"It's a pathetic scene, everything is going out the door. If people were really fans, they would've had this stuff already.\" In the United Kingdom, sales of Nirvana releases rose dramatically immediately after Cobain's death.\nGrohl believed that he knew Cobain would die at an early age, saying that \"sometimes you just can't save someone from themselves\", and \"in some ways, you kind of prepare yourself emotionally for that to be a reality\". Dave Reed, who for a short time had been Cobain's foster father, said that \"he had the desperation, not the courage, to be himself. Once you do that, you can't go wrong, because you can't make any mistakes when people love you for being yourself. But for Kurt, it didn't matter that other people loved him; he simply didn't love himself enough.\"\nA final ceremony was arranged by Cobain's mother on May 31, 1999, and was attended by Love and Tracy Marander. As a Buddhist monk chanted, daughter Frances Bean scattered Cobain's ashes into McLane Creek in Olympia, the city where he \"had found his true artistic muse\". In 2006, Love said she retained Cobain's ashes, kept in a bank vault in Los Angeles because \"no cemetery in Seattle will take them\". Cobain's death became a topic of public fascination and debate. His artistic endeavors and struggles with addiction, illness and depression, as well as the circumstances of his death, have become a frequent topic of controversy. According to a spokesperson for the Seattle Police Department, the department receives at least one weekly request to reopen the investigation, resulting in the maintenance of the basic incident report on file.\nIn March 2014, the Seattle police developed four rolls of film that had been left in an evidence vault; no reason was provided for why the rolls were not developed earlier. According to the Seattle police, the 35mm film photographs show the scene of Cobain's dead body more clearly than previous Polaroid images taken by the police. Detective Mike Ciesynski, a cold case investigator, was instructed to look at the film because \"it is 20 years later and it's a high media case\". Ciesynski stated that Cobain's death remains a suicide and that the images would not have been released publicly. The photos in question were later released, one by one, weeks before the 20th anniversary of Cobain's death. One photo shows Cobain's arm, still wearing the hospital bracelet from the drug rehab facility he had left just a few days prior to returning to Seattle. Another photo shows Cobain's foot resting next to a bag of shotgun shells, one of which was used in his death.\nLegacy.\nCobain is remembered as one of the most influential rock musicians in the history of alternative music. His angst-fueled songwriting and anti-establishment persona led him to be referenced as the spokesman of Generation X. In addition, Cobain's songs widened the themes of mainstream rock music of the 1980s to discussion of personal reflection and social issues. On April 10, 2014, Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Grohl, Novoselic and Love accepted the accolade at the ceremony, where Cobain was also remembered. Cobain is one of the best-known members of the 27 Club, a list of musicians who died when they were 27 years old.\n\"Music &amp; Media\" reporting on April 23, 1994, after Cobain had died, stated that J\u00f8rgen Larsen, the president of MCA Music Entertainment International was asked where he thought Cobain stood in terms of his contribution to contemporary music, and Larsen replied that \"If anybody comes out of nowhere to sell 11 or 12 million albums you have to conclude that there's something there. He wasn't just a one-hit wonder.\"\nAccording to music journalist Paul Lester, who worked at \"Melody Maker\" at the time, Cobain's suicide triggered an immediate reappraisal of his work. He wrote: \"The general impression offered by \"In Utero\" was that Cobain was some kind of whiny, self-absorbed, grunge, misery guts who could make routinely powerful music but was hardly a suffering godhead. You could almost hear a collective sigh of relief after April 5, 1994, that Cobain could no longer further sully his reputation; that the myth-making machinery could finally be cranked into action.\"\nBilly Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins referred to Cobain as \"the Michael Jordan of our generation\". Lars Ulrich of Metallica reflected on Cobain's influence stating that \"with Kurt Cobain you felt you were connecting to the real person, not to a perception of who he was\u2014you were not connecting to an image or a manufactured cut-out. You felt that between you and him there was nothing\u2014it was heart-to-heart. There are very few people who have that ability.\" In 1996, the Church of Kurt Cobain was established in Portland, Oregon, but it was later claimed by some media outlets to have been a media hoax. Reflecting on Cobain's death over 10 years later, MSNBC's Eric Olsen wrote, \"In the intervening decade, Cobain, a small, frail but handsome man in life, has become an abstract Generation X icon, viewed by many as the 'last real rock star'... a messiah and martyr whose every utterance has been plundered and parsed.\"\nIn 2003, David Fricke of \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Cobain the 12th greatest guitarist of all time. He was later ranked the 73rd greatest guitarist and 45th greatest singer of all time by the same magazine, and by MTV as seventh in the \"22 Greatest Voices in Music\". In 2006, he was placed at number twenty by \"Hit Parader\" on their list of the \"100 Greatest Metal Singers of All Time\".\nIn 2005, a sign was put up in Aberdeen, Washington, that read \"Welcome to Aberdeen\u2014Come As You Are\" as a tribute to Cobain. The sign was paid for and created by the Kurt Cobain Memorial Committee, a non-profit organization created in May 2004 to honor Cobain. The Committee planned to create a Kurt Cobain Memorial Park and a youth center in Aberdeen. Because Cobain was cremated and his remains scattered into the Wishkah River in Washington, many Nirvana fans visit Viretta Park, near Cobain's former Lake Washington home to pay tribute. On the anniversary of his death, fans gather in the park to celebrate his life and memory. Controversy erupted in July 2009 when a monument to Cobain in Aberdeen along the Wishkah River included the quote \"... Drugs are bad for you. They will fuck you up.\" The city ultimately decided to sandblast the monument to replace the expletive with \"f---\", but fans immediately drew the letters back in. In December 2013, the small city of Hoquiam, where Cobain once lived, announced that April 10 would become the annual Nirvana Day. Similarly, in January 2014, Cobain's birthday, February 20, was declared annual \"Kurt Cobain Day\" in Aberdeen.\nIn July 2021, the Washington State Department of Archaeology and Historic Preservation confirmed that Cobain's childhood home in Aberdeen would be included on their Heritage Register, and that the owner would be making it into an exhibit for people to visit.\nA street has been named after Cobain in Saint-Jean-d'Heurs, a rural commune of France.\nMedia.\nBooks.\nPrior to Cobain's death, Michael Azerrad published ', a book chronicling Nirvana's career from its beginning, as well as the personal histories of the band members. The book explored Cobain's drug addiction, as well as the countless controversies surrounding the band. After Cobain's death, Azerrad republished the book to include a final chapter discussing the last year of Cobain's life. The book involved the band members themselves, who provided interviews and personal information to Azerrad specifically for the book. In 2006, Azerrad's taped conversations with Cobain were transformed into a documentary about Cobain, titled '. Though this film does not feature any music by Nirvana, it has songs by the artists that inspired Cobain.\nJournalists Ian Halperin and Max Wallace published their investigation of any possible conspiracy surrounding Cobain's death in their 1998 book \"Who Killed Kurt Cobain?\". Halperin and Wallace argued that, while there was not enough evidence to prove a conspiracy, there was more than enough to demand that the case be reopened. The book included the journalists' discussions with Tom Grant, who had taped nearly every conversation that he had undertaken while he was in Love's employ. Over the next several years, Halperin and Wallace collaborated with Grant to write a second book, 2004's \"\".\nIn 2001, writer Charles R. Cross published a biography of Cobain, titled \"Heavier Than Heaven\". For the book, Cross conducted over 400 interviews, and was given access by Courtney Love to Cobain's journals, lyrics, and diaries. Cross' biography was met with criticism, including allegations of Cross accepting second-hand (and incorrect) information as fact. Friend Everett True\u2014who derided the book as being inaccurate, omissive, and highly biased\u2014said \"Heavier than Heaven\" was \"the Courtney-sanctioned version of history\" or, alternatively, Cross's \"Oh, I think I need to find the new Bruce Springsteen now\" Kurt Cobain book. However, beyond the criticism, the book contained details about Cobain and Nirvana's career that would have otherwise been unknown. In 2008, Cross published \"Cobain Unseen\", a compilation of annotated photographs and creations and writings by Cobain throughout his life and career.\nIn 2002, a sampling of Cobain's writings was published as \"Journals\". The book fills 280 pages with a simple black cover; the pages are arranged somewhat chronologically (although Cobain generally did not date them). The journal pages are reproduced in color, and there is a section added at the back with explanations and transcripts of some of the less legible pages. The writings begin in the late 1980s and were continued until his death. A paperback version of the book, released in 2003, included a handful of writings that were not offered in the initial release. In the journals, Cobain talked about the ups and downs of life on the road, made lists of what music he was enjoying, and often scribbled down lyric ideas for future reference. Upon its release, reviewers and fans were conflicted about the collection. Many were elated to be able to learn more about Cobain and read his inner thoughts in his own words, but were disturbed by what was viewed as an invasion of his privacy.\nIn 2019, on the 25th anniversary of Cobain's death, former Nirvana manager, Danny Goldberg, published \"Serving the Servant: Remembering Kurt Cobain\". In promotion of the book, Goldberg stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think that in terms of icons, Kurt was kind of the last icon of the rock era and then the hip-hop era started.\nThen, obviously, in our kid's generation, hip-hop has been a dominant voice for adolescence. It's not the only one, there were still rock artists but not only was he iconic in terms of depth in which he touched people, that music was pop. Those songs were as big as Rihanna, Travis Scott or Justin Bieber or anything today.\nThey were pop hits as well as touching the underground culture. That fusion of pop and underground, I don't think rock has produced someone else who could do that since Kurt. I think he's arguably the last of that era.\nYou could almost have bookends of an era that started with The Beatles and ended with Kurt. I mean, yeah, there was rock and roll before The Beatles but The Beatles broadened it and I think you can make that argument.\nFilm and television.\nIn the 1998 documentary \"Kurt &amp; Courtney\", filmmaker Nick Broomfield investigated Tom Grant's claim that Cobain was actually murdered. He took a film crew to visit a number of people associated with Cobain and Love; Love's father, Cobain's aunt, and one of the couple's former nannies. Broomfield also spoke to Mentors bandleader Eldon \"El Duce\" Hoke, who claimed Love offered him $ to kill Cobain. Although Hoke claimed he knew who killed Cobain, he failed to mention a name, and offered no evidence to support his assertion. Broomfield inadvertently captured Hoke's last interview, as he died days later, reportedly hit by a train. However, Broomfield felt he had not uncovered enough evidence to conclude the existence of a conspiracy. In a 1998 interview, Broomfield summed it up by saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think that he committed suicide. I don't think there's a smoking gun. And I think there's only one way you can explain a lot of things around his death. Not that he was murdered, but that there was just a lack of caring for him. I just think that Courtney had moved on, and he was expendable.\nBroomfield's documentary was noted by \"The New York Times\" to be a rambling, largely speculative and circumstantial work, relying on flimsy evidence as was his later documentary \"Biggie &amp; Tupac\".\nThe documentary \"\" was released as a home video in 1996, and on DVD in 2001. \"The Vigil\" is a 1998 comedy film about a group of young people who travel from Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada to Seattle in the United States to attend the memorial vigil for Cobain in 1994. It stars Donny Lucas and Trevor White.\nGus Van Sant loosely based his 2005 movie \"Last Days\" on the events in the final days of Cobain's life, starring Michael Pitt as the main character Blake who was based on Cobain.\nIn 2006, the Jon Brewer directed documentary, \"\", and the BBC documentary, \"The Last 48 Hours of Kurt Cobain\", were released. In January 2007, Love began to shop the biography \"Heavier Than Heaven\" to various movie studios in Hollywood to turn the book into an A-list feature film about Cobain and Nirvana.\nA Brett Morgen film, entitled \"\", premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2015, followed by small-screen and cinema releases. Morgen said that documentary \"will be this generation's \"The Wall\"\".\n\"Soaked in Bleach\" is a 2015 American docudrama directed by Benjamin Statler. The film details the events leading up to the death of Kurt Cobain, as seen through the perspective of Tom Grant, the private detective who was hired by Courtney Love to find Cobain, her husband, shortly before his death in 1994. It also explores the premise that Cobain's death was not a suicide. The film stars Tyler Bryan as Cobain and Daniel Roebuck as Grant, with Sarah Scott portraying Courtney Love and August Emerson as Dylan Carlson. Love's legal team issued a cease-and-desist letter against theatres showing the documentary.\nRegarding the depiction of Nirvana, and in particular Kurt Cobain, the indie rock author Andrew Earles wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Never has a rock band's past been so retroactively distorted into an irreversible fiction by incessant mythologizing, conjecture, wild speculation, and romanticizing rhetoric. The Cobain biographical narrative \u2013 specifically in regard to the culturally irresponsible mishandling of subjects such as drug abuse, depression, and suicide \u2013 is now impenetrable with inaccurate and overcooked connectivity between that which is completely unrelated, too chronologically disparate, or just plain untrue.\u2014\u200aMatt Reeves' film \"The Batman\" depicts a version of Bruce Wayne, performed by Robert Pattinson, that was loosely inspired by Cobain. Reeves stated, \"when I write, I listen to music, and as I was writing the first act, I put on Nirvana's 'Something in the Way,' that's when it came to me that, rather than make Bruce Wayne the playboy version we've seen before, there's another version who had gone through a great tragedy and become a recluse. So I started making this connection to Gus Van Sant's \"Last Days\", and the idea of this fictionalised version of Kurt Cobain being in this kind of decaying manor.\" \"Something in the Way\" was used in trailers to promote \"The Batman\" prior to its release and is featured twice in the film.\nTo mark the 30th anniversary of Cobain's death a new documentary titled \"\" aired on BBC Two and BBC iPlayer on April 13, 2024.\nTheatre.\nIn September 2009, the Roy Smiles play \"Kurt and Sid\" debuted at the Trafalgar Studios in London's West End. The play, set in Cobain's greenhouse on the day of his suicide, revolves around the ghost of Sid Vicious visiting Cobain to try to convince him not to kill himself. Cobain was played by Shaun Evans.\nVideo games.\nCobain was included as a playable character in the 2009 video game \"Guitar Hero 5\"; he can be used to play songs by Nirvana and other acts. Novoselic and Grohl released a statement condemning the inclusion and urging the developer, Activision, to alter it, saying they had no control over the use of Cobain's likeness. Love denied that she had given permission, saying it was \"the result of a cabal of a few assholes' greed\", and threatened to sue. The vice-president of Activision said that Love had contributed photos and videos to the development and had been \"great to work with\".\nDiscography.\nNirvana.\n\"For a complete list of all Nirvana releases, see Nirvana discography\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16708", "revid": "50285172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16708", "title": "Kent Beck", "text": "American software engineer\nKent Beck in 2025\nKent Beck (born 1961) is an American software engineer and the creator of extreme programming, a software development methodology that eschews rigid formal specification for a collaborative and iterative design process. Beck was one of the 17 original signatories of the Agile Manifesto, the founding document for agile software development. Extreme and Agile methods are closely associated with Test-Driven Development (TDD), of which Beck is perhaps the leading proponent.\nBeck pioneered software design patterns, as well as the commercial application of Smalltalk. He wrote the SUnit unit testing framework for Smalltalk, which spawned the xUnit series of frameworks, notably JUnit for Java, which Beck wrote with Erich Gamma. Beck popularized CRC cards with Ward Cunningham, the inventor of the wiki.\nHe lives in San Francisco, California and previously worked at Facebook. In 2019, Beck joined Gusto as a software fellow and coach, where he coaches engineering teams as they build out payroll systems for small businesses.\nHistory.\nBeck attended the University of Oregon between 1979 and 1987, receiving B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer and information science.\nIn 1996 Beck was hired to work on the Chrysler Comprehensive Compensation System. The Chrysler contract was signed by collaborators Adele Goldberg, president of Parc Place Systems and https://, president of Arbor Intelligent Systems. Beck in turn brought in Ron Jeffries. In March 1996 the development team estimated the system would be ready to go into production around one year later. In 1997 the development team adopted a way of working which is now formalized as extreme programming. The one-year delivery target was nearly achieved, with actual delivery being only a couple of months late.\nPublications.\nBooks.\nThe book illustrates the use of unit testing as part of the methodology, including examples in Java and Python. One section includes using test-driven development to develop a unit testing framework.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16709", "revid": "48795375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16709", "title": "Swedish krona", "text": "Currency of Sweden\nThe krona (; plural: \"kronor\"; sign: kr; code: SEK) is the currency of Sweden. Both the ISO code \"SEK\" and currency sign \"kr\" are in common use for the krona; the former precedes or follows the value, the latter usually follows it but, especially in the past, it sometimes preceded the value. In English, the currency is sometimes referred to as the Swedish crown, as means \"crown\" in Swedish. As the ninth-most traded currency in the world by value, the Swedish krona is one of the world's G10 currencies, and is the fourth-most traded from Europe after the euro, British pound and Swiss franc. Banknotes are issued by the Sveriges Riksbank.\nOne krona is subdivided into 100 \"\u00f6re\" (singular; plural \"\u00f6re\" or \"\u00f6ren\", where the former is always used after a cardinal number, hence \"50 \u00f6re\", but otherwise the latter is often preferred in contemporary speech). Coins as small as 1 \u00f6re were formerly in use, but the last coin smaller than 1 krona was discontinued in 2010. Goods can still be priced in \"\u00f6re\", but all sums are rounded to the nearest krona when paying with cash. The word \"\u00f6re\" is ultimately derived from the Latin word for gold (\"aurum\").\nHistory.\nThe introduction of the krona, which replaced the riksdaler at par, was a result of the Scandinavian Monetary Union, which came into effect in 1876 and lasted until the beginning of World War I. The parties to the union were the Scandinavian countries, where the name was \"krona\" in Sweden and \"krone\" in Denmark and Norway, which in English literally means \"crown\". The three currencies were on the gold standard, with the krona/krone defined as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442480 of a kilogram of pure gold.\nThe mutual equivalence of all three currencies ended in World War I when their convertibility to gold was suspended. While their gold parities remained during most of the interwar period, these currencies were generally quoted at varying market rates.\nThe krona is one of the six currencies included in the U.S. Dollar Index.\nCoins.\nHistory.\nBetween 1873 and 1876, coins in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, and 50 \u00f6re and 1, 2, 10, and 20 kronor were introduced. The 1, 2 and 5 \u00f6re were in bronze, the 10, 25, 50 \u00f6re and 1 krona and 2 kronor were in silver, and the 10 and 20 kronor were in gold. Gold 5-kronor coins were added in 1881.\nIn 1873 the Scandinavian Monetary Union currency was fixed so that 2,480 kronor purchased 1\u00a0kg of gold. In 2017 the price of gold is 365,289 kronor per kg. So one \u00f6re in 1873 bought as much gold as 1.47 kronor in 2017. So if it is reasonable to have the smallest denomination coin 1 krona today, in 1873 a reasonable smallest denomination coin was 1 \u00f6re. A 10 kr gold coin weighed 4.4803 grams with 900 fineness so that the fine weight was 4.03327 grams or exactly 1/248th of a kilogram.\nIn 1902, production of gold coins ceased, and was briefly restarted in 1920 and 1925 before ceasing entirely. Due to metal shortages during World War I, iron replaced bronze between 1917 and 1919. Nickel-bronze replaced silver in the 10, 25 and 50 \u00f6re in 1920, with silver returning in 1927.\nMetal shortages due to World War II again led to changes in the Swedish coinage. Between 1940 and 1947, the nickel-bronze 10, 25 and 50 \u00f6re were again issued. In 1942, iron again replaced bronze (until 1952) and the silver content of the other coins was reduced. In 1962, cupronickel replaced silver in the 10-\u00f6re, 25-\u00f6re and 50-\u00f6re coins.\nIn 1968, the 2-kronor switched to cupronickel and the 1-krona switched to cupronickel-clad copper (it was replaced entirely by cupronickel in 1982). Nonetheless, all previous mintages of the 1-krona (since 1875) and 2-kronor (since 1876) were still legal tender until 2017, though 2-kronor coins were extremely rarely seen in circulation as they have not been issued since 1971. The 2-kronor coins contained 40% silver until 1966, which meant they had been for several years worth much more than face value, so most have been bought and melted down by arbitrageurs, and the rest are kept by collectors.\nIn 1954, 1955 and 1971, 5-kronor silver coins were produced, with designs similar to contemporary 1-krona and 2-kronor coins. In 1972, a new, smaller 5-kronor coin was introduced, struck in cupronickel-clad nickel. The current design has been produced since 1976. 5-kronor coins minted since 1954 are legal tender but tend to be kept by collectors for their silver content.\nThe royal motto of the monarch is also inscribed on many of the coins. A new 5-kronor coin was designed in 1974, at a time when there were political efforts to abandon the monarchy and the young inexperienced king. The monarchy remained, but the 5-kronor was not given a portrait. Coins minted before 1974 have the same size, but contain the portrait of King Gustav VI Adolf and his royal motto.\nCash rounding (Swedish: ), commonly called Swedish rounding, is a legally-enforced method of rounding off change, up or down, to the nearest unit of physical currency, while retaining the as pricing and accounting unit. It was required in conjunction with the phaseout of smaller coins, as follows:\nIn 1971 the 2-kronor coin ceased production. In 1972 the sizes of the 5-\u00f6re and 5-kronor coins were reduced.\nIn 1991, aluminium-brass (\"Nordic gold\") 10-kronor coins were introduced; previous 10-kronor coins are not legal tender. In the same year bronze-coloured 50-\u00f6re coins were introduced.\nOn 18December 2008, the Riksbank announced a proposal to phase out the 50-\u00f6re, the final \u00f6re coin, by 2010. The \u00f6re would still remain a subdivision unit for electronic payments. The reasons may have included low purchasing power, higher production and distribution cost than the value and the coins cannot be used in most parking machines and vending machines. On 25 March 2009, the Riksdag formally decided to enact the law to abolish 50-\u00f6re coins as legal tender. Under that law, the final date payments could be made with 50-\u00f6re coins was 30 September 2010. Remaining 50-\u00f6re coins could be exchanged at banks until the end of March 2011.\nContemporary.\nOn 11September 2012, the Riksbank announced a new series of coins with new sizes to replace the 1-krona and 5-kronor coins; the new coins arrived in October 2016. The design of the coins follows the theme of singer-songwriter Ted G\u00e4rdestad's song, \"\" (English: \"Sun, wind and water\"), with the designs depicting the elements on the reverse side of the coins. This also included the reintroduction of the 2-kronor coin, while the current 10-kronor coin remained the same. The new coins also have a new portrait of the king in their design. One of the reasons for a new series of coins was to end the use of nickel (for allergy reasons). Vending machines and parking meters have to a fairly high degree stopped accepting coins and accept only bank cards or mobile phone payments.\nAfter the launch of the current coin series in 2016, all the old kronor coins have been invalid since 2017. They cannot be used for payments, nor can they be exchanged for legal tender at any bank, and are instead instructed to be recycled as metal.\nJubilee and commemorative coins have been minted, and those since 1897 are also legal tender.\nBanknotes.\nHistory.\n1909 specimen of a Sveriges Riksbank 1,000-kronor note\nIn 1874, notes were introduced by the Riksbank in denominations of 1 krona and 5, 10, 50, 100 and 1,000 kronor. The 1 krona was only initially issued for two years, although it reappeared between 1914 and 1920. In 1939 and 1958, 10,000-kronor notes were issued.\nProduction of the 5-kronor note ceased in 1981, although a coin had been issued since 1972. With the introduction of a 10-krona coin in 1991, production of 10-kronor notes ceased and a 20-kronor note was introduced.\nAll remaining one krona banknotes became invalid after 31 December 1987. All remaining five krona and ten krona banknotes became invalid after 31 December 1998.\nAn exhaustive list of every banknote design since 1874 is not included, but the following five designs were or will be retired in 2016\u20132017. The oldest design began to be printed in 1985.\nA 20-kronor banknote (a new denomination) was printed 1991\u20131995 with a portrait of the writer Selma Lagerl\u00f6f and on the reverse was an engraved interpretation of a passage from the book \"The Wonderful Adventures of Nils\". The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was printed from 1997 to 2008 and became invalid after 30 June 2016.\nA 50-kronor banknote (3rd design since 1896) was printed 1996\u20132003 with a portrait of the singer Jenny Lind and on the reverse was a picture of a silver harp and its tonal range. The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2013. A more secure version with the same portrait was printed from 2006 to 2011 and became invalid after 30 June 2016.\nA 100-kronor banknote (3rd design since 1898) was printed 1986\u20132000 with a portrait of the botanist Carl Linnaeus and on the reverse was a drawing of a bee pollinating a flower. The banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was introduced in 2001 and became invalid after 30 June 2017.\nA 500-kronor banknote (a new denomination) in a blue shade was introduced in 1985 with a portrait of King Charles XI and on the reverse an engraving depicts Christopher Polhem, the \"father of Swedish engineering\". These banknotes became invalid on 31 December 1998. A 500-kronor banknote (red, but without foil strips) with the same portrait was printed 1989\u20132000. This banknote became invalid after 31 December 2005. A more secure version with the same portrait was introduced in 2001 and became invalid after 30 June 2017. The banknote had some controversy in 1985 because of the executions of \"Snapphane\" guerrilla warriors that King Charles XI ordered.\nThe first two designs of 1,000-kronor banknotes (printed from 1894 to 1950 and 1952\u20131973) became invalid on 31 December 1987. The third design with portrait of King Charles XIV John and J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius (printed 1976\u20131988) and declared invalid on 31 December 1998. In preparation for retirement of the 10,000-kronor banknotes a new 1,000-kronor banknotes (of the 4th design / without foil strips) was printed from 1989 to 1991 with a portrait of Gustav Vasa and on the reverse a harvest picture from Olaus Magnus's Description of the Northern Peoples from 1555. Circulation peaked at over 48 million in 2001.\nOn 15 March 2006, the Riksbank introduced a new, more secure 1,000-kronor banknote with the same portrait and the Riksbank became the first central bank in the world to use the security feature of MOTION (a moving image in the striped band) on the new 1,000-kronor banknote. When the banknote is tilted, the picture in the striped band appears to move. The Vasa banknote without security thread became invalid after 31 December 2013 at which time there was only 10 million in circulation. The Vasa banknotes with the security thread became invalid after 30 June 2016 at which time there was under 4\u00a0million in circulation. Replacement banknotes featuring Dag Hammarskj\u00f6ld became valid on 1 October 2015, but were circulated in considerably fewer quantities (less than 3.5\u00a0million), thus reducing the supply of cash in Sweden.\nThe 10,000 krona banknote was always printed in small quantities as it was one of the most valuable banknotes in the world. The first design featuring the Head of Mercury was printed in 1939 and became invalid after 31 December 1987. The second design was printed 1958 and featured a portrait of Gustav VI Adolf, and became invalid after 31 December 1991.\nInvalid banknotes can be redeemed via the Riksbank, with an administration fee of 200 kronor.\nCurrent series.\nOn 6April 2011, the Riksbank announced the names of the persons whose portraits would decorate the new series of banknotes that would be introduced in 2015. This would also include a new 200-kronor banknote. These are:\nOn 24April 2012, the Riksbank announced the base for the new designs of the banknotes, based on G\u00f6ran \u00d6sterlund's entry titled \"Cultural Journey\".\nThe first banknotes, the 20, 50, 200, and 1,000 krona, were issued on 1 October 2015 with the other two notes, the 100 and 500 krona, followed on 3October 2016.\n500 kr banknote controversy.\nOpera singer Malena Ernman has criticized the Riksbank for choosing a design where Birgit Nilsson was depicted performing \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" by Richard Wagner. She pointed out that it was very inappropriate to include something by Wagner, whose works were associated with Nazi Germany, in a time of increasing problems with antisemitism in Sweden. Wagner died in 1883, long before the Nazi era, and the association is that Hitler liked his music. The Riksbank replied saying that it is \"unfortunate that the choice of design is seen as negative\", and stated that it is not going to be changed.\n journalist Bj\u00f6rn Wiman went further in his criticism, condemning the Riksbank for selecting Nilsson at all for the 500-kronor banknote. He brings up an example from Nilsson's 1995 autobiography, where she described Mauritz Rosengarten from Decca using antisemitic jokes about greed.\nExchange rate.\nTo see where Swedish krona ranks in \"most traded currencies\", read the article on the foreign exchange market.\nThe exchange rate of the Swedish krona against other currencies has historically been dependent on the monetary policy pursued by Sweden at the time. Since the Swedish banking rescue, a managed float regimen has been upheld.\nThe weakest the krona has been relative to the euro was 6 March 2009 when one euro bought 11.6465 SEK. The strongest the krona has been relative to the euro was on 13 August 2012 when one euro bought 8.2065 SEK. The weakness in the euro was due to the crisis in Greece which began in July 2012 and fear of further spreading to Italy and Spain. The average exchange rate since the beginning of 2002 when the euro banknote and coins were issued and 1 March 2017 was 9.2884 SEK/EUR.\nRelationship to the euro.\nAccording to the 1994 accession treaty (effective 1 January 1995), Sweden is required to join the eurozone and therefore must convert to the euro once the convergence criteria are met. Notwithstanding this, on 14 September 2003, a consultative Swedish referendum was held on the euro, in which 56% of voters were opposed to the adoption of the currency, out of an overall turnout of 82.6%. The Swedish government has argued such a course of action is possible since one of the requirements for eurozone membership is a prior two-year membership of the ERM II. By simply not joining the exchange rate mechanism, the Swedish government is provided a formal loophole avoiding the theoretical requirement of adopting the euro.\nSome of Sweden's major parties continue to believe it would be in the national interest to join, but all parties have pledged to abide by the results of the referendum, and none have shown any interest in raising the issue again. There was an agreement among the parties not to discuss the issue before the 2010 general election. In a poll from May 2007, 33.3% were in favour, while 53.8% were against and 13.0% were uncertain.\nIn February 2009, Fredrik Reinfeldt, the prime minister of Sweden, stated that a new referendum on the euro issue will not be held until support is gained from the people and all the major parties. Therefore, the timing is now at the discretion of the Social Democrats. He added, the request of Mona Sahlin, former leader of the Social Democratic Party, for deferral of a new referendum until after the 2010 mandate period should be respected.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], support for Swedish membership of the euro among the general population is low. In September 2013, support fell as low as 9%. The only party in the Riksdag that supports Swedish entry in the euro (as of 2015) is the Liberal Party.\nBanknotes and coins per capita in circulation.\nSweden is a wealthy country and in the 1970s and 1980s the value of banknotes and coins per capita was one of the highest in the world. In 1991, the largest banknote worth 10,000kr that was in circulation since 1958 was declared invalid and no longer was legal tender. For a discussion of the financial and banking crisis that hit Sweden in the early 1990s see the article History of Sweden (1991\u2013present) and Swedish banking rescue.\nUnlike the United States, which by policy never declares issued money invalid, Sweden and most other European countries have a date when older series of banknotes or older coin designs are invalid and are no longer legal tender. Invalid old banknotes of any age can, however, be deposited in the Riksbank, and the value be sent to a bank account.\nFrom the years 2001 to 2008 banknotes and coins were circulated at a near constant level of around 12,000 krona per capita, but in 2006 a modified 1,000-krona banknote with a motion security strip was produced. Within seven years the banknotes without the strip were declared invalid, leaving only a radically reduced number of banknotes with foil valid. The Swish mobile payment system was established in Sweden in 2012 and become a popular alternative to cash payments. The Vasa 1,000-krona banknote without the foil strip became invalid after 31 December 2013, and the pieces with the foil strip are invalid after 30 June 2016.\nAlthough many countries are performing larger and larger share of transactions by electronic means, Sweden is unique in that it is also reducing its cash in circulation by a significant percentage. According to Bank for International Settlements the last year Sweden was surpassed in cash on a per capita basis converted to United States dollars by the US in 1993, the Euro Area in 2003, Australia in 2007, Canada in 2009, United Kingdom and Saudi Arabia in 2013, South Korea in 2014, Russia in 2016, and Mexico in 2019. As of 2019 Sweden was still circulating more cash per person (converted to USD) than Argentina, Brazil, Turkey, India, Indonesia, and South Africa.\nThe tables show the value of the banknotes and coins per capita for participating countries on Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI). Local currency is converted to US dollars using end of the year rates.\nThe circulation levels in the table above were reported to the Bank for International Settlements. Possible discrepancies with these statistics and other sources may be because some sources exclude \"commemorative banknotes and coins\" (3.20% of total for Sweden in 2015) and other sources exclude \"banknotes and coin held by banks\" (2.68% of total for Sweden in 2015) as opposed \"banknotes and coin in circulation outside banks\".\nCirculation levels of cash on a per capita basis, are reduced by 51% from the high in 2007 compared to 2018. Speculation about Sweden declaring all banknotes and coins invalid at some future date is widespread in the media with Bj\u00f6rn Ulvaeus as a celebrity advocate of a cashless Sweden which he believes will result in a safer society because simple robbery will involve stealing goods that must be fenced.\nThe value of the payments between households, companies and authorities in Sweden amounts to about 20,000 kronor annual per capita in cash. In shops, almost one in seven payments is made in cash. More than half of the adult population has the Swish payment app. Annual withdrawals from Swedish ATMs in 2015 amount to 15,300 kronor per capita. According to Skingsley, \"what some consumers, smaller companies and local clubs often see as a problem, is not so much getting hold of cash, but being able to deposit it in a bank account.\"\nTo see how circulation of the Swedish krona ranks compared to other currencies see Bank for International Settlements#Red Books.\nThe e-krona.\nThe e-krona (electronic krona) is a proposed electronic currency to be issued directly by the Riksbank. It is different from the electronic transfers using commercial bank money as central bank money has no nominal credit risk, as it stands for a claim on the central bank, which cannot go bankrupt, at least not for debts in Swedish krona.\nThe declining use of cash in Sweden is going to be reinforced cyclically. As more businesses find that they can function without accepting cash, the number of businesses refusing to accept cash will increase. That will re-enforce the need for more and more citizens to get the Swish app which is already used by half the population. Cash machines, which are controlled by a Swedish bank consortium, are being dismantled by the hundreds, especially in rural areas.\nThe Riksbank has not taken a decision on issuing e-krona. First, the Riksbank needs to investigate a number of technical, legal and practical issues. \"The declining use of cash in Sweden means that this is more of a burning issue for us than for most other central banks. Although it may appear simple at first glance to issue e-krona, this is something entirely new for a central bank and there is no precedent to follow\". If the Riksbank chooses to issue e-krona, it is not to replace cash, but to act as a complement to it. \"The Riksbank will continue issuing banknotes and coins as long as there is demand for them in society. It is our statutory duty and we will of course continue to live up to it,\" concluded Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley.\nIn December 2020, Sweden's Minister for Financial Markets Per Bolund announced a government review to explore the feasibility of moving to a digital currency that was expected to be completed by the end of November in 2022. Anna Kinberg Batra, a former chairwoman of the Riksbank's finance committee, was announced as the leader of the review. As of 2023, no decision has been made.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16710", "revid": "1273498818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16710", "title": "Krone", "text": "Krone (the cognate of Crown) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16712", "revid": "36788768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16712", "title": "Kattegat", "text": "Sea area between Denmark and Sweden\nThe Kattegat (; ; ) is a sea area bounded by the peninsula of Jutland in the west, the Danish straits islands of Denmark and the Baltic Sea to the south and the Swedish provinces of Bohusl\u00e4n, V\u00e4sterg\u00f6tland, Halland and Scania in Sweden in the east. The Baltic Sea drains into the Kattegat through the Danish straits. The sea area is a continuation of the Skagerrak and may be seen as a bay of the North Sea and North Atlantic Ocean, though it is not called a bay in traditional Scandinavian usage.\nThe Kattegat is rather shallow and can be dangerous to navigate due to many sandy, stony reefs and the tricky shifting currents. In modern times, artificial seabed channels have been dug, many reefs have been dredged either by sand pumping or boulder clearance, and a well-developed light signaling network has been installed to protect the heavy international traffic on this small sea.\nThere are several large cities and major ports on the Kattegat, including, in descending size, Gothenburg, Aarhus, Aalborg, Halmstad, Varberg and Frederikshavn.\nGeography.\nAccording to the definition established in a 1932 convention signed by Denmark, Norway and Sweden (registered in the League of Nations Treaty Series 1933\u20131934), the Kattegat's boundary with the Skagerrak is at the northernmost point of Skagen on Jutland, and its boundary with the \u00d8resund is at the tip of the Kullen Peninsula in Scania.\nMajor waterways that drain into the Kattegat are the rivers of G\u00f6ta \u00e4lv at Gothenburg, together with the Lagan, Nissan, \u00c4tran and Viskan in the province of Halland on the Swedish side, and the Danish river of Guden\u00e5 in Jutland.\nThe main islands of the Kattegat are Sams\u00f8, L\u00e6s\u00f8 and Anholt; due to their relatively dry climate, the last two are perceived to belong to \"the Danish desert belt\".\nA number of noteworthy coastal areas abut the Kattegat, including the Kullaberg Nature Reserve in Scania, which contains a number of rare species and a scenic rocky shore, the town of M\u00f6lle, which has a picturesque harbour and views into the Kullaberg, and Skagen at the northern tip of Denmark.\nSince the 1950s, a bridge proposal usually referred to as \"Kattegatbroen\" (the Kattegat Bridge) to connect Jutland and Zealand across the Kattegat has been considered. Since the late 2000s, there has been renewed interest in it from several influential politicians in Denmark. Such a bridge is usually envisioned as connecting Hov (a village south of Odder in the Aarhus area) with Sams\u00f8 and Kalundborg.\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the \"Kattegat, Sound and Belts\" (that is, the Kattegat, \u00d8resund, Great Belt, and Little Belt) as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"On the North\": A line joining Skagen (The Skaw, northernmost point of Denmark) and Paternoster Sk\u00e6r () and thence northeastward through the shoals to Tj\u00f6rn Island.\n\"On the South\": The limits of the Baltic Sea in the Belts and Sound:\nEtymology.\nAccording to \"Den Store Danske Encyklop\u00e6di\" and \"Nudansk Ordbog\", the name is from the Dutch words ' 'cat's' and ' 'gate, passage'. It derives from late medieval navigation, in which captains of the Hanseatic trading fleets compared the Danish straits to a passage so tight that even a cat would have difficulty squeezing its way through, owing to the many reefs and shoals. At one point, the passable waters were wide. (The name of the Copenhagen street \"Kattesundet\" also means a narrow passage, lit.\u2009'the cat's strait'.)\nAn archaic name for the Kattegat together with the Skagerrak was the \"Norwegian Sea\" or \"Jutland Sea\" (Kn\u00fdtlinga saga mentions the name \"J\u00f3tlandshaf\"). Its ancient Latin name was \"\".\nHistory.\nControlling and having access to the Kattegat have been important throughout the history of international seafaring. Until the completion of the Eider Canal in 1784, the Kattegat was the only sea route into and out of the Baltic region.\nBeginning in 1429 in the Middle Ages, the Danish royal family\u00a0\u2013 and later the state of Denmark\u00a0\u2013 profited greatly from the Sound dues, a toll charged for passage through the \u00d8resund, while Copenhagen sheltered and repaired ships and provided trade opportunities and protection from piracy. The dues were lifted in 1857.\nBiology.\nThe salinity in the Kattegat has a pronounced two-layer structure. The upper layer's salinity is between 18\u2030 and 26\u2030, while that of the lower layer (separated by a strong halocline at around ) has a salinity between 32\u2030 and 34\u2030. The lower layer consists of inflowing seawater from the Skagerrak, with a salinity on par with most other coastal seawaters, while the upper layer, consisting of inflowing seawater from the Baltic Sea, has a much lower salinity, comparable to brackish water, but still a great deal higher than the rest of the Baltic. These two opposing flows transport a net surplus of of seawater from the Baltic to the Skagerrak every year. During strong winds, the Kattegat's layers are completely mixed in places such as the Great Belt, making the overall salinity highly variable. This leads to some distinctive conditions for sealife in the area.\nCold seeps, known locally as \"bubbling reefs\" (), can be found in the northern Kattegat. Unlike those in most other places (including the North Sea and Skagerrak), the Kattegat's cold seeps are at relatively shallow depths, generally from below the surface. The seeps rely on methane deposited during the Eemian period and during calm weather the bubbles can sometimes be seen on the surface of the water. Carbonate cementation and lithification form slaps or pillars up to tall and support a rich biodiversity. Due to their distinct properties, the Kattegat bubbling reefs are under protection and are recognised by the European Union (EU) as a Natura 2000 habitat (type 1180).\nEcological collapse.\nThe Kattegat, characterised by widespread anoxia, was one of the first marine dead zones to be noted in the 1970s, when scientists began to study the effects of heavy industry on the natural world. Since then, research has leant much insight into processes like eutrophication, and how to deal with it. Since the first Action Plan for the Aquatic Environment in 1985, Denmark and the EU have begun costly, far-reaching domestic projects to stop, repair and prevent these environmentally destructive and economically damaging processes and are now busy implementing the fourth Action Plan. The action plans sum up a broad range of initiatives and include the so-called Nitrate Directives. The action plans have generally been viewed as a success, although the work is not finished and not all goals have been met yet.\nProtections and regulation.\nDue to its very heavy sea traffic and many large coastal settlements, the Kattegat has been designated as a Sulphur Emission Control Area as part of the Baltic Sea since 2006. As from 1 January 2016 the benchmark for sulphur in fuels was lowered to 0.1%.\nSeveral large areas of the Kattegat are designated under Natura 2000 and various bird protections such as the Ramsar Convention. The remaining larger shallow reefs are among the protections, as they are important spawning and feeding grounds for fish and marine mammals and support a thriving but threatened biodiversity. Protected areas include:\nDenmark\nSweden\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16713", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16713", "title": "Kattegatt", "text": ""}
{"id": "16714", "revid": "50847959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16714", "title": "Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test", "text": "Statistical test comparing two probability distributions\nIn statistics, the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test (also K\u2013S test or KS test) is a nonparametric test of the equality of continuous (or discontinuous, see Section 2.2), one-dimensional probability distributions. It can be used to test whether a sample came from a given reference probability distribution (one-sample K\u2013S test), or to test whether or not two samples came from the same distribution (two-sample K\u2013S test). It is named after Andrey Kolmogorov and Nikolai Smirnov, who developed it in the 1930s.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic quantifies a distance between the empirical distribution function of the sample and the cumulative distribution function of the reference distribution, or between the empirical distribution functions of two samples. The null distribution of this statistic is calculated under the null hypothesis that the sample is drawn from the reference distribution (in the one-sample case) or that the samples are drawn from the same distribution (in the two-sample case). In the one-sample case, the distribution considered under the null hypothesis may be continuous (see Section 2), purely discrete or mixed (see Section 2.2). In the two-sample case (see Section 3), the distribution considered under the null hypothesis is a continuous distribution but is otherwise unrestricted. \nThe two-sample K\u2013S test is one of the most useful and general nonparametric methods for comparing two samples, as it is sensitive to differences in both location and shape of the empirical cumulative distribution functions of the two samples.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test can be modified to serve as a goodness of fit test. In the special case of testing for normality of the distribution, samples are standardized and compared with a standard normal distribution. This is equivalent to setting the mean and variance of the reference distribution equal to the sample estimates, and it is known that using these to define the specific reference distribution changes the null distribution of the test statistic (see Test with estimated parameters). Various studies have found that, even in this corrected form, the test is less powerful for testing normality than the Shapiro\u2013Wilk test or Anderson\u2013Darling test. However, these other tests have their own disadvantages. For instance, the Shapiro\u2013Wilk test is known not to work well in samples with many identical values.\nOne-sample Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic.\nThe empirical distribution function \"F\"\"n\" for \"n\" independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) ordered observations \"Xi\" is defined as\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the indicator function, equal to 1 if formula_3 and equal to 0 otherwise.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic for a given cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") is\nformula_4\nwhere sup\"x\" is the supremum of the set of distances. Intuitively, the statistic takes the largest absolute difference between the two distribution functions across all \"x\" values.\nBy the Glivenko\u2013Cantelli theorem, if the sample comes from the distribution \"F\"(\"x\"), then \"D\"\"n\" converges to 0 almost surely in the limit when formula_5 goes to infinity. Kolmogorov strengthened this result, by effectively providing the rate of this convergence (see Kolmogorov distribution). Donsker's theorem provides a yet stronger result.\nIn practice, the statistic requires a relatively large number of data points (in comparison to other goodness of fit criteria such as the Anderson\u2013Darling test statistic) to properly reject the null hypothesis.\nKolmogorov distribution.\nThe Kolmogorov distribution is the distribution of the random variable\nformula_6\nwhere \"B\"(\"t\") is the Brownian bridge. The cumulative distribution function of \"K\" is given by\nformula_7\nwhich can also be expressed by the Jacobi theta function formula_8. Both the form of the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test statistic and its asymptotic distribution under the null hypothesis were published by Andrey Kolmogorov, while a table of the distribution was published by Nikolai Smirnov. Recurrence relations for the distribution of the test statistic in finite samples are available.\nUnder null hypothesis that the sample comes from the hypothesized distribution \"F\"(\"x\"),\nformula_9\nin distribution, where \"B\"(\"t\") is the Brownian bridge. If \"F\" is continuous then under the null hypothesis formula_10 converges to the Kolmogorov distribution, which does not depend on \"F\". This result may also be known as the Kolmogorov theorem. \nThe accuracy of this limit as an approximation to the exact CDF of formula_11 when formula_5 is finite is not very impressive: even when formula_13, the corresponding maximum error is about formula_14; this error increases to formula_15 when formula_16 and to a totally unacceptable formula_17 when formula_18. However, a very simple expedient of replacing formula_19 by\nformula_20\nin the argument of the Jacobi theta function reduces these errors to \nformula_21, formula_22, and formula_23 respectively; such accuracy would be usually considered more than adequate for all practical applications.\nThe \"goodness-of-fit\" test or the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test can be constructed by using the critical values of the Kolmogorov distribution. This test is asymptotically valid when formula_24 It rejects the null hypothesis at level formula_25 if\nformula_26\nwhere \"K\"\"\u03b1\" is found from\nformula_27\nThe asymptotic power of this test is 1.\nFast and accurate algorithms to compute the cdf formula_28 or its complement for arbitrary formula_5 and formula_19, are available from:\nTest with estimated parameters.\nIf either the form or the parameters of \"F\"(\"x\") are determined from the data \"X\"\"i\" the critical values determined in this way are invalid. In such cases, Monte Carlo or other methods may be required, but tables have been prepared for some cases. Details for the required modifications to the test statistic and for the critical values for the normal distribution and the exponential distribution have been published, and later publications also include the Gumbel distribution. The Lilliefors test represents a special case of this for the normal distribution. The logarithm transformation may help to overcome cases where the Kolmogorov test data does not seem to fit the assumption that it came from the normal distribution.\nUsing estimated parameters, the question arises which estimation method should be used. Usually this would be the maximum likelihood method, but e.g. for the normal distribution MLE has a large bias error on sigma. Using a moment fit or KS minimization instead has a large impact on the critical values, and also some impact on test power. If we need to decide for Student-T data with df\u00a0=\u00a02 via KS test whether the data could be normal or not, then a ML estimate based on H0 (data is normal, so using the standard deviation for scale) would give much larger KS distance, than a fit with minimum KS. In this case we should reject H0, which is often the case with MLE, because the sample standard deviation might be very large for T-2 data, but with KS minimization we may get still a too low KS to reject\u00a0H0. In the Student-T case, a modified KS test with KS estimate instead of MLE, makes the KS test indeed slightly worse. However, in other cases, such a modified KS test leads to slightly better test power.\nDiscrete and mixed null distribution.\nUnder the assumption that formula_31 is non-decreasing and right-continuous, with countable (possibly infinite) number of jumps, the KS test statistic can be expressed as:\nformula_32\nFrom the right-continuity of formula_31, it follows that formula_34 and formula_35 and hence, the distribution of formula_36 depends on the null distribution formula_31, i.e., is no longer distribution-free as in the continuous case. Therefore, a fast and accurate method has been developed to compute the exact and asymptotic distribution of formula_36 when formula_31 is purely discrete or mixed, implemented in C++ and in the KSgeneral package of the R language. The functions codice_1, codice_2 and codice_3 compute also the KS test statistic and p-values for purely discrete, mixed or continuous null distributions and arbitrary sample sizes. The KS test and its p-values for discrete null distributions and small sample sizes are also computed in as part of the dgof package of the R language. Major statistical packages among which SAS codice_4, Stata codice_5 implement the KS test under the assumption that formula_40 is continuous, which is more conservative if the null distribution is actually not continuous (see \n).\nTwo-sample Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test may also be used to test whether two underlying one-dimensional probability distributions differ. In this case, the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic is\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 and formula_43 are the empirical distribution functions of the first and the second sample respectively, and formula_44 is the supremum function.\nFor large samples, the null hypothesis is rejected at level formula_25 if\nformula_46\nWhere formula_5 and formula_48 are the sizes of first and second sample respectively. The value of formula_49 is given in the table below for the most common levels of formula_25\nand in general by\nformula_51\nso that the condition reads\nformula_52\nHere, again, the larger the sample sizes, the more sensitive the minimal bound: For a given ratio of sample sizes (e.g. formula_53), the minimal bound scales in the size of either of the samples according to its inverse square root. \nNote that the two-sample test checks whether the two data samples come from the same distribution. This does not specify what that common distribution is (e.g. whether it's normal or not normal). Again, tables of critical values have been published. A shortcoming of the univariate Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test is that it is not very powerful because it is devised to be sensitive against all possible types of differences between two distribution functions. Some argue that the Cucconi test, originally proposed for simultaneously comparing location and scale, can be much more powerful than the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test when comparing two distribution functions.\nTwo-sample KS tests have been applied in economics to detect asymmetric effects and to study natural experiments.\nSetting confidence limits for the shape of a distribution function.\nWhile the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test is usually used to test whether a given \"F\"(\"x\") is the underlying probability distribution of \"F\"\"n\"(\"x\"), the procedure may be inverted to give confidence limits on \"F\"(\"x\") itself. If one chooses a critical value of the test statistic \"D\"\"\u03b1\" such that P(\"D\"\"n\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"D\"\"\u03b1\") = \"\u03b1\", then a band of width \u00b1\"D\"\"\u03b1\" around \"F\"\"n\"(\"x\") will entirely contain \"F\"(\"x\") with probability 1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"\u03b1\".\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic in more than one dimension.\nA distribution-free multivariate Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov goodness of fit test has been proposed by Justel, Pe\u00f1a and Zamar (1997). The test uses a statistic which is built using Rosenblatt's transformation, and an algorithm is developed to compute it in the bivariate case. An approximate test that can be easily computed in any dimension is also presented.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test statistic needs to be modified if a similar test is to be applied to multivariate data. This is not straightforward because the maximum difference between two joint cumulative distribution functions is not generally the same as the maximum difference of any of the complementary distribution functions. Thus the maximum difference will differ depending on which of formula_54 or formula_55 or any of the other two possible arrangements is used. One might require that the result of the test used should not depend on which choice is made.\nOne approach to generalizing the Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic to higher dimensions which meets the above concern is to compare the cdfs of the two samples with all possible orderings, and take the largest of the set of resulting KS statistics. In \"d\" dimensions, there are 2\"d\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 such orderings. One such variation is due to Peacock \n(see also Gosset \nfor a 3D version)\nand another to Fasano and Franceschini (see Lopes et al. for a comparison and computational details). Critical values for the test statistic can be obtained by simulations, but depend on the dependence structure in the joint distribution.\nImplementations.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test is implemented in many software programs. Most of these implement both the one and two sampled test.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16716", "revid": "51059816", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16716", "title": "Kansas", "text": "U.S. state\nKansas ( ) is a landlocked state in the Midwestern region of the United States. It borders Nebraska to the north; Missouri to the east; Oklahoma to the south; and Colorado to the west. Kansas is named after the Kansas River, in turn named after the Kansa people. Its capital is Topeka, and its most populous city is Wichita; however, the largest urban area is the bi-state Kansas City metropolitan area split between Kansas and Missouri.\nFor thousands of years, what is now known as Kansas was home to numerous and diverse Indigenous tribes. The first settlement of non-indigenous people in Kansas occurred in 1827 at Fort Leavenworth. The pace of settlement accelerated in the 1850s, in the midst of political wars over the slavery debate. When it was officially opened to settlement by the U.S. government in 1854 with the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act, conflict between abolitionist Free-Staters from New England and pro-slavery settlers from neighboring Missouri broke out over the question of whether Kansas would become a free state or a slave state, in a period known as Bleeding Kansas. On January 29, 1861, Kansas entered the Union as a free state, hence the unofficial nickname \"The Free State\". Passage of the Homestead Acts in 1862 brought a further influx of settlers, and the booming cattle trade of the 1870s attracted some of the Wild West's most iconic figures to western Kansas.\nAs of 2015, Kansas was among the most productive agricultural states, producing high yields of wheat, corn, sorghum, and soybeans. In addition to its traditional strength in agriculture, Kansas possesses an extensive aerospace industry. Kansas, which has an area of is the 15th-largest state by area, the 36th most-populous of the 50 states, with a population of 2,940,865 according to the 2020 census, and the 10th least densely populated. Residents of Kansas are called \"Kansans\". Mount Sunflower is Kansas's highest point at .\nKansas is generally considered to be the geographic center of the contiguous United States, with Lebanon being approximately the center.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Kansas\" derives from the Algonquian term \"Akansa\", referring to the Quapaw people. These were a Dhegiha Siouan-speaking people who settled in Arkansas around the 13th century. The stem -\"kansa\" is named after the Kaw people, also known as the \"Kansa\", a federally recognized Native American tribe. The tribe's name (natively \"\") is often said to mean \"people of the (south) wind\", although this was probably not the term's original meaning.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBefore European colonization, Kansas was occupied by the Caddoan Wichita and later the Siouan Kaw people. Tribes in the eastern part of the state generally lived in villages along the river valleys. Tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison. The first European to set foot in present-day Kansas was the Spanish conquistador Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado, who explored the area in 1541.\nBetween 1763 and 1803, the territory of Kansas was integrated into Spanish Louisiana. During that period, Governor Luis de Unzaga 'le Conciliateur' promoted expeditions and good relations with the Amerindians. Explorer Antoine de Marigny and others continued trading across the Kansas River, especially at its confluence with the Missouri River, tributaries of the Mississippi River.\nIn 1803, most of modern Kansas was acquired by the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase. Southwest Kansas, however, was still a part of Spain, Mexico, and the Republic of Texas until the conclusion of the Mexican\u2013American War in 1848, when these lands were ceded to the United States. From 1812 to 1821, Kansas was part of the Missouri Territory. The Santa Fe Trail traversed Kansas from 1821 to 1880, transporting manufactured goods from Missouri and silver and furs from Santa Fe, New Mexico. Wagon ruts from the trail are still visible in the prairie today.\nIn 1827, Fort Leavenworth became the first permanent settlement of white Americans in the future state. The Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act became law on May 30, 1854, establishing Nebraska Territory and Kansas Territory, and opening the area to broader settlement by whites. Kansas Territory stretched all the way to the Continental Divide and included the sites of present-day Denver, Colorado Springs, and Pueblo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBleeding Kansas and the Civil War.\nThe first non-military settlement of Euro-Americans in Kansas Territory consisted of abolitionists from Massachusetts and other Free-Staters who founded the town of Lawrence and attempted to stop the spread of slavery from neighboring Missouri.\nMissouri and Arkansas continually sent settlers into Kansas Territory along its eastern border to sway votes in favor of slavery prior to Kansas statehood elections. Directly presaging the American Civil War these forces collided, entering into skirmishes and guerrilla conflicts that earned the territory the nickname Bleeding Kansas. These included John Brown's Pottawatomie massacre of 1856.\nKansas was admitted to the Union as a free state on January 29, 1861, making it the 34th state to join the United States. By that time, the violence in Kansas had largely subsided, but during the Civil War, on August 21, 1863, William Quantrill led several hundred of his supporters on a raid into Lawrence, destroying much of the city and killing nearly 200 people. He was roundly condemned by both the conventional Confederate military and the partisan rangers commissioned by the Missouri legislature. His application to that body for a commission was flatly rejected due to his pre-war criminal record.\nSettlement and the Wild West.\nPassage of the Homestead Acts in 1862 accelerated settlement and agricultural development in the state. After the Civil War, many veterans constructed homesteads in Kansas. Many African Americans also looked to Kansas as the land of \"John Brown\" and, led by freedmen like Benjamin \"Pap\" Singleton, began establishing black colonies in the state. Leaving southern states in the late 1870s because of increasing discrimination, they became known as Exodusters.\nAt the same time, the Chisholm Trail was opened and the Wild West era commenced in Kansas. Storied lawman Wild Bill Hickok was a deputy marshal at Fort Riley and a marshal at Hays and Abilene. Dodge City was home to both Bat Masterson and Wyatt Earp, who worked as lawmen in the town. The Dalton Gang robbed trains and banks throughout Kansas and the Southwest and maintained a hideout in Meade. In one year alone, eight million head of cattle from Texas boarded trains in Dodge City bound for the East, earning Dodge the nickname \"Queen of the Cowtowns\".\n20th century.\nIn response to demands of Methodists and other evangelical Protestants, in 1881 Kansas became the first U.S. state to adopt a constitutional amendment prohibiting all alcoholic beverages, which was repealed in 1948. Anti-saloon activist Carrie Nation vandalized her first saloon in Kiowa in 1900. In 1922, suffragist Ella Uphay Mowry became the first female gubernatorial candidate in the state when she ran as \"Mrs. W.D. Mowry\". She later stated: \"Someone had to be the pioneer. I firmly believe that some day a woman will sit in the governor's chair in Kansas.\"\nKansas suffered severe environmental damage in the 1930s due to the combined effects of the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl, and large numbers of people left southwestern Kansas in particular for better opportunities elsewhere. The outbreak of World War II spurred rapid growth in aircraft manufacturing near Wichita in the so-called Battle of Kansas, and the aerospace sector remains a significant portion of the Kansan economy to this day.\nGeography.\nKansas is bordered by Nebraska to the north; Missouri to the east; Oklahoma to the south; and Colorado to the west. The state is divided into 105 counties with 628 cities, with its largest county by area being Butler County. Kansas is located equidistant from the Pacific and Atlantic oceans. The geographic center of the 48 contiguous states is in Smith County near Lebanon. Until 1989, the Meades Ranch Triangulation Station in Osborne County was the geodetic center of North America: the central reference point for all maps of North America. The geographic center of Kansas is in Barton County.\nGeology.\nKansas is underlain by a sequence of horizontal to gently westward dipping sedimentary rocks. A sequence of Mississippian, Pennsylvanian and Permian rocks outcrop in the eastern and southern part of the state. The state's western half has exposures of Cretaceous through Tertiary sediments, the latter derived from the erosion of the uplifted Rocky Mountains to the west. These are underlain by older Paleozoic and Mesozoic sediments which correlate well with the outcrops to the east. The state's northeastern corner was subjected to glaciation in the Pleistocene and is covered by glacial drift and loess.\nTopography.\nThe western third of the state, lying in the great central plain of the United States, has a generally flat or undulating surface, while the eastern third has many hills and forests; the middle third is generally hilly, with more sparse vegetation than the eastern third. The land gradually rises from east to west; its altitude ranges from along the Verdigris River at Coffeyville in Montgomery County, to at Mount Sunflower, from the Colorado border, in Wallace County. It is a common misconception that Kansas is the flattest state in the nation\u2014in 2003, a tongue-in-cheek study famously declared the state \"flatter than a pancake\". In fact, Kansas has a maximum topographic relief of , making it the 23rd flattest U.S. state measured by maximum relief.\nRivers.\nAround of the state's northeastern boundary is defined by the Missouri River. The Kansas River (locally known as the Kaw), formed by the junction of the Smoky Hill and Republican rivers at appropriately named Junction City, joins the Missouri River at Kansas City, after a course of across the northeastern part of the state.\nThe Arkansas River (pronunciation varies), rising in Colorado, flows with a bending course for nearly across the western and southern parts of the state. With its tributaries, (the Little Arkansas, Ninnescah, Walnut, Cow Creek, Cimarron, Verdigris, and the Neosho), it forms the southern drainage system of the state.\nKansas's other rivers are the Saline and Solomon Rivers, tributaries of the Smoky Hill River; the Big Blue, Delaware, and Wakarusa, which flow into the Kansas River; and the Marais des Cygnes, a tributary of the Missouri River. Spring River is located between Riverton and Baxter Springs.\nNational parks and historic sites.\nAreas under the protection of the National Park Service include:\nFlora and fauna.\nIn Kansas, there are currently 238 species of rare animals and 400 rare plants. Among those include: Smooth rockress, Virginia rail, Western Grotto Salamander, Royal Fern, Turkey-tangle, Bobolink, Cave salamander, Mead's Milkweed, Western Prairie Fringed Orchid, Gray bat, Snowy Plover, Strecker's Chorus Frog, Peregrine falcon, Arkansas River Shiner, Whooping Crane, and Black-footed ferret. Common animal species and grasses include: crows, deer, lesser prairie-chicken, mice, moles, Virginia opossum, prairie dogs, raccoon, Eastern Gama Grass, Prairie Dropseed, Indian Grass, little bluestem, Switch grass, Northern Sea Oats, Tussock Sedge, Sideoats grama, and Big Bluestem.\nClimate.\nIn the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Kansas has three climates: humid continental, semi-arid steppe, and humid subtropical. The eastern two-thirds of the state (especially the northeastern portion) has a humid continental climate, with cool to cold winters and hot, often humid summers. Most of the precipitation falls during both the summer and the spring. The USDA hardiness zones for Kansas range from Zone 5b (\u221215\u00a0\u00b0F to \u221210\u00a0\u00b0F) in the North to Zone 7a (0\u00a0\u00b0F to 5\u00a0\u00b0F) in the South.\nThe western third of the state\u2014from roughly the U.S. Route 83 corridor westward\u2014has a semi-arid steppe climate. Summers are hot, often very hot, and generally less humid. Winters are highly changeable between warm and very cold. The western region receives an average of about of precipitation per year. Chinook winds in the winter can warm western Kansas all the way into the range.\nThe south-central and southeastern portions of the state, including the Wichita area, have a humid subtropical climate with hot and humid summers, milder winters, and more precipitation than elsewhere in Kansas. Some features of all three climates can be found in most of the state, with droughts and changeable weather between dry and humid not uncommon, and both warm and cold spells in the winter.\nTemperatures in areas between U.S. Routes 83 and 81, as well as the southwestern portion of the state along and south of U.S. 50, reach or above on most days of June, July, and August. High humidity added to the high temperatures sends the heat index into life-threatening territory, especially in Wichita, Hutchinson, Salina, Russell, Hays, and Great Bend. Temperatures are often higher in Dodge City, Garden City, and Liberal, but the heat index in those three cities is usually lower than the actual air temperature.\nAlthough temperatures of or higher are not as common in areas east of U.S. 81, higher humidity and the urban heat island effect lead most summer days to heat indices between in Topeka, Lawrence, and the Kansas City metropolitan area. Also, combined with humidity between 85 and 95 percent, dangerous heat indices can be experienced at every hour of the day.\nPrecipitation ranges from about annually in the state's southeast corner to about in the southwest. Snowfall ranges from around in the fringes of the south, to in the far northwest. Frost-free days range from more than 200 days in the south, to 130 days in the northwest. Thus, Kansas is the country's ninth or tenth sunniest state, depending on the source. Western Kansas is as sunny as parts of California and Arizona.\nKansas is prone to severe weather, especially in the spring and the early-summer. Despite the frequent sunshine throughout much of the state, due to its location at a climatic boundary prone to intrusions of multiple air masses, the state is vulnerable to strong and severe thunderstorms. Some of these storms become supercell thunderstorms; these can produce some tornadoes, occasionally those of EF3 strength or higher. Kansas averages more than 50 tornadoes annually. Severe thunderstorms sometimes drop some very large hail over Kansas as well. Furthermore, these storms can even bring in flash flooding and damaging straight line winds.\nAccording to NOAA, the all-time highest temperature recorded in Kansas is () on July 24, 1936, near Alton in Osborne County, and the all-time low is on February 13, 1905, near Lebanon in Smith County. Alton and Lebanon are approximately apart.\nKansas's record high of ties with North Dakota for the fifth-highest record high in an American state, behind California (), Arizona (), Nevada (), and New Mexico ().\nSettlement.\nKnown as rural flight, the last few decades have been marked by a migratory pattern out of the countryside into cities. Out of all the cities in these Midwestern states, 89% have fewer than 3,000 people, and hundreds of those have fewer than 1,000. In Kansas alone, there are more than 6,000 ghost towns and dwindling communities, according to one Kansas historian, Daniel C. Fitzgerald. At the same time, some of the communities in Johnson County (metropolitan Kansas City) are among the fastest-growing in the country.\nKansas has 627 incorporated cities. By state statute, cities are divided into three classes as determined by the population obtained \"by any census of enumeration\". A city of the third class has a population of less than 5,000, but cities reaching a population of more than 2,000 may be certified as a city of the second class. The second class is limited to cities with a population of less than 25,000, and upon reaching a population of more than 15,000, they may be certified as a city of the first class. First and second class cities are independent of any township and are not included within the township's territory.\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not add up, because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nLife expectancy.\nThe residents of Kansas have a life expectancy near the U.S. national average. In 2013, males in Kansas lived an average of 76.6 years compared to a male national average of 76.7 years and females lived an average of 81.0 years compared to a female national average of 81.5 years. Increases in life expectancy between 1980 and 2013 were below the national average for males and near the national average for females. Male life expectancy in Kansas between 1980 and 2014 increased by an average of 5.2 years, compared to a male national average of a 6.7-year increase. Life expectancy for females in Kansas between 1980 and 2014 increased by 4.3 years, compared to a female national average of a 4.0 year increase.\nUsing 2017\u20132019 data, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation calculated that life expectancy for Kansas counties ranged from 75.8 years for Wyandotte County to 81.7 years for Johnson County. Life expectancy for the state as a whole was 78.5 years. Life expectancy for the United States as a whole in 2019 was 78.8 years.\nRegions.\nNortheast Kansas.\nThe northeastern portion of the state, extending from the eastern border to Junction City and from the Nebraska border to south of Johnson County is home to more than 1.5\u00a0million people in the Kansas City (Kansas portion), Manhattan, Lawrence, and Topeka metropolitan areas. Overland Park, a young city incorporated in 1960, has the largest population and the largest land area in the county. It is home to Johnson County Community College.\nOlathe is the county seat and home to Johnson County Executive Airport. The cities of Olathe, Shawnee, De Soto and Gardner have some of the state's fastest growing populations. The cities of Overland Park, Lenexa, Olathe, De Soto, and Gardner are also notable because they lie along the former route of the Santa Fe Trail. Among cities with at least one thousand residents, Mission Hills has the highest median income in the state.\nSeveral institutions of higher education are located in Northeast Kansas including Baker University (the oldest university in the state, founded in 1858 and affiliated with the United Methodist Church) in Baldwin City, Benedictine College (sponsored by St. Benedict's Abbey and Mount St. Scholastica Monastery and formed from the merger of St. Benedict's College (1858) and Mount St. Scholastica College (1923)) in Atchison, MidAmerica Nazarene University in Olathe, Ottawa University in Ottawa and Overland Park, Kansas City Kansas Community College and KU Medical Center in Kansas City, and KU Edwards Campus in Overland Park. Less than an hour's drive to the west, Lawrence is home to the University of Kansas, the largest public university in the state, and Haskell Indian Nations University.\nTo the north, Kansas City, with the second largest land area in the state, contains a number of diverse ethnic neighborhoods. Its attractions include the Kansas Speedway, Sporting Kansas City, Kansas City Monarchs, and The Legends at Village West retail and entertainment center. Nearby, Kansas's first settlement Bonner Springs is home to several national and regional attractions including the Providence Medical Center Amphitheater, the National Agricultural Center and Hall of Fame, and the annual Kansas City Renaissance Festival. Further up the Missouri River, the city of Lansing is the home of the state's first maximum-security prison. Historic Leavenworth, founded in 1854, was the first incorporated city in Kansas. North of the city, Fort Leavenworth is the oldest active Army post west of the Mississippi River. The city of Atchison was an early commercial center in the state and is well known as the birthplace of Amelia Earhart.\nTo the west, nearly a quarter million people reside in the Topeka metropolitan area. Topeka is the state capital and home to Washburn University and Washburn Institute of Technology. Built at a Kansas River crossing along the old Oregon Trail, this historic city has several nationally registered historic places. Further westward along Interstate 70 and the Kansas River is Junction City with its historic limestone and brick buildings and nearby Fort Riley, well known as the home to the U.S. Army's 1st Infantry Division (nicknamed \"the Big Red One\"). A short distance away, the city of Manhattan is home to Kansas State University, the second-largest public university in the state and the nation's oldest land-grant university, dating back to 1863. South of the campus, Aggieville dates back to 1889 and is the state's oldest shopping district of its kind.\nSouth Central Kansas.\nIn south-central Kansas, the Wichita metropolitan area is home to more than 600,000 people. Wichita is the largest city in the state in terms of both land area and population. 'The Air Capital' is a major manufacturing center for the aircraft industry and the home of Wichita State University. Before Wichita was 'The Air Capital' it was a Cowtown. With a number of nationally registered historic places, museums, and other entertainment destinations, it has a desire to become a cultural mecca in the Midwest. Wichita's population growth has grown by double digits and the surrounding suburbs are among the fastest growing cities in the state. The population of Goddard has grown by more than 11% per year since 2000. Other fast-growing cities include Andover, Maize, Park City, Derby, and Haysville.\nWichita was one of the first cities to add the city commissioner and city manager in their form of government. Wichita is also home of the nationally recognized Sedgwick County Zoo.\nUp river (the Arkansas River) from Wichita is the city of Hutchinson. The city was built on one of the world's largest salt deposits (of what would form Strataca), and it has the world's largest and longest wheat elevator. It is also the home of Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center, Prairie Dunes Country Club and the Kansas State Fair. North of Wichita along Interstate 135 is the city of Newton, the former western terminal of the Santa Fe Railroad and trailhead for the famed Chisholm Trail. To the southeast of Wichita are the cities of Winfield and Arkansas City with historic architecture and the Cherokee Strip Museum (in Ark City). The city of Udall was the site of the deadliest tornado in Kansas on May 25, 1955; it killed 80 people in and near the city.\nSoutheast Kansas.\nSoutheast Kansas has a unique history with a number of nationally registered historic places in this coal-mining region. Located in Crawford County (dubbed the Fried Chicken Capital of Kansas), Pittsburg is the largest city in the region and the home of Pittsburg State University. The neighboring city of Frontenac in 1888 was the site of the worst mine disaster in the state in which an underground explosion killed 47 miners. \"Big Brutus\" is located outside the city of West Mineral. Along with the restored fort, historic Fort Scott has a national cemetery designated by President Lincoln in 1862. The region also shares a Media market with Joplin, Missouri, a city in Southwest Missouri.\nCentral and North-Central Kansas.\nSalina is the largest city in central and north-central Kansas. South of Salina is the small city of Lindsborg with its numerous Dala horses. Much of the architecture and decor of this town has a distinctly Swedish style. To the east along Interstate 70, the historic city of Abilene was formerly a trailhead for the Chisholm Trail and was the boyhood home of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, and is the site of his Presidential Library and the tombs of the former president, First Lady and son who died in infancy. To the west is Lucas, the Grassroots Art Capital of Kansas.\nNorthwest Kansas.\nWestward along the Interstate, the city of Russell, traditionally the beginning of sparsely populated northwest Kansas, was the base of former U.S. Senator Bob Dole and the boyhood home of U.S. Senator Arlen Specter. The city of Hays is home to Fort Hays State University and the Sternberg Museum of Natural History, and is the largest city in the northwest with a population of around 20,001.\nTwo other landmarks are located in smaller towns in Ellis County: the \"Cathedral of the Plains\" is located east of Hays in Victoria, and the boyhood home of Walter Chrysler is west of Hays in Ellis. West of Hays, population drops dramatically, even in areas along I-70, and only two towns containing populations of more than 4,000: Colby and Goodland, which are located apart along I-70.\nSouthwest Kansas.\nDodge City, famously known for the cattle drive days of the late 19th century, was built along the old Santa Fe Trail route. The city of Liberal is located along the southern Santa Fe Trail route. The first wind farm in the state was built east of Montezuma. Garden City has the Lee Richardson Zoo. In 1992, a short-lived secessionist movement advocated the secession of several counties in southwest Kansas.\nAround the state.\nLocated midway between Kansas City, Topeka, and Wichita in the heart of the Bluestem Region of the Flint Hills, the city of Emporia has several nationally registered historic places and is the home of Emporia State University, well known for its Teachers College. It was also the home of newspaper man William Allen White.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Kansas was 2,913,314 on July 1, 2019, a 2.11% increase since the 2010 United States census and an increase of 58,387, or 2.05%, since 2010. This includes a natural increase since the last census of 93,899 (246,484 births minus 152,585 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 20,742 people out of the state. Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 44,847 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 65,589 people. At the 2020 census, its population was 2,937,880.\nIn 2018, the top countries of origin for Kansas's immigrants were Mexico, India, Vietnam, Guatemala and China.\nThe population density of Kansas is 52.9 people per square mile. The center of population of Kansas is located in Chase County, at , approximately north of the community of Strong City.\nThe focus on labor-efficient grain-based agriculture\u2014such as a large wheat farm that requires only one or a few people with large machinery to operate, rather than a vegetable farm that requires many people\u2014is causing the de-population of rural areas across Kansas.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,397 homeless people in Kansas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRace and ethnicity.\nAccording to the 2021 United States census estimates, the racial makeup of the population was: White American, non-Hispanic (74.7%), Hispanic or Latino (12.7%), Black or African American (6.2%), Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander (0.1%), two or more races (3.3%), Asian (3.2%), and American Indian and Alaska Native (1.2%). At the 2020 census, its racial and ethnic makeup was 75.6% White, 5.7% African American, 2.9% Asian American, 1.1% Native American, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 4.9% some other race, and 9.5% two or more races.\nAs of 2004, the population included 149,800 foreign-born (5.5% of the state population). The ten largest reported ancestry groups, which account for nearly 90% of the population, in the state are: German (33.75%), Irish (14.4%), English (14.1%), American (7.5%), French (4.4%), Scottish (4.2%), Dutch (2.5%), Swedish (2.4%), Italian (1.8%), and Polish (1.5%). Kansas is also home to a large Czech community.\nMexicans are present in the southwest and make up nearly half the population in certain counties. Many African Americans in Kansas are descended from the Exodusters, newly freed blacks who fled the South for land in Kansas following the Civil War.\nThere is a growing Asian community in Kansas. Since 1965, more and more Asian families have moved to Kansas from countries such as the Philippines, China, Korea, India, and Vietnam.\nAs of 2011, 35.0% of Kansas's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry).\nLanguage.\nEnglish is the most-spoken language in Kansas, with 91.3% of the population speaking only English at home as of the year 2000. 5.5% speak Spanish, 0.7% speak German, and 0.4% speak Vietnamese.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2014 Pew Religious Landscape Survey showed the religious makeup of adults in Kansas was as follows: 57% Protestant, 18% Catholic, 1% Mormon, 1% Jehovah's Witness, 20% unaffiliated, 1% Buddhist, and 2% other religions. In 2022, the Public Religion Research Institute (PRRI)'s study revealed 74% of the total population were Christian; among them, 59% were Protestant, 13% Catholic, and 2% Mormon. The religiously unaffiliated were 23% of the population, Unitarian Universalists 1%, and New Agers 1%.\nKansas's capital Topeka is sometimes cited as the home of Pentecostalism as it was the site of Charles Fox Parham's Bethel Bible College, where glossolalia was first claimed as the evidence of a spiritual experience referred to as the baptism of the Holy Spirit in 1901. It is also the home of Reverend Charles Sheldon, author of \"In His Steps\", and was the site where the question \"What would Jesus do?\" originated in a sermon of Sheldon's at Central Congregational Church.\nKansas is the location of the second Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith community west of Egypt, when the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community of Enterprise, KS was started in 1897. From that beginning the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith spread across Kansas.\nTopeka is also home of the Westboro Baptist Church, a hate group according to the Southern Poverty Law Center. The church has garnered worldwide media attention for picketing the funerals of U.S. servicemen and women for what church members claim as \"necessary to combat the fight for equality for gays and lesbians\". They have sometimes successfully raised lawsuits against the city of Topeka.\nEconomy.\nKansas's total GDP (Gross Domestic Product) was $226 billion in 2023. The state's 2023 per capita income was $63,732, which ranked 29th among U.S. states, and median household income was measured at $68,925.\nTotal Employment of the metropolitan areas in the State of Kansas by total Non-farm Employment in 2016\nTotal Number of employer establishments in 2016: 74,884\nIn 2015, the job growth rate was 0.8%, among the lowest rates in America with only \"10,900 total nonfarm jobs\" added that year. As of April 2016, the state's unemployment rate was 4.2%.\nThe State of Kansas had a $350\u00a0million budget shortfall in February 2017. In February 2017, S&amp;P downgraded Kansas's credit rating to AA\u2212.\nNearly 90% of Kansas's land is devoted to agriculture. The state's agricultural outputs are cattle, sheep, wheat, sorghum, soybeans, cotton, hogs, corn, and salt. As of 2018, there were 59,600 farms in Kansas, 86 (0.14%) of which are certified organic farms. The average farm in the state is about 770 acres (more than a square mile), and in 2016, the average cost of running the farm was $300,000.\nBy far, the most significant agricultural crop in the state is wheat. Eastern Kansas is part of the Grain Belt, an area of major grain production in the central United States. Approximately 40% of all winter wheat grown in the U.S. is grown in Kansas. Roughly 95% of the wheat grown in the state is hard red winter wheat. During 2016, farmers of conventionally grown wheat farmed 8.2\u00a0million acres and harvested an average of 57 bushels of wheat per acre.\nThe industrial outputs are transportation equipment, commercial and private aircraft, food processing, publishing, chemical products, machinery, apparel, petroleum, and mining.\nThe state's economy is also heavily influenced by the aerospace industry. Several large aircraft corporations have manufacturing facilities in Wichita and Kansas City, including Spirit AeroSystems, Bombardier Aerospace (LearJet), and Textron Aviation (a merger of the former Cessna, Hawker, and Beechcraft brands). Boeing ended a decades-long history of manufacturing in Kansas between 2012 and 2013.\nMajor companies headquartered in Kansas include the Garmin (Olathe), YRC Worldwide (Overland Park), and Koch Inc. (with national headquarters in Wichita).\nKansas is also home to three major military installations: Fort Leavenworth (Army), Fort Riley (Army), and McConnell Air Force Base (Air Force). Approximately 25,000 active duty soldiers and airmen are stationed at these bases which also employ approximately 8,000 civilian DoD employees. The U.S. Army Reserve also has the 451st Expeditionary Sustainment Command headquartered in Wichita that serves reservists and their units from around the region. The Kansas Air National Guard has units at Forbes Field in Topeka and the 184th Intelligence Wing in Wichita. The Smoky Hill Weapons Range, a detachment of the Intelligence Wing, is one of the largest and busiest bombing ranges in the nation. During World War II, Kansas was home to numerous Army Air Corps training fields for training new pilots and aircrew. Many of those airfields live on today as municipal airports.\nEnergy.\nKansas has vast renewable resources and is a top producer of wind energy in the US, with an installed capacity of about 6,100\u00a0Megawatts\u00a0(MW) from nearly 3,200 wind turbines in 2019. Wind generated the largest share of electricity from the state at 41%. An additional 700\u00a0MW of capacity was scheduled to come online during 2020. Kansas is also a leading national producer of renewable ethanol and biodiesel fuels at nearly 600\u00a0million gallons per year.\nKansas is one of 28 states with a nuclear power plant, Wolf Creek in Burlington, which houses a Westinghouse pressurized water reactor. The plant came online in 1985, and cost over $5 billion to construct. It is owned by Evergy.\nKansas is ranked eighth in U.S. petroleum extraction. Production has experienced a steady decline as the state's limited economical reserves especially from the Anadarko Basin are depleted. Since oil prices bottomed in 1999, oil production in Kansas has remained fairly constant, with an average monthly rate of about in 2004. The recent higher prices have made carbon dioxide sequestration and other oil recovery techniques more economical.\nKansas is also ranked eighth in U.S. natural gas production. Production has steadily declined since the mid-1990s with the gradual depletion of the Hugoton Natural Gas Field\u2014the state's largest field which extends into Oklahoma and Texas. In 2004, slower declines in the Hugoton gas fields and increased coalbed methane production contributed to a smaller overall decline. Average monthly production was over .\nTaxes.\nTax is collected by the Kansas Department of Revenue.\nRevenue shortfalls resulting from lower than expected tax collections and slower growth in personal income following a 1998 permanent tax reduction have contributed to the substantial growth in the state's debt level as bonded debt increased from $1.16\u00a0billion in 1998 to $3.83\u00a0billion in 2006. Some increase in debt was expected as the state continues with its 10-year Comprehensive Transportation Program enacted in 1999.\nIn 2003, Kansas had three income brackets for income tax calculation, ranging from 3.5% to 6.45%.\nThe state sales tax in Kansas is 6.15%. Various cities and counties in Kansas have an additional local sales tax. Except during the 2001 recession (March\u2013November 2001), when monthly sales tax collections were flat, collections have trended higher as the economy has grown and two rate increases have been enacted. If there had been no change in sales tax rates or in the economy, the total sales tax collections for 2003 would have been $1,797\u00a0million, compared to $805.3\u00a0million in 1990. However, they instead amounted to $1,630\u00a0million an inflation-adjusted reduction of 10%. The state sales tax is a combined destination-based tax, meaning a single tax is applied that includes state, county, and local taxes, and the rate is based on where the consumer takes possession of the goods or services. Thanks to the destination structure and the numerous local special taxing districts, Kansas has 920 separate sales tax rates ranging from 6.5% to 11.5%. This taxing scheme, known as \"Streamlined Sales Tax\" was adopted on October 1, 2005, under the governorship of Kathleen Sebelius. Groceries are subject to sales tax in the state. All sales tax collected is remitted to the state department of revenue, and local taxes are then distributed to the various taxing agencies.\nAs of June 2004, Moody's Investors Service ranked the state 14th for net tax-supported debt per capita. As a percentage of personal income, it was at 3.8%\u2014above the median value of 2.5% for all rated states and having risen from a value of less than 1% in 1992. The state has a statutory requirement to maintain cash reserves of at least 7.5% of expenses at the end of each fiscal year; however, lawmakers can vote to override the rule, and did so during the most recent budget agreement.\nDuring his campaign for the 2010 election, Governor Sam Brownback called for a complete \"phase out of Kansas's income tax\". In May 2012, Governor Brownback signed into law the Kansas Senate Bill Substitute HB 2117. Starting in 2013, the \"ambitious tax overhaul\" trimmed income tax, eliminated some corporate taxes, and created pass-through income tax exemptions, he raised the sales tax by one percent to offset the loss to state revenues but that was inadequate. He made cuts to education and some state services to offset lost revenue. The tax cut led to years of budget shortfalls, culminating in a $350\u00a0million budget shortfall in February 2017. From 2013 to 2017, 300,000 businesses were considered to be pass-through income entities and benefited from the tax exemption. The tax reform \"encouraged tens of thousands of Kansans to claim their wages and salaries as income from a business rather than from employment.\"\nThe economic growth that Brownback anticipated never materialized. He argued that it was because of \"low wheat and oil prices and a downturn in aircraft sales\". The state general fund debt load was $83\u00a0million in fiscal year 2010 and by fiscal year 2017 the debt load sat at $179\u00a0million. In 2016, Governor Brownback earned the title of \"most unpopular governor in America\". Only 26 percent of Kansas voters approved of his job performance, compared to 65 percent who said they did not. In the summer of 2016 S&amp;P Global Ratings downgraded Kansas's credit rating. In February 2017, S&amp;P lowered it to AA\u2212.\nIn February 2017, a bi-partisan coalition presented a bill that would repeal the pass-through income exemption, the \"most important provisions of Brownback's overhaul\", and raise taxes to make up for the budget shortfall. Brownback vetoed the bill but \"45 GOP legislators had voted in favor of the increase, while 40 voted to uphold the governor's veto.\" On June 6, 2017, a coalition of Democrats and newly elected Republicans overrode [Brownback's] veto and implemented tax increases to a level close to what it was before 2013. Brownback's tax overhaul was described in a June 2017 article in \"The Atlantic\" as the United States' \"most aggressive experiment in conservative economic policy\". The drastic tax cuts had \"threatened the viability of schools and infrastructure\" in Kansas.\nTransportation.\nFor automobiles, Kansas first required its residents to register their vehicles and display license plates in 1913. Plates are currently issued by the Kansas Department of Revenue through its Division of Vehicles and only rear plates have been required since 1956. Kansas is one of only 19 U.S. states that don't require front license plates.\nHighways.\nKansas is served by two Interstate highways with one beltway, two spur routes, and three bypasses, with over in all. The first section of Interstate in the nation was opened on Interstate\u00a070 (I-70) just west of Topeka on November 14, 1956.\nI-70 is a major east\u2013west route connecting to Denver, Colorado and Kansas City, Missouri. Cities along this route (from west to east) include Colby, Hays, Salina, Junction City, Topeka, Lawrence, Bonner Springs, and Kansas City.\nI-35 is a major north\u2013south route connecting to Oklahoma City, Oklahoma and Des Moines, Iowa. Cities along this route (from south to north) include Wichita, El Dorado, Emporia, Ottawa, and Kansas City (and suburbs).\nSpur routes serve as connections between the two major routes. I-135, a north\u2013south route, connects I-35 at Wichita to I-70 at Salina. I-335, a southwest\u2013northeast route, connects I-35 at Emporia to I-70 at Topeka. I-335 and portions of I-35 and I-70 make up the Kansas Turnpike. Bypasses include I-470 around Topeka, I-235 around Wichita, and I-670 in downtown Kansas City. I-435 is a beltway around the Kansas City metropolitan area while I-635 bypasses through Kansas City.\nU.S. Route\u00a069 (US-69) travels south to north, from Oklahoma to Missouri. The highway passes through the eastern section of Kansas, traveling through Baxter Springs, Pittsburg, Frontenac, Fort Scott, Louisburg, and the Kansas City area.\nKansas also has the country's third largest state highway system after Texas and California. This is because of the high number of counties and county seats (105) and their intertwining.\nIn January 2004, the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT) announced the new Kansas 511 traveler information service. By dialing 511, callers will get access to information about road conditions, construction, closures, detours and weather conditions for the state highway system. Weather and road condition information is updated every 15 minutes.\nInterstate Highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU.S. Routes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAviation.\nThe state's only major commercial (Class C) airport is Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport, located along US-54 on the western edge of the city. Manhattan Regional Airport in Manhattan offers daily flights to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport and Chicago's O'Hare International Airport, making it the second-largest commercial airport in the state. Most air travelers in northeastern Kansas fly out of Kansas City International Airport, located in Platte County, Missouri, as well as Topeka Regional Airport in the state's capital.\nIn the state's southeastern part, people often use Tulsa International Airport in Tulsa, Oklahoma or Joplin Regional Airport in Joplin, Missouri. For those in the far western part of the state, Denver International Airport is a popular option. Connecting flights are also available from smaller Kansas airports in Dodge City, Garden City, Hays, Hutchinson, Liberal, or Salina.\nDotted across the state are smaller regional and municipal airports, including the Lawrence Municipal Airport, which houses many aircraft for the city of Lawrence and the University of Kansas, Miami County Airport, Wamego Airport, Osage City Municipal Airport, which is the headquarters of \"Skydive Kansas\", Garden City Regional Airport, Manhattan Regional Airport, and Dodge City Regional Airport.\nRail.\nUp through the mid 20th century, railroads connected most cities in Kansas. During World War II, less profitable links were abandoned for scrap metal drives, then additional mileage was reduced as passenger service was halted caused by the wide spread use of automobiles and trucking on the expanding highway system.\nFor passenger service, currently the \"Southwest Chief\" Amtrak route runs through the state on its route from Chicago, Illinois to Los Angeles, California on the BNSF railway. Stops in Kansas include Lawrence, Topeka, Newton, Hutchinson, Dodge City, and Garden City.\nAn Amtrak Thruway connects Newton to the \"Heartland Flyer\" in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. There has been proposals to modify the Amtrak routing through Kansas, such as: removing rail service from the \"Southwest Chief\" between Albuquerque, New Mexico and Dodge City, and extending rail service for the \"Heartland Flyer\" from Oklahoma City to Newton with new stops at Arkansas City and Wichita.\nFor freight service, there are three Class I railroads in Kansas: BNSF, Union Pacific, and CPKC; as well as many shortline railroads.\nTransit.\nPublic transportation in Kansas is provided through a network of regional and local transit systems that serve both urban and rural communities throughout the state. In the Kansas City metropolitan area, RideKC integrates services across multiple providers, offering bus routes, the KC Streetcar, and mobility options to facilitate regional travel. Johnson County Transit, operating under the RideKC brand, delivers fixed commuter and express bus routes, microtransit, and paratransit services, connecting Johnson County with the broader Kansas City, Kansas and downtown Kansas City, Missouri.\nLawrence Transit provides fare-free public transit to the city of Lawrence through a partnership with the University of Kansas. The service includes fixed-route buses and paratransit, with routes serving both the university campus and the broader community. The fare-free model is funded through a combination of university student fees and city resources. Also available through KU is \"SafeRide\", which is a free transportation service for Lawrence college students at KU and Haskell Indian Nations University for night time transportation to the passenger's home. Lawrence Transit also partners with RideKC for routes to Johnson County along K-10 Highway.\nTopeka Metro and Wichita Transit have both operated in their respective cities since the 1950s, and Kansas Rides is a statewide initiative that connects Kansans living in rural parts of the state with public transit providers in all 105 counties. It helps users find fixed-route systems, demand-response services, and specialized transportation options across the state.\nLaw and government.\nState and local politics.\nExecutive branch: The executive branch consists of one officer and five elected officers. The governor and lieutenant governor are elected on the same ticket. The attorney general, secretary of state, state treasurer, and state insurance commissioner are each elected separately.\nLegislative branch: The bicameral Kansas Legislature consists of the Kansas House of Representatives, with 125 members serving two-year terms, and the Kansas Senate, with 40 members serving four-year terms.\nJudicial branch: The judicial branch of the state government is headed by the Kansas Supreme Court. The court has seven judges. A vacancy is filled by the Governor picking one of three nominees selected by the nine-member Kansas Supreme Court Nominating Commission. The board consists of five Kansas lawyers elected by other Kansas lawyers and four members selected by the governor.\nPolitical culture.\nSince the 1930s, Kansas has remained one of the most socially conservative states in the nation. The 1990s brought the defeat of prominent Democrats, including Dan Glickman, and the Kansas State Board of Education's 1999 decision to eliminate evolution from the state teaching standards, a decision that was later reversed. In 2005, voters accepted a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage. The next year, the state passed a law setting a minimum age for marriage at 15 years. Kansas's path to a solid Republican state has been examined by journalist and historian Thomas Frank in his 2004 book \"What's the Matter with Kansas?\".\n19th-century state politics.\nKansas was founded as a free-state by anti-slavery advocates from New England. During its early history, it faced political turmoil from politicians trying to sway the newly founded state towards pro-slavery or pro-abolition sentiment. Ultimately, upon achieving statehood in 1861, Kansas became a Republican stronghold due to the Republican party's establishment as the anti-slavery party. The state's first officials, including Governor Charles Robinson and Senators James Lane and Samuel Pomeroy, were Republicans. From 1861 to 1888, Republicans dominated Kansas politics, winning the majority of congressional and gubernatorial races. This era saw the implementation of progressive policies, including the adoption of prohibition in 1881 and early support for women's suffrage.\nStarting in 1887 Kansas women could vote in city elections and hold certain offices.\nIn the 1890 elections, Populists secured a majority in the state legislature and elected a U.S. Senator. However, internal divisions and strategic counteractions by Republicans led to the movement's decline by the late 1890s.\n20th-century state politics.\nKansas was the first state to institute a system of workers' compensation (1910) and to regulate the securities industry (1911). Kansas also permitted women's suffrage in 1912, almost a decade before the federal constitution was amended to require it. Suffrage in all states would not be guaranteed until ratification of the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1920.\nThe council\u2013manager government model was adopted by many larger Kansas cities in the years following World War I while many American cities were being run by political machines or organized crime, notably the Pendergast Machine in neighboring Kansas City, Missouri. Kansas was also at the center of \"Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka\", a 1954 Supreme Court decision that banned racially segregated schools throughout the U.S., though, infamously, many Kansas residents opposed the decision, and it led to protests in Topeka after the verdict.\nThe state backed Republican Presidential Candidates Wendell Willkie and Thomas E. Dewey in 1940 and 1944, respectively, breaking ranks with the majority of the country in the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Kansas also supported Dewey in 1948 despite the presence of incumbent president Harry S. Truman, who hailed from Independence, Missouri, approximately east of the Kansas\u2013Missouri state line. After Roosevelt carried Kansas in 1936, only one Democrat has won the state since, Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.\n21st-century state politics.\nIn 2008, Democrat Governor Kathleen Sebelius vetoed permits for the construction of new coal-fired energy plants in Kansas, saying: \"We know that greenhouse gases contribute to climate change. As an agricultural state, Kansas is particularly vulnerable. Therefore, reducing pollutants benefits our state not only in the short term\u2014but also for generations of Kansans to come.\" However, shortly after Mark Parkinson became governor in 2009 upon Sebelius's resignation to become Secretary of U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Services, Parkinson announced a compromise plan to allow construction of a coal-fired plant.\nIn 2010, Republican Sam Brownback was elected governor with 63 percent of the state vote. He was sworn in as governor in 2011, Kansas's first Republican governor in eight years. Brownback had established himself as a conservative member of the U.S. Senate in years prior, but made several controversial decisions after becoming governor, leading to a 23% approval rating among registered voters \u2013 the lowest of any governor in the United States. In May 2011, much to the opposition of art leaders and enthusiasts in the state, Brownback eliminated the Kansas Arts Commission, making Kansas the first state without an arts agency. In July 2011, Brownback announced plans to close the Lawrence branch of the Kansas Department of Social and Rehabilitation Services as a cost-saving measure. Hundreds rallied against the decision. Lawrence City Commission later voted to provide the funding needed to keep the branch open.\nDemocrat Laura Kelly defeated former Secretary of State of Kansas Kris Kobach in the 2018 election for Governor with 48.0% of the vote.\nIn August 2022, Kansas voters rejected the controversial Value Them Both Amendment, which would have eliminated the right to an abortion in the state constitution. The vote was the first referendum on abortion since Roe v. Wade was overturned earlier that summer, and the result was hailed as a landmark victory for pro-choice advocates in the traditionally socially conservative state.\nIn a 2020 study, Kansas was ranked as the 13th hardest state for citizens to vote in.\nNational politics.\nThe state's current delegation to the Congress of the United States includes Republican Senators Jerry Moran of Manhattan, and Roger Marshall of Great Bend. In the House of Representatives, Kansas is represented by Republican Representatives Tracey Mann of Quinter (District 1), Jake LaTurner of Pittsburg (District 2), Ron Estes of Wichita (District 4), and Democratic Representative Sharice Davids of Kansas City (District 3) Davids is the second Native American to represent Kansas in Congress, after Republican Charles Curtis (Kaw).\nHistorically, Kansas has been strongly Republican, dating from the Antebellum age when the Republican Party was created out of the movement opposing the extension of slavery into Kansas Territory. Kansas has not elected a Democrat to the U.S. Senate since the 1932 election, when Franklin D. Roosevelt won his first term as president in the wake of the Great Depression. This is the longest Senate losing streak for either party in a single state. Senator Sam Brownback was a candidate for the Republican party nomination for president in 2008. Brownback was not a candidate for re-election to a third full term in 2010, but he was elected Governor in that year's general election. Moran defeated Tiahrt for the Republican nomination for Brownback's seat in the August 2010 primary, then won a landslide general election victory over Democrat Lisa Johnston.\nThe only non-Republican presidential candidates Kansas has given its electoral vote to are Populist James Weaver and Democrats William Jennings Bryan (once), Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt (twice), and Lyndon Johnson. In 2004, George W. Bush won the state's six electoral votes by an overwhelming margin of 25 percentage points with 62% of the vote. The only two counties to support Democrat John Kerry in that election were Wyandotte, which contains Kansas City, and Douglas, home to the University of Kansas, located in Lawrence. The 2008 election brought similar results as John McCain won the state with 57% of the votes. Douglas, Wyandotte, and Crawford County were the only counties in support of President Barack Obama.\nAbilene was the boyhood home to Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower, and he maintained lifelong ties to family and friends there. Kansas was the adult home of two losing Republican candidates (Governor Alf Landon in 1936 and Senator Bob Dole in 1996).\nThe \"New York Times\" reported in September 2014 that as the Democratic candidate for Senator has tried to drop out of the race, independent Greg Orman has attracted enough bipartisan support to seriously challenge the reelection bid of Republican Pat Roberts:\nKansas politics have been roiled in recent years. The rise of the Tea Party and the election of President Obama have prompted Republicans to embrace a purer brand of conservatism and purge what had long been a robust moderate wing from its ranks. Mr. Roberts has sought to adapt to this new era, voting against spending bills that included projects for the state that he had sought.\nState laws.\nThe legal drinking age in Kansas is 21. In lieu of the state retail sales tax, a 10% Liquor Drink Tax is collected for liquor consumed on the licensed premises and an 8% Liquor Enforcement Tax is collected on retail purchases. Although the sale of cereal malt beverage (also known as 3.2 beer) was legalized in 1937, the first post-Prohibition legalization of alcoholic liquor did not occur until the state's constitution was amended in 1948. The following year the Legislature enacted the Liquor Control Act which created a system of regulating, licensing, and taxing, and the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) was created to enforce the act. The power to regulate cereal malt beverage remains with the cities and counties. Liquor-by-the-drink did not become legal until passage of an amendment to the state's constitution in 1986 and additional legislation the following year. As of November 2006, Kansas still has 29 dry counties and only 17 counties have passed liquor-by-the-drink with no food sales requirement. Today there are more than 2,600 liquor and 4,000 cereal malt beverage licensees in the state.\nOn May 12, 2022, Gov. Laura Kelly signed legislation (Senate Bill 84) that legalizes sports betting in the state, making Kansas the 35th state to approve sports wagering in the US. This would give the four state-owned casinos the right to partner with online bookmakers and up to 50 retailers, including gas stations and restaurants, to engage in sports betting.\nEducation.\nEducation in Kansas is governed at the primary and secondary school level by the Kansas State Board of Education. The state's public colleges and universities are supervised by the Kansas Board of Regents.\nTwice since 1999 the Board of Education has approved changes in the state science curriculum standards that encouraged the teaching of intelligent design. Both times, the standards were reversed after changes in the composition of the board in the next election.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nThe rock band Kansas was formed in the state capital of Topeka, the hometown of several of the band's members.\nJoe Walsh, guitarist for the famous rock band the Eagles, was born in Wichita. Danny Carey, drummer for the band Tool, was raised in Paola.\nSingers from Kansas include Leavenworth native Melissa Etheridge, Sharon native Martina McBride, Chanute native Jennifer Knapp (whose first album was titled \"Kansas\"), Kansas City native Janelle Mon\u00e1e, Prairie Village native Joyce DiDonato, and Liberal native Jerrod Niemann.\nThe state anthem is the American classic Home on the Range, written by Kansan Brewster Higley. Another song, the official state march adopted by the Kansas Legislature in 1935 is called \"The Kansas March\", which features the lyrics, \"Blue sky above us, silken strands of heat, Rim of the far horizon, where earth and heaven meet, Kansas as a temple, stands in velvet sod, Shrine which the sunshine, sanctifies to God.\"\nLiterature.\nThe state's most famous appearance in literature was as the home of Dorothy Gale, the main character in the novel \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\" (1900). Laura Ingalls Wilder's \"Little House on the Prairie\", published in 1935, is another well-known tale about Kansas.\nKansas was also the setting of the 1965 best-seller \"In Cold Blood\", described by its author Truman Capote as a \"nonfiction novel\". Mixing fact and fiction, the book chronicles the events and aftermath of the 1959 murder of a wealthy farmer and his family who lived in the small West Kansas town of Holcomb in Finney County.\nThe fictional town of Smallville, Kansas is the childhood home of Clark Kent/Superman in American comic books published by DC Comics. Also Keystone City is a Kansas city where The Flash works and lives.\nThe science fiction novella \"A Boy and His Dog\", as well as the film based on it, take place in post-apocalyptic Topeka.\nThe winner of the 2011 Newbery Medal for excellence in children's literature, \"Moon Over Manifest\", tells the story of a young and adventurous girl named Abilene who is sent to the fictional town of Manifest, Kansas, by her father in the summer of 1936. It was written by Kansan Clare Vanderpool.\nLawrence is the setting for a number of science fiction writer James Gunn's novels.\nArt.\nKansas is home to a number of art museums. The Wichita Art Museum collection focuses on American art. The Nerman Museum of Contemporary Art in Overland Park exhibits artists of national and international recognition. The Spencer Museum of Art, at University of Kansas in Lawrence, has a diverse permanent collection and Ingrid &amp; J.K. Lee Study Center as an education space.\nFilm.\nThe first film theater in Kansas was the Patee Theater in Lawrence. Most theaters at the time showed films only as part of vaudeville acts but not as an exclusive and stand alone form of entertainment. Though the Patee family had been involved in vaudeville, they believed films could carry the evening without other variety acts, but to show the films it was necessary for the Patee's to establish a generating plant (back in 1903 Lawrence was not yet fully electrified). The Patee Theater was one of the first of its kind west of the Mississippi River. The specialized equipment like the projector came from New York City.\nKansas has been the setting of many award-winning and popular American films, as well as being the home of some of the oldest operating cinemas in the world. The Plaza Cinema in Ottawa, Kansas, located in the northeastern portion of the state, was built on May 22, 1907, and it is listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the oldest operating cinema in the world. In 1926, The Jayhawk Theatre, an art-deco movie house in Topeka opened its doors for the first time to movie going audiences, and today, in addition to screenings of independent films, the theatre acts as a venue for plays and concerts. The Fox Theater in Hutchinson was built in 1930, and was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1989. Like the other theaters listed here, The Fox still plays first run movies to this day.\nSports.\nProfessional.\nSporting Kansas City, who have played their home games at Village West in Kansas City since 2008, are the second top-tier professional sports league (after the original Wichita Wings of the MISL) and first Major League Soccer team to be located within Kansas. In 2011 the team moved to their new home, a $165\u00a0million soccer specific stadium now known as Children's Mercy Park.\nHistorically, Kansans have supported the major league sports teams of Kansas City, Missouri, including the Kansas City Royals (MLB), and the Kansas City Chiefs (NFL), in part because the home stadiums for these teams are a few miles from the Kansas border. The Chiefs and the Royals play at the Truman Sports Complex, located about from the Kansas\u2013Missouri state line. FC Kansas City, a charter member of the National Women's Soccer League, played the 2013 season, the first for both the team and the league, on the Kansas side of the metropolitan area, but played on the Missouri side until folding after the 2017 season. From 1973 to 1997 the flagship radio station for the Royals was WIBW in Topeka.\nSome Kansans, mostly from the westernmost parts of the state, support the professional sports teams of Denver, particularly the Denver Broncos of the NFL.\nTwo major auto racing facilities are located in Kansas. The Kansas Speedway located in Kansas City hosts races of the NASCAR, IndyCar, and ARCA circuits. Also, the National Hot Rod Association (NHRA) holds drag racing events at Heartland Park Topeka. The Sports Car Club of America has its national headquarters in Topeka.\nHistory.\nThe history of professional sports in Kansas probably dates from the establishment of the minor league baseball Topeka Capitals and Leavenworth Soldiers in 1886 in the Western League. The African-American Bud Fowler played on the Topeka team that season, one year before the \"color line\" descended on professional baseball.\nIn 1887, the Western League was dominated by a reorganized Topeka team called the Golden Giants: a high-priced collection of major leaguer players, including Bug Holliday, Jim Conway, Dan Stearns, Perry Werden and Jimmy Macullar, which won the league by 15.5 games. On April 10, 1887, the Golden Giants also won an exhibition game from the defending World Series champions, the St. Louis Browns (the present-day Cardinals), by a score of 12\u20139. However, Topeka was unable to support the team, and it disbanded after one year.\nThe first night game in the history of professional baseball was played in Independence on April 28, 1930, when the Muscogee (Oklahoma) Indians beat the Independence Producers 13\u20133 in a minor league game sanctioned by the Western League of the Western Baseball Association with 1,500 fans attending the game. The permanent lighting system was first used for an exhibition game on April 17, 1930, between the Independence Producers and House of David semi-professional baseball team of Benton Harbor, Michigan with the Independence team winning 9\u20131 before a crowd of 1,700 spectators.\nCollege.\nThe history of intercollegiate of athletics in the state dates back to 1866, with the establishment of the University of Kansas baseball team, which competed against local area teams and schools in the Kansas State Fair. The Jayhawks baseball team is one of the oldest intercollegiate baseball programs in the United States.\nThe governing body for intercollegiate sports in the United States, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), was headquartered in Johnson County, Kansas from 1952 until moving to Indianapolis in 1999.\nNCAA Division I schools.\nWhile there are no franchises of the four major professional sports within the state, many Kansans are fans of the state's major college sports teams, especially the Jayhawks of the University of Kansas (KU), and the Wildcats of Kansas State University (KSU or \"K-State\"). The teams are rivals in the Big 12 Conference.\nBoth KU and K-State have tradition-rich programs in men's basketball. The Jayhawks are a perennial national power, ranking first in all-time victories among NCAA programs. The Jayhawks have won six national titles, including NCAA tournament championships in 1952, 1988, 2008, and 2022. They also were retroactively awarded national championships by the Helms Foundation for 1922 and 1923. K-State also had a long stretch of success on the hardwood, lasting from the 1940s to the 1980s, making four Final Fours during that stretch. In 1988, KU and K-State met in the Elite Eight, KU taking the game 71\u201358. After a 12-year absence, the Wildcats returned to the NCAA tournament in 2008, and advanced to the Elite Eight in 2010 and 2018. KU is fifth all-time with 15 Final Four appearances, while K-State's four appearances are tied for 17th.\nConversely, success on the gridiron has been less frequent for both KSU and KU. However, there have been recent breakthroughs for both schools' football teams. The Jayhawks won the Orange Bowl for the first time in three tries in 2008, capping a 12\u20131 season, the best in school history. And when Bill Snyder arrived to coach at K-State in 1989, he turned the Wildcats from one of the worst college football programs in America, into a national force for most of the 1990s and early 2000s. The team won the Fiesta Bowl in 1997, achieved an undefeated (11\u20130) regular season and No.1 ranking in 1998, and took the Big 12 Conference championship in 2003. After three seasons in which K-State football languished, Snyder came out of retirement in 2009 and guided them to the top of the college football ranks again, finishing second in the Big 12 in 2011 and earning a berth in the Cotton Bowl, and winning the Big 12 again in 2012.\nWichita State University, which also fields teams (called the Shockers) in Division I of the NCAA, is best known for its baseball and basketball programs. In baseball, the Shockers won the College World Series in 1989. In men's basketball, they appeared in the Final Four in 1965 and 2013, and entered the 2014 NCAA tournament unbeaten. The school also fielded a football team from 1897 to 1986. The Shocker football team is tragically known for a plane crash in 1970 that killed 31 people, including 14 players.\nNCAA Division II schools.\nNotable success has also been achieved by the state's smaller schools in football. Pittsburg State University, an NCAA Division II participant, has claimed four national titles in football, two in the NAIA and most recently the 2011 NCAA Division II national title. Pittsburg State became the winningest NCAA Division II football program in 1995. PSU passed Hillsdale College at the top of the all-time victories list in the 1995 season on its march to the national runner-up finish. The Gorillas, in 96 seasons of intercollegiate competition, have accumulated 579 victories, posting a 579\u2013301\u201348 overall mark.\nWashburn University, in Topeka, won the NAIA Men's Basketball Championship in 1987. The Fort Hays State University men won the 1996 NCAA Division II title with a 34\u20130 record, and the Washburn women won the 2005 NCAA Division II crown. St. Benedict's College (now Benedictine College), in Atchison, won the 1954 and 1967 Men's NAIA Basketball Championships.\nThe Kansas Collegiate Athletic Conference has its roots as one of the oldest college sport conferences in existence and participates in the NAIA and all ten member schools are in the state of Kansas. Other smaller school conferences that have some members in Kansas are the Mid-America Intercollegiate Athletics Association the Midlands Collegiate Athletic Conference, the Midwest Christian College Conference, and the Heart of America Athletic Conference. Many junior colleges also have active athletic programs.\nEmporia State's women's basketball team, under head coach Brandon Schneider, who is now serving as the women's basketball coach at the University of Kansas, has seen success as well. In 2010 the team won the NCAA Division II National Championship. Emporia State and Washburn in Topeka share a heated rivalry in all sports, mostly due to the close proximity of both cities.\nJunior colleges.\nThe Kansas Jayhawk Community College Conference has been heralded as one of the best conferences in all of NJCAA football, with Garden City Community College, Independence Community College, and Butler Community College all consistently in contention for national championships.\nHigh school.\nThe Kansas State High School Activities Association (KSHSAA) is the organization which oversees interscholastic competition in the state of Kansas at the high school level. It oversees both athletic and non-athletic competition, and sponsors championships in several sports and activities.\nRivalry with Missouri.\nKansas and Missouri are two bordering U.S. states with a long and tumultuous history. The relationship between these two states has its roots in Bleeding Kansas, but mutual distrust has continued off and on since then, even in sporting contexts. These states also share the Kansas City metropolitan area, where both states each have a city named Kansas City on either side of the Missouri River. The bitterness sown during Bleeding Kansas lingers in the Border War between the University of Kansas and the University of Missouri. The two states compete economically, mainly at the border which is also called a Border War. In 2019, the governors of the two states signed an agreement to stop offering financial incentives to pull business across the border. In 2022, the governor of Kansas said that agreement did not include enticement of the Chiefs football team moving its arena from Missouri to Kansas. In 2024, the Kansas House of Representatives and Kansas State Senate passed legislation that would give professional sports programs north of $1 billion in STAR bonds for the development of stadiums and entertainment districts in Kansas City, Kansas. The Chiefs and Royals both hired lobbyists in 2024 that appealed to the Kansas Legislature. As of March 2025, the Chiefs haven't commented directly on a move to Kansas, but the Royals have expressed interest in building a riverfront stadium on the junction between the Kansas River and Missouri River. Kansas House of Representatives member Sean Tarwater said that talks with the Chiefs were intensifying in February 2025, and that Kansas was close to \"bringing over at least one team, maybe two\". In June 2024, an architecture firm in Kansas released a video featuring 3D renderings of a potential design for a domed stadium in Kansas City, Kansas.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMaps\n* ."}
{"id": "16717", "revid": "48732274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16717", "title": "K", "text": "Eleventh letter of the Latin alphabet\nK, or k, is the eleventh letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"kay\" (pronounced ), plural \"kays\".\nThe letter K usually represents the voiceless velar plosive.\nHistory.\nThe letter K comes from the Greek letter \u039a (kappa), which was taken from the Semitic kaph, the symbol for an open hand. This, in turn, was likely adapted by Semitic tribes who had lived in Egypt from the hieroglyph for \"hand\" representing /\u1e0f/ in the Egyptian word for hand, \u27e8\u1e0f-r-t\u27e9 (likely pronounced in Old Egyptian). The Semites evidently assigned it the sound value instead, because their word for hand started with that sound.\nK was brought into the Latin alphabet with the name \"ka\" /ka\u02d0/ to differentiate it from C, named \"ce\" (pronounced /ke\u02d0/) and Q, named \"qu\" and pronounced /ku\u02d0/. In the earliest Latin inscriptions, the letters C, K and Q were all used to represent the sounds and (which were not differentiated in writing). Of these, Q was used before a rounded vowel (e.g. \u27e8EQO\u27e9 'ego'), K before /a/ (e.g. \u27e8KALENDIS\u27e9 'calendis'), and C elsewhere. Later, the use of C and its variant G replaced most usages of K and Q. K survived only in a few fossilized forms, such as \"Kalendae\", \"the calends\".\nAfter Greek words were taken into Latin, the kappa was transliterated as a C. Loanwords from other alphabets with the sound were also transliterated with C. Hence, the Romance languages generally use C, in imitating Classical Latin's practice, and have K only in later loanwords from other language groups. The Celtic languages also tended to use C instead of K, and this influence carried over into Old English.\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nThe letter usually represents in English. It is silent when it comes before \u27e8n\u27e9 at the start of a stem, e.g.:\nEnglish is now the only Germanic language to productively use \"hard\" \u27e8c\u27e9 (outside the digraph \u27e8ck\u27e9) rather than \u27e8k\u27e9 (although Dutch uses it in loan words of Latin origin, and the pronunciation of these words follows the same hard/soft distinction as in English).\nLike J, X, Q, and Z, the letter K is not used very frequently in English. It is the fifth least frequently used letter in the English language, with a frequency in words of about 0.8%.\nOther languages.\nIn most languages where it is employed, this letter represents the sound (with or without aspiration) or some similar sound.\nThe Latinization of Modern Greek also uses this letter for . However, before the front vowels (), this is rendered as , which can be considered a separate phoneme.\nOther systems.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet uses \u27e8\u27e9 for the voiceless velar plosive.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16718", "revid": "45445004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16718", "title": "Kappa (disambiguation)", "text": "Kappa (\u039a or \u03ba) is the tenth letter of the Greek alphabet.\nKappa may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16719", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16719", "title": "Kolmogorov Smirnoff Test", "text": ""}
{"id": "16720", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16720", "title": "Kuiper's test", "text": "Statistical test\nKuiper's test is used in statistics to test whether a data sample comes from a given distribution (one-sample Kuiper test), or whether two data samples came from the same unknown distribution (two-sample Kuiper test). It is named after Dutch mathematician Nicolaas Kuiper.\nKuiper's test is closely related to the better-known Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test (or K-S test as it is often called). As with the K-S test, the discrepancy statistics \"D\"+ and \"D\"\u2212 represent the absolute sizes of the most positive and most negative differences between the two cumulative distribution functions that are being compared. The trick with Kuiper's test is to use the quantity \"D\"+\u00a0+\u00a0\"D\"\u2212 as the test statistic. This small change makes Kuiper's test as sensitive in the tails as at the median and also makes it invariant under cyclic transformations of the independent variable. The Anderson\u2013Darling test is another test that provides equal sensitivity at the tails as the median, but it does not provide the cyclic invariance.\nThis invariance under cyclic transformations makes Kuiper's test invaluable when testing for cyclic variations by time of year or day of the week or time of day, and more generally for testing the fit of, and differences between, circular probability distributions.\nOne-sample Kuiper test.\nThe one-sample test statistic, formula_1, for Kuiper's test is defined as follows. Let \"F\" be the continuous cumulative distribution function which is to be the null hypothesis. Denote by \"F\"\"n\" the empirical distribution function for \"n\" independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations \"Xi\", which is defined as \nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the indicator function, equal to 1 if formula_4 and equal to 0 otherwise.\nThen the one-sided Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov statistic for the given cumulative distribution function \"F\"(\"x\") is\nformula_5\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the supremum function. And finally the one-sample Kuiper test is defined as,\nformula_8\nor equivalently\nformula_9\nwhere formula_10 is the infimum function.\nTables for the critical points of the test statistic formula_1 are available, and these include certain cases where the distribution being tested is not fully known, so that parameters of the family of distributions are estimated.\nThe asymptotic distribution of the statistic formula_12 is given by,\nformula_13\nFor formula_14, a reasonable approximation is obtained from the first term of the series as follows \nformula_15\nTwo-sample Kuiper test.\nThe Kuiper test may also be used to test whether a pair of random samples, either on the real line or the circle coming from a common but unknown distribution. In this case, the Kuiper statistic is\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 and formula_18 are the empirical distribution functions of the first and the second sample respectively, formula_7 is the supremum function, and formula_10 is the infimum function.\nExample.\nWe could test the hypothesis that computers fail more during some times of the year than others. To test this, we would collect the dates on which the test set of computers had failed and build an empirical distribution function. The null hypothesis is that the failures are uniformly distributed. Kuiper's statistic does not change if we change the beginning of the year and does not require that we bin failures into months or the like. Another test statistic having this property is the Watson statistic, which is related to the Cram\u00e9r\u2013von Mises test.\nHowever, if failures occur mostly on weekends, many uniform-distribution tests such as K-S and Kuiper would miss this, since weekends are spread throughout the year. This inability to distinguish distributions with a comb-like shape from continuous uniform distributions is a key problem with all statistics based on a variant of the K-S test. Kuiper's test, applied to the event times modulo one week, is able to detect such a pattern. Using event times that have been modulated with the K-S test can result in different results depending on how the data is phased. In this example, the K-S test may detect the non-uniformity if the data is set to start the week on Saturday, but fail to detect the non-uniformity if the week starts on Wednesday.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16724", "revid": "20764880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16724", "title": "Kirk Hammett", "text": "American guitarist (born 1962)\nKirk Lee Hammett (born November 18, 1962) is an American musician. Hammett has been the lead guitarist of heavy metal band Metallica since 1983; prior to joining Metallica, he co-formed thrash metal band Exodus in 1979. In 2023, Hammett and Metallica bandmate James Hetfield were co-ranked 23rd on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of Greatest Guitarists of All Time. In 2009, Hammett was ranked number 15 in Joel McIver's book \"The 100 Greatest Metal Guitarists\".\nEarly life.\nHammett was born on November 18, 1962, in San Francisco, California, and raised in the town of El Sobrante. He is the son of Teofila \"Chefela\" (born Oyao) and Dennis L. Hammett (a merchant mariner). His mother is of Filipino, specifically Cebuano, descent and his father was of English, German, Scottish, and Irish ancestry, although he has referred to him as a \"a full-blooded Irishman who liked to drink and liked to scrap. He was always fighting people, even fighting his friends. He would get together with my uncles and it was just one big fucking toxic soup of masculinity, and that\u2019s what I came out of.\" \nHe attended De Anza High School in Richmond, California. While attending De Anza High School, he met Les Claypool of Primus, and they remain close friends.\nHammett has a well-known passion for horror movies that stretches back to the late 1960s. After spraining his arm in a fight with his sister at age five, Hammett's parents placed him in front of the television. It was during this time that he first watched \"The Day of the Triffids\". After that, Hammett found himself drawn to his brother's Frankenstein figures and began spending his milk money on horror magazines. For the better part of the next decade, Hammett dove deep into the horror scene.\nHammett began showing an interest in music after listening to his brother Rick's extensive record collection (which included Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin, and UFO). He began selling his horror magazines to buy music records, which led him to properly picking up the guitar at age 15. Hammett's first guitar was (in his own words) a \"wholly unglamorous\" Montgomery Ward catalog special, which was accompanied by a shoebox (with a four-inch speaker) for an amp. After purchasing a 1978 Fender Stratocaster copy, Hammett attempted to customize his sound with various guitar parts before eventually buying a 1974 Gibson Flying V.\nCareer.\nExodus (1979\u20131983).\nHammett's musical interests eventually drew him into the fledgling thrash metal genre. In 1979, he formed the band Exodus at the age of sixteen, along with vocalist Paul Baloff, guitarist Tim Agnello, bassist Geoff Andrews, and drummer Tom Hunting. Hammett named Exodus after the Leon Uris novel of the same name, and played on the band's \"1982 Demo\" and its successor \"Die By His Hand\" from 1983. Exodus was an influential band in the Bay Area thrash movement. During the Exodus phase Hammett took lessons from Joe Satriani who was based in Berkeley, California at the time.\nMetallica (1983\u2013present).\nIn 1983, Metallica traveled to the east coast to record its debut album, \"Kill 'Em All\". Due to lead guitarist Dave Mustaine's substance abuse and violent tendencies, he was fired shortly after their arrival, and would eventually form the band Megadeth. Hammett received a phone call from Metallica on April 1, and flew out to New York for an audition on April 11, the same day Mustaine was let go. Vocalist/guitarist James Hetfield said: \"The first song we played was \"Seek and Destroy\", and Kirk pulled off this solo, and it was like ... things are going to be alright!\". Hammett was instantly asked to join the band.\nHammett has written a number of riffs for Metallica since \"Ride the Lightning\" (the band's second album). One of his riffs was used on \"Enter Sandman\" - which went on to become one of Metallica's most popular songs. It was the first track and the first single on the band's self-titled album (also known as \"The Black Album\"), and was ranked 399th on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. The bridge for \"Creeping Death\" was originally an Exodus riff that Hammett took with him to Metallica.\nIn 1986, during the band's European leg of their tour to support \"Master of Puppets\", the group had a dispute over sleeping arrangements on their tour bus. The outcome of the dispute was decided by a card draw, which Cliff Burton won by picking the Ace of Spades. Once the draw was completed, Burton looked at Hammett and said \"I want your bunk\", to which Hammett complied, saying that he might be able to sleep better in the front of the bus anyway. In the early hours of the following morning, Metallica's tour bus slid off the road and overturned in Sweden. Burton was thrown through the window of the bus, which fell on top of Burton and subsequently killed him. Hammett has stated in an interview that he once thought that it easily could have been him who was killed instead, since Burton was sleeping in what was considered to be Hammett's bunk. In Kirk's own words: \"You know to this day I just think, it could have been me or it couldn't have been me but ... it's never left me to this day.\"\nBetween the end of touring (and promoting) the \"Black Album\" and the start of touring in promotion of \"Load\", he studied at San Francisco State University, focusing on film and Asian arts. Hammett went through a \"blues period\" around this time - which had some influence on Metallica's \"Load\" and \"Reload\" albums. He also began listening to a lot of jazz music. Hammett described this period of his life as \"great education\", because he was able to discover where all of his own rock influences had gotten their own guitar licks. However, even though jazz music had a profound effect on his improvisation skills and solos, Hammett felt that he was delving too deep into the genre. Since \"Death Magnetic\", Hammett has gone back to being \"primarily\" a metal guitarist, but some of his influences of jazz and blues music still remain.\nHammett wanted to have guitar solos on Metallica's 2003 album, \"St. Anger\", but drummer Lars Ulrich and producer Bob Rock thought that the solos did not sound right in the songs. He later admitted himself, \"We tried to put in solos but they sounded like an afterthought so we left them out\". Recording for \"St. Anger\" was halted in 2001 so that Metallica frontman James Hetfield could enter rehab for alcohol abuse. Due to tensions within the band (which were well-documented in the Metallica documentary \"Some Kind of Monster\") at the time, Hammett expressed interest in working on a solo album. According to Hammett, if he ever worked on a solo album, it wouldn't be \"super-duty\" heavy metal, and may include some classical guitarists. When he was asked about his experiences of recording \"St. Anger\", Hammett said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Honestly, I was ready to start working on a solo album. I had a bunch of music I was sitting on. I was going to ask Lars [Metallica's drummer] to play drums on it.\nOn April 4, 2009, Hammett, along with Metallica bandmates Lars Ulrich, James Hetfield, and Robert Trujillo and former Metallica bandmates Jason Newsted and the deceased Cliff Burton, were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2009, Hammett provided the foreword to British author Joel McIver's book \"To Live Is to Die: The Life and Death of Metallica's Cliff Burton\".\nIn April 2015, Hammett admitted to losing his phone - which contained 250 new \"ideas\" for Metallica's upcoming studio release. The incident happened about six months prior to the admission (around November 2014). The phone was not backed up and Hammett can only remember eight out of the 250 \"ideas\" he had. On the subject, Hammett said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For me, music comes at all times of the day. When I get a riff, sometimes it's a complete riff and I can just play it and there it is, sometimes it's half a riff and I have to tweak it. Sometimes it's just a rhythm or a note selection. Or sometimes it's just something that I hum in my head. But it can come from anywhere, and I put it on my phone, and I make sure the phone is fucking backed up.\nIn 2016, Hammett provided the foreword to author Greg Prato's book \"German Metal Machine: Scorpions in the '70s\".\nOn February 8, 2022, it was announced that Hammett would release an extended play entitled \"Portals\". Said to be inspired by \"classical music, soundtracks, horror movies and maybe a little Ennio Morricone\", the EP is his solo debut and was released on April 23, 2022.\nOther appearances.\nHe also appeared on the \"Kichigai\" EP by punk band Septic Death. He played additional lead guitar on the title track.\nHammett can be seen in the background in Primus' \"John the Fisherman\" video fishing off of Les Claypool's boat. Hammett has been friends with Primus bassist and lead vocalist Les Claypool since childhood. Claypool even auditioned for Metallica after the tragic death of Cliff Burton.\nHammett played guitar on the track \"Satan\" with Orbital for the \"Spawn: The Album\" soundtrack released in July 1997.\nHammett plays a guitar solo on Pansy Division's song \"Headbanger\" which appears on the EP \"For Those About to Suck Cock\".\nIn 2005, Hammett was featured playing the guitar roles on the Carlos Santana track \"Trinity\" alongside steel-pedal guitarist Robert Randolph. Santana personally asked Hammett to contribute to his then-upcoming album \"All That I Am\". Hammett previously worked with Santana in 2001 at a live show benefit in San Francisco. Metallica had also invited Santana into the studio while recording \"St. Anger\".\nIn 2006, Hammett voiced himself on \"The Simpsons\" (\"The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer\"). He also provided various voices on the Adult Swim show \"Metalocalypse\", including a two fingered fan (\"The Curse of Dethklok\"), The Queen of Denmark (\"Happy Dethday\"), and a Finnish barkeep (\"Dethtroll\").\nHammett also appeared as a guest in an episode of \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\" titled \"Jacksonville\", alongside fellow Metallica member James Hetfield.\nHe appeared as a guest guitarist on K'Naan's 2006 song \"If Rap Gets Jealous\" off of the \"Troubadour\" album.\nAfter performing a set with Metallica at Bonnaroo in June 2008, Hammett played one song with My Morning Jacket and a couple songs with the annual Superjam collaboration, which also included Les Claypool and members of Gogol Bordello playing primarily Tom Waits songs.\nHammett is one of the main characters in \"\", along with the rest of the current line-up of Metallica.\nIn 2011, Hammett appeared in an episode of \"Jon Benjamin Has a Van\" as an actor and guitarist.\nHammett collaborated with Cindy Blackman Santana and Vernon Reid from Living Colour on \"Evolution Revolution\", a track from the former's 2020 album \"Give the Drummer Some.\"\nHammett has appeared as himself, representing the character Kevin's conscience, in the 2022 American teen comedy-drama Metal Lords.\nIn May 2023, Hammett performed at the Jeff Beck tribute concerts held at the Royal Albert Hall in London, sharing the stage with Eric Clapton, Rod Stewart, Ronnie Wood, Billy Gibbons and Johnny Depp among others.\nBook.\nOn October 1, 2012, Abrams Image published Hammett's first book, \"Too Much Horror Business\" (a collection of photos detailing Hammett's lifelong love of monster movies and horror memorabilia). Hammett has said that the book is \"basically\" all of the horror memorabilia he has managed to amass over the last 30 years. In an interview with \"Guitar World\", Hammett said that he has such a huge horror collection and thought it was the right time to share it with everyone. The 228 page hardcover features more than 300 images of Hammett's horror collection. Among these images are the costumes from the Bela Lugosi movies \"White Zombie\" and \"The Black Cat\" (which also starred Boris Karloff), original movie posters (ranging from \"Nosferatu\" to \"Hellraiser\"), rare horror-themed toys (including the 'Great Garloo' and 'Frankenstein Tricky Walkers'), movie props (including the 'Dr. Tongue' zombie from George A. Romero's \"Day of the Dead\"), original Basil Gogos \"Famous Monsters\" art, and fantasy paintings by Frank Frazetta. In addition to the images from Hammett's horror collection, \"Too Much Horror Business\" contains three conversations with the guitarist about his childhood, the nature of his horror collection, and the connection between Metallica's music and horror movies. On the book, Hammett has been quoted saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is my gift to all the other horror nerds out there who are just like me. It's (the book) been made with great love for all the many characters and movies which guided me through childhood, into adulthood and which still keep me on track today.\n\"Kirk Von Hammett's Fear FestEvil\".\n\"Kirk Von Hammett's Fear FestEvil\" is an annual horror convention created by Kirk Hammett. The first \"Fear FestEvil\" took place at the Regency Ballroom in San Francisco - over a three-day period (from February 6\u20138, 2014). Hammett was inspired to create his own horror convention after experiencing the enjoyment of making his \"crypt\" at the \"Orion Music + More\" festival. The convention features live music, signings, interactive displays, vending, live talks, and guest appearances. At the 2014 event, guests included Sara Karloff (daughter of actor Boris Karloff), Bela G. Lugosi (son of actor Bela Lugosi), make-up artist Gregory Nicotero (who worked on George A. Romero's \"Day of the Dead\"), actor Tom Savini (who portrayed \"Sex Machine\" in \"From Dusk till Dawn\" and worked on many of George A. Romero's movies), Heather Langenkamp (who portrayed Nancy in Wes Craven's \"A Nightmare on Elm Street\"), Kane Hodder (who portrayed Jason Voorhees in the \"Friday the 13th\" film series), and Haruo Nakajima (of Godzilla fame). Other guests in attendance included Hammett's former band Exodus, Death Angel, Orchid, Metallica band member Robert Trujillo, Richard Christy, Stephen Perkins, Slash, and Scott Ian. Exodus played on-stage with Carcass on the Friday, whilst Death Division and Orchid played before Death Angel on the Saturday. Hammett joined Exodus and Death Angel on-stage for their encores.\nThe second annual \"Fear FestEvil\" took place between April 10\u201312, 2015, at the \"Rockbar Theater\" in San Jose, California. Meshuggah headlined the event, whilst High on Fire, Blues Pills, Agnostic Front, and Asada Messiah also made appearances. Orchid also made a second appearance at the \"Fear FestEvil\". On April 10, VIPs were able to attend the \"Dinner and Murder Mystery\" - along with Hammett - at the Winchester Mystery House.\nPersonal life.\nHammett has been married twice. His first marriage to Rebecca lasted three years, having ended in 1990, during the recording of \"Metallica\". His second marriage to Lani lasted from 1998 to 2020, with Hammett filing for divorce back in 2012. They have two sons. He is currently engaged to Monikka De La Zerda. They have a child together. He resides in Sonoma, California, and Hawaii.\nIn addition to playing guitar and collecting horror memorabilia, Hammett's hobbies include reading comic books and surfing.\nSubstance abuse.\nAt one point in his life, Hammett spent a \"lot of money\" on drugs. Hammett has said that he used drugs because he thought they would be fun. During the Damaged Justice tour, he had a cocaine addiction. Hammett eventually pulled out of the addiction because cocaine made him feel depressed, but he relapsed during the \"Load\" era. One of the reasons Hammett said he spent a lot of money on comic books is because he finds them to be a more enjoyable and healthier alternative to drugs. He also smoked heroin a few times but \"didn't like it\".\nPolitics and environmentalism.\nAlthough the other members of Metallica do not speak publicly about their politics, Hammett has expressed his disagreement with statements by Donald Trump. In an interview with \"Billboard\" magazine in December 2016 (one month after Trump's first election), Hammett said that he was \"just waiting to get into a personal Twitter war with (Trump).\" In the same interview, Hammett stressed the importance of the fight against global warming, which Trump has claimed is a hoax.\nEquipment and techniques.\nHammett is known for consistently taping sections of his right (picking) hand in order to protect his skin from abrasions from his use of palm muting and fast picking techniques over lengthy tour cycles.\nGuitars.\nHammett's touring guitars over the years have included:\nOn the 25th anniversary of Metallica's debut album \"Kill 'Em All\", Hammett appears on the cover of Feb. 2008's \"Guitar World\" sporting his new custom ESP. This model is the KH20, the 20th anniversary model from ESP.\nIn 2014, Hammett purchased \"Greeny\", a 1959 Les Paul formerly used by Gary Moore and Peter Green; using it on tour as of 2015[ [update]] when playing a cover of Thin Lizzy's version of \"Whiskey in the Jar\".\nAmplifiers and cabinets.\nThroughout Metallica's career, Hammett has used a range of different amplifiers. For the first two albums, he used Marshall amplifiers and cabinets, with occasional effects. For the recording of Metallica's third album, \"Master of Puppets\" (1986), he and James Hetfield bought a Mesa/Boogie MarkIIC+ amplifier, and used Mesa/Boogie Dual Rectifier heads. Even when he made his move to Randall Amplifiers in 2007, he still used Mesa/Boogie amplifiers in his setup, and still does to this day. He currently uses two rack-mounted Dual Rectifier 2-channel heads in tandem with his Randalls.\nIn September 2007, Randall Amplifiers announced a partnership with Hammett to design a line of signature amplifiers, heads, combos and preamp modules.\nIn December 2011, it was announced by Fortin Amps that they would team up with Randall to start a new line of tube amplifiers based on the Fortin Meathead amplifier. Hammett is currently using a prototype of the amplifier that he used for the Big 4 show at Yankee Stadium and for all of the shows in India and Asia, and was recently sent a second prototype.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEffects.\nTo avoid problems with pedals being damaged during live performances, Hammett keeps his effect pedals in a rack along with his amplifiers. His guitar technician controls them through a pedalboard sidestage. The pedal controller allows him to change between different effect pedals and amplifiers.\nAlthough using a wah-wah pedal since Kill \u2018Em All, the release of The Black Album, saw prominent usage in Hammett's playing thereafter. In 2008, Jim Dunlop started working in partnership with Hammett to create a signature wah-wah pedal, the KH95. In 2022 on an interview with Rick Beato, he claimed to own \"around 200\" wah-wah pedals, citing his favorite one to be the Dunlop Dimebag Cry Baby From Hell.\nHammett said that the Ibanez Tube Screamer has been an essential part of his sound since he was a teenager, but it was not versatile enough, which started him searching for a better pedal. In 2012, he co-founded KHDK Electronics with sound designer David Karon, hiring Antonin Salva as chief engineer, based in Prague. The company makes guitar pedals in Paducah, Kentucky. They began developing pedals and trying out prototypes. In September 2015, the company launched its first series of pedals, surprising the industry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccessories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16726", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16726", "title": "Kul Tigin", "text": "Prince and military commander of the Second Turkic Khaganate\nKul Tigin ( , Pinyin: Qu\u00e8t\u00e8q\u00edn, Wade\u2013Giles: ch\u00fceh-t'e-ch'in, 684\u2013731) was a general and a prince of the Second Turkic Khaganate.\nEtymology.\nNecip As\u0131m (1921) initially gave his name as \"k\u00f6l\", based on the etymology of Mahmud al-Kashgari, meaning \"lake, sea\". Radloff rendered this word as \"k\u00fcl\", and Thomsen (1896), Malov (1951) and Tekin (1968) adopted this reading. Bazin (1956) and Hamilton (1962) rejected Radloff's reading and preferred the form \"k\u00f6l\". However, Chinese sources used the Chinese character \u95d5 (\"qu\u00e8\"). Therefore, this word should be read as \"k\u00fcl\", not \"k\u00f6l\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nKul Tigin was the second son of Ilterish Qaghan, the Second Turkic Khaganate's founder, and the younger brother of Bilge Qaghan (born Ashina Mojilian), the fourth qaghan. He was seven when his father died.\nDuring the reign of Qapaghan Qaghan, Kul Tigin and his older brother earned reputation for their military prowess. They defeated the Yenisei Kyrgyz, T\u00fcrgesh, and Karluks, extending the kaganate territory to the Iron Gate south of Samarkand. They also subjugated all nine of the Toquz Oghuz tribes.\nIn 705, Turkic forces commanded by Ashina Mojilian entered Lingwu, defeating Shazha Chongyi (\u6c99\u5412\u5fe0\u4e49). Kul Tigin commanded a unit in battle, in which he lost three horses.\nIn 711, he participated in Battle of Bolchu, which was disastrous for the T\u00fcrgesh.\nIn 713 he participated in subjugation of Karluk tribes with his brother and uncle.\nAs supreme commander.\nUpon the death of Qapaghan Qaghan, his son Inel Qaghan attempted to illegally ascend to the throne, defying the traditional lateral succession, but K\u00fcl Tigin refused to recognize the takeover. He raised an army, attacked, and killed Inel, Ashina Duoxifu and his trusted followers. He placed Mojilian on the throne as Bilge Qaghan, and took the title of shad, an equivalent of commander-in-chief of the army, for himself.\nDeath.\nHe died suddenly on 27 February 731. A stele in his memory, which included inscriptions in both Turkic and Chinese, was erected at his memorial complex of Khoshoo Tsaidam, at the present site of the Orkhon inscriptions. K\u00fcl-Tegin is also mentioned in the inscription erected in memory of his older brother Bilge Qaghan at the neighbouring site of Kh\u00f6sh\u00f6\u00f6-Tsaidam-1.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Heavenly Divine T\u00fcrk Bilg\u00e4 Qaghan, I reign at this time.&lt;br&gt;Hear out my words, all my brothers, my sons, and also you, my tribe, my people:&lt;br&gt;\u0160ad P\u00eft lords of the south;&lt;br&gt;Tarqan Buyruq lords of the north;&lt;br&gt;Otuz . . .;\nHis burial ceremony took place in 1 November 731. He was posthumously renamed Inan\u010du Apa Yar\u011fan Tarqan () by Bilge Qaghan.\nThe head of the K\u00fcl Tigin sculpture in the Kh\u00f6sh\u00f6\u00f6-Tsaidam enclave in (Orkhon, in northern Mongolia) carries a bird with wings spread like an eagle, personifying a raven. The head was found by the Czech archeologist Lumir Jisl during his 1957\u20131958 expedition to Mongolia.\nPopular culture.\nHe was portrayed by Ham Suk Hun (\ud568\uc11d\ud6c8) in Korean TV Series \"Dae Jo-yeong.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16733", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16733", "title": "Kinky Friedman", "text": "American singer-songwriter, writer and politician (1944\u20132024)\nRichard Samet \"Kinky\" Friedman (November 1, 1944 \u2013 June 27, 2024) was an American singer, songwriter, novelist, humorist, politician, and columnist for \"Texas Monthly\", who styled himself in the mold of popular American satirists Will Rogers and Mark Twain.\nFriedman was one of two independent candidates in the 2006 Texas gubernatorial election. Receiving 12.6% of the vote, Friedman placed fourth in the six-person race.\nBiography.\nRichard Samet Friedman was born in Chicago on November 1, 1944, to Jewish parents, Dr. S. Thomas Friedman and his wife Minnie (Samet) Friedman. Both of his parents were the children of Russian Jewish immigrants. When Friedman was young, his family moved to the Texas Hill Country where they opened a summer camp called Echo Hill Ranch.\nFriedman had an early interest in both pop music and chess, and was chosen at age seven as one of 50 local players to challenge U.S. grandmaster Samuel Reshevsky to simultaneous games in Houston. Reshevsky won all 50 games, but Friedman was, by far, the youngest competitor.\nFriedman graduated from Austin High School in Austin, Texas, in 1962. He subsequently earned a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Texas at Austin in 1966, majoring in psychology. He took part in the Plan II Honors program and was a member of the Tau Delta Phi fraternity. During his first year, Chinga Chavin gave Friedman the nickname \"Kinky\" because of his curly hair.\nFriedman served two years in the United States Peace Corps, teaching in Borneo, Malaysia with John Gross. During his service in the Peace Corps, he met future road manager Dylan Ferrero, with whom he worked for the remainder of his life. Friedman lived at Echo Hill Ranch, his family's summer camp near Kerrville, Texas. He founded Utopia Animal Rescue Ranch, also located near Kerrville, whose mission is to care for stray, abused and aging animals; to date, the ranch has saved more than 1,000 dogs from animal euthanasia.\nOn June 27, 2024, it was announced that Friedman had died at his home at Echo Hill Ranch, Medina, Bandera County, Texas, from complications of Parkinson's disease. He was 79.\nMusic career.\nFriedman formed his first band, King Arthur &amp; the Carrots, while a student at the University of Texas at Austin. The band, which poked fun at surf music, recorded only one single in 1966 (\"Schwinn 24/Beach Party Boo Boo\").\nBy 1973, Friedman had formed his second band, Kinky Friedman and The Texas Jewboys, which many took to be a play on the name of the famous band Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys. In keeping with the band's satirical nature, each member had a comical name: in addition to Kinky there were Little Jewford, Big Nig, Panama Red, Wichita Culpepper, Sky Cap Adams, Rainbow Colours, and Snakebite Jacobs. More conventionally named roadie Jack Slaughter and road manager Dylan Ferrero rounded out the crew and provided most of the driving of the \"tour bus\", a Cadillac with 10-year-old expired license plates and a propensity to break down (but, according to Friedman, her talent lay in her ability to stop on a dime and pick up the change).\nFriedman's father objected to the name of the band, calling it a \"negative, hostile, peculiar thing\", which gave Kinky even more reason to choose the name.\nArriving on the wave of country rock following on from Gram Parsons, The Band, and Eagles, Friedman originally found cult fame as a country and western singer. His break came in 1973 thanks to Commander Cody of Commander Cody and His Lost Planet Airmen, who contacted Vanguard Music on his behalf. Friedman released \"Kinky Friedman\" in 1974 for ABC Records, then toured with Bob Dylan in 1975\u20131976. His repertoire mixed social commentary (\"We Reserve the Right to Refuse Service to You\") and maudlin ballads (\"Western Union Wire\") with raucous humor (such as \"Get Your Biscuits in the Oven and Your Buns in the Bed\"). His \"Ride 'Em Jewboy\" was an extended tribute to the victims of the Holocaust.\nOne of his most famous songs is \"They Ain't Makin' Jews Like Jesus Anymore,\" a song in which Kinky verbally and physically beats up a drunken white racist who berates blacks, Jews, Italians, Greeks, Irish people, and Sigma Nus in a bar, with lyrics such as,\n&lt;poem&gt;\nOh, they ain't makin' Jews like Jesus anymore,\nThey ain't makin' carpenters that know what nails are for\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nOther Friedman tunes include \"The Ballad of Charles Whitman,\" in which Friedman lampooned Charles Whitman's sniper attack from the University of Texas at Austin's Main Building tower on August 1, 1966. He also covered Chinga Chavin's \"Asshole from El Paso\", a parody of Merle Haggard's \"Okie from Muskogee\".\nOne of Friedman's most infamous concerts was a 1973 performance in Buffalo, New York; upon performing \"Get Your Biscuits in the Oven and Your Buns in the Bed\" (a song that lampoons feminism), a group of what Friedman described as \"cranked-up lesbians\" entered into a fight with the band and forced the concert to end early while Friedman and the band were escorted off stage. The National Organization for Women awarded Friedman the \"Male Chauvinist Pig Award\" later that year, an award Friedman took with pride. Friedman would not return to Buffalo until 2012. Another was at The Boarding House in early-March 1975 when an offended Buffy Sainte-Marie rushed on stage and snatched the war bonnet that Friedman was wearing while he and his band were performing \"Miss Nickelodeon,\" a composition that spoofs the indigenous peoples of the Americas.\nFriedman and his band taped an \"Austin City Limits\" show on November 11, 1975, which was never aired. According to the show's executive producer, Terry Lickona, this is the first and only time in the show's long history that an episode went unaired. Lickona told the \"Austin Chronicle\" \"I've seen it many times \u2013 it's a very popular party tape among friends. I think it was a great show, and it might be as offensive today as it was back then.\"\nIn early 1976, he joined Bob Dylan on the second leg of the Rolling Thunder Revue tour.\nFriedman was the musical guest on the Season 2 fifth episode of \"Saturday Night Live\" which aired on October 23, 1976. He performed his own composition \"Dear Abbie\".\nAlthough hard to verify, given the number of Jewish-origin entertainers in country/hillbilly-tour circles (e.g. Gilbert Maxwell \"Broncho Billy\" Anderson), Friedman claims to have been the first full-blooded Jew to take the stage at the Grand Ole Opry.\nIn February 2007, Sustain Records released a compilation of the songs of Kinky Friedman sung by other artists called \"Why the Hell Not ...\" The compilation includes contributions by Dwight Yoakam, Willie Nelson, Lyle Lovett, and Kelly Willis.\nOn July 20, 2007, Friedman hosted the Concert to Save Town Lake to honor the memory of Lady Bird Johnson and her efforts to protect and preserve the shores of Town Lake in Austin, Texas.\nOn April 27, 2011, Friedman launched his Springtime for Kinky Tour (cf. \"Springtime for Hitler\") in Kansas City, Missouri, at Knuckleheads Saloon; it included dates in Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Kentucky before heading towards the East Coast. This was followed by a tour of Australia with Van Dyke Parks.\nWriting career.\nAfter his music career stalled in the 1980s, Friedman shifted his creative focus to writing detective novels. His books have similarities to his song lyrics, featuring a fictionalized version of himself solving crimes in New York City and dispensing jokes, wisdom, recipes, charm, and Jameson's whiskey in equal measure. They are written in a straightforward style which owes a debt to Raymond Chandler. The Kinky character views himself as a latter-day Sherlock Holmes and he is aided in his investigations by his close friend Larry Sloman aka Ratso who assumes the role of Dr. Watson.\nHe authored two novels that do not star the Kinky Friedman character: \"Kill Two Birds and Get Stoned\" and \"The Christmas Pig.\"\nFriedman also wrote a regular column for the magazine \"Texas Monthly\" from April 2001 to March 2005 which was suspended during his run for governor of Texas. In 2008, \"Texas Monthly\" brought his column back on a bimonthly basis.\nTwo books have been published collecting some of these nonfiction writings, as well as previously unpublished ones: \"Scuse Me While I Whip This Out\" and \"Texas Hold'em\". He has also published a travelog (\"The Great Psychedelic Armadillo Picnic\") and an etiquette guide.\nFriedman's early books have been republished by Friedman's own Vandam Press as ebooks. During March and April 2011, Vandam released seven of Friedman's early titles including: \"Greenwich Killing Time, A Case of Lone Star, Musical Chairs, When The Cat's Away, Frequent Flyer, Roadkill\" and the rarely seen \"Curse of the Missing Puppet Head\". \"Elvis Jesus and Coca-Cola, God Bless John Wayne, Blast From The Past, Armadillos and Old Lace\", and two nonfiction books, \"Drinker With A Writing Problem\" and \"Heroes of A Texas Childhood\" were released in 2011. E-book releases are announced on Friedman's X (Twitter) feed and Facebook page, \"TheRealKinkster\".\nFriedman also announced (via Jim Bessman's column at examiner.com) the upcoming release of all Vandam Press titles as unabridged audio books \"read by the author\".\nThe recurring character \"Rambam\", a New York private investigator and friend of the Friedman character in the books, is based on the real-life investigator Steven Rambam, who acted as a technical advisor for the real Friedman. Old Peace Corps friend and long time road manager Dylan Ferrero is also a recurring character in Kinky's mystery novels; his character is known for only speaking in rock and roll quotes, a trait taken from real life.\nPolitics.\nIn 1986, Friedman ran for justice of the peace in Kerrville, Texas, as a Republican but lost the election.\nIn 2004, Friedman began an ostensibly serious, though colorful, campaign to become the governor of Texas in 2006. One of his stated goals is the \"dewussification\" of Texas. Among his campaign slogans were \"How Hard Could It Be?\", \"Why The Hell Not?\", \"My Governor is a Jewish Cowboy\", and \"He ain't Kinky, he's my Governor\" (cf. \"He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother\").\nFriedman had hoped to follow in the footsteps of other entertainers-turned-governors, including Jimmie Davis, Jesse Ventura, Arnold Schwarzenegger, and Ronald Reagan. Jesse Ventura even campaigned with Friedman for his election. When the campaign finance reports came out after the second quarter had ended, Friedman had raised more funds than the Democratic nominee, former Congressman Chris Bell.\nOn election day, Friedman was defeated, receiving 12.6% of the votes in the six-candidate matchup.\nFriedman released a statement on October 15, 2013, announcing his intent to again run for Texas agriculture commissioner as a Democrat. Friedman previously ran for the post in 2010, losing in the Democratic primary.\nIssues and positions.\nFriedman supported the full legalization and cultivation of hemp and marijuana, declaring that the end of the prohibition is a health, education funding, prison reduction, border security, and state's rights issue.\nOn education, he supported higher pay for teachers and working to lower Texas's dropout rate. He supported more investment in harnessing Texas's alternative fuel resources such as wind and biodiesel. Friedman was opposed to the Trans-Texas Corridor since it relies on toll road construction.\nFriedman supported capital punishment reform. He previously summed up his position, \"I am not anti-death penalty, but I'm damn sure anti-the-wrong-guy-getting-executed.\" He later clarified his position: \"The system is not perfect. Until it's perfect, let's do away with the death penalty.\"\nOn illegal immigration, Friedman wanted to increase the number of Texas National Guard troops on the border (from the current 1,500 to 10,000), impose $25,000 and $50,000 fines on companies that hire illegal immigrants, and require foreign nationals seeking employment to purchase a foreign taxpayer ID card once they have passed a criminal background check. \"Texas can no longer wait for our federal government to solve our illegal immigration problem,\" Friedman said. \"These are steps that Texas can immediately take to help stem the tide of illegal immigrants penetrating our border.\" Had he been elected, he had promised to meet regularly with Governor Bill Richardson of New Mexico and Governor Janet Napolitano of Arizona to develop a coordinated border state plan to supplement federal efforts to curb illegal immigration. Previously, Kinky put forth the \"Five Mexican Generals\" Plan, to pay Mexican officials to halt immigration on their side of the border. Although he originally stated \"When I talk about the five Mexican generals, people think I'm joking but I'm dead serious\", Friedman later told the \"Dallas Morning News\" that the plan, never meant to be carried out, was a joke with an element of seriousness.\nAccording to his official website, Friedman's answer to the question \"How does Kinky feel about abortion?\" was \"Kinky believes in a woman's right to choose.\" In person, he hedged his bets, saying \"I'm not pro-life, and I'm not pro-choice. I'm pro-football.\" On social issues, he supported gay marriage, answering an Associated Press reporter's question on the subject on February 3, 2005, by saying, \"I support gay marriage. I believe they have a right to be as miserable as the rest of us.\" (Friedman himself never married.)\nAccording to \"Cigar Aficionado\" magazine, Friedman planned to roll back \"any and all smoking bans\" if elected. One of his favorite quotes came from Mark Twain: \"If smoking is not allowed in heaven, I shall not go.\" Friedman supported the decriminalization of marijuana, though he did not advocate making its sale legal. \"I'm not talking about like Amsterdam,\" he noted, \"We've got to clear some of the room out of the prisons so we can put the bad guys in there, like the pedophiles and the politicians.\"\nFurther political activities.\nOn August 9, 2007, the \"Austin American-Statesman\" reported that Friedman was considering another run for governor of Texas in 2010. \"I'm open to running\", Friedman said, adding that he would not make a final decision until after the 2008 elections. On February 10, 2009, Friedman confirmed to the Associated Press that he was still interested in running.\nIn an August 23, 2007 interview with the \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\" and a February 10, 2009 interview with the Associated Press, Friedman stated that if he did run in 2010, he would run as a Democrat, citing that \"God probably couldn't have won as an independent\" and that he was a Democrat all his life.\nOn April 14, 2009, Friedman announced in an email to supporters that he intended to make a second gubernatorial run, this time as a Democrat. Friedman then announced on December 14, 2009, that he was leaving the gubernatorial race and would instead seek the party nomination in March 2010 for Texas Agriculture Commissioner. He lost the nomination to rancher Hank Gilbert in the primary held on March 2, 2010.\nOther work and references in popular culture.\nFriedman appeared in the 2004 documentary film \"Barbecue: A Texas Love Story\" by Austin-based director Chris Elley. In the film, narrated by Governor Ann Richards, Kinky exclaims that \"Jesus loved Barbecue\" and analyzes the speech patterns of Texans versus New Yorkers. Raw footage from Friedman's interview appears in the 2005 DVD release of the film. \nFriedman's first movie appearance was in \"Record City\" (1977). He appeared in other movies as well, including \"Loose Shoes\" (1978) (also known as Coming Attractions and Quackers) and \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2\" (1986).\nFriedman's persona as a politically incorrect raconteur has been likened to that of movie critic and commentator John Irving Bloom, better known in print as Joe Bob Briggs, with whom he appeared in the B movie \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2\".\nFriedman preferred to smoke Montecristo No. 2 Cigars, the same brand once smoked by Fidel Castro. However, he also smoked Bolivars, noting that \"Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar is the only person in history to be exiled from a country named after him.\" Friedman later made eponymous cigars under the name Kinky Friedman Cigars.\nFriedman was given brief praise in Joseph Heller's 1976 novel, \"Good as Gold\", in which a governor (meant to satirize Lyndon B. Johnson), tells the main character, Bruce Gold: \"Gold, I like you. You remind me a lot of this famous country singer from Texas I'm crazy about, a fellow calls himself Kinky Friedman, the Original Texas Jewboy. Kinky's smarter, but I like you more.\"\nFriedman was friends with Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, and he visited both at the White House. He wrote about his friendships with them in his November 2001 column (\"Hail to the Kinkster\") for \"Texas Monthly\".\nThe play \"Becoming Kinky: The World According to Kinky Friedman\", directed by Ted Swindley (\"Always...Patsy Cline\"), starring Jesse Dayton, Little Jewford, Alan Lee, and Andross Bautsch, premiered in Houston, Texas on March 28, 2011.\nFriedman was responsible for the quote \"you've got to find what you love and let it kill you,\" which is often falsely attributed to the poet and novelist Charles Bukowski.\nFriedman hosted the live concert music television show \"Texas Roadhouse Live\" around 2011, which would air on over-the-air network television late Saturday night (or midnight Sunday morning) in some Texas markets.\nOn the 2017 album entitled \"Out of All This Blue\", Mike Scott of The Waterboys composed a song called \"Kinky's History Lesson\" where the singer attempts to correct Friedman on a number of false statements he has allegedly made.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16734", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16734", "title": "Kurt Goedel", "text": ""}
{"id": "16736", "revid": "50938160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16736", "title": "Kurt G\u00f6del", "text": "Mathematical logician and philosopher (1906\u20131978)\nKurt Friedrich G\u00f6del ( ; ; April 28, 1906\u00a0\u2013 January 14, 1978) was a logician, mathematician, and philosopher. Considered along with Aristotle and Gottlob Frege to be one of the most significant logicians in history, G\u00f6del profoundly influenced scientific and philosophical thinking in the 20th century (at a time when Bertrand Russell, Alfred North Whitehead, and David Hilbert were using logic and set theory to investigate the foundations of mathematics), building on earlier work by Frege, Richard Dedekind, and Georg Cantor.\nG\u00f6del's discoveries in the foundations of mathematics led to the proof of his completeness theorem in 1929 as part of his dissertation to earn a doctorate at the University of Vienna, and the publication of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems two years later, in 1931. The incompleteness theorems address limitations of formal axiomatic systems. In particular, they imply that a formal axiomatic system satisfying certain technical conditions cannot decide the truth value of all statements about the natural numbers, and cannot prove that it is itself consistent. To prove this, G\u00f6del developed a technique now known as G\u00f6del numbering, which codes formal expressions as natural numbers.\nG\u00f6del also showed that neither the axiom of choice nor the continuum hypothesis can be disproved from the accepted Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, assuming that its axioms are consistent. The former result opened the door for mathematicians to assume the axiom of choice in their proofs. He also made important contributions to proof theory by clarifying the connections between classical logic, intuitionistic logic, and modal logic.\nBorn into a wealthy German-speaking family in Brno, G\u00f6del emigrated to the United States in 1939 to escape the rise of Nazi Germany. Later in life, he suffered from mental illness, which ultimately claimed his life: believing that his food was being poisoned, he refused to eat and starved to death.\nEarly life and education.\nChildhood.\nG\u00f6del was born on 28 April 1906, in Br\u00fcnn, Austria-Hungary (now Brno, Czech Republic), into the German-speaking family of Rudolf G\u00f6del, the managing director and part owner of a major textile firm, and Marianne G\u00f6del (n\u00e9e Handschuh). His father was Catholic and his mother was Protestant, and the children were raised as Protestants. Many of Kurt G\u00f6del's ancestors were active in Br\u00fcnn's cultural life. For example, his grandfather Joseph G\u00f6del was a famous singer in his time and for some years a member of the (Men's Choral Union of Br\u00fcnn).\nG\u00f6del automatically became a citizen of Czechoslovakia at age 12 when the Austro-Hungarian Empire collapsed following its defeat in the First World War. According to his classmate , like many residents of the predominantly German , \"G\u00f6del considered himself always Austrian and an exile in Czechoslovakia\". In February 1929, he was granted release from his Czechoslovak citizenship and then, in April, granted Austrian citizenship. When Germany annexed Austria in 1938, G\u00f6del automatically became a German citizen at age 32. In 1948, after World War II, at age 42, he became a U.S. citizen.\nIn his family, the young G\u00f6del was nicknamed (\"Mr. Why\") because of his insatiable curiosity. According to his brother Rudolf, at the age of six or seven, Kurt suffered from rheumatic fever; he completely recovered, but remained convinced for the rest of his life that his heart had been permanently damaged. Beginning at age four, G\u00f6del had \"frequent episodes of poor health\", which continued all his life.\nG\u00f6del attended the , a Lutheran school in Br\u00fcnn, from 1912 to 1916, and was enrolled in the from 1916 to 1924, excelling with honors in all subjects, particularly mathematics, languages, and religion. Although he had first excelled in languages, he became more interested in history and mathematics. His interest in mathematics increased when in 1920 his older brother Rudolf left for Vienna, where he attended medical school at the University of Vienna. During his teens, G\u00f6del studied Gabelsberger shorthand, criticism of Isaac Newton, and the writings of Immanuel Kant.\nStudies in Vienna.\nAt age 18, G\u00f6del joined his brother at the University of Vienna. He had already mastered university-level mathematics. Although initially intending to study theoretical physics, he also attended courses on mathematics and philosophy. During this time, he adopted ideas of mathematical realism. He read Kant's , and participated in the Vienna Circle with Moritz Schlick, Hans Hahn, and Rudolf Carnap. G\u00f6del then studied number theory, but when he took part in a seminar run by Moritz Schlick that studied Bertrand Russell's book \"Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy\", he became interested in mathematical logic. According to G\u00f6del, mathematical logic was \"a science prior to all others, which contains the ideas and principles underlying all sciences.\"\nAttending a lecture by David Hilbert in Bologna on completeness and consistency in mathematical systems may have set G\u00f6del's life course. In 1928, Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann published (\"Principles of Mathematical Logic\"), an introduction to first-order logic in which the problem of completeness was posed: \"Are the axioms of a formal system sufficient to derive every statement that is true in all models of the system?\"\nG\u00f6del chose this topic for his doctoral work. In 1929, aged 23, he completed his doctoral dissertation under Hans Hahn's supervision. In it, he established his eponymous completeness theorem regarding first-order logic. He was awarded his doctorate in 1930, and his thesis (accompanied by additional work) was published by the Vienna Academy of Science.\nIn 1929 G\u00f6del met Adele Nimbursky (n\u00e9e Porkert), a divorcee living with her parents across the street from him. The two married (in a civil ceremony) a decade later, in September 1938. A trained ballet dancer, Adele was working as a masseuse at the time they met. At one point she worked as a dancer at a downtown nightclub called the \"Nachtfalter\" (\"nocturnal moth\"). G\u00f6del's parents opposed their relationship because of her background and age (six years older than him). It appears to have been a happy marriage. Adele was an important support to G\u00f6del, whose psychological problems affected their daily lives. The two had no children.\nCareer.\nIncompleteness theorems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Kurt G\u00f6del's achievement in modern logic is singular and monumental\u2014indeed it is more than a monument, it is a landmark which will remain visible far in space and time. ... The subject of logic has certainly completely changed its nature and possibilities with G\u00f6del's achievement.\u2014\u200a\nIn 1930 G\u00f6del attended the Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences, held in K\u00f6nigsberg on 5\u20137 September. There, he presented his completeness theorem of first-order logic, and, at the end of the talk, mentioned that this result does not generalise to higher-order logic, thus hinting at his incompleteness theorems.\nG\u00f6del published his incompleteness theorems in (called in English \"On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems\"). In that article, he proved for any computable axiomatic system powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers (e.g., the Peano axioms or Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice), that:\nThese theorems ended a half-century of attempts, beginning with the work of Frege and culminating in and Hilbert's program, to find a non-relatively consistent axiomatization sufficient for number theory (that was to serve as the foundation for other fields of mathematics).\nG\u00f6del constructed a formula that claims it is itself unprovable in a given formal system. If it were provable, it would be false. Thus there will always be at least one true but unprovable statement. That is, for any computably enumerable set of axioms for arithmetic (that is, a set that can in principle be printed out by an idealized computer with unlimited resources), there is a formula that is true of arithmetic, but not provable in that system. To make this precise, G\u00f6del had to produce a method to encode (as natural numbers) statements, proofs, and the concept of provability; he did this by a process known as G\u00f6del numbering.\nIn his two-page paper (1932), G\u00f6del refuted the finite-valuedness of intuitionistic logic. In the proof, he implicitly used what has later become known as G\u00f6del\u2013Dummett intermediate logic (or G\u00f6del fuzzy logic).\nMid-1930s: further work and U.S. visits.\nG\u00f6del earned his habilitation at Vienna in 1932, and in 1933 became a (unpaid lecturer) there. In 1933, Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany, and over the following years the Nazis rose in influence in Austria and among Vienna's mathematicians. In June 1936, Moritz Schlick, whose seminar had aroused G\u00f6del's interest in logic, was murdered by one of his former students, Johann Nelb\u00f6ck. This triggered \"a severe nervous crisis\" in G\u00f6del. He developed paranoid symptoms, including a fear of being poisoned, and spent several months in a sanitarium for nervous diseases.\nIn 1933, G\u00f6del first traveled to the U.S., where he met Albert Einstein, who became a good friend. He delivered an address to the annual meeting of the American Mathematical Society. During this year, G\u00f6del also developed the ideas of computability and recursive functions to the point where he was able to present a lecture on general recursive functions and the concept of truth. This work was developed in number theory, using G\u00f6del numbering.\nIn 1934, G\u00f6del gave a series of lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton, New Jersey, titled \"On undecidable propositions of formal mathematical systems\". Stephen Kleene, who had just completed his PhD at Princeton, took notes on these lectures that were later published.\nG\u00f6del visited the IAS again in the autumn of 1935. The traveling and hard work had exhausted him and the next year he took a break to recover from a depressive episode. He returned to teaching in 1937. During this time, he worked on the proof of consistency of the axiom of choice and of the continuum hypothesis; he went on to show that these hypotheses cannot be disproved from the common system of axioms of set theory.\nAfter marrying Adele Nimbursky in 1938, he visited the U.S. again, spending the autumn of 1938 at the IAS and publishing \"Consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum-hypothesis with the axioms of set theory\", a classic of modern mathematics. In it, he introduced the constructible universe, a model of set theory in which the only sets that exist are those that can be constructed from simpler sets. G\u00f6del showed that both the axiom of choice (AC) and the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) are true in the constructible universe, and therefore must be consistent with the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms for set theory (ZF). This result has considerable consequences for working mathematicians, as it means they can assume the axiom of choice when proving the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem. Paul Cohen later constructed a model of ZF in which AC and GCH are false; together these proofs mean that AC and GCH are independent of the ZF axioms for set theory.\nG\u00f6del spent the spring of 1939 at the University of Notre Dame.\nPrinceton, Einstein, U.S. citizenship.\nAfter the Anschluss on 12 March 1938, Austria became a part of Nazi Germany. Germany abolished the title , so G\u00f6del had to apply for a different position under the new order. His former association with Jewish members of the Vienna Circle, especially Hahn, weighed against him. The University of Vienna turned his application down.\nHis predicament worsened when the German army found him fit for conscription. World War II started in September 1939. Before the year was up, G\u00f6del and his wife left Vienna for Princeton. To avoid the difficulty of an Atlantic crossing, the G\u00f6dels took the Trans-Siberian Railway to the Pacific, sailed from Japan to San Francisco (which they reached on March 4, 1940), then traveled to Princeton by train. During this trip, G\u00f6del was supposed to be carrying a secret letter to Einstein from Viennese physicist Hans Thirring to alert President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the possibility that Hitler was making an atom bomb. G\u00f6del never conveyed that letter to Einstein, although they did meet, because he was not convinced Hitler could achieve this feat. In any case, Leo Szilard had already conveyed the message to Einstein, and Einstein had already warned Roosevelt.\nIn Princeton, G\u00f6del accepted a position at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), which he had visited during 1933\u201334.\nEinstein was also living in Princeton during this time. G\u00f6del and Einstein developed a strong friendship, and were known to take long walks together to and from the IAS. The nature of their conversations was a mystery to the other Institute members. Economist Oskar Morgenstern recounts that toward the end of Einstein's life, Einstein confided that his \"own work no longer meant much, that he came to the Institute merely ... to have the privilege of walking home with G\u00f6del\".\nG\u00f6del and his wife spent the summer of 1942 in Blue Hill, Maine, at the Blue Hill Inn at the top of the bay. G\u00f6del had a very productive summer of work. Using [volume 15] of G\u00f6del's still-unpublished [working notebooks], John W. Dawson Jr. conjectures that G\u00f6del discovered a proof for the independence of the axiom of choice from finite type theory, a weakened form of set theory, while in Blue Hill in 1942. G\u00f6del's close friend Hao Wang supports this conjecture, noting that G\u00f6del's Blue Hill notebooks contain his most extensive treatment of the problem.\nOn 5 December 1947, Einstein and Morgenstern accompanied G\u00f6del to his U.S. citizenship exam, where they acted as witnesses. G\u00f6del had confided in them that he had discovered an inconsistency in the U.S. Constitution that could allow the U.S. to become a dictatorship; this has since been dubbed G\u00f6del's Loophole. Einstein and Morgenstern were concerned that their friend's unpredictable behavior might jeopardize his application. The judge turned out to be Phillip Forman, who knew Einstein and had administered the oath at Einstein's own citizenship hearing. Everything went smoothly until Forman happened to ask G\u00f6del if he thought a dictatorship like the Nazi regime could happen in the U.S. G\u00f6del then started to explain his discovery to Forman. Forman understood what was going on, cut G\u00f6del off, and moved the hearing on to other questions and a routine conclusion.\nG\u00f6del became a permanent member of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton in 1946. He became a full professor at the Institute in 1953 and an emeritus professor in 1976.\nDuring his time at the institute, G\u00f6del's interests turned to philosophy and physics. In 1949, he demonstrated the existence of solutions involving closed timelike curves, to Einstein's field equations in general relativity. He is said to have given this elaboration to Einstein as a present for his 70th birthday. His \"rotating universes\" would allow time travel to the past and caused Einstein to have doubts about his own theory. His solutions are known as the G\u00f6del metric (an exact solution of the Einstein field equation).\nG\u00f6del studied and admired the work of Gottfried Leibniz, but came to believe that a hostile conspiracy had caused some of Leibniz's work to be suppressed. To a lesser extent he studied Kant and Edmund Husserl. In the early 1970s, G\u00f6del circulated among his friends an elaboration of Leibniz's version of Anselm of Canterbury's ontological argument for God's existence. This is now known as G\u00f6del's ontological proof.\nAwards and honours.\nG\u00f6del was awarded (with Julian Schwinger) the first Albert Einstein Award in 1951 and the National Medal of Science in 1974. G\u00f6del was elected a resident member of the American Philosophical Society in 1961 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1968. He was a Plenary Speaker at the ICM in 1950 in Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nPersonal life and death.\nG\u00f6del married Adele in Vienna in 1938, and they emigrated a year later to the US.\nIn his later life, G\u00f6del suffered periods of mental instability and illness. Some scholars have suggested Asperger syndrome and obsessive-compulsive disorder as diagnoses. After his close friend Moritz Schlick was murdered, G\u00f6del developed an obsessive fear of being poisoned, and ate only food prepared by his wife, Adele. Adele was hospitalized beginning in late 1977, and in her absence G\u00f6del refused to eat; he weighed when he died of \"malnutrition and inanition caused by personality disturbance\" in Princeton Hospital on 14 January 1978. He was buried in Princeton Cemetery. Adele died in 1981, donating G\u00f6del's papers to the Institute for Advanced Study upon her death.\nReligious views.\nG\u00f6del believed that God was personal, and called his philosophy \"rationalistic, idealistic, optimistic, and theological\". He formulated a draft of formal proof of God's existence known as G\u00f6del's ontological proof.\nG\u00f6del believed in an afterlife, saying, \"Of course this supposes that there are many relationships which today's science and received wisdom haven't any inkling of. But I am convinced of this [the afterlife], independently of any theology.\" It is \"possible today to perceive, by pure reasoning\" that it \"is entirely consistent with known facts.\" \"If the world is rationally constructed and has meaning, then there must be such a thing [as an afterlife].\" He also read widely on other paranormal topics, including telepathy, reincarnation, and ghosts.\nIn an unmailed answer to a questionnaire, G\u00f6del described his religion as \"baptized Lutheran (but not member of any religious congregation). My belief is \"theistic\", not pantheistic, following Leibniz rather than Spinoza.\" Of religion(s) in general, he said: \"Religions are for the most part bad, but not religion itself.\" According to his wife, Adele, \"G\u00f6del, although he did not go to church, was religious and read the Bible in bed every Sunday morning\", while of Islam, he said, \"I like Islam: it is a consistent [or consequential] idea of religion and open-minded.\"\nLegacy.\nDouglas Hofstadter's 1979 book interweaves the work and ideas of G\u00f6del, M. C. Escher, and Johann Sebastian Bach. It partly explores the ramifications of the fact that G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem can be applied to any Turing-complete computational system, which may include the human brain. In 2005, John W. Dawson Jr. published a biography, \"Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt G\u00f6del\". That year, Rebecca Goldstein published \"Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt G\u00f6del\" as part of the Great Discoveries series. Stephen Budiansky's G\u00f6del's biography, \"Journey to the Edge of Reason: The Life of Kurt G\u00f6del\", was a \"New York Times\" Critics' Top Book of 2021. G\u00f6del was one of four mathematicians examined in David Malone's 2008 BBC documentary \"Dangerous Knowledge\".\nThe Kurt G\u00f6del Society, founded in 1987, is an international organization for the promotion of research in logic, philosophy, and the history of mathematics. The University of Vienna hosts the Kurt G\u00f6del Research Center for Mathematical Logic. The Association for Symbolic Logic has held an annual G\u00f6del Lecture since 1990. The G\u00f6del Prize is given annually to an outstanding paper in theoretical computer science. G\u00f6del's philosophical notebooks are being edited at the Kurt G\u00f6del Research Centre at the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities. Five volumes of G\u00f6del's collected works have been published. The first two include his publications; the third includes unpublished manuscripts from his , and the final two include correspondence.\nIn the 1994 film \"I.Q.\", Lou Jacobi portrays G\u00f6del. In the 2023 movie \"Oppenheimer\", G\u00f6del, played by James Urbaniak, briefly appears walking with Einstein in the gardens of Princeton.\nBibliography.\nImportant publications.\nIn German:\nIn English:\nIn English translation:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16737", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16737", "title": "Keynsian", "text": ""}
{"id": "16742", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16742", "title": "Kirchhoff's current law", "text": ""}
{"id": "16743", "revid": "48729834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16743", "title": "Karl Marx", "text": "German philosopher (1818\u20131883)\nKarl Marx (; 5 May 1818 \u2013 14 March 1883) was a German philosopher, political theorist, economist, journalist, and revolutionary socialist. He is best-known for the 1848 pamphlet \"The Communist Manifesto\" (written with Friedrich Engels), and his three-volume (1867\u20131894), a critique of classical political economy which employs his theory of historical materialism in an analysis of capitalism, in the culmination of his life's work. Marx's ideas and their subsequent development, collectively known as Marxism, have had enormous influence.\nBorn in Trier in the Kingdom of Prussia, Marx studied at the University of Bonn and the University of Berlin, and received a doctoral degree in philosophy from the University of Jena in 1841. A Young Hegelian, he was influenced by the philosophy of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, and both critiqued and developed Hegel's ideas in works such as \"The German Ideology\" (written 1846) and the \"Grundrisse\" (written 1857\u20131858). While in Paris, Marx wrote his \"Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844\" and met Engels, who became his closest friend and collaborator. After moving to Brussels in 1845, they were active in the Communist League, and in 1848 they wrote \"The Communist Manifesto\", which expresses Marx's ideas and lays out a programme for revolution. Marx was expelled from Belgium and Germany, and in 1849 moved to London, where he wrote \"The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte\" (1852) and . From 1864, Marx was involved in the International Workingmen's Association (First International), in which he fought the influence of anarchists led by Mikhail Bakunin. In his \"Critique of the Gotha Programme\" (1875), Marx wrote on revolution, the state and the transition to communism. He died stateless in 1883 and was buried in Highgate Cemetery.\nMarx's critiques of history, society and political economy hold that human societies develop through class conflict. In the capitalist mode of production, this manifests itself in the conflict between the ruling classes (the bourgeoisie) that control the means of production and the working classes (the proletariat) that enable these means by selling their labour power for wages. Employing his historical materialist approach, Marx predicted that capitalism produced internal tensions like previous socioeconomic systems and that these tensions would lead to its self-destruction and replacement by a new system known as the socialist mode of production. For Marx, class antagonisms under capitalism\u2014owing in part to its instability and crisis-prone nature\u2014would eventuate the working class's development of class consciousness, leading to their conquest of political power and eventually the establishment of a classless, communist society constituted by a free association of producers. Marx actively pressed for its implementation, arguing that the working class should carry out organised proletarian revolutionary action to topple capitalism and bring about socio-economic emancipation.\nMarx has been described as one of the most influential figures of the modern era, and his work has been both lauded and criticised. Marxism has exerted major influence on socialist thought and political movements, with Marxist schools of thought such as Marxism\u2013Leninism and its offshoots becoming the guiding ideologies of revolutions that took power in many countries during the 20th century, forming communist states. Marx's work in economics has had a strong influence on modern heterodox theories of labour and capital, and he is often cited as one of the principal architects of modern sociology.\nBiography.\nChildhood and early education: 1818\u20131836.\nKarl Marx was born on 5 May 1818 to Heinrich Marx and Henriette Pressburg, at Br\u00fcckengasse 664 in Trier, then part of the Kingdom of Prussia. Marx's family was originally non-religious Jewish but had converted formally to Christianity before his birth. His maternal grandfather was a Dutch rabbi, while his paternal line had supplied Trier's rabbis since 1723, a role taken by his grandfather Meier Halevi Marx. His father was the first in the line to receive a secular education. He became a lawyer with a comfortably upper middle class income and the family owned a number of Moselle vineyards, in addition to his income as an attorney. After Prussia's annexation of the Rhineland in 1815 and the subsequent abrogation of Jewish emancipation, Heinrich converted from Judaism to the state Evangelical Church of Prussia in order to retain his career as a lawyer.\nLargely non-religious, Heinrich was a man of the Enlightenment, interested in the ideas of the philosophers Immanuel Kant and Voltaire. A classical liberal, he took part in agitation for a constitution and reforms in Prussia, which was then an absolute monarchy. In 1815, Heinrich Marx began working as an attorney and in 1819 moved his family to a ten-room property near the Porta Nigra. His wife, Henriette Pressburg, was a Dutch Jew from a prosperous business family that later founded the company Philips Electronics. Her sister Sophie Pressburg married Lion Philips and was the grandmother of both Gerard and Anton Philips and great-grandmother to Frits Philips. Lion Philips was a wealthy Dutch tobacco manufacturer and industrialist, upon whom Karl and Jenny Marx would later often come to rely for loans while they were exiled in London.\nLittle is known of Marx's childhood. The third of nine children, he became the eldest son when his brother Moritz died in 1819. Marx and his surviving siblings were baptised into the Lutheran Church on 28 August 1824, and their mother in November 1825. Marx was privately educated by his father until 1830 when he entered Trier High School (Trier High School), whose headmaster, Hugo Wyttenbach, was a friend of his father. By employing many liberal humanists as teachers, Wyttenbach incurred the anger of the local conservative government. In 1832, police raided the school and discovered that literature promoting political liberalism was being distributed among the students. Viewing the distribution of such material as a seditious act, the authorities implemented reforms and replaced several members of the staff during Marx's time at the school.\nIn October 1835 at the age of 16, Marx travelled to the University of Bonn wishing to study philosophy and literature, but his father insisted on law as a more practical field. Due to a condition referred to as a \"weak chest\", Marx was excused from military duty when he turned 18. While at the University at Bonn, Marx joined the Poets' Club, a group containing political radicals that were monitored by the police. Marx also joined the Trier Tavern Club drinking society and at one point served as the club's co-president. In August 1836 he took part in a duel with a member of the university's Borussian Korps. Although his grades in the first term were good, they soon deteriorated, leading his father to force a transfer to the more serious and academic University of Berlin.\nHegelianism and early journalism: 1836\u20131843.\nSpending summer and autumn 1836 in Trier, Marx became more serious about his studies and his life. He became engaged to Jenny von Westphalen, an educated member of the petty nobility who had known Marx since childhood. As she had broken off her engagement with a young aristocrat to be with Marx, their relationship was socially controversial owing to the differences between their religious and class origins, but Marx befriended her father Ludwig von Westphalen (a liberal aristocrat) and later dedicated his doctoral thesis to him. Seven years after their engagement, on 19 June 1843, they married in a Protestant church in Kreuznach.\nIn October 1836, Marx arrived in Berlin, matriculating in the university's faculty of law and renting a room in the Mittelstrasse. During the first term, Marx attended lectures of Eduard Gans (who represented the progressive Hegelian standpoint, elaborated on rational development in history by emphasising particularly its libertarian aspects, and the importance of social question) and of Karl von Savigny (who represented the Historical School of Law). Although studying law, he was fascinated by philosophy and looked for a way to combine the two, believing that \"without philosophy nothing could be accomplished\". Marx became interested in the recently deceased German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, whose ideas were then widely debated among European philosophical circles. During a convalescence in Stralau, he joined the Doctors Club, a student group which discussed Hegelian ideas, and through them became involved with a group of radical thinkers known as the Young Hegelians in 1837. They gathered around Ludwig Feuerbach and Bruno Bauer, with Marx developing a particularly close friendship with Adolf Rutenberg. Like Marx, the Young Hegelians were critical of Hegel's metaphysical assumptions but adopted his dialectical method to criticise established society, politics and religion from a left-wing perspective. Marx's father died in May 1838, resulting in a diminished income for the family. Marx had been emotionally close to his father and treasured his memory after his death.\nBy 1837, Marx had completed a short novel, \"Scorpion and Felix\"; a drama, \"Oulanem\"; and a number of love poems dedicated to his wife. None of this early work was published during his lifetime. The love poems were published posthumously in the \"Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 1\". Marx soon abandoned fiction for other pursuits, including the study of English and Italian, art history and the translation of Latin classics. He began co-operating with Bruno Bauer on editing Hegel's \"Philosophy of Religion\" in 1840. Marx was also engaged in writing his doctoral thesis, \"The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature\", which he completed in 1841. It was described as \"a daring and original piece of work in which Marx set out to show that theology must yield to the superior wisdom of philosophy\". The essay was controversial, particularly among the conservative professors at the University of Berlin. Marx decided instead to submit his thesis to the more liberal University of Jena, whose faculty awarded him his Ph.D. in April 1841. As Marx and Bauer were both atheists, in March 1841 they began plans for a journal entitled (\"Atheistic Archives\"), but it never came to fruition. In July, Marx and Bauer took a trip to Bonn from Berlin. There they scandalised their class by getting drunk, laughing in church and galloping through the streets on donkeys.\nMarx was considering an academic career, but this path was barred by the government's growing opposition to classical liberalism and the Young Hegelians. Marx moved to Cologne in 1842, where he became a journalist, writing for the radical newspaper (\"Rhineland News\"), expressing his early views on socialism and his developing interest in economics. Marx criticised right-wing European governments as well as figures in the liberal and socialist movements, whom he thought ineffective or counter-productive. The newspaper attracted the attention of the Prussian government censors, who checked every issue for seditious material before printing, which Marx lamented: \"Our newspaper has to be presented to the police to be sniffed at, and if the police nose smells anything un-Christian or un-Prussian, the newspaper is not allowed to appear\". After the published an article strongly criticising the Russian monarchy, Tsar Nicholas I requested it be banned, and Prussia's government complied in 1843.\nParis: 1843\u20131845.\nIn 1843, Marx became co-editor of a new, radical left-wing Parisian newspaper, the (\"German-French Annals\"), then being set up by the German activist Arnold Ruge to bring together German and French radicals. Therefore Marx and his wife moved to Paris in October 1843. Initially living with Ruge and his wife communally at 23 Rue Vaneau, they found the living conditions difficult, so moved out following the birth of their daughter Jenny in 1844. Although intended to attract writers from both France and the German states, the was dominated by the latter and the only non-German writer was the exiled Russian anarchist collectivist Mikhail Bakunin. Marx contributed two essays to the paper, \"Introduction to a Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right\" and \"On the Jewish Question\", the latter introducing his belief that the proletariat were a revolutionary force and marking his embrace of communism. Only one issue was published, but it was relatively successful, largely owing to the inclusion of Heinrich Heine's satirical odes on King Ludwig of Bavaria, leading the German states to ban it and seize imported copies (Ruge nevertheless refused to fund the publication of further issues and his friendship with Marx broke down). \nAfter \"Jahrb\u00fccher\"'s collapse, Marx began writing for (\"Forwards!\"), the only remaining uncensored German-language radical newspaper. Based in Paris, the paper was connected to the League of the Just, a utopian socialist secret society of workers and artisans. Marx attended some of their meetings but did not join. In , Marx refined his views on socialism based upon Hegelian and Feuerbachian ideas of dialectical materialism, at the same time criticising liberals and other socialists operating in Europe.\nOn 28 August 1844, Marx met the German socialist Friedrich Engels at the Caf\u00e9 de la R\u00e9gence, beginning a lifelong friendship. Engels showed Marx his recently published \"The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844\", convincing Marx that the working class would be the agent and instrument of the final revolution in history. Soon, Marx and Engels were collaborating on a criticism of the philosophical ideas of Marx's former friend, Bruno Bauer. This work was published in 1845 as \"The Holy Family\". Although critical of Bauer, Marx was increasingly influenced by the ideas of the Young Hegelians Max Stirner and Ludwig Feuerbach, but eventually Marx and Engels abandoned Feuerbachian materialism as well.\nDuring the time that he lived at 38 Rue Vaneau in Paris (from October 1843 until January 1845), Marx engaged in an intensive study of political economy (Adam Smith, David Ricardo, James Mill, \"etc.\")\",\" the French socialists (especially Claude Henri St. Simon and Charles Fourier) and the history of France. The study of, and critique, of political economy is a project that Marx would pursue for the rest of his life and would result in his major economic work\u2014the three-volume series called \"Das Kapital\". Marxism is based in large part on three influences: Hegel's dialectics, French utopian socialism and British political economy. Together with his earlier study of Hegel's dialectics, the studying that Marx did during this time in Paris meant that all major components of \"Marxism\" were in place by the autumn of 1844. Marx was constantly being pulled away from his critique of political economy\u2014not only by the usual daily demands of the time, but additionally by editing a radical newspaper and later by organising and directing the efforts of a political party during years of potentially revolutionary popular uprisings of the citizenry. Still, Marx was always drawn back to his studies where he sought \"to understand the inner workings of capitalism\".\nAn outline of \"Marxism\" had definitely formed in the mind of Karl Marx by late 1844. Indeed, many features of the Marxist view of the world had been worked out in great detail, but Marx needed to write down all of the details of his world view to further clarify the new critique of political economy in his own mind. Accordingly, Marx wrote \"The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts\". These manuscripts covered numerous topics, detailing Marx's concept of alienated labour. By the spring of 1845, his continued study of political economy, capital and capitalism had led Marx to the belief that the new critique of political economy he was espousing\u2014that of scientific socialism\u2014needed to be built on the base of a thoroughly developed materialistic view of the world.\nThe \"Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844\" had been written between April and August 1844, but soon Marx recognised that the \"Manuscripts\" had been influenced by some inconsistent ideas of Ludwig Feuerbach. Accordingly, Marx recognised the need to break with Feuerbach's philosophy in favour of historical materialism, thus a year later (in April 1845) after moving from Paris to Brussels, Marx wrote his eleven \"Theses on Feuerbach\". The \"Theses on Feuerbach\" are best known for Thesis 11, which states that \"philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways, the point is to change it\". This work contains Marx's criticism of materialism (for being contemplative), idealism (for reducing practice to theory), and, overall, philosophy (for putting abstract reality above the physical world). It thus introduced the first glimpse at Marx's historical materialism, an argument that the world is changed not by ideas but by actual, physical, material activity and practice. In 1845, after receiving a request from the Prussian king, the French government shut down , with the interior minister, Fran\u00e7ois Guizot, expelling Marx from France.\nBrussels: 1845\u20131848.\nUnable either to stay in France or to move to Germany, Marx decided to emigrate to Brussels in Belgium in February 1845. However, to stay in Belgium he had to pledge not to publish anything on the subject of contemporary politics. In Brussels, Marx associated with other exiled socialists from across Europe, including Moses Hess, Karl Heinzen and Joseph Weydemeyer. In April 1845, Engels moved from Barmen in Germany to Brussels to join Marx and the growing cadre of members of the League of the Just now seeking home in Brussels. Later, Mary Burns, Engels' long-time companion, left Manchester, England to join Engels in Brussels.\nIn mid-July 1845, Marx and Engels left Brussels for England to visit the leaders of the Chartists, a working-class movement in Britain. This was Marx's first trip to England and Engels was an ideal guide for the trip. Engels had already spent two years living in Manchester from November 1842 to August 1844. Not only did Engels already know the English language, but he had also developed a close relationship with many Chartist leaders. Indeed, Engels was serving as a reporter for many Chartist and socialist English newspapers. Marx used the trip as an opportunity to examine the economic resources available for study in various libraries in London and Manchester.\nIn collaboration with Engels, Marx also set about writing a book which is often seen as his best treatment of the concept of historical materialism, \"The German Ideology\". In this work, Marx broke with Ludwig Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer, Max Stirner and the rest of the Young Hegelians, while he also broke with Karl Gr\u00fcn and other \"true socialists\" whose philosophies were still based in part on \"idealism\". In \"German Ideology\", Marx and Engels finally completed their philosophy, which was based solely on materialism as the sole motor force in history. \"German Ideology\" is written in a humorously satirical form, but even this satirical form did not save the work from censorship. Like so many other early writings of his, \"German Ideology\" would not be published in Marx's lifetime and was published only in 1932.\nAfter completing \"German Ideology\", Marx turned to a work that was intended to clarify his own position regarding \"the theory and tactics\" of a truly \"revolutionary proletarian movement\" operating from the standpoint of a truly \"scientific materialist\" philosophy. This work was intended to draw a distinction between the utopian socialists and Marx's own scientific socialist philosophy. Whereas the utopians believed that people must be persuaded one person at a time to join the socialist movement, the way a person must be persuaded to adopt any different belief, Marx knew that people would tend, on most occasions, to act in accordance with their own economic interests, thus appealing to an entire class (the working class in this case) with a broad appeal to the class's best material interest would be the best way to mobilise the broad mass of that class to make a revolution and change society. This was the intent of the new book that Marx was planning, but to get the manuscript past the government censors he called the book \"The Poverty of Philosophy\" (1847) and offered it as a response to the \"petty-bourgeois philosophy\" of the French anarchist socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon as expressed in his book \"The Philosophy of Poverty\" (1840).\nThese books laid the foundation for Marx and Engels's most famous work, a political pamphlet that has since come to be commonly known as \"The Communist Manifesto\". While residing in Brussels in 1846, Marx continued his association with the secret radical organisation League of the Just. As noted above, Marx thought the League to be just the sort of radical organisation that was needed to spur the working class of Europe toward the mass movement that would bring about a working-class revolution. However, to organise the working class into a mass movement the League had to cease its \"secret\" or \"underground\" orientation and operate in the open as a political party. Members of the League eventually became persuaded in this regard. Accordingly, in June 1847 the League was reorganised by its membership into a new open \"above ground\" political society that appealed directly to the working classes. This new open political society was called the Communist League. Both Marx and Engels participated in drawing up the programme and organisational principles of the new Communist League.\nIn late 1847, Marx and Engels began writing what was to become their most famous work\u00a0\u2013 a programme of action for the Communist League. Written jointly by Marx and Engels from December 1847 to January 1848, \"The Communist Manifesto\" was first published on 21 February 1848. \"The Communist Manifesto\" laid out the beliefs of the new Communist League. No longer a secret society, the Communist League wanted to make aims and intentions clear to the general public rather than hiding its beliefs as the League of the Just had been doing. The opening lines of the pamphlet set forth the principal basis of Marxism: \"The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles\". It goes on to examine the antagonisms that Marx claimed were arising in the clashes of interest between the bourgeoisie (the wealthy capitalist class) and the proletariat (the industrial working class). Proceeding on from this, the \"Manifesto\" presents the argument for why the Communist League, as opposed to other socialist and liberal political parties and groups at the time, was truly acting in the interests of the proletariat to overthrow capitalist society and to replace it with socialism.\nLater that year, Europe experienced a series of protests, rebellions, and often violent upheavals that became known as the Revolutions of 1848. In France, a revolution led to the overthrow of the monarchy and the establishment of the French Second Republic. Marx was supportive of such activity and having recently received a substantial inheritance from his father (withheld by his uncle Lionel Philips since his father's death in 1838) of either 6,000 or 5,000 francs he allegedly used a third of it to arm Belgian workers who were planning revolutionary action. Although the veracity of these allegations is disputed, the Belgian Ministry of Justice accused Marx of it, subsequently arresting him and he was forced to flee back to France, where with a new republican government in power he believed that he would be safe.\nCologne: 1848\u20131849.\nTemporarily settling down in Paris, Marx transferred the Communist League executive headquarters to the city and also set up a German Workers' Club with various German socialists living there. Hoping to see the revolution spread to Germany, in 1848 Marx moved back to Cologne where he began issuing a handbill entitled the \"Demands of the Communist Party in Germany\", in which he argued for only four of the ten points of the \"Communist Manifesto\", believing that in Germany at that time the bourgeoisie must overthrow the feudal monarchy and aristocracy before the proletariat could overthrow the bourgeoisie. On 1 June, Marx started the publication of a daily newspaper, the , which he helped to finance through his recent inheritance from his father. Designed to put forward news from across Europe with his own Marxist interpretation of events, the newspaper featured Marx as a primary writer and the dominant editorial influence. Despite contributions by fellow members of the Communist League, according to Friedrich Engels it remained \"a simple dictatorship by Marx\".\nWhilst editor of the paper, Marx and the other revolutionary socialists were regularly harassed by the police and Marx was brought to trial on several occasions, facing various allegations including insulting the Chief Public Prosecutor, committing a press misdemeanor and inciting armed rebellion through tax boycotting, although each time he was acquitted. Meanwhile, the democratic parliament in Prussia collapsed and the king, Frederick William IV, introduced a new cabinet of his reactionary supporters, who implemented counterrevolutionary measures to expunge left-wing and other revolutionary elements from the country. Consequently, the was soon suppressed, and Marx was ordered to leave the country on 16 May 1849. Marx returned to Paris, which was then under the grip of both a reactionary counterrevolution and a cholera epidemic, and was soon expelled by the city authorities, who considered him a political threat. With his wife Jenny expecting their fourth child and with Marx not able to move back to Germany or Belgium, in August 1849 he sought refuge in London.\nMove to London and further writing: 1850\u20131860.\nMarx moved to London in early June 1849 and would remain based in the city for the rest of his life. The headquarters of the Communist League also moved to London. However, in the winter of 1849\u20131850, a split within the ranks of the Communist League occurred when a faction within it led by August Willich and Karl Schapper began agitating for an immediate uprising. Willich and Schapper believed that once the Communist League had initiated the uprising, the entire working class from across Europe would rise \"spontaneously\" to join it, thus creating revolution across Europe. Marx and Engels protested that such an unplanned uprising on the part of the Communist League was \"adventuristic\" and would be suicide for the Communist League. Such an uprising as that recommended by the Schapper/Willich group would easily be crushed by the police and the armed forces of the reactionary governments of Europe. Marx maintained that this would spell doom for the Communist League itself, arguing that changes in society are not achieved overnight through the efforts and will power of a handful of men. They are instead brought about through a scientific analysis of economic conditions of society and by moving toward revolution through different stages of social development. In the present stage of development (\"circa\" 1850), following the defeat of the uprisings across Europe in 1848 he felt that the Communist League should encourage the working class to unite with progressive elements of the rising bourgeoisie to defeat the feudal aristocracy on issues involving demands for governmental reforms, such as a constitutional republic with freely elected assemblies and universal (male) suffrage. In other words, the working class must join with bourgeois and democratic forces to bring about the successful conclusion of the bourgeois revolution before stressing the working-class agenda and a working-class revolution.\nAfter a long struggle that threatened to ruin the Communist League, Marx's opinion prevailed and eventually, the Willich/Schapper group left the Communist League. Meanwhile, Marx also became heavily involved with the socialist German Workers' Educational Society. The Society held their meetings in Great Windmill Street, Soho, central London's entertainment district. This organisation was also racked by an internal struggle among its members, some of whom followed Marx while others followed the Schapper/Willich faction. The issues in this internal split were the same issues raised in the internal split within the Communist League, but Marx lost the fight with the Schapper/Willich faction within the German Workers' Educational Society and on 17 September 1850 resigned from the Society.\n\"New-York Daily Tribune\" and journalism.\nIn the early period in London, Marx committed himself almost exclusively to his studies, such that his family endured extreme poverty. His main source of income was Engels, whose own source was his wealthy industrialist father. In Prussia as editor of his own newspaper, and contributor to others ideologically aligned, Marx could reach his audience, the working classes. In London, without finances to run a newspaper themselves, he and Engels turned to international journalism. At one stage they were being published by six newspapers from England, the United States, Prussia, Austria, and South Africa. Marx's principal earnings came from his work as European correspondent, from 1852 to 1862, for the \"New-York Daily Tribune\", and from also producing articles for more \"bourgeois\" newspapers. Marx had his articles translated from German by Wilhelm Pieper, until his proficiency in English had become adequate.\nThe \"New-York Daily Tribune\" had been founded in April 1841 by Horace Greeley. Its editorial board contained progressive bourgeois journalists and publishers, among them George Ripley and the journalist Charles Dana, who was editor-in-chief. Dana, a fourierist and an abolitionist, was Marx's contact. The \"Tribune\" was a vehicle for Marx to reach a transatlantic public, such as for his \"hidden warfare\" against Henry Charles Carey. The journal had wide working-class appeal from its foundation; at two cents, it was inexpensive; and, with about 50,000 copies per issue, its circulation was the widest in the United States. Its editorial ethos was progressive and its anti-slavery stance reflected Greeley's. Marx's first article for the paper, on the British parliamentary elections, was published on 21 August 1852.\nOn 21 March 1857, Dana informed Marx that due to the economic recession only one article a week would be paid for, published or not; the others would be paid for only if published. Marx had sent his articles on Tuesdays and Fridays, but, that October, the \"Tribune\" discharged all its correspondents in Europe except Marx and B. Taylor, and reduced Marx to a weekly article. Between September and November 1860, only five were published. After a six-month interval, Marx resumed contributions from September 1861 until March 1862, when Dana wrote to inform him that there was no longer space in the \"Tribune\" for reports from London, due to American domestic affairs. In 1868, Dana set up a rival newspaper, the \"New York Sun\", at which he was editor-in-chief. In April 1857, Dana invited Marx to contribute articles, mainly on military history, to the \"New American Cyclopedia\", an idea of George Ripley, Dana's friend and literary editor of the \"Tribune\". In all, 67 Marx-Engels articles were published, of which 51 were written by Engels, although Marx did some research for them in the British Museum. By the late 1850s, American popular interest in European affairs waned and Marx's articles turned to topics such as the \"slavery crisis\" and the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 in the \"War Between the States\". Between December 1851 and March 1852, Marx worked on his theoretical work about the French Revolution of 1848, titled \"The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon\". In this he explored concepts in historical materialism, class struggle, dictatorship of the proletariat, and victory of the proletariat over the bourgeois state.\nThe 1850s and 1860s may be said to mark a philosophical boundary distinguishing the young Marx's Hegelian idealism and the more mature Marx's scientific ideology associated with structural Marxism. However, not all scholars accept this distinction. For Marx and Engels, their experience of the Revolutions of 1848 to 1849 were formative in the development of their theory of economics and historical progression. After the \"failures\" of 1848, the revolutionary impetus appeared spent and not to be renewed without an economic recession. Contention arose between Marx and his fellow communists, whom he denounced as \"adventurists\". Marx deemed it fanciful to propose that \"will power\" could be sufficient to create the revolutionary conditions when in reality the economic component was the necessary requisite. The recession in the United States' economy in 1852 gave Marx and Engels grounds for optimism for revolutionary activity, yet this economy was seen as too immature for a capitalist revolution. Open territories on America's western frontier dissipated the forces of social unrest. Moreover, any economic crisis arising in the United States would not lead to revolutionary contagion of the older economies of individual European nations, which were closed systems bounded by their national borders. When the so-called Panic of 1857 in the United States spread globally, it broke all economic theory models, and was the first truly global economic crisis.\nFirst International and \"Das Kapital\".\nMarx continued to write articles for the \"New York Daily Tribune\" as long as he was sure that the \"Tribune\"'s editorial policy was still progressive. However, the departure of Charles Dana from the paper in late 1861 and the resultant change in the editorial board brought about a new editorial policy. No longer was the \"Tribune\" to be a strong abolitionist paper dedicated to a complete Union victory. The new editorial board supported an immediate peace between the Union and the Confederacy in the Civil War in the United States with slavery left intact in the Confederacy. Marx strongly disagreed with this new political position and in 1863 was forced to withdraw as a writer for the \"Tribune\".\nIn 1864, Marx became involved in the International Workingmen's Association (known as the First International), to whose General Council he was elected at its inception in 1864. In that organisation, Marx was involved in the struggle against the anarchist wing centred on Mikhail Bakunin. Although Marx won this contest, the transfer of the seat of the General Council from London to New York in 1872, which Marx supported, led to the decline of the International. The most important political event during the existence of the International was the Paris Commune of 1871 when the citizens of Paris rebelled against their government and held the city for two months. In response to the bloody suppression of this rebellion, Marx wrote one of his most famous pamphlets, \"The Civil War in France\", a defence of the Commune.\nGiven the repeated failures and frustrations of workers' revolutions and movements, Marx also sought to understand and provide a critique suitable for the capitalist mode of production, and hence spent a great deal of time in the reading room of the British Museum studying. By 1857, Marx had accumulated over 800 pages of notes and short essays on capital, landed property, wage labour, the state, and foreign trade, and the world market, though this work did not appear in print until 1939, under the title \"Grundrisse der Kritik der Politischen \u00d6konomie\" ().\nIn 1859, Marx published \"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy\", his first serious critique of political economy. This work was intended merely as a preview of his three-volume \"Das Kapital\" (English title: \"Capital: Critique of Political Economy\"), which he intended to publish at a later date. In \"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy\", Marx began to critically examine axioms and categories of economic thinking. The work was enthusiastically received, and the edition sold out quickly.\nThe successful sales of \"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy\" stimulated Marx in the early 1860s to finish work on the three large volumes that would compose his major life's work\u00a0\u2013 and the \"Theories of Surplus Value\", which discussed and critiqued the theoreticians of political economy, particularly Adam Smith and David Ricardo. \"Theories of Surplus Value\" is often referred to as the fourth volume of and constitutes one of the first comprehensive treatises on the history of economic thought. In 1867, the first volume of was published, a work which critically analysed capital. proposes an explanation of the \"laws of motion\" of the mode of production from its origins to its future by describing the dynamics of the accumulation of capital, with topics such as the growth of wage labour, the transformation of the workplace, capital accumulation, competition, the banking system, the tendency of the rate of profit to fall and land-rents, as well as how waged labour continually reproduce the rule of capital. Marx proposes that the driving force of capital is in the exploitation of labour, whose unpaid work is the ultimate source of surplus value.\nDemand for a Russian language edition of soon led to the printing of 3,000 copies of the book in the Russian language, which was published on 27 March 1872. By the autumn of 1871, the entire first edition of the German-language edition of had been sold out and a second edition was published.\nVolumes II and III of remained mere manuscripts upon which Marx continued to work for the rest of his life. Both volumes were published by Engels after Marx's death. Volume II of was prepared and published by Engels in July 1893 under the name \"Capital II: The Process of Circulation of Capital\". Volume III of was published a year later in October 1894 under the name \"Capital III: The Process of Capitalist Production as a Whole\". \"Theories of Surplus Value\" derived from the sprawling \"Economic Manuscripts of 1861\u20131863\", a second draft for , the latter spanning volumes 30\u201334 of the \"Collected Works of Marx and Engels\". Specifically, \"Theories of Surplus Value\" runs from the latter part of the \"Collected Works'\" thirtieth volume through the end of their thirty-second volume; meanwhile, the larger \"Economic Manuscripts of 1861\u20131863\" run from the start of the \"Collected Works\"' thirtieth volume through the first half of their thirty-fourth volume. The latter half of the Collected Works' thirty-fourth volume consists of the surviving fragments of the \"Economic Manuscripts of 1863\u20131864\", which represented a third draft for , and a large portion of which is included as an appendix to the Penguin edition of , volume I. A German-language abridged edition of \"Theories of Surplus Value\" was published in 1905 and in 1910. This abridged edition was translated into English and published in 1951 in London, but the complete unabridged edition of \"Theories of Surplus Value\" was published as the \"fourth volume\" of in 1963 and 1971 in Moscow.\nDuring the last decade of his life, Marx's health declined, and he became incapable of the sustained effort that had characterised his previous work. He did manage to comment substantially on contemporary politics, particularly in Germany and Russia. His \"Critique of the Gotha Programme\" opposed the tendency of his followers Wilhelm Liebknecht and August Bebel to compromise with the state socialist ideas of Ferdinand Lassalle in the interests of a united socialist party. This work is also notable for another famous Marx quote: \"From each according to his ability, to each according to his need\".\nIn a letter to Vera Zasulich dated 8 March 1881, Marx contemplated the possibility of Russia's bypassing the capitalist stage of development and building communism on the basis of the common ownership of land characteristic of the village \"mir\". While admitting that Russia's rural \"commune is the fulcrum of social regeneration in Russia\", Marx also warned that in order for the mir to operate as a means for moving straight to the socialist stage without a preceding capitalist stage it \"would first be necessary to eliminate the deleterious influences which are assailing it [the rural commune] from all sides\". Given the elimination of these pernicious influences, Marx allowed that \"normal conditions of spontaneous development\" of the rural commune could exist. However, in the same letter to Vera Zasulich he points out that \"at the core of the capitalist system\u00a0... lies the complete separation of the producer from the means of production\". In one of the drafts of this letter, Marx reveals his growing passion for anthropology, motivated by his belief that future communism would be a return on a higher level to the communism of our prehistoric past. He wrote: the historical trend of our age is the fatal crisis which capitalist production has undergone in the European and American countries where it has reached its highest peak, a crisis that will end in its destruction, in the return of modern society to a higher form of the most archaic type\u00a0\u2013 collective production and appropriation. He added that \"the vitality of primitive communities was incomparably greater than that of Semitic, Greek, Roman, etc. societies, and, a fortiori, that of modern capitalist societies\". Before he died, Marx asked Engels to write up these ideas, which were published in 1884 under the title \"The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State\".\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nMarx and von Westphalen had seven children together, but partly owing to the poor conditions in which they lived whilst in London, only three survived to adulthood. Their children were: Jenny Caroline (m. Longuet; 1844\u20131883); Jenny Laura (m. Lafargue; 1845\u20131911); Edgar (1847\u20131855); Henry Edward Guy (\"Guido\"; 1849\u20131850); Jenny Eveline Frances (\"Franziska\"; 1851\u20131852); Jenny Julia Eleanor (1855\u20131898) and one more who died before being named (July 1857). According to his son-in-law, Paul Lafargue, Marx was a loving father. In 1962, there were allegations that Marx fathered a son, Freddy, out of wedlock by his housekeeper, Helene Demuth, but the claim is disputed for lack of documented evidence.\nHelene Demuth was also largely entrusted as a confidante. In her obituary, penned by Friedrich Engels, her role is revealed as: \"Marx took counsel of Helena Demuth, not only in difficult and intricate party matters, but even in respect of his economical writings\".\nMarx frequently used pseudonyms, often when renting a house or flat, apparently to make it harder for the authorities to track him down. While in Paris, he used that of \"Monsieur Ramboz\", whilst in London, he signed off his letters as \"A. Williams\". His friends referred to him as \"Moor\", owing to his dark complexion and black curly hair, while he encouraged his children to call him \"Old Nick\" and \"Charley\". He also bestowed nicknames and pseudonyms on his friends and family, referring to Friedrich Engels as \"General\", his housekeeper Helene as \"Lenchen\" or \"Nym\", while one of his daughters, Jennychen, was referred to as \"Qui Qui, Emperor of China\" and another, Laura, was known as \"Kakadou\" or \"the Hottentot\".\nHealth.\nMarx drank heavily after joining the Trier Tavern Club drinking society in the 1830s, and continued to do so until his death.\nMarx was afflicted by poor health, what he himself described as \"the wretchedness of existence\", and various authors have sought to describe and explain it. His biographer Werner Blumenberg attributed it to liver and gall problems which Marx had in 1849 and from which he was never afterward free, exacerbated by an unsuitable lifestyle. The attacks often came with headaches, eye inflammation, neuralgia in the head, and rheumatic pains. A serious nervous disorder appeared in 1877 and protracted insomnia was a consequence, which Marx fought with narcotics.\nThe illness was aggravated by excessive nocturnal work and faulty diet. Marx was fond of highly seasoned dishes, smoked fish, caviare, pickled cucumbers, \"none of which are good for liver patients\", but he also liked wine and liqueurs and smoked an enormous amount \"and since he had no money, it was usually bad-quality cigars\". From 1863, Marx complained a lot about boils: \"These are very frequent with liver patients and may be due to the same causes\". The abscesses were so bad that Marx could neither sit nor work upright. According to Blumenberg, Marx's irritability is often found in liver patients:\nThe illness emphasised certain traits in his character. He argued cuttingly, his biting satire did not shrink at insults, and his expressions could be rude and cruel. Though in general Marx had blind faith in his closest friends, nevertheless he himself complained that he was sometimes too mistrustful and unjust even to them. His verdicts, not only about enemies but even about friends, were sometimes so harsh that even less sensitive people would take offence\u00a0... There must have been few whom he did not criticize like this\u00a0... not even Engels was an exception.\nAccording to Princeton historian Jerrold Seigel, in his late teens, Marx may have had pneumonia or pleurisy, the effects of which led to his being exempted from Prussian military service. In later life whilst working on (which he never completed), Marx suffered from a trio of afflictions. A liver ailment, probably hereditary, was aggravated by overwork, a bad diet, and lack of sleep. Inflammation of the eyes was induced by too much work at night. A third affliction, eruption of carbuncles or boils, \"was probably brought on by general physical debility to which the various features of Marx's style of life\u00a0\u2013 alcohol, tobacco, poor diet, and failure to sleep\u00a0\u2013 all contributed. Engels often exhorted Marx to alter this dangerous regime\". In Seigel's thesis, what lay behind this punishing sacrifice of his health may have been guilt about self-involvement and egoism, originally induced in Karl Marx by his father.\nIn 2007, a retrodiagnosis of Marx's skin disease was made by dermatologist Sam Shuster of Newcastle University. For Shuster, the most probable explanation was that Marx suffered not from liver problems, but from hidradenitis suppurativa, a recurring infective condition arising from blockage of apocrine ducts opening into hair follicles. Shuster went on to consider the potential psychosocial effects of the disease, noting that the skin is an organ of communication and that hidradenitis suppurativa produces much psychological distress, including loathing and disgust and depression of self-image, mood, and well-being, feelings for which Shuster found \"much evidence\" in the Marx correspondence. Professor Shuster went on to ask himself whether the mental effects of the disease affected Marx's work and even helped him to develop his theory of alienation.\nDeath.\nFollowing the death of his wife Jenny in December 1881, Marx developed a catarrh that kept him in ill health for the last 15 months of his life. It eventually brought on the bronchitis and pleurisy that killed him in London on 14 March 1883, when he died a stateless person at age 64. Family and friends in London buried his body in Highgate Cemetery (East), London, on 17 March 1883 in an area reserved for agnostics and atheists. According to Francis Wheen, there were between nine and eleven mourners at his funeral. Research from contemporary sources identifies thirteen named individuals attending the funeral: Friedrich Engels, Eleanor Marx, Edward Aveling, Paul Lafargue, Charles Longuet, Helene Demuth, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Gottlieb Lemke, Frederick Lessner, G Lochner, Sir Ray Lankester, Carl Schorlemmer and Ernest Radford. A contemporary newspaper account claims that twenty-five to thirty relatives and friends attended the funeral.\nA writer in \"The Graphic\" noted: By a strange blunder ... his death was not announced for two days, and then as having taken place at Paris. The next day the correction came from Paris; and when his friends and followers hastened to his house in Haverstock Hill, to learn the time and place of burial, they learned that he was already in the cold ground. But for this secresy [sic] and haste, a great popular demonstration would undoubtedly have been held over his grave.\nSeveral of his closest friends spoke at his funeral, including Wilhelm Liebknecht and Friedrich Engels. Engels' speech included the passage: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMarx's surviving daughters Eleanor and Laura, as well as Charles Longuet and Paul Lafargue, Marx's two French socialist sons-in-law, were also in attendance. He had been predeceased by his wife and his eldest daughter, the latter dying a few months earlier in January 1883. Liebknecht, a founder and leader of the German Social Democratic Party, gave a speech in German, and Longuet, a prominent figure in the French working-class movement, made a short statement in French. Two telegrams from workers' parties in France and Spain were also read out. Together with Engels's speech, this constituted the entire programme of the funeral. Non-relatives attending the funeral included three communist associates of Marx: Friedrich Lessner, imprisoned for three years after the Cologne Communist Trial of 1852; G. Lochner, whom Engels described as \"an old member of the Communist League\"; and Carl Schorlemmer, a professor of chemistry in Manchester, a member of the Royal Society, and a communist activist involved in the 1848 Baden revolution. Another attendee of the funeral was Ray Lankester, a British zoologist who would later become a prominent academic.\nMarx left a personal estate valued for probate at \u00a3250, equivalent to \u00a338,095 in 2024. Upon his own death in 1895, Engels left Marx's two surviving daughters a \"significant portion\" of his considerable estate, valued in 2024 at US$6.8\u00a0million.\nMarx and his family were reburied on a new site nearby in November 1954. The tomb at the new site, unveiled on 14 March 1956, bears the carved message: \"Workers of All Lands Unite\", the final line of \"The Communist Manifesto\"; and, from the 11th \"Thesis on Feuerbach\" (as edited by Engels), \"The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways\u2014the point however is to change it\". The Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) had the monument with a portrait bust by Laurence Bradshaw erected and Marx's original tomb had only humble adornment.\nThe Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm remarked: \"One cannot say Marx died a failure.\" Although he had not achieved a large following of disciples in Britain, his writings had already begun to make an impact on the left-wing movements in Germany and Russia. Within twenty-five years of his death, the continental European socialist parties that acknowledged Marx's influence on their politics had contributed to significant gains in their representative democratic elections.\nThought.\nInfluences.\nMarx's thought demonstrates influence from many sources, including but not limited to:\nMarx's view of history, which came to be called historical materialism (controversially adapted as the philosophy of dialectical materialism by Engels and Lenin), certainly shows the influence of Hegel's claim that one should view reality (and history) dialectically. However, whereas Hegel had thought in idealist terms, putting ideas in the forefront, Marx sought to conceptualise dialectics in materialist terms, arguing for the primacy of matter over idea.\nWhere Hegel saw the \"spirit\" as driving history, Marx saw this as an unnecessary mystification, obscuring the reality of humanity and its physical actions shaping the world. He wrote that Hegelianism stood the movement of reality on its head, and that one needed to set it upon its feet. Despite his dislike of mystical terms, Marx used Gothic language in several of his works: in \"The Communist Manifesto\" he proclaims \"A spectre is haunting Europe\u00a0\u2013 the spectre of communism. All the powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise this spectre\", and in \"The Capital\" he refers to capital as \"necromancy that surrounds the products of labour\".\nThough inspired by French socialist and sociological thought, Marx criticised utopian socialists, arguing that their favoured small-scale socialistic communities would be bound to marginalisation and poverty and that only a large-scale change in the economic system could bring about real change.\nOther important contributions to Marx's revision of Hegelianism came from Engels's book, \"The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844\", which led Marx to conceive of the historical dialectic in terms of class conflict and to see the modern working class as the most progressive force for revolution, as well as from the social democrat Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz, who in described the movement of society as \"flowing from the contradiction between the forces of production and the mode of production\".\nMarx believed that he could study history and society scientifically, discerning tendencies of history and thereby predicting the outcome of social conflicts. Some followers of Marx, therefore, concluded that a communist revolution would inevitably occur. However, Marx famously asserted in the eleventh of his \"Theses on Feuerbach\" that \"philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways; the point however is to change it\" and he clearly dedicated himself to trying to alter the world.\nMarx's theories inspired several theories and disciplines of future, including but not limited to:\nPhilosophy and social thought.\nMarx has been called \"the first great user of critical method in social sciences\", a characterisation stemming from his frequent use of polemics throughout his work to effect critiques of other thinkers. He criticised speculative philosophy, equating metaphysics with ideology. By adopting this approach, Marx attempted to separate key findings from ideological biases. This set him apart from many contemporary philosophers.\nHuman nature.\nLike Tocqueville, who described a faceless and bureaucratic despotism with no identifiable despot, Marx also broke with classical thinkers who spoke of a single tyrant and with Montesquieu, who discussed the nature of the single despot. Instead, Marx set out to analyse \"the despotism of capital\". Fundamentally, Marx assumed that human history involves transforming human nature, which encompasses both human beings and material objects. Humans recognise that they possess both actual and potential selves.\nFor both Marx and Hegel, self-development begins with an experience of internal alienation stemming from this recognition, followed by a realisation that the actual self, as a subjective agent, renders its potential counterpart an object to be apprehended. Marx further argues that by moulding nature in desired ways the subject takes the object as its own and thus permits the individual to be actualised as fully human. For Marx, the human nature\u00a0\u2013 , or species-being\u00a0\u2013 exists as a function of human labour.\nFundamental to Marx's idea of meaningful labour is the proposition that for a subject to come to terms with its alienated object it must first exert influence upon literal, material objects in the subject's world. Marx acknowledges that Hegel \"grasps the nature of work and comprehends objective man, authentic because actual, as the result of his own work\", but characterises Hegelian self-development as unduly \"spiritual\" and abstract.\nMarx thus departs from Hegel by insisting that \"the fact that man is a corporeal, actual, sentient, objective being with natural capacities means that he has actual, sensuous objects for his nature as objects of his life-expression, or that he can only express his life in actual sensuous objects\". Consequently, Marx revises Hegelian \"work\" into material \"labour\" and in the context of human capacity to transform nature the term \"labour power\".\nLabour, class struggle and false consciousness.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.\u2014\u200a\nMarx had a special concern with how people relate to their own labour power. He wrote extensively about this in terms of the problem of alienation. As with the dialectic, Marx began with a Hegelian notion of alienation but developed a more materialist conception. Capitalism mediates social relationships of production (such as among workers or between workers and capitalists) through commodities, including labour, that are bought and sold on the market. For Marx, the possibility that one may give up ownership of one's own labour\u00a0\u2013 one's capacity to transform the world\u00a0\u2013 is tantamount to being alienated from one's own nature and it is a spiritual loss. Marx described this loss as commodity fetishism, in which the things that people produce, commodities, appear to have a life and movement of their own to which humans and their behaviour merely adapt.\nCommodity fetishism provides an example of what Engels called \"false consciousness\", which relates closely to the understanding of ideology. By \"ideology\", Marx and Engels meant ideas that reflect the interests of a particular class at a particular time in history, but which contemporaries see as universal and eternal. Marx and Engels's point was not only that such beliefs are at best half-truths, as they serve an important political function. Put another way, the control that one class exercises over the means of production include not only the production of food or manufactured goods but also the production of ideas (this provides one possible explanation for why members of a subordinate class may hold ideas contrary to their own interests).\nMarx was an outspoken opponent of child labour, saying that British industries \"could but live by sucking blood, and children's blood too\", and that U.S. capital was financed by the \"capitalized blood of children\".\nReligion.\nMarx agreed with Ludwig Feuerbach that religion is a human construct reflecting human conditions (\"man creates religion, religion does not create man\"), but analysed this in historical, not abstract terms. He saw religion as both an expression of suffering and a protest against it. In his 1843 essay \"Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right,\" Marx sought to distance himself from Young Hegelians like Bruno Bauer, whose religion-focused critique, in his view, could not be a solution to human suffering without a transformative critique of society. Critique of religion would be ineffective without changing the real social conditions of which religion is only an expression.\nAccording to Shlomo Avineri, the famous passage from the introduction to this essay is, though often only partially quoted, \"both more complex and more profound\" than would seem, and Marx here expressed \"empathy, not scorn\" for religious feelings:Religious suffering is, at one and the same time, the expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium of the people.\nThe abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness. To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is to call on them to give up a condition that requires illusions.Similar to the later views of Max Weber, Marx believed that religion plays a legitimating function for the dominant classes by providing a divine sanction for inequality and existing social conditions, and that for subordinate classes religion offers an escape: like an opiate, alleviating pain but not offering a cure. Marx's gymnasium senior thesis at the Gymnasium zu Trier argued that religion had as its primary social aim the promotion of solidarity.\nCritique of political economy, history and society.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut you Communists would introduce community of women, screams the whole bourgeoisie in chorus. The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production. He hears that the means of production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the women. He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do away with the status of women as mere mean of production.\n\u2014Karl Marx, \"The Communist Manifesto\"\nMarx's thoughts on labour and its function in reproducing capital were related to the primacy he gave to social relations in determining the society's past, present and future. Critics have called this economic determinism. Labour is the precondition for the existence of, and accumulation of capital, which both shape the social system. For Marx, social change was driven by conflict between opposing interests, by parties situated in the historical situation of their mode of production. This became the inspiration for the body of works known as the conflict theory.\nIn his evolutionary model of history, he argued that human history began with free, productive and creative activities that was over time coerced and dehumanised, a trend most apparent under capitalism. Marx noted that this was not an intentional process, but rather due to the immanent logic of the current mode of production which demands more human labour (abstract labour) to reproduce the social relationships of capital.\nThe organisation of society depends on means of production. The means of production are all things required to produce material goods, such as land, natural resources, and technology but not human labour. The relations of production are the social relationships people enter into as they acquire and use the means of production. Together, these compose the mode of production and Marx distinguished historical eras in terms of modes of production. Marx differentiated between base and superstructure, where the base (or substructure) is the economic system and superstructure is the cultural and political system. Marx regarded this mismatch between economic base and social superstructure as a major source of social conflict.\nDespite Marx's stress on the critique of capitalism and discussion of the new communist society that should replace it, his explicit critique is guarded, as he saw it as an improved society compared to the past ones (slavery and feudalism). Marx never clearly discusses issues of morality and justice, but scholars agree that his work contained implicit discussion of those concepts.\nMarx's view of capitalism was two-sided. On one hand, in the 19th century's deepest critique of the dehumanising aspects of this system he noted that defining features of capitalism include alienation, exploitation and recurring, cyclical depressions leading to mass unemployment. On the other hand, he characterised capitalism as \"revolutionising, industrialising and universalising qualities of development, growth and progressivity\" (by which Marx meant industrialisation, urbanisation, technological progress, increased productivity and growth, rationality, and scientific revolution) that are responsible for progress, at in contrast to earlier forms of societies.\nMarx considered the capitalist class to be one of the most revolutionary in history because it constantly improved the means of production, more so than any other class in history and was responsible for the overthrow of feudalism. Capitalism can stimulate considerable growth because the capitalist has an incentive to reinvest profits in new technologies and capital equipment.\nAccording to Marx, capitalists take advantage of the difference between the labour market and the market for whatever commodity the capitalist can produce. Marx observed that in practically every successful industry, input unit-costs are lower than output unit-prices. Marx called the difference \"surplus value\" and argued that it was based on surplus labour, the difference between what it costs to keep workers alive, and what they can produce. Although Marx describes capitalists as vampires sucking worker's blood, he notes that drawing profit is \"by no means an injustice\" since Marx, according to Allen W. Wood \"excludes any trans-epochal standpoint from which one can comment\" on the morals of such particular arrangements. Marx also noted that even the capitalists themselves cannot go against the system. The problem is the \"cancerous cell\" of capital, understood not as property or equipment, but the social relations between workers and owners, (the selling and purchasing of labour power)\u00a0\u2013 the societal system, or rather mode of production, in general.\nAt the same time, Marx stressed that capitalism was unstable and prone to periodic crises. He suggested that over time capitalists would invest more and more in new technologies and less and less in labour. Since Marx believed that profit derived from surplus value appropriated from labour, he concluded that the rate of profit would fall as the economy grows. Marx believed that increasingly severe crises would punctuate this cycle of growth and collapse. Moreover, he believed that in the long-term, this process would enrich and empower the capitalist class and impoverish the proletariat. In section one of \"The Communist Manifesto\", Marx describes feudalism, capitalism, and the role internal social contradictions play in the historical process:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMarx believed that those structural contradictions within capitalism necessitate its end, giving way to socialism, or a post-capitalistic, communist society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThanks to various processes overseen by capitalism, such as urbanisation, the working class, the proletariat, should grow in numbers and develop class consciousness, in time realising that they can and must change the system. Marx believed that if the proletariat were to seize the means of production, they would encourage social relations that would benefit everyone equally, abolishing the exploiting class and introducing a system of production less vulnerable to cyclical crises. Marx argued in \"The German Ideology\" that capitalism will end through the organised actions of an international working class: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn this new society, the alienation would end and humans would be free to act without being bound by selling their labour. It would be a democratic society, enfranchising the entire population. In such a utopian world, there would also be little need for a state, whose goal was previously to enforce the alienation. Marx theorised that between capitalism and the establishment of a socialist/communist system, would exist a period of dictatorship of the proletariat\u00a0\u2013 where the working class holds political power and forcibly socialises the means of production. As he wrote in his \"Critique of the Gotha Program\", \"between capitalist and communist society there lies the period of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat\". While he allowed for the possibility of peaceful transition in some countries with strong democratic institutional structures (such as Britain, the United States, and the Netherlands), he suggested that in other countries in which workers cannot \"attain their goal by peaceful means\" the \"lever of our revolution must be force\".\nInternational relations.\nMarx viewed Russian Tsarism as the main threat to European revolutions. During the Crimean War, Marx backed the Ottoman Empire and its allies Britain and France against Russia. He was absolutely opposed to Pan-Slavism, viewing it as an instrument of Russian foreign policy. Marx considered the Slavic nations except Poles as 'counter-revolutionary'. Marx and Engels published in the \"Neue Rheinische Zeitung\" in February 1849:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the sentimental phrases about brotherhood which we are being offered here on behalf of the most counter-revolutionary nations of Europe, we reply that hatred of Russians was and still is the primary revolutionary passion among Germans; that since the revolution [of 1848] hatred of Czechs and Croats has been added, and that only by the most determined use of terror against these Slav peoples can we, jointly with the Poles and Magyars, safeguard the revolution. We know where the enemies of the revolution are concentrated, \"viz\". in Russia and the Slav regions of Austria, and no fine phrases, no allusions to an undefined democratic future for these countries can deter us from treating our enemies as enemies. Then there will be a struggle, an \"inexorable life-and-death struggle\", against those Slavs who betray the revolution; an annihilating fight and ruthless terror\u00a0\u2013 not in the interests of Germany, but in the interests of the revolution!\"\nMarx and Engels sympathised with the Narodnik revolutionaries of the 1860s and 1870s. When the Russian revolutionaries assassinated Tsar Alexander II of Russia, Marx expressed the hope that the assassination foreshadowed 'the formation of a Russian commune'. Marx supported the Polish uprisings against tsarist Russia. He said in a speech in London in 1867:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the first place the policy of Russia is changeless... Its methods, its tactics, its manoeuvres may change, but the polar star of its policy \u2013 world domination \u2013 is a fixed star. In our times only a civilised government ruling over barbarian masses can hatch out such a plan and execute it. ... There is but one alternative for Europe. Either Asiatic barbarism, under Muscovite direction, will burst around its head like an avalanche, or else it must re-establish Poland, thus putting twenty million heroes between itself and Asia and gaining a breathing spell for the accomplishment of its social regeneration.\nMarx supported the cause of Irish independence. In 1867, he wrote Engels: \"I used to think the separation of Ireland from England impossible. I now think it inevitable. The English working class will never accomplish anything until it has got rid of Ireland. ... English reaction in England had its roots ... in the subjugation of Ireland.\"\nMarx spent some time in French Algeria, which had been invaded and made a French colony in 1830, and had the opportunity to observe life in colonial North Africa. He wrote about the colonial justice system, in which \"a form of torture has been used (and this happens 'regularly') to extract confessions from the Arabs; naturally it is done (like the English in India) by the 'police'; the judge is supposed to know nothing at all about it.\" Marx was surprised by the arrogance of many European settlers in Algiers and wrote in a letter: when a European colonist dwells among the 'lesser breeds,' either as a settler or even on business, he generally regards himself as even more inviolable than handsome William I [a Prussian king]. Still, when it comes to bare-faced arrogance and presumptuousness vis-\u00e0-vis the 'lesser breeds,' the British and Dutch outdo the French.\nAccording to the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\": Marx's analysis of colonialism as a progressive force bringing modernization to a backward feudal society sounds like a transparent rationalization for foreign domination. His account of British domination, however, reflects the same ambivalence that he shows towards capitalism in Europe. In both cases, Marx recognizes the immense suffering brought about during the transition from feudal to bourgeois society while insisting that the transition is both necessary and ultimately progressive. He argues that the penetration of foreign commerce will cause a social revolution in India.\nMarx discussed British colonial rule in India in the \"New York Herald Tribune\" in 1853:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegacy.\nMarx's ideas have had a profound impact on world politics and intellectual thought, in particular in the aftermath of the 1917 Russian Revolution. Followers of Marx have often debated among themselves over how to interpret Marx's writings and apply his concepts to the modern world. The legacy of Marx's thought has become contested between numerous tendencies, each of which sees itself as Marx's most accurate interpreter. In the political realm, these tendencies include political theories such as Leninism, Marxism\u2013Leninism, Trotskyism, Maoism, Luxemburgism, libertarian Marxism, and Open Marxism. Various currents have also developed in academic Marxism, often under influence of other views, resulting in structuralist Marxism, historical materialism, phenomenological Marxism, analytical Marxism, and Hegelian Marxism.\nFrom an academic perspective, Marx's work contributed to the birth of modern sociology. He has been cited as one of the 19th century's three masters of the \"school of suspicion\", and as one of the three principal architects of modern social science. In contrast to other philosophers, Marx offered theories that could often be tested with the scientific method.\nBoth Marx and Auguste Comte set out to develop scientifically justified ideologies in the wake of European secularisation and new developments in the philosophies of history and science. Working in the Hegelian tradition, Marx rejected Comtean sociological positivism in an attempt to develop a \"science of society\". Karl L\u00f6with considered Marx and S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard to be the two greatest philosophical successors of Hegel.\nIn modern sociological theory, Marxist sociology is recognised as one of the main classical perspectives. Isaiah Berlin considers Marx the true founder of modern sociology \"in so far as anyone can claim the title\". Beyond social science, he has also had a lasting legacy in philosophy, literature, the arts, and the humanities.\nSocial theorists of the 20th and 21st centuries have pursued two main strategies in response to Marx. One move has been to reduce it to its analytical core, known as analytical Marxism. Another, more common move has been to dilute the explanatory claims of Marx's social theory and emphasise the \"relative autonomy working-class agenda\" of aspects of social and economic life not directly related to Marx's central narrative of interaction between the development of the \"forces of production\" and the succession of \"modes of production\". This has been the neo-Marxist theorising adopted by historians inspired by Marx's social theory such as E. P. Thompson and Eric Hobsbawm. It has also been a line of thinking pursued by thinkers and activists such as Antonio Gramsci who have sought to understand the opportunities and the difficulties of transformative political practice, seen in the light of Marxist social theory. Marx's ideas had a profound influence on subsequent artists and art history, with avant-garde movements across literature, visual art, music, film, and theatre.\nPolitically, Marx's legacy is more complex. Throughout the 20th century, revolutions in dozens of countries labelled themselves \"Marxist\"\u2014most notably the Russian Revolution, which led to the founding of the Soviet Union. Major world leaders including Vladimir Lenin, Mao Zedong, Fidel Castro, Salvador Allende, Josip Broz Tito, Kwame Nkrumah, Jawaharlal Nehru, Nelson Mandela, Xi Jinping, Joseph Stalin and Thomas Sankara have all cited Marx as an influence. Beyond where Marxist revolutions took place, Marx's ideas have informed political parties worldwide. Many prominent communist revolutionaries and activists throughout the world such as Rosa Luxemburg, Bhagat Singh, Ernst Th\u00e4lmann, Che Guevara, Chandra Shekhar Azad, Antonio Gramsci and Fred Hampton were deeply influenced by Marxist ideology.\nIn countries associated with Marxism, political opponents have blamed Marx for millions of deaths, while others argue for a distinction between the legacy and influence of Marx specifically, and the legacy and influence of those who have shaped his ideas for political purposes. Arthur Lipow describes Marx and his collaborator Friedrich Engels as \"the founders of modern revolutionary democratic socialism.\"\nThe cities of Marks, Russia and Karl-Marx-Stadt, Germany, now known as Chemnitz, were named after Marx. In May 2018, to mark the bicentenary of his birth, a statue of him by leading Chinese sculptor Wu Weishan and donated by the Chinese government was unveiled in his birthplace of Trier, Germany. The then-European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker defended Marx's memory, saying that today Marx \"stands for things which he is not responsible for and which he didn't cause because many of the things he wrote down were redrafted into the opposite\". In 2013, UNESCO added two documents with Marx's handwriting to its Memory of the World International Register. These are his annotated first edition of \"Das Kapital\" Volume 1 and a manuscript page from \"The Communist Manifesto\". These are held among more of Marx's papers at the International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam.\nAs well as influencing 20th century cinema, Marx's life and times and his principal works have all been represented in film as subjects in their own right. Films depicting Marx and his ideas range from documentary to fictional drama, art house and comedy. In 2017, \"The Young Karl Marx\" received good reviews for both its historical accuracy and its brio in dealing with intellectual life.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommentaries on Marx.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "16744", "revid": "1315980954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16744", "title": "Keno", "text": "Game of chance\nKeno is a lottery-like gambling game often played at modern casinos, and also offered as a game in some lotteries.\nPlayers wager by choosing numbers ranging from 1 through (usually) 80. After all players make their wagers, 20 numbers (some variants draw fewer numbers) are drawn at random, either with a ball machine similar to ones used for lotteries and bingo, or with a random number generator.\nEach casino sets its own series of payouts, called \"paytables\". The player is paid based on how many numbers were chosen (either player selection, or the terminal picking the numbers), the number of matches out of those chosen, and the wager.\nThere are a wide variety of keno paytables depending on the casino, usually with a larger \"house edge\" than other games, ranging from less than 4 percent to over 35 percent in online play, and 20-40% in in-person casinos. By way of comparison, the typical house edge for non-slot casino games is under 5%.\nHistory.\nThe word \"keno\" has French or Latin roots (Fr. \"quine\" \"five winning numbers\", L. \"quini\" \"five each\"), but by all accounts the game originated in China. Legend has it that Zhang Liang invented the game during the Chu-Han Contention to raise money to defend an ancient city, and its widespread popularity later helped raise funds to build the Great Wall of China. In modern China, the idea of using lotteries to fund a public institution was not accepted before the late 19th century.\nChinese lottery is not documented before 1847, when the Portuguese government of Macao decided to grant a licence to lottery operators. According to some, results of keno games in great cities were sent to outlying villages and hamlets by carrier pigeons, resulting in its Chinese name \u767d\u9e3d\u7968 \"b\u00e1ig\u0113 pi\u00e0o\", with the literal reading \"white dove tickets\" in Mandarin, but in Southern varieties of Chinese spoken in Guangdong simply meaning \"pigeon tickets\", and pronounced \"baak6-gaap3-piu3\" in Cantonese (on which the Western spelling 'pak-ah-pu' / 'pakapoo' was based).\nThe Chinese played the game using sheets printed with Chinese characters, often the first 80 characters of the \"Thousand Character Classic\", from which the winning characters were selected. Eventually, Chinese immigrants introduced keno to the West when they sailed across the Pacific Ocean to work on construction of the First transcontinental railroad in the 19th century, where the name was Westernized into \"boc hop bu\" and \"puck-apu\". There were also other, earlier games called Keno, but these were played in the same way as the game now known as \"Bingo\", not the modern game of Keno.\nProbabilities.\nKeno payouts are based on how many numbers the player chooses and how many of those numbers are \"hit\", multiplied by the proportion of the player's original wager to the \"base rate\" of the paytable. Typically, the more numbers a player chooses and the more numbers hit, the greater the payout, although some paytables pay for hitting a lesser number of spots. For example, it is not uncommon to see casinos paying $500 or even $1,000 for a \u201ccatch\u201d of 0 out of 20 on a 20 spot ticket with a $5.00 wager. Payouts vary widely by casino. Most casinos allow paytable wagers of 1 through 20 numbers, but some limit the choice to only 1 through 10, 12 and 15 numbers, or \"spots\" as keno aficionados call the numbers selected.\nThe probability of a player hitting all 20 numbers on a 20 spot ticket is approximately 1 in 3.5 quintillion (1 in 3,535,316,142,212,174,320).\nEven though it is highly improbable to hit all 20 numbers on a 20 spot ticket, the same player would typically also get paid for hitting \u201ccatches\u201d 0, 1, 2, 3, and 7 through 19 out of 20, often with the 17 through 19 catches paying the same as the solid 20 hit. Some of the other paying \"catches\" on a 20 spot ticket or any other ticket with high \"solid catch\" odds are in reality very possible to hit:\nProbabilities change significantly based on the number of spots and numbers that are picked on each ticket.\nProbability calculation.\nKeno probabilities come from a hypergeometric distribution.\nFor Keno, one calculates the probability of hitting exactly formula_1 spots on an formula_2-spot ticket by the formula:\nP(hitting formula_1 spots) formula_4 for an formula_2-spot ticket. \nTo calculate the probability of hitting 4 spots on a 6-spot ticket, the formula is:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is calculated as formula_8, where X! is notation for X factorial. Spreadsheets have the function to calculate \nformula_7.\nTo calculate \"odds-to-1\", divide the probability into 1.0 and subtract 1 from the result.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16745", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16745", "title": "Kenyanthropus", "text": "Oldest-known tool-making hominin\nKenyanthropus ('man from Kenya') is a genus of extinct hominin identified from the Lomekwi site by Lake Turkana, Kenya, dated to 3.3 to 3.2 million years ago during the Middle Pliocene. It contains one species, K. platyops, but may also include the two-million-year-old \"Homo rudolfensis\", or K. rudolfensis. Before its naming in 2001, \"Australopithecus afarensis\" was widely regarded as the only australopithecine to exist during the Middle Pliocene, but \"Kenyanthropus\" evinces a greater diversity than once acknowledged. \"Kenyanthropus\" is most recognisable by an unusually flat face and small teeth for such an early hominin, with values on the extremes or beyond the range of variation for australopithecines in regard to these features. Multiple australopithecine species may have coexisted by foraging for different food items (niche partitioning), which may be the reason why these apes anatomically differ in features related to chewing.\nThe Lomekwi site also yielded the earliest stone tool industry, the Lomekwian, characterised by the rudimentary production of simple flakes by pounding a core against an anvil or with a hammerstone. It may have been manufactured by \"Kenyanthropus\", but it is unclear if multiple species were present at the site or not. The knappers were using volcanic rocks collected no more than from the site. \"Kenyanthropus\" seems to have lived on a lakeside or floodplain environment featuring forests and grasslands. \nTaxonomy.\nDiscovery.\nIn August 1998, field technician Blasto Onyango discovered a hominin partial left maxilla (upper jaw), specimen KNM-WT 38350, on the Kenyan Lomekwi dig site by Lake Turkana, overseen by prominent paleoanthropologists Louise and Meave Leakey. In August 1999 at the Lomekwi site, research assistant Justus Erus discovered an uncharacteristically flat-faced australopithecine skull, specimen KNM-WT 40000. The 1998\u20131999 field season subsequently uncovered 34 more craniodental hominin specimens, but the research team was unable to determine if these can be placed into the same species as the former two specimens (that is, if multiple species were present at the site).\nAge.\nThe specimens were recovered near the Nabetili tributary of the Lomekwi river in a mudstone layer of the Nachukui Formation. KNM-WT 40000 was recovered from the Kataboi Member, below the 3.4-million-year-old Tulu Bor Tuff, and above the 3.57-million-year-old Lokochot Tuff. By linear interpolation, KNM-WT 40000 is approximately 3.5 million years old, dating back to the Middle Pliocene. Only three more specimens were recovered from the Kataboi Member at around the same level, the deepest KNM-WT 38341 probably sitting on 3.53-million-year-old sediments. KNM-WT 38350 was recovered from the Lomekwi Member above Tulu Bor, and is approximately 3.3 million years old. The other specimens from this member sit above Tulu Bor, roughly 3.3 million years old as well. The highest specimens\u2014KNM-WT 38344, -55 and -56\u2014may be around 3.2 million years old.\nClassification.\nIn 2001, Meave Leakey and colleagues assigned the Lomekwi remains to a new genus and species, \"Kenyanthropus platyops\", with KNM-WT 40000 the holotype, and KNM-WT 38350 a paratype. The genus name honours Kenya where Lomekwi and a slew of other major human-ancestor sites have been identified. The species name derives from Ancient Greek \"platus\" \"flat\" and \"opsis\" \"face\" in reference to the unusually flat face for such an early hominin.\nThe classification of early hominins with their widely varying anatomy has been a difficult subject matter. The 20th century generated an overabundance of hominin genera plunging the field into taxonomic turmoil, until German evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr, surveying a \"bewildering diversity of names\", decided to recognise only a single genus, \"Homo\", containing a few species. Though other genera and species have since become popular, his more conservative view of hominin diversity has become the mainstay, and the acceptance of further genera is usually met with great resistance. Since Mayr, hominins are classified into \"Australopithecus\" which gave rise to \"Homo\" (which includes modern humans) and the robust \"Paranthropus\" (which is sometimes not recognised as its own genus), which by definition leaves \"Australopithecus\" polyphyletic (a non-natural group which does not comprise a common ancestor and all of its descendants). In addition to \"Kenyanthropus\", the 1990s saw the introduction of \"A. bahrelghazali\", \"Ardipithecus\", \"Orrorin\" and \"Sahelanthropus\", which has complicated discussions of hominin diversity, though the latter three have not been met with much resistance on account of their greater age (all predating \"Australopithecus\").\nAt the time \"Kenyanthropus\" was discovered, \"Australopithecus afarensis\" was the only recognised australopithecine to have existed between 4 and 3 million years ago, aside from its probable ancestor \"A. anamensis\", making \"A. afarensis\" the likely progenitor of all other australopithecines as they diversified in the late Pliocene and into the Pleistocene. Leakey and colleagues considered \"Kenyanthropus\" to be evidence of a greater diversity of Pliocene australopithecines than previously acknowledged. In 2015, Ethiopian palaeoanthropologist Yohannes Haile-Selassie and colleagues erected a new species, \"A. deyiremeda\", which lived in the same time and region as \"Kenyanthropus\" and \"A. afarensis\".\nMeave Leakey and colleagues drew attention to namely the flat face and small cheek teeth, in addition to several other traits, to distinguish the genus from earlier \"Ardipithecus\", contemporary and later \"Australopithecus\", and later \"Paranthropus\". \"Kenyanthropus\" lacks any of the derived traits seen in \"Homo\". They conceded \"Kenyanthropus\" could be subsumed into \"Australopithecus\" if the widest definition of the latter is used, but this conservative approach to hominin diversity leaves \"Australopithecus\" a grade taxon, a non-natural grouping of similar-looking species whereby it effectively encompasses all hominins not classifiable into \"Ardipithecus\" or \"Homo\" regardless of how they may be related to each other. Leakey and colleagues further drew parallels with KNM-WT 40000 and the two-million-year-old KNM-ER 1470 assigned to \"Homo rudolfensis\", attributing differences in braincase and nasal anatomy to archaicness. They suggested \"H. rudolfensis\" may be better classified as \"K. rudolfensis\".\nIn 2003, American palaeoanthropologist Tim D. White was concerned that KNM-WT 40000 was far too distorted to obtain any accurate metrics for classification purposes, especially because the skull was splintered into over 1,100 pieces often measuring less than across. Because such damage is rarely even seen, he argues that it cannot be reliably reconstructed. Because the skulls of modern ape species vary widely, he suggested further fossil discoveries in the region may prove the Lomekwi hominins to be a local variant of \"A. afarensis\" rather than a distinct genus or species. In response, anthropologist Fred Spoor and Meave and Louise Leakey produced much more detailed digital topographical scans of the KNM-WT 40000 maxilla in 2010, permitting the comparison of many more anatomical landmarks on the maxillae of all other early hominins, modern humans, chimpanzees and gorillas, in order to more accurately correct the distortion. The new reconstruction more convincingly verifies the distinctness of \"Kenyanthropus\".\nIn 2003, Spanish writer Camilo Jos\u00e9 Cela Conde and evolutionary biologist Francisco J. Ayala proposed resurrecting the genus \"\"Praeanthropus\" to house all australopithecines which are not \"Ardipithecus\", \"Paranthropus\", or \"A. africanus\", though they opted to synonymise \"Kenyanthropus\" with \"Homo\" as \"H. platyops\"\". Their recommendations have been largely rejected.\nAnatomy.\nKNM-WT 40000 has been heavily distorted during the fossilisation process, the braincase shifted downwards and backwards, the nasal region to the right, and the mouth and cheek region forward. It is unclear if the specimen represents a male or a female.\n\"Kenyanthropus\" has a relatively flat face, including subnasally, between the nose and the mouth (the nasoalveolar clivus). The clivus inclines at 45\u00b0 (there is relaxed sub-nasal prognathism), steeper than almost all other australopithecine specimens (on the upper end of variation for \"Paranthropus\"), more comparable to \"H. rudolfensis\" and \"H. habilis\". This is the earliest example of a flat face in the hominin fossil record. Unlike \"A. afarensis\", \"Kenyanthropus\" lacks the anterior pillars, bony columns running down from the nasal aperture (nose hole). It is also one of the longest early hominin clivi discovered at . The nasal aperture (nose hole) is narrow compared to that of \"Australopithecus\" and \"Paranthropus\". The cheekbones are tall and steep, and the anterior surface (where the cheeks juts out the most) is positioned above the premolars, more frequently seen in \"Paranthropus\" than other hominins. The zygomaticoalveolar crest (stretching between the cheek and the teeth) is low and curved. Overall, the face resembles \"H. rudolfensis\", though has longer nasal bones, a narrower nasal aperture, a shorter postcanine (the molars and premolars) tooth row, and a less steeply inclined (less flat, more prognathic) midfacial region. Much later \"Paranthropus\" are also characterised by relatively flat faces, but this is generally considered to be an adaptation to maximise bite force through enormous teeth, which \"Kenyanthropus\" enigmatically does not have.\nAmong all the specimens, only the M2 (2nd upper left molar) and the tooth sockets of the left side of the mouth of KNM-WT 40000 are preserved well enough to measure and study. With dimensions of , a surface area of , it is the smallest M2 ever discovered for an early hominin. For comparison, those of \"A. afarensis\" in the comparative sample Leakey and colleagues used ranged from about , \"H. habilis\" and \"H. rudolfensis\" , and the robust \"P. boisei\" (with the largest molars among hominins) about . The reconstructed dimensions of KNM-WT 38350's M1 are for a surface area of , which is on the lower end of variation for \"A. anamensis\", \"A. afarensis\" and \"H. habilis\". The thick molar enamel is on par with that of \"A. anamensis\" and \"A. afarensis\". KNM-WT40000 retains the ancestral ape premolar tooth root morphology, with a single lingual root (on the tongue side) and two buccal roots (towards the cheeks), though the P4 of KNM-WT 38350 may only have a single buccal root; the ancestral pattern is frequent in \"Paranthropus\" and variable in \"Australopithecus\". Individuals of more derived species typically have single-rooted premolars. The canine jugum is not visible (a line of bone in the maxilla corresponding to the canine tooth root), which may mean the canines were not that large. The cross-sectional area of the I2 (2nd upper incisor) is 90% the size of that of I1, whereas it is usually 50 to 70% in other great apes. The tooth roots of the incisors do not appear to be orientated out (there was probably no alveolar prognathism, the front teeth did not jut forward).\nBrain volume is uncalculable due to distortion of the braincase, but it was probably similar to that of \"Australopithecus\" and \"Paranthropus\". A sample of five \"A. afarensis\" averaged 445 cc. Like \"Paranthropus\", there is no frontal trigon (a triangle formed by the conjunction of the temporal lines behind the brow ridge). Unlike \"H. habilis\" but like \"H. rudolfensis\", there is no sulcus (trench) behind the brow ridge. The degree of postorbital constriction, the narrowing of the braincase in the frontal lobe region, is on par with that of \"Australopithecus\", \"H. rudolfensis\" and \"H. habilis\", but less than \"P. boisei\". Like the earlier \"A. anamensis\" and \"Ar. ramidus\", the tympanic bone retains the ancestral hominin ear morphology, lacking the petrous crest, and bearing a narrow ear canal with a small opening. The foramen magnum, where the skull connects to the spine, was probably oval shaped as opposed to the heart-shaped one of \"P. boisei\".\nTechnology.\nIn 2015, French archaeologist Sonia Harmand and colleagues identified the Lomekwian stone-tool industry at the Lomekwi site. The tools are attributed to \"Kenyanthropus\" as it is the only hominin identified at the site, but in 2015, anthropologist Fred Spoor suggested that at least some of the indeterminate specimens may be assignable to \"A. deyiremeda\" as the two species have somewhat similar maxillary anatomy. At 3.3 million years old, it is the oldest proposed industry. The assemblage comprises 83 cores, 35 flakes, 7 possible anvils, 7 possible hammerstones, 5 pebbles (which may have also been used as hammers), and 12 indeterminant fragments, of which 52 were sourced from basalt, 51 from phonolite, 35 from trachyphonolite (intermediate composition of phonolite and trachyte), 3 from vesicular basalt, 2 from trachyte, and 6 indeterminant. These materials could have originated at a conglomerate only from the site.\nThe cores are large and heavy, averaging and . Flakes ranged in length, normally shorter than later Oldowan industry flakes. Anvils were heavy, up to . Flakes seem to have been cleaved off primarily using the passive hammer technique (directly striking the core on the anvil) and/or the bipolar method (placing the core on the anvil and striking it with a hammerstone). They produced both unifaces (the flake was worked on one side) and bifaces (both sides were worked). Though they may have been shaping cores beforehand to make them easier to work, the knappers more often than not poorly executed the technique, producing incomplete fractures and fissures on several cores, or requiring multiple blows to flake off a piece. Harmand and colleagues suggested such rudimentary skills may place the Lomekwian as an intermediate industry between simple pounding techniques probably used by earlier hominins, and the flaking Oldowan industry developed by \"Homo\".\nIt is typically assumed that early hominins were using stone tools to cut meat in addition to other organic materials. Wild chimpanzees and black-striped capuchins have been observed to make flakes by accident while using hammerstones to crack nuts on anvils, but the Lomekwi knappers were producing multiple flakes from the same core, and flipped over flakes to work the other side, which speak to the intentionality of their production. In 2016, Spanish archaeologists Manuel Dom\u00ednguez-Rodrigo and Luis Alcal\u00e1 argued Harmand and colleagues did not convincingly justify that the tools were discovered \"in situ\", that is, the tools may be much younger and were reworked into an older layer. If the date of 3.3 million years is accepted, then there is a 700,000-year gap between the next solid evidence of stone tools, at Ledi-Geraru associated with the earliest \"Homo\" LD 350-1, the Oldowan industry, reported by American palaeoanthropologist David Braun and colleagues in 2019. This gap can either be interpreted as the loss and reinvention of stone tool technology, or preservation bias (that tools from this time gap either did not preserve for whatever reason, or sit undiscovered), the latter implying the Lomekwian evolved into the Oldowan.\nPalaeoecology.\nFrom 4.5 to 4 million years ago, Lake Turkana may have swelled to upwards of , in comparison to today's ; the lake at what is now the Koobi Fora site possibly sat at minimum below the surface. Volcanic hills by Lomekwi pushed basalt into the lake sediments. The lake broke up and from 3.6 to 3.2 million years ago, the region was probably characterised by a series of much smaller lakes, each covering no more than . Similarly, the bovid remains at Lomekwi are suggestive of a wet mosaic environment featuring both grasslands and forests on a lakeside or floodplain. \"Theropithecus brumpti\" is the most common monkey at the site as well as the rest of the Turkana Basin at this time; this species tends to live in more forested and closed environments. At the fossiliferous \"A. afarensis\" Hadar site in Ethiopia, \"Theropithecus darti\" is the most common monkey, which tends to prefer drier conditions conducive to wood- or grassland environments. Leakey and colleagues argued this distribution means \"Kenyanthropus\" was living in somewhat more forested environments than more northerly \"A. afarensis\".\n\"Kenyanthropus\", \"A. afarensis\" and \"A. deyiremeda\" all coexisted in the same time and region, and, because their anatomy largely diverges in areas relevant to chewing, they may have practised niche partitioning and foraged for different food items.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16746", "revid": "399105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16746", "title": "Karate", "text": "Japanese and Okinawan martial art\n (; ; ), also , is a martial art developed in the Ryukyu Kingdom. It developed from the indigenous Ryukyuan martial arts (called , \"hand\"; \"t\u012b\" in Okinawan) under the influence of Chinese martial arts. While modern karate is primarily a striking art that uses punches and kicks, traditional karate training also employs throwing and joint locking techniques. A karate practitioner is called a .\nBeginning in the 1300s, early Chinese martial artists brought their techniques to Okinawa. Despite the Ryukyu Kingdom being turned into a puppet state by Japanese samurai in 1609, after the Invasion of Ryukyu, its cultural ties to China remained strong. Since Ryukyuans were banned from carrying swords under samurai rule, groups of young aristocrats created unarmed combat methods as a form of resistance, combining Chinese and local styles of martial arts. Training emphasized self-discipline. This blend of martial arts became known as kara-te , which translates to \"Chinese hand.\" Initially, there were no uniforms, colored belts, ranking systems, or standardized styles. Many elements essential to modern karate were actually incorporated a century ago.\nThe Ryukyu Kingdom had been conquered by the Japanese Satsuma Domain and had become its vassal state since 1609, but was formally annexed to the Empire of Japan in 1879 as Okinawa Prefecture. The Ryukyuan samurai (Okinawan: \"samur\u0113\") who had been the bearers of karate lost their privileged position, and with it, karate was in danger of losing transmission. However, karate gradually regained popularity after 1905, when it began to be taught in schools in Okinawa. During the Taish\u014d era (1912\u20131926), karate was initially introduced to mainland Japan by Ank\u014d Itosu and then by his students Gichin Funakoshi and Motobu Ch\u014dki. The ultranationalistic sentiment of the 1930s affected every aspect of Japanese culture. To make the imported martial art more relatable, Funakoshi incorporated elements from judo, such as the training uniforms, colored belts, and ranking systems. Karate's popularity was initially sluggish with little exposition but when a magazine reported a story about Motobu defeating a foreign boxer in Kyoto, karate rapidly became well known throughout Japan.\nIn this era of escalating Japanese militarism, the name was changed from (\"Chinese hand\" or \"Tang hand\") to (\"empty hand\") \u2013 both of which are pronounced \"karate\" in Japanese \u2013 to indicate that the Japanese wished to develop the combat form in Japanese style. After World War II, Okinawa became (1945) an important United States military site and karate became popular among servicemen stationed there. The martial arts movies of the 1960s and 1970s served to greatly increase the popularity of martial arts around the world, and English-speakers began to use the word \"karate\" in a generic way to refer to all striking-based Asian martial arts. Karate schools (\"d\u014dj\u014ds\") began appearing around the world, catering to those with casual interest as well as those seeking a deeper study of the art.\nKarate-do, like most Japanese martial arts, is considered to be not only about fighting techniques, but also about spiritual cultivation. Many karate schools and \"d\u014dj\u014ds\" have established rules called \"d\u014dj\u014d kun\", which emphasize the perfection of character, the importance of effort, and respect for courtesy. Karate featured at the 2020 Summer Olympics after its inclusion at the Games was supported by the International Olympic Committee. Web Japan (sponsored by the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs) claims that karate has 50 million practitioners worldwide, while the World Karate Federation claims there are 100 million practitioners around the world.\nEtymology.\nOriginally in Okinawa during the Ryukyu Kingdom period, there existed an indigenous Ryukyuan martial art called \"te\" (Okinawan:\"t\u012b\", lit.\u2009'hand'). Furthermore, in the 19th century, a Chinese-derived martial art called \"t\u014dde\" (Okinawan: \"t\u014dd\u012b\", lit.\u2009'Tang hand') emerged. According to Gichin Funakoshi, a distinction between \"Okinawan-te\" and \"t\u014dde\" existed in the late 19th century. With the emergence of \"t\u014dde\", it is thought that \"te\" also came to be called \"Okinawa-te\" (Okinawan: \"Uchin\u0101d\u012b\", lit.\u2009'Okinawa hand'). However, this distinction gradually became blurred with the decline of \"Okinawa-te\".\nAround 1905, when \"karate\" began to be taught in public schools in Okinawa, \"t\u014dde\" was read kun\u2019yomi and called \"karate\" (, lit.\u2009'Tang hand') in the Japanese style. Both \"t\u014dde\" and \"karate\" are written in the same Chinese characters meaning \"Tang/China hand,\" but the former is on'yomi (Chinese reading) and the latter is kun'yomi (Japanese reading). Since the distinction between \"Okinawa-te\" and \"t\u014dde\" was already blurred at that time, karate was used to encompass both. \"Kara (\u304b\u3089)\" is a kun\u2019yomi for the character \"\u5510\" (t\u014d/\u3068\u3046 in on'yomi) which is derived from an alternate spelling of \"Kaya confederacy (\u52a0\u7f85)\" and later included things deriving from China (specifically from the Tang dynasty). Therefore, \"t\u014dde\" and \"karate\" (Tang hand) differ in the scope of meaning of the words. \nJapan sent envoys to the Tang dynasty and introduced much Chinese culture. Gichin Funakoshi proposed that \"t\u014dde\"/karate may have been used instead of \"te\", as Tang became a synonym for luxury imported goods.\nAccording to Gichin Funakoshi, the word pronounced existed in the Ryukyu Kingdom period, but it is unclear whether it meant or .\nThe Chinese origins of karate were increasingly viewed with suspicion due to rising tensions between China and Japan and as well as the looming threat of a full-scale war between the two countries. In 1933, the Japanese character for karate was altered to a homophone\u2014 a word pronounced identically but with a different meaning. Thus, \"Chinese hand\" was replaced with \"empty hand.\"\nBut this name change did not immediately spread among Okinawan karate practitioners. There were many karate practitioners, such as Ch\u014djun Miyagi, who still used \"te\" in everyday conversation until World War II.\nWhen karate was first taught in mainland Japan in the 1920s, Gichin Funakoshi and Motobu Ch\u014dki used the name \"karate-jutsu\" (, lit.\u2009'Tang hand art') along with karate. The word \"jutsu\" () means art or technique, and in those days it was often used as a suffix to the name of each martial art, as in \"jujutsu\" and \"kenjutsu\" (swordsmanship).\nThe first documented use of a homophone of the logogram pronounced \"kara\" by replacing the Chinese character meaning \"Tang dynasty\" with the character meaning \"empty\" took place in \"Karate Kumite\" () written in August 1905 by Ch\u014dmo Hanashiro (1869\u20131945). In mainland Japan, karate (, empty hand) gradually began to be used from the writings of Gichin Funakoshi and Motobu Ch\u014dki in the 1920s.\nIn 1929 the Karate Study Group of Keio University (Instructor Gichin Funakoshi) used this term in reference to the concept of emptiness in the Heart Sutra, and this terminology was later popularized, especially in Tokyo. There is also a theory that the background for this name change was the worsening of Japan-China relations at the time.\nOn 25 October 1936 a roundtable meeting of karate masters was held in Naha, Okinawa Prefecture, and it was officially resolved to use the name karate (empty hand) in the sense of \"k\u016bshu k\u016bken\" (, lit.\u2009'without anything in the hands or fists'). To commemorate this day, the Okinawa Prefectural Assembly passed a resolution in 2005 to decide 25 October as \"Karate Day.\"\nAnother nominal development is the addition of \"d\u014d\" (; ) to the end of the word karate. \"D\u014d\" is a suffix having numerous meanings including road, path, route and way. It is used in many martial arts that survived Japan's transition from feudal culture to modern times. It implies that these arts are not just fighting systems but contain spiritual elements when promoted as disciplines. In this context \"d\u014d\" is usually translated as \"the way of \u2026\". Examples include aikido, judo, ky\u016bd\u014d and kendo. Thus karated\u014d is more than just empty hand techniques. It is \"the way of the empty hand\".\nSince the 1980s the term karate () has been written in katakana instead of Chinese characters, mainly by Kyokushin Karate (founder: Masutatsu Oyama). In Japan, katakana is mainly used for foreign words, giving Kyokushin Karate a modern and new impression.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThere are several theories regarding the origins of karate, but the main ones are as follows.\nTheory of development from \"m\u0113kata\".\nIn Okinawa there was an ancient martial dance called \"m\u0113kata\" (). The dancers danced to the accompaniment of songs and \"sanshin\" music, similar to karate kata. In the Okinawan countryside, \"m\u0113kata\" remained until the early 20th century. There is a theory that from this \"m\u0113kata\" with martial elements, \"te\" (Okinawan:\"t\u012b\", hand) was born and developed into karate. This theory is advocated by Ank\u014d Asato and his student Gichin Funakoshi.\nTheory of introduction by thirty-six families from Min.\nIt is said that in 1392 a group of professional people known as the \"Thirty-six families from Min\" migrated to Kume Village (now Kume, Naha City) in Naha from Fujian Province in the Ming Dynasty at that time. They brought with them advanced learning and skills to Ryukyu, and there is a theory that Chinese kenp\u014d, the origin of karate, was also brought to Ryukyu at this time.\nThere is also the \"Keich\u014d import theory,\" which states that karate was brought to Ryukyu after the invasion of Ryukyu by the Satsuma Domain (Keich\u014d 14, 1609), as well as the theory that it was introduced by K\u014dsh\u014dkun (Okinawan: K\u016bsank\u016b) based on the description in \"\u014cshima Writing\".\nOther theories.\nThere are also other theories, such as that it developed from Okinawan sumo (\"shima\") or that it originated from jujutsu, which had been introduced from Japan.\nOkinawa.\n15th\u201317th centuries.\nThe reason for the development of unarmed combat techniques in Ryukyu has conventionally been attributed to a policy of banning weapons, which is said to have been implemented on two occasions. The first was during the reign of King Sh\u014d Shin (1476\u20131526; r. 1477\u20131527), when weapons were collected from all over the country and strictly controlled by the royal government. The second time was after the invasion of Ryukyu by the Satsuma Domain in 1609. Through the two policies, the popular belief that Ryukyuan samurai, who were deprived of their weapons, developed karate to compete with Satsuma's samurai has traditionally been referred to as if it were a historical fact.\nBut in recent years many researchers have questioned the causal relationship between the policy of banning weapons and the development of karate. For example, as the basis for King Sh\u014d Shin's policy of banning weapons, an inscription on the parapet of the main hall of Shuri Castle (, 1509), which states that \"swords, bows and arrows are to be piled up exclusively as weapons of national defense,\" has been conventionally interpreted as meaning \"weapons were collected and sealed in a warehouse.\" However, in recent years, researchers of Okinawan studies have pointed out that the correct interpretation is that \"swords, bows and arrows were collected and used as weapons of the state.\"\nIt is also known that the policy of banning weapons (a 1613 notice to the Ryukyu royal government), which is said to have been implemented by the Satsuma Domain, only prohibited the carrying of swords and other weapons, but not their possession, and was a relatively lax regulation. This notice stated, \"(1) The possession of guns is prohibited. (2) The possession of weapons owned privately by princes, three magistrates, and samurai is permitted. (3) Weapons must be repaired in Satsuma through the magistrate's office of Satsuma. (4) Swords must be reported to the magistrate's office of Satsuma for approval.\" It did not prohibit the possession of weapons (except guns) or even their practice. In fact, even after subjugation to the Satsuma Domain, a number of Ryukyuan masters of swordsmanship, spearmanship, archery, and other arts are known. Therefore, some researchers criticize the theory that karate developed due to the policy of banning weapons as \"a rumor on the street with no basis at all.\"\nKarate began as a common fighting system known as \"te\" (Okinawan: \"t\u012b\") among the Ryukyuan samurai class. There were few formal styles of \"te,\" but rather many practitioners with their own methods. One surviving example is Motobu Udund\u012b (lit.\u2009'Motobu Palace Hand'), which has been handed down to this day in the Motobu family, one of the branches of the former Ryukyu royal family. In the 16th century, the Ryukyuan history book \"Ky\u016by\u014d\" (, established around 1745) mentions that Ky\u014d Ahagon Jikki, a favored retainer of King Sh\u014d Shin, used a martial art called \"karate\" (, lit.\u2009'empty hand') to smash both legs of an assassin. This karate is thought to refer to \"te\", not today's karate, and Ank\u014d Asato introduces Ky\u014d Ahagon as a \"prominent martial artist.\"\n18th century.\nHowever, some believe that Ky\u014d Ahagon's anecdote is a half-legend and that it is unclear whether he was actually a \"te\" master. In the 18th century, the names of Nishinda \"U\u0113kata\", Gushikawa \"U\u0113kata\", and Ch\u014dken Makabe are known as masters of \"te\".\nNishinda \"U\u0113kata\" and Gushikawa \"U\u0113kata\" were martial artists active during the reign of King Sh\u014d Kei (reigned 1713\u20131751). Nishinda \"U\u0113kata\" was good at spear as well as \"te\", and Gushikawa \"U\u0113kata\" was also good at wooden sword (swordsmanship).\nCh\u014dken Makabe was a man of the late 18th century. His light stature and jumping ability gave him the nickname \"Makabe \"Ch\u0101n-gw\u0101\"\" (lit.\u2009'little fighting cock'), as he was like a \"ch\u0101n\" (fighting cock). The ceiling of his house is said to have been marked by his kicking foot.\nIt is known that in \"\u014cshima Writing\" (1762), written by Yoshihiro Tobe, a Confucian scholar of the Tosa Domain, who interviewed Ryukyuan samurai who had drifted to Tosa (present-day K\u014dchi Prefecture), there is a description of a martial art called \"kumiai-jutsu\" () performed by K\u014dsh\u014dkun (Okinawan:K\u016bsank\u016b). It is believed that K\u014dsh\u014dkun may have been a military officer on a mission from Qing that visited Ryukyu in 1756, and some believe that karate originated with K\u014dsh\u014dkun.\nIn addition, the will (Part I: 1778, Part II: 1783) of Ryukyuan samurai Aka P\u0113chin Chokushki (1721\u20131784) mentions the name of a martial art called \"karamut\u014d\" (), along with Japanese Jigen-ry\u016b swordsmanship and jujutsu, indicating that Ryukyuan samurai practiced these arts in the 18th century.\nIn 1609, the Japanese Satsuma Domain invaded Ryukyu and Ryukyu became its vassal state, but it continued to pay tribute to the Ming and Qing Dynasties in China. At the time, China had implemented a policy of sea ban and only traded with tributary countries, so the Satsuma Domain wanted Ryukyu to continue its tribute to benefit from it.\nThe envoys of the tribute mission were chosen from among the samurai class of Ryukyu, and they went to Fuzhou in Fujian and stayed there for six months to a year and a half. Government-funded and privately funded foreign students were also sent to study in Beijing or Fuzhou for several years. Some of these envoys and students studied Chinese martial arts in China. The styles of Chinese martial arts they studied are not known for certain, but it is assumed that they studied Fujian White Crane and other styles from Fujian Province.\nS\u014dryo Ts\u016bshin (monk Ts\u016bshin), active during the reign of King Sh\u014d Kei, was a monk who went to the Qing Dynasty to study Chinese martial arts and was reportedly one of the best martial artists of his time in Ryukyu.\n19th and early 20th century.\nIt is not known when the name \"t\u014dde\" (, lit.\u2009'Tang hand') first came into use in the Ryukyu Kingdom, but according to Ank\u014d Asato, it was popularized from Kanga Sakugawa (1786\u20131867), who was nicknamed \"T\u014dde Sakugawa.\" Sakugawa was a samurai from Shuri who traveled to Qing China to learn Chinese martial arts. The martial arts he mastered were new and different from te. As \"t\u014dde\" was spread by Sakugawa, traditional \"te\" became distinguished as \"Okinawa-te\" (, lit.\u2009'Okinawa hand'), and gradually faded away as it merged with \"t\u014dde\".\nIt is generally believed that today's karate is a result of the synthesis of \"te\" (\"Okinawa-te\") and \"t\u014dde\". Funakoshi writes, \"In the early modern era, when China was highly revered, many martial artists traveled to China to practice Chinese kenpo, and added it to the ancient kenpo, the so-called 'Okinawa-te'. After further study, they discarded the disadvantages of both, adopted their advantages, and added more subtlety, and karate was born.\"\nEarly styles of karate are often generalized as Shuri-te, Naha-te, and Tomari-te, named after the three cities from which they emerged. Each area and its teachers had particular kata, techniques, and principles that distinguished their local version of \"te\" from the others.\nAround the 1820s, Matsumura S\u014dkon (1809\u20131899) began teaching \"Okinawa-te\". Matsumura was, according to one theory, a student of Sakugawa. Matsumura's style later became the origin of many Shuri-te schools.\nItosu Ank\u014d (1831\u20131915) studied under Matsumura and Bushi Nagahama of Naha-te. He created the \"Pin'an\" forms (\"Heian\" in Japanese) which are simplified kata for beginning students. In 1905, Itosu helped to get karate introduced into Okinawa's public schools. These forms were taught to children at the elementary school level. Itosu's influence in karate is broad. The forms he created are common across nearly all styles of karate. His students became some of the most well-known karate masters, including Motobu Ch\u014dy\u016b, Motobu Ch\u014dki, Yabu Kents\u016b, Hanashiro Ch\u014dmo, Gichin Funakoshi and Kenwa Mabuni. Itosu is sometimes referred to as \"the Grandfather of Modern Karate.\"\nIn 1881, Higaonna Kanry\u014d returned from China after years of instruction with Ryu Ryu Ko and founded what would become Naha-te. One of his students was the founder of Goj\u016b-ry\u016b, Ch\u014djun Miyagi. Ch\u014djun Miyagi taught such well-known karateka as Seko Higa (who also trained with Higaonna), Meitoku Yagi, Miyazato Ei'ichi, and Seikichi Toguchi, and for a very brief time near the end of his life, An'ichi Miyagi (a teacher claimed by Morio Higaonna).\nIn addition to the three early \"te\" styles of karate a fourth Okinawan influence is that of Uechi Kanbun (1877\u20131948). At the age of 20 he went to Fuzhou in Fujian Province, China, to escape Japanese military conscription. While there he studied under Sh\u016b Shiwa (Chinese: \"Zhou Zihe\" \u5468\u5b50\u548c 1874\u20131926). He was a leading figure of Chinese Nanpa Shorin-ken style at that time. He later developed his own style of Uechi-ry\u016b karate based on the Sanchin, Seisan, and Sanseiryu kata that he had studied in China.\nJapan.\nWhen Sh\u014d Tai, the last king of the Ry\u016bky\u016b Kingdom, was ordered to move to Tokyo in 1879, he was accompanied by prominent karate masters such as Ank\u014d Asato and Ch\u014dfu Kyan (father of Ch\u014dtoku Kyan). It is unknown if they taught karate to the Japanese in Tokyo, although there are records that Kyan taught his son karate.\nIn 1908, students from the Okinawa Prefectural Middle School gave a karate demonstration at Butokuden in Kyoto, which was also witnessed by Kan\u014d Jigor\u014d (founder of judo).\nIn May 1922, Gichin Funakoshi (founder of Shotokan) presented pictures of karate on two hanging scrolls at the first Physical Education Exhibition in Tokyo. The following June, Funakoshi was invited to the Kodokan to give a karate demonstration in front of Jigoro Kano and other judo experts. This was the beginning of the full-scale introduction of karate in Tokyo.\nIn November 1922, Motobu Ch\u014dki (founder of Motobu-ry\u016b) participated in a judo versus boxing match in Kyoto, defeating a foreign boxer. The match was featured in Japan's largest magazine \"King,\" which had a circulation of about one million at the time, and karate and Motobu's name became instantly known throughout Japan.\nIn 1922, Funakoshi published the first book on karate, and in 1926 Motobu published the first technical book on kumite (sparring). As karate's popularity grew, karate clubs were established one after another in Japanese universities with Funakoshi and Motobu as instructors.\nIn the Showa era (1926\u20131989), other Okinawan karate masters also came to mainland Japan to teach karate. These included Kenwa Mabuni, Ch\u014djun Miyagi, Kanken T\u014dyama, and Kanbun Uechi.\nWith the rise of militarism in Japan, some karate masters gradually came to consider the name karate (, lit.\u2009'Tang hand') undesirable. The name karate (, lit.\u2009'empty hand') had already been used by Ch\u014dmo Hanashiro in Okinawa in 1905, and Funakoshi decided to use this name as well. In addition, the name \"karated\u014d\" (, lit.\u2009'the way of the Tang hand'), which was already used by the karate club of Tokyo Imperial University (now the University of Tokyo) in 1929 by adding the suffix \"d\u014d\" (, way) to karate, was also used by Funakoshi, who decided to use the name \"karated\u014d\" (, lit.\u2009'the way of the empty hand') in the same way.\nThe \"d\u014d\" suffix implies that \"karated\u014d\" is a path to self-knowledge, not just a study of the technical aspects of fighting. Like most martial arts practised in Japan, karate made its transition from -\"jutsu\" to -\"d\u014d\" around the beginning of the 20th century. The \"d\u014d\" in \"karate-d\u014d\" sets it apart from karate-\"jutsu\", as aikido is distinguished from aikijutsu, judo from jujutsu, kendo from kenjutsu and iaido from iaijutsu.\nIn 1933, karate was officially recognized as a Japanese martial art by the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai, but initially belonged to the jujutsu division and title examinations were conducted by jujutsu masters.\nIn 1935, Funakoshi changed the names of many kata and karate itself. Funakoshi's motivation was that the names of many of the traditional kata were unintelligible, and that it would be inappropriate to use the Chinese style names to teach karate as a Japanese martial art. He also said that the kata had to be simplified to spread karate as a form of physical education, so some of the kata were modified. He always referred to what he taught as simply karate, but in 1936 he built a d\u014dj\u014d in Tokyo and the style he left behind is usually called Shotokan after this d\u014dj\u014d. \"Shoto\", meaning \"pine wave\", was Funakoshi's pen name and \"kan\" meaning \"hall\".\nOn 25 October 1936, a roundtable meeting of karate masters was held in Naha, Okinawa Prefecture, where it was officially decided to change the name of karate from karate (Tang hand) to karate (empty hand). In attendance were Ch\u014dmo Hanashiro, Ch\u014dki Motobu, Ch\u014dtoku Kyan, J\u016bhatsu Kyoda, Ch\u014djun Miyagi, Shinpan Gusukuma, and Ch\u014dshin Chibana. In 2005, the Okinawa Prefectural Assembly passed a resolution to commemorate this decision by designating 25 October as \"Karate Day.\"\nThe modernization and systemization of karate in Japan also included the adoption of the white uniform that consisted of the \"dogi\" or \"keikogi\"\u2014mostly called just karategi\u2014and coloured belt ranks. Both of these innovations were originated and popularized by Jigoro Kano, the founder of judo and one of the men Funakoshi consulted in his efforts to modernize karate.\nAt that time, there was almost no kumite training in karate, and kata training was the main focus. There were also no matches. However, at that time, judo and kendo matches were already being held in mainland Japan, and practice was also being actively practiced, the young people in mainland Japan gradually became dissatisfied with kata-only practice.\nIn pre\u2013World War II Okinawa, karateka practiced \"iri kumi\" (Okinawan for kumite) allowing all kinds of techniques (strikes, choke holds, joint locks, etc.) but in a controlled manner to not injure the opponent when aiming to vital areas. Despite sparring was originally an unnoticed form of practice for senior students, there were no \"contests\" until Western-style competitions were introduced to Japan.\nGichin Funakoshi stated, \"There are no contests in karate.\" Shigeru Egami relates that, during his visit to Okinawa in 1940, he heard some karateka were ousted from their \"d\u014dj\u014d\" because they adopted sparring after having learned it in Tokyo. In the early 1930s, pre-arranged sparring was introduced and developed, and finally a few years later free sparring was permitted for Shotokan students.\nAccording to Yasuhiro Konishi, kata-only training was often criticized by the leading judo practitioners of the time, such as Shuichi Nagaoka and Hajime Isogai, who said, \"The karate you do cannot be understood from kata alone, so why don't you try a little more so that the general public can understand it?\" Against the backdrop of these complaints and criticisms, young people such as Hironori \u014ctsuka and Konishi devised their own kumite and kumite matches, which are the prototypes of today's kumite. Motobu's emphasis on kumite attracted \u014ctsuka and Konishi, who later studied Okinawan kumite under him.\nAfter World War II, karate activities were temporarily stalled due to the \"Notice Banning Judo, Kendo, and Other Martial Arts\" issued by the Ministry of Education under the directive of the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers. However, because this notice did not include the word \"karate,\" it was interpreted by the Ministry of Education that karate was not prohibited, and karate was able to resume its activities earlier than other martial arts.\nA new form of karate called Kyokushin was formally founded in 1957 by Masutatsu Oyama (who was born a Korean, Choi Yeong-Eui \ucd5c\uc601\uc758). Kyokushin is largely a synthesis of Shotokan and G\u014dj\u016b-ry\u016b. It teaches a curriculum that emphasizes aliveness, physical toughness, and full contact sparring. Because of its emphasis on physical, full-force sparring, Kyokushin is now often called \"full contact karate\", or \"Knockdown karate\" (after the name for its competition rules). Many other karate organizations and styles are descended from the Kyokushin curriculum.\nPractice.\nKarate can be practiced as an art (bud\u014d), self defense or as a combat sport. Traditional karate places emphasis on self-development (bud\u014d). Modern Japanese style training emphasizes the psychological elements incorporated into a proper \"kokoro\" (attitude) such as perseverance, fearlessness, virtue, and leadership skills. Sport karate places emphasis on exercise and competition. Weapons are an important training activity in some styles of karate.\nKarate training is commonly divided into \"kihon\" (basics or fundamentals), \"kata\" (forms), and \"kumite\" (sparring).\nKihon.\nKihon means basics and these form the base for everything else in the style including stances, strikes, punches, kicks and blocks. Karate styles place varying importance on kihon. Typically this is training in unison of a technique or a combination of techniques by a group of karateka. Kihon may also be prearranged drills in smaller groups or in pairs.\nKata.\nKata (\u578b:\u304b\u305f) means literally \"shape\" or \"model.\" Kata is a formalized sequence of movements which represent various offensive and defensive postures. These postures are based on idealized combat applications. The applications when applied in a demonstration with real opponents is referred to as a Bunkai. The Bunkai shows how every stance and movement is used. Bunkai is a useful tool to understand a kata.\nTo attain a formal rank the karateka must demonstrate competent performance of specific required kata for that level. The Japanese terminology for grades or ranks is commonly used. Requirements for examinations vary among schools.\nKumite.\nSparring in Karate is called kumite (\u7d44\u624b:\u304f\u307f\u3066). It literally means \"meeting of hands.\" Kumite is practiced both as a sport and as self-defense training.\nLevels of physical contact during sparring vary considerably. Full contact karate has several variants. Knockdown karate (such as Kyokushin) uses full power techniques to bring an opponent to the ground. Sparring in armour, \"bogu kumite\", allows full power techniques with some safety. Sport kumite in many international competition under the World Karate Federation is free or structured with light contact or semi contact and points are awarded by a referee.\nIn structured kumite (\"yakusoku\", prearranged), two participants perform a choreographed series of techniques with one striking while the other blocks. The form ends with one devastating technique (\"hito tsuki\").\nIn free sparring (Jiyu Kumite), the two participants have a free choice of scoring techniques. The allowed techniques and contact level are primarily determined by sport or style organization policy, but might be modified according to the age, rank and sex of the participants. Depending upon style, take-downs, sweeps and in some rare cases even time-limited grappling on the ground are also allowed.\nFree sparring is performed in a marked or closed area. The bout runs for a fixed time (2 to 3 minutes.) The time can run continuously (\"iri kume\") or be stopped for referee judgment. In light contact or semi contact kumite, points are awarded based on the criteria: good form, sporting attitude, vigorous application, awareness/\"zanshin\", good timing and correct distance.\nIn full contact karate kumite, points are based on the results of the impact, rather than the formal appearance of the scoring technique.\nD\u014dj\u014d Kun.\nIn the bushid\u014d tradition \"d\u014dj\u014d kun\" is a set of guidelines for karateka to follow. These guidelines apply both in the \"d\u014dj\u014d\" (training hall) and in everyday life.\nConditioning.\nOkinawan karate uses supplementary training known as \"hojo undo\". This uses simple equipment made of wood and stone. The \"makiwara\" is a striking post. The \"nigiri game\" is a large jar used for developing grip strength. These supplementary exercises are designed to increase strength, stamina, speed, and muscle coordination. Sport Karate emphasizes aerobic exercise, anaerobic exercise, power, agility, flexibility, and stress management. All practices vary depending upon the school and the teacher.\nSport.\nKarate is divided into style organizations. These organizations sometimes cooperate in non-style specific sport karate organizations or federations. Examples of sport organizations include AAKF/ITKF, AOK, TKL, AKA, WKF, NWUKO, WUKF and WKC. Organizations hold competitions (tournaments) from local to international level. Tournaments are designed to match members of opposing schools or styles against one another in kata, sparring and weapons demonstration. They are often separated by age, rank and sex with potentially different rules or standards based on these factors. The tournament may be exclusively for members of a particular style (closed) or one in which any martial artist from any style may participate within the rules of the tournament (open).\nThe World Karate Federation (WKF) is the largest sport karate organization and is recognized by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) as being responsible for karate competition in the Olympic Games. The WKF has developed common rules governing all styles. The national WKF organizations coordinate with their respective National Olympic Committees.\nWKF karate competition has two disciplines: sparring (\"kumite\") and forms (\"kata\"). Competitors may enter either as individuals or as part of a team. Evaluation for kata and kobud\u014d is performed by a panel of judges, whereas sparring is judged by a head referee, usually with assistant referees at the side of the sparring area. Sparring matches are typically divided by weight, age, gender, and experience.\nWKF only allows membership through one national organization/federation per country to which clubs may join. The World Union of Karate-do Federations (WUKF) offers different styles and federations a world body they may join, without having to compromise their style or size. The WUKF accepts more than one federation or association per country.\nSport organizations use different competition rule systems. Light contact rules are used by the WKF, WUKO, IASK and WKC. Full contact karate rules used by Kyokushinkai, Seidokaikan and other organizations. Bogu kumite (full contact with protective shielding of targets) rules are used in the World Koshiki Karate-Do Federation organization. Shinkaratedo Federation use boxing gloves. Within the United States, rules may be under the jurisdiction of state sports authorities, such as the boxing commission.\nMixed Martial Arts (MMA).\nKarate, although not widely used in mixed martial arts, has been effective for some MMA practitioners. Various styles of karate are practiced in MMA: Lyoto Machida and John Makdessi practice Shotokan; Bas Rutten and Georges St-Pierre train in Kyokushin; Michelle Waterson holds a black belt in American Free Style Karate; Stephen Thompson practices American Kenpo Karate; and both Gunnar Nelson and Robert Whittaker practiced G\u014dj\u016b-ry\u016b. Additionally, John Kavanagh has been successful as coach with a Kenpo Karate pedigree.\nOlympic Games.\nIn August 2016, the International Olympic Committee approved karate as an Olympic sport beginning at the 2020 Summer Olympics. Karate also debuted at the 2018 Summer Youth Olympics. During this debut of Karate in the Summer Olympics, sixty competitors from around the world competed in the Kumite competition, and twenty competed in the Kata competition. In September 2015, karate was included in a shortlist along with baseball, softball, skateboarding, surfing, and sport climbing to be considered for inclusion in the 2020 Summer Olympics; and in June 2016, the executive board of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced that they would support the proposal to include all of the shortlisted sports in the 2020 Games. Finally, on 3 August 2016, all five sports (counting baseball and softball together as one sport) were approved for inclusion in the 2020 Olympic program.\nKarate was not included in the 2024 Olympic Games, although it has made the shortlist for inclusion, alongside nine others, in the 2028 Summer Olympics.\nDan Rank system.\nIn 1924, Gichin Funakoshi, founder of Shotokan Karate, adopted the Dan system from the judo founder Jigoro Kano using a rank scheme with a limited set of belt colors. Other Okinawan teachers also adopted this practice. In the Ky\u016b/Dan system the beginner grades start with a higher numbered ky\u016b (\"e.g.\", 10th Ky\u016b or Juky\u016b) and progress toward a lower numbered ky\u016b. The Dan progression continues from 1st Dan (Shodan, or 'beginning dan') to the higher dan grades. Ky\u016b-grade karateka are referred to as \"color belt\" or mudansha (\"ones without dan/rank\"). Dan-grade karateka are referred to as \"yudansha\" (holders of dan/rank). Yudansha typically wear a black belt. Normally, the first five to six dans are given by examination by superior dan holders, while the subsequent (7 and up) are honorary, given for special merits and/or age reached. Requirements of rank differ among styles, organizations, and schools. Ky\u016b ranks stress Karate stances, Equilibrioception, and motor coordination. Speed and power are added at higher grades.\nMinimum age and time in rank are factors affecting promotion. Testing consists of demonstration of techniques before a panel of examiners or senseis. This will vary by school, but testing may include everything learned at that point, or just new information. The demonstration is an application for new rank (shinsa) and may include basics, kata, bunkai, self-defense, routines, tameshiwari (breaking), and kumite (sparring).\nPhilosophy.\nIn \"Karate-Do Kyohan,\" Funakoshi quoted from the Heart Sutra, which is prominent in Shingon Buddhism: \"Form is emptiness, emptiness is form itself\" (\"shiki zokuze k\u016b k\u016b zokuze shiki\").\nHe interpreted the \"kara\" of Karate-d\u014d to mean \"to purge oneself of selfish and evil thoughts ... for only with a clear mind and conscience can the practitioner understand the knowledge which he receives.\" Funakoshi believed that one should be \"inwardly humble and outwardly gentle.\" Only by behaving humbly can one be open to Karate's many lessons. This is done by listening and being receptive to criticism. He considered courtesy of prime importance. He said that \"Karate is properly applied only in those rare situations in which one really must either down another or be downed by him.\" Funakoshi did not consider it unusual for a devotee to use Karate in a real physical confrontation no more than perhaps once in a lifetime. He stated that Karate practitioners must \"never be easily drawn into a fight.\" It is understood that one blow from a real expert could mean death. It is clear that those who misuse what they have learned bring dishonor upon themselves. He promoted the character trait of personal conviction. In \"time of grave public crisis, one must have the courage\u00a0... to face a million and one opponents.\" He taught that indecisiveness is a weakness.\nStyles.\nKarate is divided into many styles, each with their different training methods, focuses, and cultures; though they mainly originate from the historical Okinawan parent styles of Naha-te, Tomari-te and Shuri-te.\nHowever some of the schools' founders have been sceptical about the division of karate into many styles. Gichin Funakoshi simply stated that there are as many styles as instructors in the world while Kenwa Mabuni explained that the notion of different variations of karate came from outsiders. Even before the karate popularization in mainland Japan, it was spread the idea that karate was divided into two branches: Sh\u014drei-ry\u016b (roughly what is known as Naha-te) and Sh\u014drin-ry\u016b (also classified as Shuri-te and Tomari-te though the latter somewhat lying in between); but Ch\u014djun Miyagi believed that was just a wrong perception. Kanken T\u014dyama disregarded that idea as he supported the \"non-school principle\". Mas Oyama was actively opposed to the idea of the fragmentation into several karate schools. He believed that making karate a combat sport, as well keeping it as a martial art, could be a possible approach to unify all schools.\nAs of 1980s[ [update]] the four main schools of karate in mainland Japan were considered to be G\u014dj\u016b-ry\u016b, Shotokan, Shit\u014d-ry\u016b, and Wad\u014d-ry\u016b. These four styles are those recognised by the World Karate Federation for international kata competition. Some widespread styles often accepted for kata competition include Kyokushin, Sh\u014drin-ry\u016b, Uechi-Ry\u016b or Isshin-ry\u016b among others.\nWorld.\nAfrica.\nKarate has grown in popularity in Africa, particularly in South Africa and Ghana.\nAmericas.\nCanada.\nKarate began in Canada in the 1930s and 1940s as Japanese people immigrated to the country. Karate was practised quietly without a large amount of organization. During the Second World War, many Japanese-Canadian families were moved to the interior of British Columbia. Masaru Shintani, at the age of 13, began to study Shorin-Ryu karate in the Japanese camp under Kitigawa. In 1956, after 9 years of training with Kitigawa, Shintani travelled to Japan and met Hironori Otsuka (Wado Ryu). In 1958, Otsuka invited Shintani to join his organization Wado Kai, and in 1969 he asked Shintani to officially call his style Wado.\nIn Canada during this same time, karate was also introduced by Masami Tsuruoka who had studied in Japan in the 1940s under Tsuyoshi Chitose. In 1954, Tsuruoka initiated the first karate competition in Canada and laid the foundation for the National Karate Association.\nIn the late 1950s Shintani moved to Ontario and began teaching karate and judo at the Japanese Cultural Centre in Hamilton. In 1966, he began (with Otsuka's endorsement) the Shintani Wado Kai Karate Federation. During the 1970s Otsuka appointed Shintani the Supreme Instructor of Wado Kai in North America. In 1979, Otsuka publicly promoted Shintani to hachidan (8th dan) and privately gave him a kudan certificate (9th dan), which was revealed by Shintani in 1995. Shintani and Otsuka visited each other in Japan and Canada several times, the last time in 1980 two years prior to Otsuka's death. Shintani died 7 May 2000.\nUnited States.\nAfter World War II, members of the United States military learned karate in Okinawa or Japan and then opened schools in the US. In 1945, Robert Trias opened the first \"d\u014dj\u014d\" in the United States in Phoenix, Arizona, a Shuri-ry\u016b karate \"d\u014dj\u014d\". In the 1950s, William J. Dometrich, Ed Parker, Cecil T. Patterson, Gordon Doversola, Harold G. Long, Donald Hugh Nagle, George Mattson and Peter Urban all began instructing in the US.\nTsutomu Ohshima began studying karate under Shotokan's founder, Gichin Funakoshi, while a student at Waseda University, beginning in 1948. In 1957, Ohshima received his godan (fifth-degree black belt), the highest rank awarded by Funakoshi. He founded the first university karate club in the United States at California Institute of Technology in 1957. In 1959, he founded the Southern California Karate Association (SCKA) which was renamed Shotokan Karate of America (SKA) in 1969.\nIn the 1960s, Anthony Mirakian, Richard Kim, Teruyuki Okazaki, John Pachivas, Allen Steen, Gosei Yamaguchi (son of G\u014dgen Yamaguchi), Michael G. Foster and Pat Burleson began teaching martial arts around the country.\nIn 1961, Hidetaka Nishiyama, a co-founder of the Japan Karate Association (JKA) and student of Gichin Funakoshi, began teaching in the United States. He founded the International Traditional Karate Federation (ITKF). Takayuki Mikami was sent to New Orleans by the JKA in 1963.\nIn 1964, Takayuki Kubota relocated the International Karate Association from Tokyo to California.\nAsia.\nKorea.\nDue to past conflict between Korea and Japan, most notably during the Japanese occupation of Korea in the early 20th century, the influence of karate in Korea is a contentious issue. From 1910 until 1945, Korea was annexed by the Japanese Empire. It was during this time that many of the Korean martial arts masters of the 20th century were exposed to Japanese karate. After regaining independence from Japan, many Korean martial arts schools that opened up in the 1940s and 1950s were founded by masters who had trained in karate in Japan as part of their martial arts training.\nWon Kuk Lee, a Korean student of Funakoshi, founded the first martial arts school after the Japanese occupation of Korea ended in 1945, called the Chung Do Kwan. Having studied under Gichin Funakoshi at Chuo University, Lee had incorporated taekkyon, kung fu, and karate in the martial art that he taught which he called \"Tang Soo Do\", the Korean transliteration of the Chinese characters for \"Way of Chinese Hand\" (\u5510\u624b\u9053). In the mid-1950s, the martial arts schools were unified under President Rhee Syngman's order, and became taekwondo under the leadership of Choi Hong Hi and a committee of Korean masters. Choi, a significant figure in taekwondo history, had also studied karate under Funakoshi. Karate also provided an important comparative model for the early founders of taekwondo in the formalization of their art including hyung and the belt ranking system. The original taekwondo \"hyung\" were identical to karate \"kata\". Eventually, original Korean forms were developed by individual schools and associations. Although the World Taekwondo Federation and International Taekwon-Do Federation are the most prominent among Korean martial arts organizations, \"tang soo do\" schools that teach Japanese karate still exist as they were originally conveyed to Won Kuk Lee and his contemporaries from Funakoshi.\nSoviet Union.\nKarate appeared in the Soviet Union in the mid-1960s, during Nikita Khrushchev's policy of improved international relations. The first Shotokan clubs were opened in Moscow's universities. In 1973, however, the government banned karate\u2014together with all other foreign martial arts\u2014endorsing only the Soviet martial art of sambo. Failing to suppress these uncontrolled groups, the USSR's Sport Committee formed the Karate Federation of USSR in December 1978. On 17 May 1984, the Soviet Karate Federation was disbanded and all karate became illegal again. In 1989, karate practice became legal again, but under strict government regulations, only after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 did independent karate schools resume functioning, and so federations were formed and national tournaments in authentic styles began.\nEurope.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, several Japanese karate masters began to teach the art in Europe, but it was not until 1965 that the Japan Karate Association (JKA) sent to Europe four well-trained young Karate instructors Taiji Kase, Keinosuke Enoeda, Hirokazu Kanazawa and Hiroshi Shirai. Kase went to France, Enoeada to England and Shirai in Italy. These Masters maintained always a strong link between them, the JKA and the others JKA masters in the world, especially Hidetaka Nishiyama in the US\nFrance.\nFrance Shotokan Karate was created in 1964 by Tsutomu Ohshima. It is affiliated with another of his organizations, Shotokan Karate of America (SKA). However, in 1965 Taiji Kase came from Japan along with Enoeda and Shirai, who went to England and Italy respectively, and karate came under the influence of the JKA.\nItaly.\nHiroshi Shirai, one of the original instructors sent by the JKA to Europe along with Kase, Enoeda and Kanazawa, moved to Italy in 1965 and quickly established a Shotokan enclave that spawned several instructors who in their turn soon spread the style all over the country. By 1970 Shotokan karate was the most spread martial art in Italy apart from Judo. Other styles such as Wado Ryu, Goju Ryu and Shito Ryu, are present and well established in Italy, while Shotokan remains the most popular.\nUnited Kingdom.\nVernon Bell, a 3rd Dan Judo instructor who had been instructed by Kenshiro Abbe introduced Karate to England in 1956, having attended classes in Henry Pl\u00e9e's Yoseikan \"d\u014dj\u014d\" in Paris. Yoseikan had been founded by Minoru Mochizuki, a master of multiple Japanese martial arts, who had studied Karate with Gichin Funakoshi, thus the Yoseikan style was heavily influenced by Shotokan. Bell began teaching in the tennis courts of his parents' back garden in Ilford, Essex and his group was to become the British Karate Federation. On 19 July 1957, Vietnamese Hoang Nam 3rd Dan, billed as \"Karate champion of Indo China\", was invited to teach by Bell at Maybush Road, but the first instructor from Japan was Tetsuji Murakami (1927\u20131987) a 3rd Dan Yoseikan under Minoru Mochizuki and 1st Dan of the JKA, who arrived in England in July 1959. In 1959, Frederick Gille set up the Liverpool branch of the British Karate Federation, which was officially recognised in 1961. The Liverpool branch was based at Harold House Jewish Boys Club in Chatham Street before relocating to the YMCA in Everton where it became known as the Red Triangle. One of the early members of this branch was Andy Sherry who had previously studied Jujutsu with Jack Britten. In 1961, Edward Ainsworth, another blackbelt Judoka, set up the first Karate study group in Ayrshire, Scotland having attended Bell's third 'Karate Summer School' in 1961.\nOutside of Bell's organisation, Charles Mack traveled to Japan and studied under Masatoshi Nakayama of the Japan Karate Association who graded Mack to 1st Dan Shotokan on 4 March 1962 in Japan. Shotokai Karate was introduced to England in 1963 by another of Gichin Funakoshi's students, Mitsusuke Harada. Outside of the Shotokan stable of karate styles, Wado Ryu Karate was also an early adopted style in the UK, introduced by Tatsuo Suzuki, a 6th Dan at the time in 1964.\nDespite the early adoption of Shotokan in the UK, it was not until 1964 that JKA Shotokan officially came to the UK. Bell had been corresponding with the JKA in Tokyo asking for his grades to be ratified in Shotokan having apparently learnt that Murakami was not a designated representative of the JKA. The JKA obliged, and without enforcing a grading on Bell, ratified his black belt on 5 February 1964, though he had to relinquish his Yoseikan grade. Bell requested a visitation from JKA instructors and the next year Taiji Kase, Hirokazu Kanazawa, Keinosuke Enoeda and Hiroshi Shirai gave the first JKA demo at the old Kensington Town Hall on 21 April 1965. Hirokazu Kanazawa and Keinosuke Enoeda stayed and Murakami left (later re-emerging as a 5th Dan Shotokai under Harada).\nIn 1966, members of the former British Karate Federation established the Karate Union of Great Britain (KUGB) under Hirokazu Kanazawa as chief instructor and affiliated to JKA. Keinosuke Enoeda came to England at the same time as Kanazawa, teaching at a \"d\u014dj\u014d\" in Liverpool. Kanazawa left the UK after 3 years and Enoeda took over. After Enoeda's death in 2003, the KUGB elected Andy Sherry as Chief Instructor. Shortly after this, a new association split off from KUGB, JKA England.\nAn earlier significant split from the KUGB took place in 1991 when a group led by KUGB senior instructor Steve Cattle formed the English Shotokan Academy (ESA). The aim of this group was to follow the teachings of Taiji Kase, formerly the JKA chief instructor in Europe, who along with Hiroshi Shirai created the World Shotokan Karate-do Academy (WKSA), in 1989 to pursue the teaching of \"Budo\" karate as opposed to what he viewed as \"sport karate\". Kase sought to return the practice of Shotokan Karate to its martial roots, reintroducing among other things open hand and throwing techniques that had been side lined as the result of competition rules introduced by the JKA. Both the ESA and the WKSA (renamed the Kase-Ha Shotokan-Ryu Karate-do Academy (KSKA) after Kase's death in 2004) continue following this path today.\nIn 1975, Great Britain became the first team ever to take the World male team title from Japan after being defeated the previous year in the final.\nOceania.\nThe World Karate Federation was first introduced to Oceania as the Oceanian Karate Federation 1973.\nAustralia.\nThe Australian Karate Federation, under the World Karate Federation, was first introduced in 1970. In 1972 Frank Novak became the first fully qualified Shotokan instructor to arrive in Australia and teach in the country, establishing the first Shotokan Karate dojo in Australia. At karate's debut in the Olympics at the 2020 Summer Olympics, Tsuneari Yahiro became Australia's first Karate Olympian.\nIn film and popular culture.\nKarate spread rapidly in the West through popular culture. In 1950s popular fiction, karate was at times described to readers in near-mythical terms, and it was credible to show Western experts of unarmed combat as unaware of Eastern martial arts of this kind. Following the inclusion of judo at the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, there was growing mainstream Western interest in Japanese martial arts, particularly karate, during the 1960s. By the 1970s, martial arts films (especially kung fu films and Bruce Lee flicks from Hong Kong) had formed a mainstream genre and launched the \"kung fu craze\" which propelled karate and other Asian martial arts into mass popularity. However, mainstream Western audiences at the time generally did not distinguish between different Asian martial arts such as karate, kung fu and tae kwon do.\nIn the film series 007 (1953\u2013present), the main protagonist James Bond is exceptionally skillful in martial arts. He is an expert in various types of martial arts including Karate, as well as Judo, Aikido, Brazilian jiu-jitsu, Filipino Eskrima and Krav Maga.\nDuring the late 20th century, specifically during the 80s and 90s, karate saw a rise in mainstream popularity. America in the 80s took hold of the martial arts craze and began to produce more homegrown films in the martial arts genre. Films weren't the only popular visual representation of Karate in the 80s, just as arcades grew in popularity, so did Karate in arcade fighting games. The first video game to feature fist fighting was \"Heavyweight Champ\" in 1976, but it was \"Karate Champ\" that popularized the one-on-one fighting game genre in arcades in 1984. In 1987, Capcom released \"Street Fighter\", featuring multiple Karateka characters.\n\"The Karate Kid\" (1984) and its sequels \"The Karate Kid, Part II\" (1986), \"The Karate Kid, Part III\" (1989) and \"The Next Karate Kid\" (1994) are films relating the fictional story of an American adolescent's introduction into karate. Its television sequel, \"Cobra Kai\" (2018), has led to similar growing interest in karate. The success of \"The Karate Kid\" further popularized karate (as opposed to Asian martial arts more generally) in mainstream American popular culture. \"Karate Kommandos\" is an animated children's show, with Chuck Norris appearing to reveal the moral lessons contained in every episode.\n\"Dragon Ball\" (1984\u2013present) is a Japanese media franchise (Anime) whose characters use a variety and hybrid of east Asian martial arts styles, including Karate and Wing Chun (Kung fu). \"Dragon Ball\" was originally inspired by the classical 16th-century Chinese novel \"Journey to the West\", combined with elements of Hong Kong martial arts films, with influences of Jackie Chan and Bruce Lee.\nIn the film series \"The Matrix\", Neo uses a variety of martial arts styles. Neo's skill in martial arts was shown as having been downloaded into his brain, which granted combat abilities equivalent to a martial artist with decades of experience. Kenpo Karate is one of the many styles Neo learns as part of his computerised combat training. As part of the preparation for the movie, Yuen Woo-ping had Keanu Reeves undertake four months of martial arts training in a variety of different styles.\nMany other film stars such as Bruce Lee, Chuck Norris, Jackie Chan, Sammo Hung, and Jet Li come from a range of other martial arts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16747", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16747", "title": "KaratE", "text": ""}
{"id": "16748", "revid": "49867084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16748", "title": "Kickboxing", "text": "Full-contact hybrid martial art and combat sport\nKickboxing is a full-contact hybrid martial art and boxing type based on punching and kicking. Kickboxing originated in the 1950s. The fight takes place in a boxing ring, normally with boxing gloves, mouth guards, shorts, and bare feet to favor the use of kicks. Kickboxing is practiced for self-defense, general fitness, or for competition. Some styles of kickboxing include: full contact karate, Muay Thai, Japanese kickboxing, Lethwei, Sanda, and Savate.\nAlthough since the dawn of humanity people have faced each other in hand-to-hand combat, the first documentation on the use of kicking and punching in sports combat is from ancient Greece and ancient India. But nevertheless, the term kickboxing originated in Japan, in the 1960s, and developed in the late 1950s from karate mixed with boxing, having some influence, with competitions held since then. American kickboxing originated in the 1970s and was brought to prominence in September 1974, when the Professional Karate Association (PKA) held the first World Championships. Historically, kickboxing can be considered a hybrid martial art formed from the combination of elements of various traditional styles. This approach became increasingly popular since the 1970s, and since the 1990s, kickboxing has contributed to the emergence of mixed martial arts via further hybridization with ground fighting techniques from Brazilian jiu-jitsu, and folk wrestling.\nAlthough, there are many governing bodies such as the World Kickboxing Association, the Professional Kickboxing Association (PKA), International Sport Karate Association, International Kickboxing Federation, and WKN - World Kickboxing Network, among others, the World Association of Kickboxing Organizations (also known as WAKO) is the recognized as the official kickboxing world governing body by the IOC. \nAt professional level, there is no single kickboxing world championship, and champion titles are issued by individual promotions, such as Glory, K-1 and ONE Championship among others. Bouts organized under different governing bodies apply different rules, such as allowing the use of knees or clinching etc.\nTerminology.\nThe term can be used in a narrow and in a broad sense.\nThe term itself was introduced in the 1960s as a Japanese anglicism by Japanese boxing promoter Osamu Noguchi for a hybrid martial art combining Muay Thai and karate which he had introduced in 1958. The term was later also adopted by the American variant. Since there has been a lot of cross-fertilization between these styles, with many practitioners training or competing under the rules of more than one style, the history of the individual styles cannot be seen in isolation from one another.\nThe French term \"Boxe pieds-poings\" (literally \"feet-fists-boxing\") is also used in the sense of \"kickboxing\" in the general meaning, including French boxing (Savate) as well as American, Dutch and Japanese kickboxing, and Burmese and Thai boxing, any style of full contact karate, etc.\nStyles and descendant arts.\nArts labelled as \"kickboxing\" in the general sense include:\nHistory.\nOverview.\nSince kickboxing is a broad term, understanding the history can be somewhat difficult, since combat is an inherent part of being human. Kicking and punching as an act of human aggression have probably existed throughout the world since prehistory.\nThe earliest known depiction of any type of boxing comes from a Sumerian relief in Iraq from the 3rd millennium BC. Forms of kickboxing existed in ancient India. The earliest references to musti-yuddha come from classical Vedic epics such as the \"Ramayana\" and \"Rig Veda,\" compiled in the middle of the 2nd millennium BC. The \"Mahabharata\" describes two combatants boxing with clenched fists and fighting with kicks, finger strikes, knee strikes and headbutts. Mushti Yuddha has travelled along the Indian cultural sphere and has connections to many famous martial arts of Southeast Asia such as Muay Thai and Muay Laos.\nIn the Pankration, a mixed martial art from ancient Greece, a form of kickboxing was used in its An\u014d Pankration modality, being able to use any extremity to hit. In addition, it is debated whether kicks were allowed in ancient Greek boxing, and while there is some evidence of kicks, this is the subject of debate among scholars.\nThe French were the first to include boxing gloves into a sport that included kicking and boxing techniques. In 1743, modern boxing gloves were invented by Englishman Jack Broughton. Frenchman Charles Lecour added English boxing gloves to la boxe fran\u00e7aise. Charles Lecour was a pioneer of modern savate or la boxe fran\u00e7aise. He created a form where both kicking and punching was used. Lecour was the first to view savate as a sport and self-defense system. The French colonists introduced European boxing gloves into the native Asian martial arts in French Indochina. The use of European boxing gloves spread to neighboring Siam.\nIn the 1950s, Japanese karateka Tatsuo Yamada laid the foundation for a new sport that blended elements of karate and Muay Thai. This concept was further developed in the early 1960s through interstyle competitions between practitioners of the two disciplines, which led to the evolution and adjustment of rules. By the mid-1960s, the first events officially referred to as \"kickboxing\" were held in Osaka.\nBy the 1970s and 1980s, kickboxing expanded beyond Japan and had reached North America and Europe. It was during this time that many of the most prominent governing bodies were formed.\nSince the 1990s kickboxing has been mostly dominated by the Japanese K-1 promotion, with some competition coming from other promotions and mostly pre-existing governing bodies.\nAlong with the growing popularity in competition, there has been an increased amount of participation and exposure in the mass media, fitness, and self-defense.\nJapan.\nOn December 20, 1959, a Muay Thai match among Thai fighters was held at Asakusa town hall in Tokyo. Tatsuo Yamada, who established \"Nihon Kempo Karate-do\", was interested in Muay Thai because he wanted to perform karate matches with full-contact rules since practitioners are not allowed to hit each other directly in karate matches. He had already announced his plan which was named \"The draft principles of project of establishment of a new martial art and its industrialization\" in November 1959, and he proposed the tentative name of \"karate-boxing\" for this new art. It is still unknown whether Nak Muay was invited by Yamada, but it is clear that Yamada was the only karateka who was really interested in Muay Thai. Yamada invited a champion Nak Muay (and formerly his son Kan Yamada's sparring partner), and started studying Muay Thai. At this time, the Thai fighter was taken by Osamu Noguchi who was a promoter of boxing and was also interested in Muay Thai. The Thai fighter's photo was on the magazine \"The Primer of Nihon Kempo Karate-do, the first number\" which was published by Yamada.\nThere were \"Karate vs. Muay Thai fights\" on February 12, 1963. The three karate fighters from \"Oyama dojo\" (kyokushin later) went to the Lumpinee Boxing Stadium in Thailand and fought against three Muay Thai fighters. The three kyokushin karate fighters' names are Tadashi Nakamura, Kenji Kurosaki and Akio Fujihira (also known as Noboru Osawa). The Muay Thai team were composed of only one Thai-born fighter. Japan won by 2\u20131: Tadashi Nakamura and Akio Fujihira both KOed opponents by punch while Kenji Kurosaki, who fought the Thai, was KOed by elbow. The only Japanese loser Kenji Kurosaki was then a kyokushin instructor rather than a contender and temporarily designated as a substitute for the absent chosen fighter. On June of the same year, karateka and future kickboxer Tadashi Sawamura faced against top Thai fighter Samarn Sor Adisorn, in which Sawamura was knocked down 16 times and defeated. Sawamura would use what he learned in that fight to incorporate in the evolving kickboxing tournaments.\nNoguchi studied Muay Thai and developed a combined martial art which Noguchi named \"kick boxing\", which absorbed and adopted more rules than techniques from Muay Thai. The main techniques of kickboxing are still derived from a form of Japanese full contact karate where kicks to the legs are allowed, kyokushin. In early competitions, throwing and butting were allowed to distinguish it from Muay Thai. This was later repealed. The \"Kickboxing Association\", the first kickboxing sanctioning body, was founded by Osamu Noguchi in 1966 soon after that. Then the first kickboxing event was held in Osaka on April 11, 1966.\nTatsu Yamada died in 1967, but his dojo changed its name to \"Suginami Gym\", and kept sending kickboxers off to support kickboxing.\nKickboxing boomed and became popular in Japan as it began to be broadcast on TV. By 1970, kickboxing was telecast in Japan on three different channels three times weekly. The fight cards regularly included bouts between Japanese (kickboxers) and Thai (Muay Thai) boxers. Tadashi Sawamura was an especially popular early kickboxer. In 1971 the All Japan Kickboxing Association (AJKA) was established and it registered approximately 700 kickboxers. The first AJKA Commissioner was Shintaro Ishihara, the longtime Governor of Tokyo. Champions were in each weight division from fly to middle. Longtime Kyokushin practitioner Noboru Osawa won the AJKA bantamweight title, which he held for years. Raymond Edler, an American university student studying at Sophia University in Tokyo, took up kickboxing and won the AJKC middleweight title in 1972; he was the first non-Thai to be officially ranked in the sport of Thai boxing, when in 1972 Rajadamnern ranked him no. 3 in the Middleweight division. Edler defended the All Japan title several times and abandoned it. Other popular champions were Toshio Fujiwara and Mitsuo Shima. Most notably, Fujiwara was the first non-Thai to win an official Thai boxing title, when he defeated his Thai opponent in 1978 at Rajadamnern Stadium winning the lightweight championship bout.\nBy 1980, due to poor ratings and then infrequent television coverage, the golden-age of kickboxing in Japan was suddenly finished.\nKickboxing had not been seen on TV until K-1 was founded in 1993.\nIn 1993, as Kazuyoshi Ishii (founder of Seidokaikan karate) produced K-1 under special kickboxing rules (no elbow and neck wrestling) in 1993, kickboxing became famous again.\nIn the mid-1980s to early 1990s, before the first k-1, Kazuyoshi Ishii also partook in the formation of glove karate as an amateur sport in Japan. Glove karate is based on knockdown karate rules, but wearing boxing gloves and allowing punches to the head. In effect, it is oriental rules kickboxing with scoring based on knockdowns and aggression rather than the number of hits. As K-1 grew in popularity, Glove karate for a while became the fastest-growing amateur sport in Japan.\nNorth America.\nCount Dante, Ray Scarica and Maung Gyi held the United States' earliest\ncross-style full-contact style martial arts tournaments as early as 1962.\nBetween 1970 and 1973 a handful of kickboxing promotions were staged across the US. The first recognized bout of this kind occurred on January 17, 1970, and came about when Joe Lewis, a Shorin Ryu stylist who had also studied Jeet Kune Do with the legendary Bruce Lee, and noted champion in the Karate tournament circuit, grew disillusioned with the point-sparring format and sought to create an event that would allow martial artists to fight to the knock out. Enlisting the help of promoter Lee Faulkner, training in boxing and combining the techniques of boxing and Karate for the first time in America, Lewis arranged the bout to be held at the 1st Pro Team Karate Championships. Lewis faced Kenpo stylist Greg \"Om\" Baines, who had defeated two opponents in years pasts. Lewis won the fight by knockout in the second round. The event was advertised as \"Full contact\" but the announcers referred to it as Kickboxing, and rules included knees, elbows and sweeps. Lewis would defend his U.S. Heavyweight champion title 10 times, remaining undefeated until he came back from his retirement. In the early days, the rules were never clear; one of the first tournaments had no weight divisions, and all the competitors fought off until one was left. During this early time, kickboxing and full contact karate are essentially the same sport.\nThe institutional separation of American full-contact karate from kickboxing occurred with the formation of the Professional Karate Association (PKA) in 1974 and of the World Kickboxing Association (WKA) in 1976.\nThey were the first organised body of martial arts on a global scale to sanction fights, create ranking systems, and institute a development programme.\nThe International Kickboxing Federation (IKF) and the International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA) have been the only organizations to have thrived in the modern era.\nThe International Kickboxing Federation (IKF) was founded in 1992 by Steve Fossum and Dan Stell. Stell eventually stepped down to go back to fighting while Fossum continued with the organization. In 1999 Fossum and Joe Taylor of Ringside Products created the first amateur open North American tournament for Kickboxing and Muay Thai, now the IKF World Classic.\nAfter ending its venture with K-1 in 2006, ISKA co-operated the World Combat League with Chuck Norris, and Strikeforce MMA in partnership with Silicon Valley Entertainment (SVE), an investor group who also own the San Jose Sharks. Norris passed the WCL to his son-in-law Damien Diciolli in 2007, and it has since become inactive. Strikeforce MMA was sold to UFC in 2011.\nThe ISKA expanded into sport (tournament) martial arts about 15 years ago, and is a co-operator along with WAKO and Global Marketing Ventures (GMV) in the global Open World Tour (OWT) the first worldwide pro circuit of sport karate professional competitors. It sanctions and assists in the annual US Open ISKA World Martial Arts Championships that anchors the OWT and the North American-based NASKA Tour. The US Open ISKA World Championships is broadcast live on ESPN2 and ESPN3 each year.\nOther kickboxing sanctioning bodies include World Association of Kickboxing Organizations (primarily amateurs) and KICK International.\nEurope.\nIn West Germany, American-styled kickboxing was promulgated from its inception in the 1970s by Georg F. Bruckner, who in 1976 was the co-founder of the World Association of Kickboxing Organizations. The term \"kickboxing\" as used in German-speaking Europe is therefore mostly synonymous with American kickboxing. The low-kick and knee techniques allowed in Japanese kickboxing, by contrast, were associated with Muay Thai, and Japanese kickboxing went mostly unnoticed in German-speaking Europe before the launch of K-1 in 1993.\nBy contrast, in the Netherlands kickboxing was introduced in its Japanese form, by Jan Plas and Thom Harinck who founded NKBB (The Dutch Kickboxing Association) in 1976.\nHarinck also founded the MTBN (Dutch Muay Thai Association) in 1983, and the WMTA (World Muay Thai Association) and the EMTA (European Muay Thai Association) in 1984.\nThe most prominent kickboxing gyms in the Netherlands, Mejiro Gym, Chakuriki Gym and Golden Glory, were all derived from or were significantly influenced by Japanese kickboxing and kyokushin karate.\nDutch athletes have been very successful in the K-1 competitions.\nOut of the 19 K-1 World Grand Prix championship titles issued from 1993 to 2012, 15 went to Dutch participants (Peter Aerts, Ernesto Hoost, Remy Bonjasky, Semmy Schilt and Alistair Overeem). The remaining four titles were won by Branko Cikati\u0107 of Croatia in 1993, Andy Hug of Switzerland in 1996, Mark Hunt of New Zealand in 2001 and Mirko Filipovi\u0107 of Croatia in 2012.\nModern sport.\nKickboxing promotions.\nSome of the top kickboxing promotions in the world are: \nKickboxing promoters.\nSome of the notable kickboxing promoters in the world are:\nKickboxing styles and rulesets.\nKickboxing has a number of different rulesets. For example, Oriental/K-1 rules allow punches, high and low kicks and even knee strikes, while American kickboxing is limited to punches and kicks only above the belt (high kicks).\nIn the first two decades of the 21st century, several larger kickboxing promotions such as Glory, One Championship and Bellator Kickboxing have adopted the k1/oriental rule set, which allows knee strikes, kicking and punching.\nJapanese Kickboxing.\nOriental rules (also known as K-1 rules or unified rules, and sometimes referred to as Japanese kickboxing) was the first combat sport that adopted the name of \"kickboxing\" in 1966, later termed \"Japanese kickboxing\" as a retronym. Since the 1990s, many of the largest kickboxing promotions such as K-1, ONE Championship, Glory and Bellator Kickboxing adopted this ruleset. Oriental rules began to be developed by the Japanese boxing promoter Osamu Noguchi and Karate practitioner Tatsuo Yamada, and it was initially intended as a mix of Karate and Muay Thai, but it was later affected also by the Dutch rules, which were first formalised in the Netherlands in the 1970s. The primary difference between Muay Thai and Oriental Kickboxing was the prohibition of elbow strikes and throws. In addition, the amount of clinch fighting is drastically decreased. These changes were aimed at reducing injuries and making bouts more accessible to TV viewers. Oriental rules bouts were traditionally fought over 5, 3-minute rounds but 3 round bouts have since become popular. The male kickboxers are bare-chested wearing shorts (although trousers and karate gis have been worn) and protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, shin-wraps, gloves.\nNotable fighters under K-1 rules include Semmy Schilt, Badr Hari, Ernesto Hoost, Albert Kraus, Masato, Peter Aerts, Remy Bonjasky, Giorgio Petrosyan, Mike Zambidis, Buakaw and Andy Souwer.\nRules:\nKorean Kickboxing.\nGwon Gyokdo, also known as Kun Gek Do and Kyuk Too Ki is a style of Kickboxing from Korea which was founded by Jung Mo-Do.\nIt is a hybrid style which is composed by Taekwondo, Western Boxing and Muay Thai rules and techniques.\nKorean Kickboxing uses the basic kicking style of Taekwondo, but also adds typical Muay Thai techniques, as well as footwork and dodging tactics of Western Boxing.\nRules:\nFull Contact.\nFull Contact (also referred to as American Kickboxing) is essentially a mixture of Western boxing and traditional karate. The male kickboxers are bare-chested wearing kickboxing trousers and protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, boxing gloves, groin-guard, shin-pads, and kick-boots and protective helmet (for amateurs and those under 16). Female kickboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear.\nNotable fighters under full contact rules include, Dennis Alexio, Joe Lewis, Rick Roufus, Jean-Yves Th\u00e9riault, Benny Urquidez, Bill Wallace, Demetrius Havanas, Billy Jackson, Akseli Saurama, Tony LoCoco, Pete Cunningham, and Don \"The Dragon\" Wilson\nRules:\nSemi Contact.\nSemi Contact or Points Fighting, is the variant of American kickboxing most similar to karate, since it consists in fighting for the purpose of scoring points with an emphasis on delivery, speed, and technique. Under such rules, fights are held on the tatami, presenting the belts to classify the fighters in order of experience and ability. The male kickboxers wear shirts and kickboxing trousers as well as protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, . boxing gloves, groin-guard, shin-pads, kick-boots, and headgear. The female kickboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear.\nNotable fighters under semi-contact rules include Raymond Daniels, Michael Page, Stephen Thompson and Gregorio Di Leo.\nRules:\nDutch Kickboxing.\nDutch rules (sometimes referred to as Dutch Kickboxing) came about when Japanese kickboxing and Muay Thai were first introduced in Holland in the 1970s. European rules began to be developed by the Netherland Kick Boxing Bond in the 1970s when the late Jan Plas brought the sport from Japan to his native country. \nThe primary difference between Dutch rules and full Muay Thai rules was the prohibition of elbow strikes and the limited knees strikes (only to the body). However, elbows were allowed when both parties agree to it. These changes were aimed at reducing injuries and making bouts more accessible to TV viewers. Like the Thai counterpart, the fights are accompanied with the traditional Thai music during a battle. The Dutch kickboxing rules were instrumental to the development of the K-1 rules.\nNotable fighters under Dutch rules include Alistair Overeem, Bas Rutten, Melvin Manhoef, Gegard Mousasi, Remy Bonjasky and Peter Aerts.\nRules:\nFreestyle Kickboxing.\nInternational rules, or freestyle kickboxing (also known as Low Kick in the United States), contrast with full contact rules in that it also allows low kicks. The male kickboxers are bare-chested, wearing kickboxing trousers or shorts and protective gear, including mouth-guard, hand wraps, Boxing gloves, shin guards, and groin guard. The female kickboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear.\nNotable fighters under international rules include Rick Roufus and Abraham Roque\u00f1i.\nRules:\nWKA Kickboxing.\nWKA Kickboxing is a style promoted by the World Kickboxing Association, and uses a mixture of Muay Thai, Japanese Kickboxing and Full Contact Kickboxing moves and rulesets.\nRules:\nISKA Kickboxing.\nISKA Kickboxing is a style promoted by the International Sport Kickboxing association from Europe, and it's a blend of Full Contact, Japanese, Muay Thai and Freestyle Kickboxing rules.\nRules:\nMuay Thai.\nMuay Thai, or Thai boxing, rules usually sees bouts contested over 5, 3 minute rounds and male fighters bare-chested wearing shorts and protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, shin-wraps, boxing gloves, groin-guard and sometimes \"prajioud\" arm bands. 4oz MMA-style, open-finger gloves are sometimes used. The female Thaiboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear. Muay Thai is unique in that it is the only style of kickboxing that allows elbows, knees, clinch fighting, throws, sweeps and low kicks. Groin strikes were allowed until the 1980s in international Muay Thai and are still partially allowed in Thailand itself (though the boxers wear cups to lessen the impact). Kicking to mid-body and head are scored highly generating a large number of points on judges' scorecards. Moreover, kicking is still judged highly even if the kick was blocked. In contrast, punching is worth fewer points.\nNotable fighters under Muay Thai rules include Apidej Sit Hrun, Buakaw Por. Pramuk, Changpuek Kiatsongrit, Rob Kaman, Ramon Dekkers, Coban Lookchaomaesaitong, Dieselnoi Chor Thanasukarn, Saenchai P.K. Saenchaimuaythaigym, Samart Payakaroon and Yodsanklai Fairtex.\nRules:\nLethwei.\nLethwei is a type of kickboxing originating from Myanmar that features minimal rules and protective equipment. Lethwei not only allows the use of headbutts but actually emphasizes it, and fighters wear no gloves. Bouts can only be won with a knockout, either a proper or a technical. Uniquely, after one knockout and two minutes rest, the knocked out fighter may still choose to continue the fight once, unless they are knocked out in the final round. There are no points; if no knockout happens before the end of the fifth round, the fight is declared a draw. Male fighters are bare-chested and wear shorts. Protective gear consists of a mouth-guard, groin-guard, and wraps around hands and feet. Female fighters wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing and protective gear.\nNotable fighters under Lethwei rules include Tun Tun Min, Too Too, Dave Leduc and Soe Lin Oo.\nRules:\nSanda.\nSanda or Sanshou (also known as Chinese boxing and Chinese kickboxing) is a form of kickboxing originally developed by the Chinese military based upon the study and practices of traditional Kung fu and modern combat fighting techniques; it combines traditional kickboxing, which include close range and rapid successive punches and kicks, with wrestling, takedowns, throws, sweeps, kick catches, and in some competitions, even elbow and knee strikes. The male fighters are bare-chested wearing shorts and protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, boxing gloves and groin-guard. The female kickboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear.\nNotable fighters under Sanshou rules include Wei Rui, Fang Bian, Jia Aoqi, Muslim Salikhov, Pat Barry, Zhang Tiequan, Liu Hailong, Cung Le, Shahbulat Shamhalaev and Shamil Zavurov.\nRules:\nShootboxing.\nShootboxing (also known as Standing Vale Tudo) is a unique style of hybrid kickboxing popular in Japan that utilizes standing submissions such as chokeholds, armlocks and wristlocks in addition to kicks, punches, knees and throws. The male fighters are bare-chested wearing skin tight trousers and protective gear including: mouth-guard, hand-wraps, boxing gloves and groin-guard. The female kickboxers will wear a sports bra and chest protection in addition to the male clothing/protective gear.\nNotable fighters under shootboxing rules include Rena Kubota, Kenichi Ogata, Hiroki Shishido, Ai Takahashi and Andy Souwer.\nRules:\nDraka Kickboxing.\nDraka, also known as Russian Kickboxing, is a hybrid style of Kickboxing which was developed and founded by Igor Ejov in 1992, and its mainly promoted by the World Wide Draka Federation (WWDF) and the International Kickboxing Draka Federation (IKDF).\nThe first event where this style was featured, was held in the U.S. by Ejov in association with World Wide Kickboxing Promotions.\nThis style particularly resembles Sanda and Shoot Boxing with Muay Thai, Boxing, Sambo, Judo and Wrestling techniques added to the mixture.\nXtreme Gladiator Kickboxing.\nXtreme Gladiator is a hybrid style of Kickboxing created by the International Kickboxing Federation, which is a mixture of Boxing, Muay Thai, Sanshou, Wrestling and Judo techniques.\nJust like Shoot Boxing, it's also one of the only styles who allows submission techniques like joint locks, chokeholds and strangles both standing and on the ground, although there is a 30-second or 1 minute limit time for groundfighting.\nRules:\nTechniques.\nPunching.\nPunching techniques are very much identical to boxing punches, including\nKicking.\nThe standard kicking techniques are:\nThere are a large number of special or variant kicking techniques, including spinning kicks, jumping kicks, and other variants such as\nSpinning versions of the back, side, hook and axe kicks can also be performed along with jumping versions of all kicks.\nKnee.\nThe knee techniques in Japanese kickboxing, indicative of its Muay Thai heritage, are the main difference that separates this style from other kickboxing rules.\nSee \"ti khao\" for details.\nDefense.\nThere are three main defensive positions (guards or styles) used in kickboxing. Within each style, there is considerable variation among fighters, as some fighters may have their guard higher for more head protection while others have their guard lower to provide better protection against body punches. Many fighters vary their defensive style throughout a bout in order to adapt to the situation of the moment, choosing the position best suited to protect them.\nBrain injury and CTE.\nKnocking a person unconscious or even causing a concussion may cause permanent brain damage. There is no clear division between the force required to knock a person out and the force likely to kill a person. Also, contact sports, especially combat sports, are directly related to a brain disease called chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). This disease begins to develop during the life of the athlete, and continues to develop even after sports activity has ceased. In addition, repetitive and subconcussive blows to the head, and not just concussions, cause CTE.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16749", "revid": "38716918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16749", "title": "Korea", "text": "Region in East Asia\nKorea is a peninsular region in East Asia consisting of the Korean Peninsula, Jeju Island, and smaller islands. Since the end of World War II in Asia in 1945, it has been politically divided at or near the 38th parallel between North Korea (Democratic People's Republic of Korea; DPRK) and South Korea (Republic of Korea; ROK). Both countries proclaimed independence in 1948, and the two countries fought the Korean War from 1950 to 1953. The region is bordered by China to the north and Russia to the northeast, across the Amnok (Yalu) and Duman (Tumen) rivers, and is separated from Japan to the southeast by the Korea Strait.\nKnown human habitation of the Korean peninsula dates to 40,000 BC. The kingdom of Gojoseon, which according to tradition was founded in 2333 BC, fell to the Han dynasty in 108 BC. It was followed by the Three Kingdoms period, in which Korea was divided into Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla. In 668 AD, Silla conquered Baekje and Goguryeo with the aid of the Tang dynasty, forming Unified Silla; Balhae succeeded Goguryeo in the north. In the late 9th century, Unified Silla collapsed into three states, beginning the Later Three Kingdoms period. In 918, Goguryeo was resurrected as Goryeo, which achieved what has been called a \"true national unification\" by Korean historians, as it unified both the Later Three Kingdoms and the ruling class of Balhae after its fall. Goryeo, whose name developed into the modern exonym \"Korea\", was highly cultured and saw the invention of the first metal movable type. During the 13th century, Goryeo became a vassal state of the Mongol Empire. Goryeo overthrew Mongol rule before falling to a coup led by General Yi Seong-gye, who established the Joseon dynasty in 1392. The first 200 years of Joseon were marked by peace; the Hangul, the Korean alphabet was created and Confucianism became influential. This ended with Japanese and Qing invasions, which brought devastation to Joseon and led to Korean isolationism. After the invasions, an isolated Joseon experienced another nearly 200-year period of peace and prosperity, along with cultural and technological development. In the final years of the 19th century, Japan forced Joseon to open up and Joseon experienced turmoil such as the Kapsin Coup, Donghak Peasant Revolution, and the assassination of Empress Myeongseong. In 1895, Japan defeated China in the First Sino-Japanese War and China lost suzerainty over Korea and Korea was placed under further Japanese influence. In 1897, the centuries old Joseon was replaced by the Korean Empire with the Joseon's last king, Gojong, becoming the Emperor of the Korean Empire. Japan's further victory in the 1904\u20131905 Russo-Japanese War, expelled Russian influence in Korea and Manchuria. In 1905, the Korean Empire became a protectorate of the Empire of Japan. In 1910, the Empire of Japan officially annexed the Korean peninsula.\nKorea under Japanese rule was marked by industrialization and modernization, economic exploitation, and brutal suppression of the Korean independence movement, as reflected in the 1919 March First Movement. The Japanese suppressed Korean culture, and during World War II forcefully mobilized millions of Koreans to support its war effort. In 1945, Japan surrendered to the Allies, and the Soviet Union and United States agreed to divide Korea into two military occupation zones divided by the 38th parallel, with the Soviet zone in the north and American zone in the south. The division was meant to be temporary, with plans for Korea to be reunited under a single government. In 1948, the DPRK and ROK were established with the backing of each power, and ongoing tensions led to the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, which came to involve U.S.-led United Nations and communist Chinese forces. The war ended in stalemate in 1953, but without a peace treaty. A demilitarized zone was created between the countries, approximating the original partition.\nThis status contributes to the high tensions that divide the peninsula, and both states claim to be the sole legitimate government of Korea. South Korea is a regional power and a developed country, with its economy ranked as the world's fourteenth-largest by GDP (PPP). Its armed forces are one of the world's strongest militaries, with the world's second-largest standing army by military and paramilitary personnel. South Korea has been renowned for its globally influential pop culture, particularly in music (K-pop) and cinema, a phenomenon referred to as the Korean Wave. North Korea follows \"Songun\", a \"military first\" policy which prioritizes the Korean People's Army in state affairs and resources. It possesses nuclear weapons, and is the country with the highest number of military personnel, with a total of 7.8 million active, reserve, and paramilitary personnel, or approximately of its population. Its active duty army of 1.3 million soldiers is the fourth-largest in the world, consisting of of its population. North Korea is widely considered to have the worst human rights record in the world.\nEtymology.\n\"Korea\" is the modern spelling of \"Corea\", a name attested in English as early as 1614. \"Corea\" is derived from the name of the ancient kingdom of Goryeo. Korea was transliterated as \"Cauli\" in \"The Travels of Marco Polo\", of the Chinese (: \"Kawlej\", \"G\u0101ol\u00ec\"). This was the Hanja for the Korean kingdom of Goryeo (Korean:\u00a0; MR:\u00a0), which ruled most of the Korean peninsula during the 12th century. Korea's introduction to the West resulted from trade and contact with merchants from Arabic lands, with some records dating back as far as the 9th century. Goryeo's name was a continuation of Goguryeo (Kogury\u014f) the northernmost of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, which was officially known as Goryeo beginning in the 5th century. The original name was a combination of the adjectives \"high\" and \"lofty\" with the name of a local Yemaek tribe, whose original name is thought to have been either \"Guru\" (, inferred from some toponyms in Chinese historical documents) or \"Gauri\" (). With expanding British and American trade following the opening of Korea in the late 19th century, the spelling \"Korea\" appeared and gradually grew in popularity. The name Korea is now commonly used in English contexts by both North and South Korea.\nIn South Korea, Korea as a whole is referred to as (; lit.\u00a0country of the \"Han\", ). The name references \"Samhan\", referring to the Three Kingdoms of Korea, not the ancient confederacies in the southern Korean Peninsula. Although written in Hanja as , , or , this \"Han\" has no relation to the Chinese place names or peoples who used those characters but was a phonetic transcription (: *\"Gar\", : \"Han\" or \"Gan\") of a native Korean word that seems to have had the meaning \"big\" or \"great\", particularly in reference to leaders. It has been tentatively linked with the title \"khan\" used by the nomads of Manchuria and Central Asia.\nIn North Korea, Korea as a whole is referred to as (; lit.\u00a0[land of the] Morning Calm, ). is the modern Korean pronunciation of the Hanja , which is also the basis of the word for Korea as a whole in Japan (), China (), and Vietnam (). \"Great Joseon\" was the name of the kingdom ruled by the Joseon dynasty from 1392 until their declaration of the short-lived Great Korean Empire in 1897. King Taejo had named them for the earlier Gojoseon (), who ruled northern Korea from its legendary prehistory until their conquest in 108 BCE by China's Han Empire. The \"Go-\" in Gojoseon is the Hanja word and simply means \"ancient\" or \"old\"; it is a modern usage to distinguish the ancient Joseon from the later dynasty. It is unclear whether was a transcription of a native Korean name ( *\"T[r]awser\", \"Trjewsjen\") or a partial translation into Chinese of the Korean capital Asadal (), whose meaning has been reconstructed as \"Morning Land\" or \"Mountain\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe Korean Academy claimed ancient hominid fossils originating from about 100,000 BCE in the lava at a stone city site in Korea. Fluorescent and high-magnetic analyses indicate the volcanic fossils may be from as early as 300,000 BCE. The best preserved Korean pottery goes back to the Paleolithic times around 10,000 BCE and the Neolithic period begins around 6000 BCE.\nBeginning around 300 BC, the Japonic-speaking Yayoi people from the Korean Peninsula entered the Japanese islands and displaced or intermingled with the original J\u014dmon inhabitants. The linguistic homeland of Proto-Koreans is located somewhere in Southern Siberia / Manchuria, such as the Liao river area or the Amur region. Proto-Koreans arrived in the southern part of the Korean Peninsula at around 300 BC, replacing and assimilating Japonic-speakers and likely causing the Yayoi migration.\nGojoseon.\nAccording to Korean legend, Dangun, a descendant of Heaven, established Gojoseon in 2333 BCE. In 108 BCE, the Han dynasty defeated Gojoseon and installed four commanderies in the northern Korean peninsula. Three of the commanderies fell or retreated westward within a few decades, but the Lelang Commandery remained as a center of cultural and economic exchange with successive Chinese dynasties for four centuries. By 313, Goguryeo annexed all of the Chinese commanderies.\nProto\u2013Three Kingdoms.\nThe Proto\u2013Three Kingdoms period, sometimes called the Multiple States Period, is the earlier part of what is commonly called the Three Kingdoms Period, following the fall of Gojoseon but before Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla fully developed into kingdoms.\nThis time period saw numerous states spring up from the former territories of Gojoseon, which encompassed northern Korea and southern Manchuria. With the fall of Gojoseon, southern Korea entered the Samhan period.\nLocated in the southern part of Korea, Samhan referred to the three confederacies of Mahan, Jinhan, and Byeonhan. Mahan was the largest and consisted of 54 states. Byeonhan and Jinhan both consisted of twelve states, bringing a total of 78 states within the Samhan. These three confederacies eventually developed into Baekje, Silla, and Gaya.\nThree Kingdoms.\nThe Three Kingdoms of Korea consisted of Goguryeo, Silla, and Baekje. Silla and Baekje controlled the southern half of the Korean Peninsula, maintaining the former Samhan territories, while Goguryeo controlled the northern half of the Korean Peninsula, Manchuria and the Liaodong Peninsula, uniting Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye and other states in the former Gojoseon territories.\nGoguryeo was a highly militaristic state, and a large empire in East Asia, reaching its zenith in the 5th century when its territories expanded to encompass most of Manchuria to the north, parts of Inner Mongolia to the west, parts of Russia to the east, and the Seoul region to the south. Goguryeo experienced a golden age under Gwanggaeto the Great and his son Jangsu, who both subdued Baekje and Silla during their times, achieving a brief unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea and becoming the most dominant power on the Korean Peninsula. In addition to contesting for control of the Korean Peninsula, Goguryeo had many military conflicts with various Chinese dynasties, most notably the Goguryeo\u2013Sui War, in which Goguryeo defeated a huge force said to number over a million men. In 642, the powerful general Y\u014fn Kaesomun led a coup and gained complete control over Goguryeo. In response, Emperor Tang Taizong of China led a campaign against Goguryeo, in which the Gorguryeo forces were decimated by the Tang at the Battle of Mount Jupil. Taizong was later defeated at the Battle of Ansi and withdrew his forces from Goguryeo. After the death of Tang Taizong, his son Emperor Tang Gaozong allied with the Korean kingdom of Silla and invaded Goguryeo again, but were forced to withdraw in 662. However, Y\u014fn Kaesomun died of a natural cause in 666 and Goguryeo was thrown into chaos and weakened by a succession struggle among his sons and younger brother, with his eldest son defecting to Tang and his younger brother defecting to Silla. The Tang-Silla alliance conquered Goguryeo in 668. After the collapse of Goguryeo, Tang and Silla ended their alliance and fought over control of the Korean Peninsula. Silla succeeded in gaining control over most of the Korean Peninsula, while Tang gained control over Goguryeo's northern territories. However, 30 years after the fall of Goguryeo, a Goguryeo general by the name of Dae Joyeong founded the Korean-Mohe state of Balhae and successfully expelled the Tang presence from much of the former Goguryeo territories.\nThe southwestern Korean kingdom of Baekje was founded around modern-day Seoul by a Goguryeo prince, a son of the founder of Goguryeo. Baekje absorbed all of the Mahan states and subjugated most of the western Korean peninsula (including the modern provinces of Gyeonggi, Chungcheong, and Jeolla, as well as parts of Hwanghae and Gangwon) to a centralised government; during the expansion of its territory, Baekje acquired Chinese culture and technology through maritime contacts with the Southern Dynasties. Baekje was a great maritime power; its nautical skill, which made it the Phoenicia of East Asia, was instrumental in the dissemination of Buddhism throughout East Asia and continental culture to Japan. Historic evidence suggests that Japanese culture, art, and language were influenced by the kingdom of Baekje and Korea itself; Baekje also played an important role in transmitting advanced Chinese culture to the Japanese archipelago. Baekje was once a great military power on the Korean Peninsula, most notably in the 4th century during the rule of Geunchogo when its influence extended across the sea to Liaoxi and Shandong in China, taking advantage of the weakened state of Former Qin, and Kyushu in the Japanese archipelago; however, Baekje was critically defeated by Gwanggaeto the Great and declined.\nAlthough later records claim that Silla was the oldest of the Three Kingdoms of Korea, it is now believed to have been the last kingdom to develop. By the 2nd century, Silla existed as a large state in the southeast, occupying and influencing its neighbouring city-states. In 562, Silla annexed the Gaya confederacy, which was located between Baekje and Silla. The Three Kingdoms of Korea often warred with each other and Silla was often dominated by Baekje and Goguryeo. Silla was the smallest and weakest of the three, but it used cunning diplomatic means to make opportunistic pacts and alliances with the more powerful Korean kingdoms, and eventually Tang China, to its great advantage. In 660, King Muyeol ordered his armies to attack Baekje. General Kim Yu-shin, aided by Tang forces, conquered Baekje after defeating General Gyebaek at the Battle of Hwangsanbeol. In 661, Silla and Tang attacked Goguryeo but were repelled. King Munmu, son of Muyeol and nephew of General Kim Yu-shin, launched another campaign in 667 and Goguryeo fell in the following year.\nNorth\u2013South States Period.\nBeginning in the 6th century, Silla's power gradually extended across the Korean Peninsula. Silla first annexed the adjacent Gaya confederacy in 562. By the 640s, Silla formed an alliance with the Tang dynasty of China to conquer Baekje and later Goguryeo. After conquering Baekje and Goguryeo, Silla repulsed Tang China from the Korean peninsula in 676. Even though Silla unified most of the Korean Peninsula, most of the Goguryeo territories to the north of the Korean Peninsula were ruled by Balhae. Former Goguryeo general or chief of Sumo Mohe Dae Jo-yeong led a group of Goguryeo and Mohe refugees to the Jilin and founded the kingdom of Balhae, 30 years after the collapse of Goguryeo, as the successor to Goguryeo. At its height, Balhae's territories extended from southern Manchuria down to the northern Korean peninsula. Balhae was called the \"Prosperous Country in the East\".\nLater Silla carried on the maritime prowess of Baekje, which acted like the Phoenicia of medieval East Asia, and during the 8th and 9th centuries dominated the seas of East Asia and the trade between China, Korea and Japan, most notably during the time of Chang Pogo; in addition, Silla people made overseas communities in China on the Shandong Peninsula and the mouth of the Yangtze River. Later Silla was a prosperous and wealthy country, and its metropolitan capital of Gyeongju was the fourth largest city in the world. Later Silla experienced a golden age of art and culture, as evidenced by the Hwangnyongsa, Seokguram, and Emille Bell. Buddhism flourished during this time, and many Korean Buddhists gained great fame among Chinese Buddhists and contributed to Chinese Buddhism, including: Woncheuk, Wonhyo, Uisang, Musang, and Kim Gyo-gak, a Silla prince whose influence made Mount Jiuhua one of the Four Sacred Mountains of Chinese Buddhism.\nLater Silla fell apart in the late 9th century, giving way to the tumultuous Later Three Kingdoms period (892\u2013935), and Balhae was destroyed by the Khitans in 926. Goryeo unified the Later Three Kingdoms and received the last crown prince and much of the ruling class of Balhae, thus bringing about a unification of the two successor nations of Goguryeo.\nGoryeo dynasty.\nGoryeo was founded in 918 and replaced Silla as the ruling dynasty of Korea. Goryeo's land was at first what is now South Korea and about 1/3 of North Korea, but later on managed to recover most of the Korean peninsula. Momentarily, Goryeo advanced to parts of Jiandao while conquering the Jurchens, but returned the territories due to the harsh climate and difficulties in defending them. The name \"Goryeo\" (\u9ad8\u9e97) is a short form of \"Goguryeo\" (\u9ad8\u53e5\u9e97) and was first used during the time of King Jangsu. Goryeo regarded itself as the successor of Goguryeo, hence its name and efforts to recover the former territories of Goguryeo. Wang Geon, the founder of Goryeo, was of Goguryeo descent and traced his ancestry to a noble Goguryeo clan. He made Kaesong, his hometown, the capital.\nDuring this period, laws were codified and a civil service system was introduced. Buddhism flourished and spread throughout the peninsula. The development of celadon industries flourished in the 12th and 13th centuries. The publication of the Tripitaka Koreana onto more than 80,000 wooden blocks and the invention of the world's first metal movable type in the 13th century attest to Goryeo's cultural achievements.\nGoryeo had to defend frequently against attacks by nomadic empires, especially the Khitans and the Mongols. Goryeo had a hostile relationship with the Khitans, because the Khitan Empire had destroyed Balhae, also a successor state of Goguryeo. In 993, the Khitans, who had established the Liao dynasty in 907, invaded Goryeo, demanding that it make amity with them. Goryeo sent the diplomat S\u014f H\u016di to negotiate, who successfully persuaded the Khitans to let Goryeo expand to the banks of the Amnok (Yalu) River, citing that in the past the land belonged to Goguryeo, the predecessor of Goryeo. During the Goryeo\u2013Khitan War, the Khitan Empire invaded Korea twice more in 1009 and 1018, but was defeated.\nAfter defeating the Khitan Empire, which was the most powerful empire of its time, Goryeo experienced a golden age that lasted a century, during which the Tripitaka Koreana was completed, and there were great developments in printing and publishing, promoting learning and dispersing knowledge on philosophy, literature, religion, and science; by 1100, there were 12 universities that produced famous scholars and scientists.\nGoryeo was invaded by the Mongols in seven major campaigns from the 1230s until the 1270s, but was never conquered. Exhausted after decades of fighting, Goryeo sent its crown prince to the Yuan capital to swear allegiance to the Mongols; Kublai Khan accepted, and married one of his daughters to the Korean crown prince, and the dynastic line of Goryeo continued to survive under the overlordship of the Mongol Yuan dynasty as a semi-autonomous vassal state and compulsory ally. The two nations became intertwined for 80 years as all subsequent Korean kings married Mongol princesses, and the last empress of the Yuan dynasty was a Korean princess.\nIn the 1350s, King Gongmin was free at last to reform the Goryeo government when the Yuan dynasty began to crumble. Gongmin had various problems that needed to be dealt with, which included the removal of pro-Mongol aristocrats and military officials, the question of land holding, and quelling the growing animosity between the Buddhists and Confucian scholars. During this tumultuous period, Goryeo momentarily conquered Liaoyang in 1356, repulsed two large invasions by the Red Turbans in 1359 and 1360, and defeated the final attempt by the Yuan to dominate Goryeo when General Ch'oe Y\u014fng defeated a Mongol tumen in 1364. During the 1380s, Goryeo turned its attention to the Wokou threat and used naval artillery created by Ch'oe Mu-s\u014fn to annihilate hundreds of pirate ships.\nJoseon dynasty.\nIn 1392, the general Yi Seong-gye overthrew the Goryeo dynasty after he staged a coup and defeated General Ch'oe Y\u014fng. Yi Seong-gye named his new dynasty Joseon and moved the capital from Kaesong to Hanseong (formerly Hanyang; modern-day Seoul) and built the Gyeongbokgung palace. In 1394, he adopted Confucianism as the country's official ideology, resulting in much loss of power and wealth by the Buddhists. The prevailing philosophy of the Joseon dynasty was Neo-Confucianism, which was epitomized by the seonbi class, scholars who passed up positions of wealth and power to lead lives of study and integrity.\nJoseon was a nominal tributary state of China but exercised full sovereignty, and maintained the highest position among China's tributary states, which also included countries such as the Ryukyu Kingdom, Vietnam, Burma, Brunei, Laos, Thailand, and the Philippines, among others. In addition, Joseon received tribute from Jurchens and Japanese until the 17th century, and had a small enclave in the Ryukyu Kingdom that engaged in trade with Siam and Java.\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, Joseon enjoyed many benevolent rulers who promoted education and science. Most notable among them was Sejong the Great (r. 1418\u201350), who personally created and promulgated Hangul, the Korean alphabet. This golden age saw great cultural and scientific advancements, including in printing, meteorological observation, astronomy, calendar science, ceramics, military technology, geography, cartography, medicine, and agricultural technology, some of which were unrivaled elsewhere. Joseon implemented a class system that consisted of \"yangban\" the noble class, \"jungin\" the middle class, \"yangin\" the common class, and \"cheonin\" the lowest class, which included occupations such as butchers, tanners, shamans, entertainers, and \"nobi\", the equivalent of slaves, bondservants, or serfs.\nIn 1592 and again in 1597, the Japanese invaded Korea; the Korean military at the time was unprepared and untrained, due to two centuries of peace on the Korean Peninsula. Toyotomi Hideyoshi intended to conquer China and India through the Korean Peninsula, but was defeated by strong resistance from the Righteous Army, the naval superiority of Admiral Yi Sun-sin and his turtle ships, and assistance from Wanli Emperor of Ming China. However, Joseon experienced great destruction, including a tremendous loss of cultural sites such as temples and palaces to Japanese pillaging, and the Japanese brought back to Japan an estimated 100,000\u2013200,000 noses cut from Korean victims. Less than 30 years after the Japanese invasions, the Manchus took advantage of Joseon's war-weakened state and invaded in 1627 and 1637, and then went on to conquer the destabilized Ming dynasty.\nAfter normalising relations with the new Qing dynasty, Joseon experienced a nearly 200-year period of peace. Kings Yeongjo and Jeongjo led a new renaissance of the Joseon dynasty during the 18th century.\nIn the 19th century, the royal in-law families gained control of the government, leading to mass corruption and weakening of the state, with severe poverty and peasant rebellions spreading throughout the country. Furthermore, the Joseon government adopted a strict isolationist policy, earning the nickname \"the hermit kingdom\", but ultimately failed to protect itself against imperialism and was forced to open its borders, beginning an era leading into Japanese imperial rule.\nKorean Empire.\nBeginning in 1871, Japan began to exert more influence in Korea, forcing it out of China's traditional sphere of influence. As a result of the First Sino-Japanese War (1894\u201395), the Qing dynasty had to give up such a position according to Article 1 of the Treaty of Shimonoseki, which was concluded between China and Japan in 1895. That same year, Empress Myeongseong of Korea was assassinated by Japanese agents.\nIn 1897, the Joseon dynasty proclaimed the Korean Empire (1897\u20131910). King Gojong became emperor. During this brief period, Korea had some success in modernising the military, economy, real property laws, education system, and various industries. Russia, Japan, France, and the United States all invested in the country and sought to influence it politically.\nThe Russians were pushed out of the fight for Korea following the conclusion of the Russo-Japanese War (1904\u20131905). Korea became a protectorate of Japan shortly afterwards. In Manchuria on 26 October 1909, An Jung-geun assassinated the former Resident-General of Korea, It\u014d Hirobumi, for his role in trying to force Korea into occupation.\nJapanese annexation and occupation of Korea.\nIn 1910, an already militarily occupied Korea was a forced party to the Japan\u2013Korea Annexation Treaty. The treaty was signed by Lee Wan-Yong, who was given the General Power of Attorney by the Emperor. However, the Emperor is said to have not actually ratified the treaty according to Yi Tae-jin. There is a long dispute whether this treaty was legal or illegal due to its signing under duress, threat of force and bribes.\nKorean resistance to the brutal Japanese occupation was manifested in the nonviolent March First Movement of 1919, during which 7,000 demonstrators were killed by Japanese police and military. The Korean liberation movement also spread to neighbouring Manchuria and Siberia.\nOver five million Koreans were conscripted for labour beginning in 1939, and tens of thousands of men were forced into Japan's military. Nearly 400,000 Korean labourers died. Approximately 200,000 girls and women, mostly from China and Korea, were forced into sexual slavery for the Japanese military. In 1993, Japanese Chief Cabinet Secretary Yohei Kono acknowledged the terrible injustices faced by these euphemistically named \"comfort women\".\nDuring the Japanese annexation, the Korean language was suppressed in an effort to eradicate indigenous Korean national identity. Koreans were forced to take Japanese surnames, known as S\u014dshi-kaimei. Traditional Korean culture suffered heavy losses, as numerous Korean cultural artefacts were destroyed or taken to Japan. One such artefact is rumored to be a sacred Korean mask (tal), still up on display in a Japanese museum. To this day, valuable Korean artefacts can often be found in Japanese museums or among private collections. One investigation by the South Korean government identified 75,311 cultural assets that were taken from Korea, 34,369 in Japan and 17,803 in the United States. However, experts estimate that over 100,000 artefacts actually remain in Japan. Japanese officials considered returning Korean cultural properties, but to date this has not occurred. Both Koreas and Japan still dispute the ownership of the Dokdo islets, located east of the Korean Peninsula.\nThere was significant emigration to the overseas territories of the Empire of Japan during the Japanese occupation period, including Korea. By the end of World War II, there were over 850,000 Japanese settlers in Korea. After World War II, most of these overseas Japanese repatriated to Japan. Migrants who remained squatted in informal settlements.\nDivision and conflict.\nIn 1945, with the surrender of Japan, the United Nations developed plans for a trusteeship administration, the Soviet Union administering the peninsula north of the 38th parallel and the United States administering the south. The politics of the Cold War resulted in the 1948 establishment of two separate governments, North Korea and South Korea.\nThe aftermath of World War II left Korea partitioned along the 38th parallel on 2 September 1945, with the north under Soviet occupation and the south under US occupation supported by other allied states. Consequently, North Korea, a Soviet-style socialist republic was established in the north, and South Korea, a Western-style regime, was established in the south.\nNorth Korea is a one-party state ruled by the Workers' Party of Korea, now centred on Kim Il Sung's \"Juche\" ideology, with a centrally planned industrial economy. South Korea is a multi-party state with a capitalist market economy, alongside membership in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the Group of Twenty. The two states have greatly diverged both culturally and economically since their partition, though they still share a common traditional culture and pre-Cold War history.\nSince the 1960s, the South Korean economy has grown enormously and the economic structure was radically transformed. In 1957, South Korea had a lower per capita GDP than Ghana, and by 2008 it was 17 times as high as Ghana's.\nAccording to R. J. Rummel, forced labour, executions, and concentration camps were responsible for over one million deaths in North Korea from 1948 to 1987; others have estimated 400,000 deaths in concentration camps alone. Estimates based on the most recent North Korean census suggest that 240,000 to 420,000 people died as a result of the 1990s famine and that there were 600,000 to 850,000 unnatural deaths in North Korea from 1993 to 2008. In South Korea, as guerrilla activities expanded, the South Korean government used strong measures against peasants, such as forcefully moving their families from guerrilla areas. According to one estimate, these measures resulted in 36,000 people killed, 11,000 people wounded, and 432,000 people displaced.\nKorean War.\nThe Korean War broke out when Soviet-backed North Korea invaded South Korea. Despite massive swings in territorial gain back and forth, in the end neither side gained much territory as a result. The Korean Peninsula remained divided, the Korean Demilitarized Zone being the \"de facto\" border between the two states.\nIn June 1950 North Korea invaded the South, using Soviet tanks and weaponry. During the Korean War (1950\u201353) more than 1.2 million people died and the three years of fighting throughout the nation effectively destroyed most cities. The war ended with an armistice agreement at approximately the Military Demarcation Line, but the two governments are officially still at war.\nNorth and South Korea.\nIn 2018, the leaders of North Korea and South Korea officially signed the Panmunjom Declaration, announcing that they will work to end the conflict.\nIn November 2020, South Korea and China agreed to work together to mend South Korea's relationship with North Korea. During a meeting between President Moon and China's foreign minister, Wang Yi, Moon expressed his gratitude to China for its role in helping to foster peace in the Korean Peninsula. Moon was quoted telling Wang during their meeting that \"[the South Korean] government will not stop efforts to put an end (formally) to war on the Korean Peninsula and achieve complete denuclearization and permanent peace together with the international community, including China.\"\nGeography.\nKorea consists of a peninsula and nearby islands located in East Asia. The peninsula extends southwards for about from continental Asia into the Pacific Ocean and is surrounded by the Sea of Japan to the east and the Yellow Sea (West Sea) to the west, the Korea Strait connecting the two bodies of water. To the northwest, the Amnok River separates Korea from China and to the northeast, the Duman River separates it from China and Russia. Notable islands include Jeju Island, Ulleung Island, Dokdo.\nThe southern and western parts of the peninsula have well-developed plains, while the eastern and northern parts are mountainous. The highest mountain in Korea is Mount Paektu (2,744\u00a0m), through which runs the border with China. The southern extension of Mount Paektu is a highland called Gaema Heights. This highland was mainly raised during the Cenozoic orogeny and partly covered by volcanic matter. To the south of Gaema Gowon, successive high mountains are located along the eastern coast of the peninsula. This mountain range is named Baekdu-daegan. Some significant mountains include Sobaeksan (1,439\u00a0m), Mount Kumgang (1,638\u00a0m), Seoraksan (1,708\u00a0m), Taebaeksan (1,567\u00a0m), and Jirisan (1,915\u00a0m). There are several lower, secondary mountain series whose direction is almost perpendicular to that of Baekdu-daegan. They are developed along the tectonic line of Mesozoic orogeny and their directions are basically northwest.\nUnlike most ancient mountains on the mainland, many important islands in Korea were formed by volcanic activity in the Cenozoic orogeny. Jeju Island, situated off the southern coast, is a large volcanic island whose main mountain, Mount Halla or Hallasan (1,950\u00a0m), is the highest in South Korea. Ulleung Island is a volcanic island in the Sea of Japan, the composition of which is more felsic than Jeju. The volcanic islands tend to be younger, the more westward.\nBecause the mountainous region is mostly on the eastern part of the peninsula, the main rivers tend to flow westwards. Two exceptions are the southward-flowing Nakdong River and Seomjin River. Important rivers running westward include the Amnok River, the Chongchon River, the Taedong River, the Han River, the Geum River, and the Yeongsan River. These rivers have vast flood plains and provide an ideal environment for wet-rice cultivation.\nThe southern and southwestern coastlines of the peninsula form a well-developed ria coastline, known as \"Dadohae-jin\" in Korean. This convoluted coastline provides mild seas, and the resulting calm environment allows for safe navigation, fishing, and seaweed farming. In addition to the complex coastline, the western coast of the Korean Peninsula has an extremely high tidal amplitude (at Incheon, around the middle of the western coast, the tide can get as high as 9\u00a0m). Vast tidal flats have been developing on the south and west coastlines.\nClimate.\nKorea has a temperate climate with comparatively fewer typhoons than other countries in East Asia. Due to the peninsula's position, it has a unique climate influenced by Siberia in the north, the Pacific Ocean in the east and the rest of Eurasia in the west. The peninsula has four distinct seasons: spring, summer, autumn and winter.\nSpring.\nAs influence from Siberia weakens, temperatures begin to increase while the high pressure begins to move away. If the weather is abnormally dry, Siberia will have more influence on the peninsula leading to wintry weather such as snow.\nSummer.\nDuring June at the start of the summer, there tends to be a lot of rain due to the cold and wet air from the Sea of Okhotsk and the hot and humid air from the Pacific Ocean combining. When these fronts combine, it leads to a so-called rainy season with often cloudy days with rain, which is sometimes very heavy. The hot and humid winds from the south west blow causing an increasing amount of humidity and this leads to the fronts moving towards Manchuria in China and thus there is less rain and this is known as midsummer; temperatures can exceed daily at this time of year.\nAutumn.\nUsually, high pressure is heavily dominant during autumn leading to clear conditions. Furthermore, temperatures remain high but the humidity becomes relatively low.\nWinter.\nThe weather becomes increasingly dominated by Siberia during winter and the jet stream moves further south causing a drop in temperature. This season is relatively dry with some snow falling at times.\nBiodiversity.\nAnimal life of the Korean Peninsula includes a considerable number of bird species and native freshwater fish. Native or endemic species of the Korean Peninsula include Korean hare, Korean water deer, Korean field mouse, Korean brown frog, Korean pine and Korean spruce. The Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) with its forest and natural wetlands is a unique biodiversity spot, which harbours eighty-two endangered species. Korea once hosted many Siberian tigers, but as the number of people affected by the tigers increased, the tigers were killed in the Joseon dynasty and the Siberian tigers in the South Korea became extinct during the Japanese colonial era period. It has been confirmed that Siberian tigers are only on the side of North Korea now.\nThere are also approximately 3,034 species of vascular plants throughout the peninsula.\nEconomy.\nScience and technology.\nOne of the best known artefacts of Korea's history of science and technology is the Cheomseongdae, a 9.4-meter high astronomical observatory built in 634 CE.\nThe earliest known surviving Korean example of woodblock printing is The Great Dharani Sutra. It is believed to have been printed in Korea in 750\u201351 CE, which if correct, would make it older than the Diamond Sutra.\nDuring the Goryeo period, metal movable type printing was invented by Ch'oe Yun-\u016di in 1234 CE. This invention made printing easier, more efficient and also increased literacy, which observed by Chinese visitors was seen to be so important where it was considered to be shameful to not be able to read. The Mongol Empire later adopted Korea's movable type printing and spread as far as Central Asia. There is conjecture as to whether or not Ch'oe's invention had any influence on later printing inventions such as Gutenberg's Printing press. When the Mongols invaded Europe they inadvertently introduced different kinds of Asian technology.\nDuring the Joseon period, the Turtle Ship was invented, which were covered by a wooden deck and iron with thorns, as well as other weapons such as the bigyeokjincheolloe cannon (\ube44\uaca9\uc9c4\ucc9c\ub8b0, \u98db\u64ca\u9707\u5929\u96f7) and the hwacha.\nThe Korean alphabet hangul was also invented during this time by King Sejong the Great.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the combined population of the Koreas is about 77.9 million (South Korea: 51.7 million, North Korea: 26.1 million). Korea is chiefly populated by a highly homogeneous ethnic group, the Koreans, who speak the Korean language. The number of foreigners living in Korea has also steadily increased since the late 20th century, particularly in South Korea, where more than 1 million foreigners reside. It was estimated in 2006 that only 26,700 of the old Chinese community now remain in South Korea. However, in recent years, immigration from mainland China has increased; 624,994 persons of Chinese nationality have immigrated to South Korea, including 443,566 of ethnic Korean descent. Small communities of ethnic Chinese and Japanese are also found in North Korea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage.\nKorean is the official language of both North and South Korea, and (along with Mandarin) of Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Jilin Province, China. Worldwide, there are up to 80 million speakers of the Korean language. South Korea has around 50 million speakers while North Korea around 25 million. Other large groups of Korean speakers through Korean diaspora are found in China, the United States, Japan, former Soviet Union and elsewhere.\nModern Korean is written almost exclusively in the script of the Korean alphabet (known as Hangul in South Korea and Chosungul in China and North Korea), which was invented in the 15th century. Korean is sometimes written with the addition of some Chinese characters called Hanja; however, this is only occasionally seen nowadays.\nReligion.\nConfucian tradition has dominated Korean thought, along with contributions by Buddhism, Taoism, and Korean Shamanism. Since the middle of the 20th century, however, Christianity has competed with Buddhism in South Korea, while religious practice has been suppressed in North Korea. Throughout Korean history and culture, regardless of separation; the influence of traditional beliefs of Korean Shamanism, Mahayana Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism have remained an underlying religion of the Korean people as well as a vital aspect of their culture; all these traditions have coexisted peacefully for hundreds of years up to today despite strong Westernisation from Christian missionary conversions in the South or the pressure from the Juche government in the North.\nAccording to 2005 statistics from the South Korean government, about 46% of citizens profess no particular religion. Christians account for 29.2% of the population (of which are Protestants 18.3% and Catholics 10.9%) and Buddhists 22.8%. In North Korea, around 71.3% claim to be non-religious or atheists, 12.9% follow Cheondoism and 12.3% Korean Folk Religion, while Christians account for 2% of the population and Buddhists 1.5%.\nIslam in South Korea is practised by about 45,000 natives (about 0.09% of the population) in addition to some 100,000 foreign workers from Muslim countries. While in North Korea it's estimated to be around 3000 Muslims, which is around 0.01% of the population. The Ar-Rahman Mosque is the only mosque in DPRK, and it is located at the Iranian Embassy grounds in Pyongyyang.\nIn 1993, the Korean Overseas Culture and Information Service estimated that around 1,600,000 people practice Korean new religions in both Korean countries.\nEducation.\nThe modern South Korean school system consists of six years in elementary school, three years in middle school, and three years in high school. Students are required to go to elementary and middle school, and do not have to pay for their education, except for a small fee called a \"School Operation Support Fee\" that differs from school to school. The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, ranks South Korea's science education as the third best in the world and being significantly higher than the OECD average.\nAlthough South Korean students often rank high on international comparative assessments, the education system is criticized for emphasising too much upon passive learning and memorisation. The South Korean education system is rather notably strict and structured as compared to its counterparts in most Western societies.\nThe North Korean education system consists primarily of universal and state funded schooling by the government. The national literacy rate for citizens 15 years of age and above is over 99 per cent. Children go through one year of kindergarten, four years of primary education, six years of secondary education, and then on to universities. The most prestigious university in the DPRK is Kim Il Sung University. Other notable universities include Kim Chaek University of Technology, which focuses on computer science, Pyongyang University of Foreign Studies, which trains working level diplomats and trade officials, and Kim Hyong Jik University of Education, which trains teachers.\nCulture.\nIn ancient Chinese texts, Korea is referred to as \"Rivers and Mountains Embroidered on Silk\" (; ) and \"Eastern Nation of Decorum\" (; ). Individuals are regarded as one year old when they are born, as Koreans reckon the pregnancy period as one year of life for infants, and age increments increase on New Year's Day rather than on the anniversary of birthdays. Thus, one born immediately before New Year's Day may only be a few days old in western reckoning, but two years old in Korea. Accordingly, a Korean person's stated age (at least among fellow Koreans) will be one or two years more than their age according to western reckoning. However, western reckoning is sometimes applied with regard to the concept of legal age; for example, the legal age for purchasing alcohol or cigarettes in the Republic of Korea is 19, which is measured according to western reckoning.\nMusic.\nTraditional Korean music includes combinations of the folk, vocal, religious and ritual music styles of the Korean people. Korean music has been practised since prehistoric times. Korean music falls into two broad categories. The first, Hyangak, literally means \"The local music\" or \"Music native to Korea\", a famous example of which is Sujechon, a piece of instrumental music often claimed to be at least 1,300 years old. The second, \"yangak\", represents a more Western style.\nCuisine.\nKoreans traditionally believe that the taste and quality of food depend on its spices and sauces, the essential ingredients to making a delicious meal. Therefore, soybean paste, soy sauce, \"gochujang\" or red pepper paste and kimchi are some of the most important staples in a Korean household.\nKorean cuisine was greatly influenced by the geography and climate of the Korean Peninsula, which is known for its cold autumns and winters, therefore there are many fermented dishes and hot soups and stews.\nKorean cuisine is probably best known for kimchi, a side dish which uses a distinctive fermentation process of preserving vegetables, most commonly cabbage. Kimchi is said to relieve the pores on the skin, thereby reducing wrinkles and providing nutrients to the skin naturally. It is also healthy, as it provides necessary vitamins and nutrients. Gochujang, a traditional Korean sauce made of red pepper is also commonly used, often as pepper (chilli) paste, earning the cuisine a reputation for spiciness.\nBulgogi (roasted marinated meat, usually beef), galbi (marinated grilled short ribs), and samgyeopsal (pork belly) are popular main courses. Fish is also a popular commodity, as it is the traditional meat that Koreans eat. Meals are usually accompanied by a soup or stew, such as galbitang (stewed ribs) or doenjang jjigae (fermented bean paste soup). The center of the table is filled with a shared collection of sidedishes called banchan.\nOther popular dishes include \"bibimbap\", which literally means \"mixed rice\" (rice mixed with meat, vegetables, and red pepper paste), and naengmyeon (cold noodles).\nInstant noodles, or \"ramyeon\", is a popular snack food. Koreans also enjoy food from \"pojangmachas\" (street vendors), which serve tteokbokki, rice cake and fish cake with a spicy gochujang sauce; \"gimbap\", made of steamed white rice wrapped in dried green laver seaweed; fried squid; and glazed sweet potato. Soondae, a sausage made of cellophane noodles and pork blood, is widely eaten.\nAdditionally, some other common snacks include \"Choco Pie\", shrimp crackers, \"bbeongtwigi\" (puffed rice grains), and \"nurungji\" (slightly burnt rice). Nurungji can be eaten as it is or boiled with water to make a soup. Nurungji can also be eaten as a snack or a dessert.\nKorea is unique among Asian countries in its use of metal chopsticks. Metal chopsticks have been discovered in archaeological sites belonging to the ancient Korean kingdoms of Goguryeo, Baekje and Silla.\nSports.\nNorth Korea and South Korea usually compete as two separate nations in international events. There are, however, a few examples of them having competed as one entity, under the name Korea.\nWhile association football remains one of the most popular sports in South Korea, the martial art of taekwondo is considered to be the national sport. Baseball and golf are also popular. The board game Go, known in Korea as \"baduk\", has also been popular for over a millennium, first arriving from China in the 5th century CE; \"baduk\" is played both casually and competitively.\nMartial arts.\nTaekwon-Do.\nTaekwon-Do is Korea's most famous martial art and sport. It combines combat techniques, self-defence, sport and exercise. Taekwon-Do has become an official Olympic sport, starting as a demonstration event in 1988 (when South Korea hosted the Games in Seoul) and becoming an official medal event in 2000. The two major Taekwon-Do federations, the International Taekwon-Do Federation and the World Taekwondo Federation, were founded in Korea..\nHapkido.\nHapkido is a modern Korean martial art with a grappling focus that employs joint locks, throws, kicks, punches and other striking attacks like attacks against pressure points. Hapkido emphasizes circular motion, non-resisting movements and control of the opponent. Practitioners seek to gain advantage through footwork and body positioning to employ leverage, avoiding the pure use of strength against strength.\nSsireum.\nSsireum is a traditional form of wrestling that has been practised in Korea for thousands of years, with evidence discovered from Goguryeo of Korea's Three Kingdoms Period (57 BCE to 688). Ssireum is the traditional national sport of Korea. During a match, opponents grip each other by sash belts wrapped around the waist and the thigh, attempting to throw their competitor to the sandy ground of the ring. The first opponent to touch the ground with any body part above the knee or to lose hold of their opponent loses the round.\nSsireum competitions are traditionally held twice a year, during the Dano Festival (the 5th day of the fifth lunar month) and Chuseok (the 15th day of the 8th lunar month). Competitions are also held throughout the year as a part of festivals and other events.\nTaekkyon.\nTaekkyon is a traditional martial art, considered the oldest form of fighting technique of Korea. Practiced for centuries and especially popular during the Joseon period, two forms co-existed: one for practical use, the other for sport. This form was usually practised alongside Ssireum during festivals and competitions between villages. Nonetheless, Taekkyon almost disappeared during the Japanese Occupation and the Korean War.\nThough lost in North Korea, Taekkyon has enjoyed a spectacular revival from the 1980s in South Korea. It is the only martial art in the world (with Ssireum) recognized as a National Treasure of South Korea and a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16750", "revid": "1311775454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16750", "title": "Kleene star", "text": "Unary operation on string sets\nIn formal language theory, the Kleene star (or Kleene operator or Kleene closure) refer to two related unary operations, that can be applied either to an alphabet of symbols or to a formal language, a set of strings (finite sequences of symbols).\nThe Kleene star operator on an alphabet V generates the set V* of all finite-length strings over V, that is, finite sequences whose elements belong to V; in mathematics, it is more commonly known as the free monoid construction. The Kleene star operator on a language L generates another language L*, the set of all strings that can be obtained as a concatenation of zero or more members of L. In both cases, repetitions are allowed.\nThe Kleene star operators are named after American mathematician Stephen Cole Kleene, who first introduced and widely used it to characterize automata for regular expressions.\nOf an alphabet.\nGiven an alphabet formula_1,\ndefine\nformula_2 (the set consists only of the empty string),\nformula_3\nand define recursively the set\nformula_4 for each formula_5\nwhere formula_6 denotes the string obtained by appending the single character formula_7 to the end of formula_8. Here, \"formula_9\" can be understood to be the set of all strings of length exactly formula_10, with characters from formula_1.\nThe definition of Kleene star on formula_1 is\nformula_13\nOf a language.\nGiven a language formula_14 (any finite or infinite set of strings), define\nformula_15 (the language consisting only of the empty string),\nformula_16\nand define recursively the set\nformula_17 for each formula_5\nwhere formula_6 denotes the string obtained by concatenating formula_8 and formula_7. Here, \"formula_22\" can be understood to be the set of all strings that can be obtained by concatenating exactly formula_10 strings from formula_14, allowing repetitions.\nThe definition of Kleene star on formula_14 is\nformula_26\nKleene plus.\nIn some formal language studies, (e.g. AFL theory) a variation on the Kleene star operation called the \"Kleene plus\" is used. The Kleene plus omits the formula_27 or formula_28 term in the above unions. In other words, the Kleene plus on formula_1 is\nformula_30\nor\nformula_31\nExamples.\nExample of Kleene star applied to a set of strings:\n {\"ab\",\"c\"}* = { \u03b5, \"ab\", \"c\", \"abab\", \"abc\", \"cab\", \"cc\", \"ababab\", \"ababc\", \"abcab\", \"abcc\", \"cabab\", \"cabc\", \"ccab\", \"ccc\", ...}.\nExample of Kleene star applied to a set of strings without the prefix property:\n {\"a\",\"ab\",\"b\"}* = { \u03b5, \"a\", \"ab\", \"b\", \"aa\", \"aab\", \"aba\", \"abab\", \"abb\", \"ba\", \"bab\", \"bb\", ...};&lt;BR&gt;In this example, the string \"aab\" can be obtained in two different ways. The Sardinas-Patterson algorithm can be used to check for a given \"V\" whether any member of \"V\"* can be obtained in more than one way.\nExample of Kleene and Kleene plus applied to a set of characters (following the C programming language convention where a character is denoted by single quotes and a string is denoted by double quotes):\n {'a', 'b', 'c'}* = { \u03b5, \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"aa\", \"ab\", \"ac\", \"ba\", \"bb\", \"bc\", \"ca\", \"cb\", \"cc\", \"aaa\", \"aab\", ...}.\n {'a', 'b', 'c'}+ = { \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"aa\", \"ab\", \"ac\", \"ba\", \"bb\", \"bc\", \"ca\", \"cb\", \"cc\", \"aaa\", \"aab\", ...}.\nGeneralization.\nStrings form a monoid with concatenation as the binary operation and \u03b5 the identity element. In addition to strings, the Kleene star is defined for any monoid.\nMore precisely, let (\"M\", \u22c5) be a monoid, and \"S\" \u2286 \"M\". Then \"S\"* is the smallest submonoid of \"M\" containing \"S\"; that is, \"S\"* contains the neutral element of \"M\", the set \"S\", and is such that if \"x\",\"y\" \u2208 \"S\"*, then \"x\"\u22c5\"y\" \u2208 \"S\"*.\nFurthermore, the Kleene star is generalized by including the *-operation (and the union) in the algebraic structure itself by the notion of complete star semiring.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
