{"id": "18524", "revid": "48982725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18524", "title": "Latin America", "text": "Region of the Americas\nLatin America (Spanish and ; ) is the cultural region of the Americas where Romance languages are predominantly spoken, primarily Spanish and Portuguese. Latin America is defined according to cultural identity, not geography, and as such it includes countries in both North and South America. Most countries south of the United States tend to be included: Mexico and the countries of Central America, South America and the Caribbean. Commonly, it refers to Hispanic America plus Brazil. Related terms are the narrower Hispanic America, which exclusively refers to Spanish-speaking nations, and the broader Ibero-America, which includes all Iberic countries in the Americas and occasionally European countries like Spain, Portugal and Andorra. English- and Dutch-speaking countries and territories, although in the same geographical region, are excluded (Suriname, Guyana, the Falkland Islands, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Belize, etc.).\nThe term \"Latin America\" was first introduced in 1856 at a Paris conference titled, literally, \"Initiative of the Americas: Idea for a Federal Congress of the Republics\" (\"Iniciativa de la Am\u00e9rica. Idea de un Congreso Federal de las Rep\u00fablicas\"). Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao coined the term to unify countries with shared cultural and linguistic heritage. It gained further prominence during the 1860s under the rule of Napoleon III, whose government sought to justify France's intervention in the Second Mexican Empire.\nEtymology and definitions.\nLatin America is a geographical region where Spanish or Portuguese is the national language, those that share a common language, culture and traditions. As whole can be traced back to the 1830s, in the writing of the French Saint-Simonian Michel Chevalier, who postulated that a part of the Americas was inhabited by people of a \"Latin race\", and that it could, therefore, ally itself with \"Latin Europe\", ultimately overlapping the Latin Church, in a struggle with \"Teutonic Europe\" and \"Anglo-Saxon America\" with its Anglo-Saxonism, as well as \"Slavic Europe\" with its Pan-Slavism.\nSome scholarship has identified political origins of the term. Two historians, Uruguayan Arturo Ardao and Chilean , found evidence that the term \"Latin America\" was used earlier than Phelan claimed, and the first use of the term was in opposition to imperialist projects in the Americas. Ardao wrote about this subject in his book \"G\u00e9nesis de la idea y el nombre de Am\u00e9rica latina\" (Genesis of the Idea and the Name of Latin America, 1980), and Miguel Rojas Mix in his article \"Bilbao y el hallazgo de Am\u00e9rica latina: Uni\u00f3n continental, socialista y libertaria\" (Bilbao and the Finding of Latin America: a Continental, Socialist, and Libertarian Union, 1986). Michel Gobat notes that \"Arturo Ardao, Miguel Rojas Mix, and Aims McGuinness have revealed [that] the term 'Latin America' had already been used in 1856 by Central Americans and South Americans protesting US expansion into the Southern Hemisphere\". Edward Shawcross summarizes Ardao's and Rojas Mix's findings: \"Ardao identified the term in a poem by a Colombian diplomat and intellectual resident in France, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Torres Caicedo, published on 15 February 1857 in a French based Spanish-language newspaper, while Rojas Mix located it in a speech delivered in France by the radical liberal Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in June 1856\".\nBy the late 1850s, the term was being used in California (which had become a part of the United States), in local newspapers such as \"El Clamor P\u00fablico\" by Californios writing about and , and identifying as as the abbreviated term for their \"hemispheric membership in \".\nThe words \"Latin\" and \"America\" were first found to be combined in a printed work to produce the term \"Latin America\" in 1856 at a conference by the Chilean politician Francisco Bilbao in Paris. The conference had the title \"Initiative of the America. The idea for a Federal Congress of Republics.\" The following year, Colombian writer also used the term in his poem \"The Two Americas\". \nBoth authors called for the union of all Latin American countries as the only way to defend their territories against further foreign US interventions. Both also rejected European imperialism, claiming that the return of European countries to non-democratic forms of government was another danger for Latin American countries, and used the same word to describe the state of European politics at the time: \"despotism.\" Several years later, during the French invasion of Mexico, Bilbao wrote another work, \"Emancipation of the Spirit in the Americas\", where he asked all Latin American countries to support the Mexican cause against France, and rejected French imperialism in Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas. He asked Latin American intellectuals to search for their \"intellectual emancipation\" by abandoning all French ideas, claiming that France was: \"Hypocrite, because she [France] calls herself protector of the Latin race just to subject it to her exploitation regime; treacherous, because she speaks of freedom and nationality, when, unable to conquer freedom for herself, she enslaves others instead!\" Therefore, as Michel Gobat puts it, the term Latin America itself had an \"anti-imperial genesis,\" and their creators were far from supporting any form of imperialism in the region, or in any other place of the globe.\nHistorian Mauricio Tenorio-Trillo explores at length the \"allure and power\" of the idea of Latin America. He remarks at the outset, \"The idea of 'Latin America' ought to have vanished with the obsolescence of racial theory... But it is not easy to declare something dead when it can hardly be said to have existed,\" going on to say, \"The term is here to stay, and it is important.\" Following in the tradition of Chilean writer Francisco Bilbao, who excluded Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay from his early conceptualization of Latin America, Chilean historian Jaime Eyzaguirre has criticized the term Latin America for \"disguising\" and \"diluting\" the Spanish character of a region (i.e. Hispanic America) with the inclusion of nations that, according to him, do not share the same pattern of conquest and colonization.\nModern definitions.\nQuebec and Acadia, Francophone parts of North America, are generally excluded from the definition of Latin America.\nSubregions and countries.\nLatin America can be subdivided into several subregions based on geography, politics, democracy, demographics and culture. The basic geographical subregions are North America, Central America, the Caribbean and South America; the latter contains further politico-geographical subdivisions such as the Southern Cone, the Guianas and the Andean states. It may be subdivided on linguistic grounds into Spanish America and Portuguese America, and by some definitions, French America.\nHistory.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans in the late 15th and early 16th centuries, the region was home to many indigenous peoples, including advanced civilizations, most notably from South: the Olmec, Maya, Muisca, Aztecs and Inca. The region came under control of the kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, which established colonies, and imposed Roman Catholicism and their languages. Both brought African slaves to their colonies as laborers, exploiting large, settled societies and their resources. The Spanish Crown regulated immigration, allowing only Christians to travel to the New World. The colonization process led to significant native population declines due to disease, forced labor, and violence. They imposed their culture, destroying native codices and artwork. Colonial-era religion played a crucial role in everyday life, with the Spanish Crown ensuring religious purity and aggressively prosecuting perceived deviations like witchcraft.\nIn the early nineteenth century nearly all of areas of Spanish America attained independence by armed struggle, with the exceptions of Cuba and Puerto Rico. Brazil, which had become a monarchy separate from Portugal, became a republic in the late nineteenth century. Political independence from European monarchies did not result in the abolition of black slavery in the new nations, it resulted in political and economic instability in Spanish America, immediately after independence. Yet, as regional Caudillos started to rise in power nation nation-builders started to view themselves as more modern than their former European colonizers. Leaders began to shift away from aristocracy toward republicanism and democracy, which allowed all citizens, not just the Creole elites, to have a voice in politics. Politics helped unify many of the Latin American nations as all people, even illiterate people, would gather in their communities to talk about political ideals and how they should be used in their nation. Great Britain and the United States exercised significant influence in the post-independence era, resulting in a form of neo-colonialism, where political sovereignty remained in place, but foreign powers exercised considerable power in the economic sphere. Newly independent nations faced domestic and interstate conflicts, struggling with economic instability and social inequality.\nThe 20th century brought U.S. intervention and the Cold War's impact on the region, with revolutions in countries like Cuba influencing Latin American politics. The late 20th and early 21st centuries saw shifts towards left-wing governments, followed by conservative resurgences, and a recent resurgence of left-wing politics in several countries.\nAfter 2000.\nIn many countries in the early 2000s, left-wing political parties rose to power, known as the Pink tide. The presidencies of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez (1999\u20132013) in Venezuela, Ricardo Lagos and Michelle Bachelet in Chile, Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff of the Workers Party (PT) in Brazil, N\u00e9stor Kirchner and his wife Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez in Argentina, Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez and Jos\u00e9 Mujica in Uruguay, Evo Morales in Bolivia, Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua, Rafael Correa in Ecuador, Fernando Lugo in Paraguay, Manuel Zelaya in Honduras (removed from power by a coup d'\u00e9tat), Mauricio Funes and Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n in El Salvador are all part of this wave of left-wing politicians who often declare themselves socialists, Latin Americanists, or anti-imperialists, often implying opposition to US policies towards the region. An aspect of this has been the creation of the eight-member ALBA alliance, or \"The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America\" (Spanish: \"Alianza Bolivariana para los Pueblos de Nuestra Am\u00e9rica\") by some of these countries.\nFollowing the pink tide, there was a Conservative wave across Latin America. In Mexico, the rightwing National Action Party (PAN) won the presidential election of 2000 with its candidate Vicente Fox, ending the 71-year rule of the Institutional Revolutionary Party. He was succeed six-years later by another conservative, Felipe Calder\u00f3n (2006\u20132012), who attempted to crack down on the Mexican drug cartels and instigated the Mexican drug war . Several right-wing leaders rose to power, including Argentina's Mauricio Macri and Brazil's Michel Temer, following the impeachment of the country's first female president. In Chile, the conservative Sebasti\u00e1n Pi\u00f1era succeeded the socialist Michelle Bachelet in 2017. In 2019, center-right Luis Lacalle Pou ended a 15-year leftist rule in Uruguay, after defeating the Broad Front candidate.\nEconomically, the 2000s commodities boom caused positive effects for many Latin American economies. Another trend was the rapidly increasing importance of their relations with China.\nHowever, with the Great Recession beginning in 2008, there was an end to the commodity boom, resulting in economic stagnation or recession resulted in some countries. A number of left-wing governments of the Pink tide lost support. The worst-hit was Venezuela, which is facing severe social and economic upheaval.\nCharges of against a major Brazilian conglomerate, Odebrecht, has raised allegations of corruption across the region's governments (see Operation Car Wash). This bribery ring has become the largest corruption scandal in Latin American history. As of July 2017, the highest ranking politicians charged were former Brazilian President Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva, who was arrested, and former Peruvian presidents Ollanta Humala and Alejandro Toledo, who fled to the United States and was extradited back to Peru.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic proved a political challenge for many unstable Latin American democracies, with scholars identifying a decline in civil liberties as a result of opportunistic emergency powers. This was especially true for countries with strong presidential regimes, such as Brazil.\nGeography.\nEnvironment.\nThe environment of Latin America has been changed by human use in the expanding of agriculture, new agricultural technologies, including the Green Revolution, extraction of minerals, growth of cities, and redirection of rivers by the construction of dams for irrigation, drinking water, and hydroelectric power. In the twentieth century, there is a growing movement to protect nature and many governments have sought recognition of natural sites by the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Brazil, Mexico, and Peru currently have the greatest number of natural sites.\nEconomy.\nSize.\nAccording to Goldman Sachs' BRICS review of emerging economies, by 2050 the largest economies in the world will be as follows: China, United States, India, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom, Mexico and Brazil.\nAgriculture.\nThe four countries with the strongest agricultural sector in South America are Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Colombia. Currently:\nIn Central America, the following stand out:\nBrazil is the world's largest exporter of chicken meat: 3.77\u00a0million tons in 2019. The country had the second largest herd of cattle in the world, 22.2% of the world herd. The country was the second largest producer of beef in 2019, responsible for 15.4% of global production. It was also the third largest world producer of milk in 2018. This year, the country produced 35.1\u00a0billion liters. In 2019, Brazil was the fourth largest pork producer in the world, with almost four million tons.\nIn 2018, Argentina was the fourth largest producer of beef in the world, with a production of 3 million tons (behind only United States, Brazil and China). Uruguay is also a major meat producer. In 2018, it produced 589 thousand tons of beef.\nIn the production of chicken meat, Mexico is among the ten largest producers in the world, Argentina among the 15 largest and Peru and Colombia among the 20 largest. In beef production, Mexico is one of the ten largest producers in the world and Colombia is one of the 20 largest producers. In the production of pork, Mexico is among the 15 largest producers in the world. In the production of honey, Argentina is among the five largest producers in the world, Mexico among the ten largest and Brazil among the 15 largest. In terms of cow's milk production, Mexico is among the 15 largest producers in the world and Argentina among the 20 largest.\nMining and petroleum.\nMining is one of the most important economic sectors in Latin America, especially for Chile, Peru and Bolivia, whose economies are highly dependent on this sector. The continent has large productions of:\nBrazil stands out in the extraction of \nIn terms of gemstones, Brazil is the world's largest producer of amethysts, topaz, and agates and one of the main producers of tourmaline, emeralds, aquamarines, garnets and opals.\nChile contributes about a third of the world's copper production. In addition, Chile was, in 2019, the world's largest producer of iodine and rhenium, the second largest producer of lithium and molybdenum, the sixth largest producer of silver, the seventh largest producer of salt, the eighth largest producer of potash, the thirteenth-largest producer of sulfur and the thirteenth largest producer of iron ore in the world.\nIn 2019, Peru was the second largest world producer of copper and silver, 8th largest world producer of gold, third largest world producer of lead, second largest world producer of zinc, fourth largest world producer of tin, fifth largest world producer of boron, and fourth largest world producer of molybdenum.\nIn 2019, Bolivia was the eighth largest world producer of silver; fourth largest world producer of boron; fifth largest world producer of antimony; fifth largest world producer of tin; sixth largest world producer of tungsten; seventh largest producer of zinc, and the eighth largest producer of lead.\nIn 2019, Mexico was the world's largest producer of silver (representing almost 23% of world production, producing more than 200 million ounces in 2019); ninth largest producer of gold, the eighth largest producer of copper, the world's fifth largest producer of lead, the world's sixth largest producer of zinc, the world's fifth largest producer of molybdenum, the world's third largest producer of mercury, the world's fifth largest producer of bismuth, the world's 13th largest producer of manganese and the 23rd largest world producer of phosphate. It is also the eighth largest world producer of salt.\nIn 2019, Argentina was the fourth largest world producer of lithium, the ninth largest world producer of silver, the 17th largest world producer of gold and the seventh largest world producer of boron.\nColombia is the world's largest producer of emeralds. In the production of gold, between 2006 and 2017, the country produced 15 tons per year until 2007, when its production increased significantly, breaking a record of 66.1 tons extracted in 2012. In 2017, it extracted 52.2 tons. The country is among the 25 largest gold producers in the world. In the production of silver, in 2017 the country extracted 15,5 tons.\nIn the production of oil, Brazil was the tenth largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.8\u00a0million barrels a day. Mexico was the twelfth largest, with 2.1\u00a0million barrels a day, Colombia in 20th place with 886 thousand barrels a day, Venezuela was the twenty-first place, with 877 thousand barrels a day, Ecuador in 28th with 531 thousand barrels a day and Argentina. 29th with 507 thousand barrels a day. Since Venezuela and Ecuador consume little oil and export most of their production, they are part of OPEC. Venezuela had a big drop in production after 2015 (when it produced 2.5\u00a0million barrels a day), falling in 2016 to 2.2\u00a0million, in 2017 to 2 million, in 2018 to 1.4\u00a0million and in 2019 to 877 thousand, due to lack of investment.\nIn the production of natural gas, in 2018, Argentina produced 1,524 bcf (billions of cubic feet), Mexico produced 999, Venezuela 946, Brazil 877, Bolivia 617, Peru 451, Colombia 379.\nIn the production of coal, the continent had three of the 30 largest world producers in 2018: Colombia (12th), Mexico (24th) and Brazil (27th).\nManufacturing.\nThe World Bank annually lists the top manufacturing countries by total manufacturing value. According to the 2019 list:\nIn Latin America, few countries stand out in industrial activity: Brazil, Argentina, Mexico and, less prominently, Chile. Begun late, the industrialization of these countries received a great boost from World War II: this prevented the countries at war from buying the products they were used to importing and exporting what they produced. At that time, benefiting from the abundant local raw material, the low wages paid to the labor force and a certain specialization brought by immigrants, countries such as Brazil, Mexico and Argentina, as well as Venezuela, Chile, Colombia and Peru, were able to implement important industrial parks. In general, in these countries there are industries that require little capital and simple technology for their installation, such as the food processing and textile industries. The basic industries (steel, etc.) also stand out, as well as the metallurgical and mechanical industries.\nThe industrial parks of Brazil, Mexico, Argentina and Chile, however, present much greater diversity and sophistication, producing advanced technology items. In the rest of Latin American countries, mainly in Central America, the processing industries of primary products for export predominate.\nIn the food industry, in 2019, Brazil was the second largest exporter of processed foods in the world. In 2016, the country was the second largest producer of pulp in the world and the eighth largest producer of paper. In the footwear industry, in 2019, Brazil ranked fourth among world producers. In 2019, the country was the eighth largest producer of vehicles and the ninth largest producer of steel in the world. In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the eighth largest in the world. In the textile industry, Brazil, although it was among the five largest world producers in 2013, is very little integrated into world trade. In the aviation sector, Brazil has Embraer, the third largest aircraft manufacturer in the world, behind Boeing and Airbus.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport in Latin America is basically carried out using the road mode, the most developed in the region. There is also a considerable infrastructure of ports and airports. The railway and fluvial sector, although it has potential, is usually treated in a secondary way.\nBrazil has more than 1.7\u00a0million km of roads, of which 215,000\u00a0km are paved, and about 14,000\u00a0km are divided highways. The two most important highways in the country are BR-101 and BR-116. Argentina has more than 600,000\u00a0km of roads, of which about 70,000\u00a0km are paved, and about 2,500\u00a0km are divided highways. The three most important highways in the country are Route 9, Route 7 and Route 14. Colombia has about 210,000\u00a0km of roads, and about 2,300\u00a0km are divided highways. Chile has about 82,000\u00a0km of roads, 20,000\u00a0km of which are paved, and about 2,000\u00a0km are divided highways. The most important highway in the country is the Route 5 (Pan-American Highway) These 4 countries are the ones with the best road infrastructure and with the largest number of double-lane highways, in South America.\nThe roadway network in Mexico has an extent of , of which are paved, Of these, are multi-lane expressways: are four-lane highways and the rest have 6 or more lanes.\nDue to the Andes Mountains, Amazon River and Amazon Forest, there have always been difficulties in implementing transcontinental or bioceanic highways. Practically the only route that existed was the one that connected Brazil to Buenos Aires, in Argentina and later to Santiago, in Chile. However, in recent years, with the combined effort of countries, new routes have started to emerge, such as Brazil-Peru (Interoceanic Highway), and a new highway between Brazil, Paraguay, northern Argentina and northern Chile (Bioceanic Corridor).\nThere are more than 2,000 airports in Brazil. The country has the second largest number of airports in the world, behind only the United States. S\u00e3o Paulo International Airport, located in the Metropolitan Region of S\u00e3o Paulo, is the largest and busiest in the country \u2013 the airport connects S\u00e3o Paulo to practically all major cities around the world. Brazil has 44 international airports, such as those in Rio de Janeiro, Bras\u00edlia, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, Florian\u00f3polis, Cuiab\u00e1, Salvador, Recife, Fortaleza, Bel\u00e9m and Manaus, among others. Argentina has important international airports such as Buenos Aires, Cordoba, Bariloche, Mendoza, Salta, Puerto Iguaz\u00fa, Neuqu\u00e9n and Ushuaia, among others. Chile has important international airports such as Santiago, Antofagasta, Puerto Montt, Punta Arenas and Iquique, among others. Colombia has important international airports such as Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, Cartagena, Cali and Barranquilla, among others. Peru has important international airports such as Lima, Cuzco and Arequipa. Other important airports are those in the capitals of Uruguay (Montevideo), Paraguay (Asunci\u00f3n), Bolivia (La Paz) and Ecuador (Quito). The 10 busiest airports in South America in 2017 were: S\u00e3o Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Bogot\u00e1 (Colombia), S\u00e3o Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), Bras\u00edlia (Brazil), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Buenos Aires-Aeroparque (Argentina), Buenos Aires-Ezeiza (Argentina), and Minas Gerais (Brazil).\nThere are 1,580 airports in Mexico, the fourth-largest number of airports by country in the world. The seven largest airports\u2014which absorb 90% of air travel\u2014are (in order of air traffic): Mexico City, Canc\u00fan, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Tijuana, Acapulco, and Puerto Vallarta. Considering all of Latin America, the 10 busiest airports in 2024 were: Bogot\u00e1 (Colombia), Mexico City (Mexico), S\u00e3o Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Canc\u00fan (Mexico), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), S\u00e3o Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Tocumen (Panama), Guadalajara (Mexico) and Brasilia (Brazil).\nAbout ports, Brazil has some of the busiest ports in South America, such as Port of Santos, Port of Rio de Janeiro, Port of Paranagu\u00e1, Port of Itaja\u00ed, Port of Rio Grande, Port of S\u00e3o Francisco do Sul and Suape Port. Argentina has ports such as Port of Buenos Aires and Port of Rosario. Chile has important ports in Valpara\u00edso, Caldera, Mejillones, Antofagasta, Iquique, Arica and Puerto Montt. Colombia has important ports such as Buenaventura, Cartagena Container Terminal and Puerto Bolivar. Peru has important ports in Callao, Ilo and Matarani. The 15 busiest ports in South America are: Port of Santos (Brazil), Port of Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile), Buenaventura (Colombia), Itaja\u00ed (Brazil), Valpara\u00edso (Chile), Montevideo (Uruguay), Paranagu\u00e1 (Brazil), Rio Grande (Brazil), S\u00e3o Francisco do Sul (Brazil), Manaus (Brazil) and Coronel (Chile).\nThe four major seaports concentrating around 60% of the merchandise traffic in Mexico are Altamira and Veracruz in the Gulf of Mexico, and Manzanillo and L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas in the Pacific Ocean. Considering all of Latin America, the 10 largest ports in terms of movement are: Colon (Panama), Santos (Brazil), Manzanillo (Mexico), Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Pacifico (Panama), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile) and Buenaventura (Colombia).\nThe Brazilian railway network has an extension of about 30,000 kilometers. It is basically used for transporting ores. The Argentine rail network, with 47,000\u00a0km of tracks, was one of the largest in the world and continues to be the most extensive in Latin America. It came to have about 100,000\u00a0km of rails, but the lifting of tracks and the emphasis placed on motor transport gradually reduced it. It has four different trails and international connections with Paraguay, Bolivia, Chile, Brazil and Uruguay. Chile has almost 7,000\u00a0km of railways, with connections to Argentina, Bolivia and Peru. Colombia has only about 3,500\u00a0km of railways.\nAmong the main Brazilian waterways, two stand out: Hidrovia Tiet\u00ea-Paran\u00e1 (which has a length of 2,400\u00a0km, 1,600 on the Paran\u00e1 River and 800\u00a0km on the Tiet\u00ea River, draining agricultural production from the states of Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Goi\u00e1s and part of Rond\u00f4nia, Tocantins and Minas General) and Hidrovia do Solim\u00f5es-Amazonas (it has two sections: Solim\u00f5es, which extends from Tabatinga to Manaus, with approximately 1600\u00a0km, and Amazonas, which extends from Manaus to Bel\u00e9m, with 1650\u00a0km. Almost entirely passenger transport from the Amazon plain is done by this waterway, in addition to practically all cargo transportation that is directed to the major regional centers of Bel\u00e9m and Manaus). In Brazil, this transport is still underutilized: the most important waterway stretches, from an economic point of view, are found in the Southeast and South of the country. Its full use still depends on the construction of locks, major dredging works and, mainly, of ports that allow intermodal integration. In Argentina, the waterway network is made up of the La Plata, Paran\u00e1, Paraguay and Uruguay rivers. The main river ports are Z\u00e1rate and Campana. The port of Buenos Aires is historically the first in individual importance, but the area known as Up-River, which stretches along 67\u00a0km of the Santa F\u00e9 portion of the Paran\u00e1 River, brings together 17 ports that concentrate 50% of the total exports of the country.\nEnergy.\nAs of 2023, Latin America and the Caribbean generates 60% of its electricity from renewable energy - double the global average of 30%. Despite this, fossil fuels still play a substantial role, especially in transportation and industry, with oil and gas constituting a notable portion. Approximately two-thirds of the region's energy mix comes from fossil fuels, Of the region's total energy production, 43% is hydroelectric, 8% wind and 6% is solar.\nBrazil.\nThe Brazilian government has undertaken an ambitious program to reduce dependence on imported petroleum. Imports previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs but Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006\u20132007. Brazil was the 10th largest oil producer in the world in 2019, with 2.8\u00a0million barrels / day. Production manages to supply the country's demand. In the beginning of 2020, in the production of oil and natural gas, the country exceeded 4 million barrels of oil equivalent per day, for the first time. In January this year, 3.168\u00a0million barrels of oil per day and 138.753\u00a0million cubic meters of natural gas were extracted.\nBrazil is one of the main world producers of hydroelectric power. In 2019, Brazil had 217 hydroelectric plants in operation, with an installed capacity of 98,581 MW, 60.16% of the country's energy generation. In the total generation of electricity, in 2019 Brazil reached 170,000 megawatts of installed capacity, more than 75% from renewable sources (the majority, hydroelectric).\nIn 2013, the Southeast Region used about 50% of the load of the National Integrated System (SIN), being the main energy consuming region in the country. The region's installed electricity generation capacity totaled almost 42,500 MW, which represented about a third of Brazil's generation capacity. The hydroelectric generation represented 58% of the region's installed capacity, with the remaining 42% corresponding basically to the thermoelectric generation. S\u00e3o Paulo accounted for 40% of this capacity; Minas Gerais by about 25%; Rio de Janeiro by 13.3%; and Esp\u00edrito Santo accounted for the rest. The South Region owns the Itaipu Dam, which was the largest hydroelectric plant in the world for several years, until the inauguration of Three Gorges Dam in China. It remains the second largest operating hydroelectric in the world. Brazil is the co-owner of the Itaipu Plant with Paraguay: the dam is located on the Paran\u00e1 River, located on the border between countries. It has an installed generation capacity of 14 GW for 20 generating units of 700 MW each. North Region has large hydroelectric plants, such as Belo Monte Dam and Tucuru\u00ed Dam, which produce much of the national energy. Brazil's hydroelectric potential has not yet been fully exploited, so the country still has the capacity to build several renewable energy plants in its territory.\nAs of \u00a02022,http:// according to ONS, total installed capacity of wind power was 22 GW, with average capacity factor of 58%. While the world average wind production capacity factors is 24.7%, there are areas in Northern Brazil, specially in Bahia State, where some wind farms record with average capacity factors over 60%; the average capacity factor in the Northeast Region is 45% in the coast and 49% in the interior. In 2019, wind energy represented 9% of the energy generated in the country. In 2019, it was estimated that the country had an estimated wind power generation potential of around 522 GW (this, only onshore), enough energy to meet three times the country's current demand. In 2021 Brazil was the 7th country in the world in terms of installed wind power (21 GW), and the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, USA and Germany.\nNuclear energy accounts for about 4% of Brazil's electricity. The nuclear power generation monopoly is owned by Eletronuclear (Eletrobr\u00e1s Eletronuclear S/A), a wholly owned subsidiary of Eletrobr\u00e1s. Nuclear energy is produced by two reactors at Angra. It is located at the Central Nuclear Almirante \u00c1lvaro Alberto (CNAAA) on the Praia de Itaorna in Angra dos Reis, Rio de Janeiro. It consists of two pressurized water reactors, Angra I, with capacity of 657 MW, connected to the power grid in 1982, and Angra II, with capacity of 1,350 MW, connected in 2000. A third reactor, Angra III, with a projected output of 1,350 MW, is planned to be finished.\nAs of \u00a02022,http:// according to ONS, total installed capacity of photovoltaic solar was 21 GW, with average capacity factor of 23%. Some of the most irradiated Brazilian States are MG (\"Minas Gerais\"), BA (\"Bahia\") and GO (\"Goi\u00e1s\"), which have indeed world irradiation level records. In 2019, solar power represented 1.27% of the energy generated in the country. In 2021, Brazil was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13 GW), and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.8 TWh).\nIn 2020, Brazil was the 2nd largest country in the world in the production of energy through biomass (energy production from solid biofuels and renewable waste), with 15,2 GW installed.\nOther countries.\nAfter Brazil, Mexico is the country in Latin America that most stands out in energy production. In 2020, the country was the 14th largest petroleum producer in the world, and in 2018 it was the 12th largest exporter. In natural gas, the country was, in 2015, the 21st largest producer in the world, and in 2007 it was the 29th largest exporter. Mexico was also the world's 24th largest producer of coal in 2018. In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 14th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (8.1 GW), 20th in the world in terms of installed solar energy (5.6 GW) and 19th in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (12.6 GW). In third place, Colombia stands out: In 2020, the country was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, and in 2015 it was the 19th largest exporter. In natural gas, the country was, in 2015, the 40th largest producer in the world. Colombia's biggest highlight is in coal, where the country was, in 2018, the world's 12th largest producer and the 5th largest exporter. In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 45th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (0.5 GW), 76th in the world in terms of installed solar energy (0.1 GW) and 20th in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (12.6 GW).\nVenezuela, which was one of the world's largest oil producers (about 2.5 million barrels/day in 2015) and one of the largest exporters, due to its political problems, has had its production drastically reduced in recent years: in 2016, it dropped to 2.2 million, in 2017 to 2 million, in 2018 to 1.4 million and in 2019 to 877 thousand, reaching only 300,000 barrels/day at a given point. The country also stands out in hydroelectricity, where it was the 14th country in the world in terms of installed capacity in 2020 (16,5 GW).\nArgentina was, in 2017, the 18th largest producer in the world, and the largest producer in Latin America, of natural gas, in addition to being the 28th largest oil producer; although the country has the Vaca Muerta field, which holds close to 16 billion barrels of technically recoverable shale oil, and is the second largest shale natural gas deposit in the world, the country lacks the capacity to exploit the deposit: it is necessary capital, technology and knowledge that can only come from offshore energy companies, who view Argentina and its erratic economic policies with considerable suspicion, not wanting to invest in the country. In renewable energies, in 2020, the country ranked 27th in the world in terms of installed wind energy (2.6 GW), 42nd in the world in terms of installed solar energy (0.7 GW) and 21st in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (11.3 GW). The country has great future potential for the production of wind energy in the Patagonia region. Chile, although currently not a major energy producer, has great future potential for solar energy production in the Atacama Desert region.\nParaguay stands out today in hydroelectric production thanks to the Itaipu Power Plant. Trinidad and Tobago and Bolivia stand out in the production of natural gas, where they were, respectively, the 20th and 31st largest in the world in 2015. Ecuador, because it consumes little energy, is part of OPEC and was the 27th largest oil producer in the world in 2020, being the 22nd largest exporter in 2014.\nTourism.\nIncome from tourism is key to the economy of several Latin American countries. Mexico is the only Latin American country to be ranked in the top 10 worldwide in the number of tourist visits. It received by far the largest number of international tourists, with 39.3\u00a0million visitors in 2017, followed by Argentina, with 6.7\u00a0million; then Brazil, with 6.6\u00a0million; Chile, with 6.5\u00a0million; Dominican Republic, with 6.2\u00a0million; Cuba with 4.3\u00a0million; Peru and Colombia with 4.0\u00a0million. The World Tourism Organization reports the following destinations as the top six tourism earners for the year 2017: Mexico, with US$21,333\u00a0million; the Dominican Republic, with US$7,178\u00a0million; Brazil, with US$6,024\u00a0million; Colombia, with US$4,773\u00a0million; Argentina, with US$4,687\u00a0million; and Panama, with US$4,258\u00a0million.\nPlaces such as Canc\u00fan, Riviera Maya, Chichen Itza, Cabo San Lucas, Mexico City, Acapulco, Puerto Vallarta, Guanajuato City, San Miguel de Allende, Guadalajara in Mexico, Punta Cana, Santo Domingo in Dominican Republic, Punta del Este in Uruguay, San Juan, Ponce in Puerto Rico, Panama City in Panama, Po\u00e1s Volcano National Park in Costa Rica, Vi\u00f1a del Mar in Chile, Rio de Janeiro, Florian\u00f3polis, Iguazu Falls, S\u00e3o Paulo, Arma\u00e7\u00e3o dos B\u00fazios, Salvador, Bombinhas, Angra dos Reis, Balne\u00e1rio Cambori\u00fa, Paraty, Ipojuca, Natal, Cairu, Fortaleza and Itapema in Brazil; Buenos Aires, Bariloche, Salta, Jujuy, Perito Moreno Glacier, Valdes Peninsula, Guarani Jesuit Missions in the cities of Misiones and Corrientes, Ischigualasto Provincial Park, Ushuaia and Patagonia in Argentina;\nIsla Margarita, Angel Falls, Los Roques archipelago, Gran Sabana in Venezuela; Machu Picchu, Lima, Nazca Lines, Cuzco in Peru; Lake Titicaca, Salar de Uyuni, La Paz, Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos in Bolivia; Tayrona National Natural Park, Santa Marta, Bogot\u00e1, Cali, Medell\u00edn, Cartagena, San Andr\u00e9s in Colombia, and the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands in Ecuador are popular among international visitors in the region.\nTrade blocs.\nThe major trade blocs (or agreements) in the region are the Pacific Alliance and Mercosur. Minor blocs or trade agreements are the G3 Free Trade Agreement, the Dominican Republic \u2013 Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA), the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Andean Community of Nations (CAN). However, major reconfigurations are taking place along opposing approaches to integration and trade; Venezuela has officially withdrawn from both the CAN and G3 and it has been formally admitted into the Mercosur (pending ratification from the Paraguayan legislature). The president-elect of Ecuador has manifested his intentions of following the same path. This bloc nominally opposes any Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States, although Uruguay has manifested its intention otherwise. Chile, Peru, Colombia and Mexico are the only four Latin American nations that have an FTA with the United States and Canada, both members of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).\nChina.\nChina's economic influence in Latin America increased substantially in the 21st century. Imports from China valued $8.3 billion in 2000, but by 2022 its value was $450 billion and had grown to be the largest trading partner of South America, as well as the second-largest for the broader Latin America. In particular, many of the investments are related to the Belt and Road Initiative or energy. China has also provided loans to several Latin American countries; this has raised concerns about the possibility of debt traps.\" Specifically, Venezuela, Brazil, Ecuador, and Argentina received the most loans from China during 2005\u20132016.\nInequality.\nWealth inequality in Latin America remains a serious issue despite strong economic growth and improved social indicators. A report released in 2013 by the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs entitled \"Inequality Matters: Report of the World Social Situation\", observed that: 'Declines in the wage share have been attributed to the impact of labour-saving technological change and to a general weakening of labour market regulations and institutions.' Such declines are likely to disproportionately affect individuals in the middle and bottom of the income distribution, as they rely mostly on wages for income. In addition, the report noted that 'highly-unequal land distribution has created social and political tensions and is a source of economic inefficiency, as small landholders frequently lack access to credit and other resources to increase productivity, while big owners may not have had enough incentive to do so.\nAccording to the United Nations ECLAC, Latin America is the most unequal region in the world. In 2025, \"The Economist\" said that Latin America\u2019s \"tax and welfare systems are shockingly bad at reducing inequality.\"\nInequality in Latin America has deep historical roots in the Latin European racially based Casta system instituted in Latin America during colonial times that has been difficult to eradicate because of the differences between initial endowments and opportunities among social groups have constrained the poorest's social mobility, thus causing poverty to transmit from generation to generation, and become a vicious cycle. Inequality has been reproduced and transmitted through generations because Latin American political systems allow a differentiated access on the influence that social groups have in the decision-making process, and it responds in different ways to the least favored groups that have less political representation and capacity of pressure. Recent economic liberalisation also plays a role as not everyone is equally capable of taking advantage of its benefits. Differences in opportunities and endowments tend to be based on race, ethnicity, rurality, and gender. Because inequality in gender and location are near-universal, race and ethnicity play a larger, more integral role in discriminatory practices in Latin America. The differences have a strong impact on the distribution of income, capital and political standing.\nOne indicator of inequality is access to and quality of education. During the first phase of globalization in Latin America, educational inequality was on the rise, peaking around the end of the 19th century. In comparison with other developing regions, Latin America then had the highest level of educational inequality, which is certainly a contributing factor for its current general high inequality. During the 20th century, however, educational inequality started decreasing.\nStandard of living.\nLatin America has the highest levels of income inequality in the world. The following table lists all the countries in Latin America indicating a valuation of the country's Human Development Index, GDP at purchasing power parity per capita, measurement of inequality through the Gini index, measurement of poverty through the Human Poverty Index, a measure of extreme poverty based on people living on less than 1.25 dollars a day, life expectancy, murder rates and a measurement of safety through the Global Peace Index. Green cells indicate the best performance in each category, and red the lowest.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLargest cities.\nUrbanization accelerated starting in the mid-twentieth century, especially in capital cities, or in the case of Brazil, traditional economic and political hubs founded in the colonial era. In Mexico, the rapid growth and modernization in country's north has seen the growth of Monterrey, in Nuevo Le\u00f3n. The following is a list of the ten largest metropolitan areas in Latin America. Entries in \"bold\" indicate they are ranked the highest.\nRace and ethnicity.\nLatin American populations are diverse, with descendants of the Indigenous peoples, Europeans, Africans initially brought as slaves, and Asians, as well as new immigrants.\nMixing of groups was a fact of life at contact of the Old World and the New, but colonial regimes established legal and social discrimination against non-white populations simply on the basis of perceived ethnicity and skin color. Social class was usually linked to a person's racial category, with European-born Spaniards and Portuguese on top. During the colonial era, with a dearth initially of European women, European men and Indigenous women and African women produced what were considered mixed-race children. In Spanish America, the so-called \"Sociedad de castas\" or \"Sistema de castas\" was constructed by white elites to try to rationalize the processes at work. In the sixteenth century the Spanish crown sought to protect Indigenous populations from exploitation by white elites for their labor and land. The crown created the\" Rep\u00fablica de indios\" to paternalistically govern and protect Indigenous peoples. It also created the \"Rep\u00fablica de Espa\u00f1oles\", which included not only European whites, but all non-Indigenous peoples, such as Black, mulattoes, and mixed-race castas who were not dwelling in Indigenous communities. In the religious sphere, the Indigenous were deemed perpetual neophytes in the Catholic faith, which meant Indigenous men were not eligible to be ordained as Catholic priests; however, Indigenous were also excluded from the jurisdiction of the Inquisition. Catholics saw military conquest and religious conquest as two parts of the assimilation of Indigenous populations, suppressing Indigenous religious practices and eliminating the Indigenous priesthood. Some worship continued underground. Jews and other non-Catholics, such as Protestants (all called \"Lutherans\") were banned from settling and were subject to the Inquisition.\nConsiderable mixing of populations occurred in cities, while the countryside was largely Indigenous. At independence in the early nineteenth century, in many places in Spanish America formal racial and legal distinctions disappeared, although slavery was not uniformly abolished. Significant black populations exist in Brazil and Spanish Caribbean islands such as Cuba and Puerto Rico and the circum-Caribbean mainland (Venezuela, Colombia, Panama), as long as in the southern part of South America and Central America (Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Ecuador, and Peru) a legacy of their use in plantations. All these areas also have significant white populations. In Brazil, coastal Indigenous peoples largely died out in the early sixteenth century, with Indigenous populations surviving far from cities, sugar plantations, and other European enterprises. Many mixed-race people in much of Latin America are tri-racial, usually of European, African, and Indigenous blood, where European (mostly Spanish/Portuguese) tends to be the strongest of the three. In most of Brazil and the Spanish Caribbean, the average ancestral mix is European and African blood, with much smaller amounts of indigenous blood. While the opposite is true in many mainland Spanish-speaking Latin American countries like Venezuela, Colombia, and Panama, where the average ancestral mix is of European and indigenous blood, with smaller amounts of African. But in Mexico, and other places in northern Central America and southern South America, mixed race people tend to be completely of European and indigenous blood.\nDominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Brazil have dominant Mulatto/Triracial populations (\"Pardo\" in Brazil), in Brazil and Cuba, there is equally large white populations and smaller black populations, while Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico are more Mulatto/Triracial dominated, with significant black and white minorities. Parts of Central America and northern South America are more diverse in that they are predominantly made up of Mestizos and Whites but also have large numbers of Mulattos, Black, and Indigenous people, especially Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama. \nThe Southern Cone region\u2014encompassing Argentina, Uruguay, and Chile\u2014is predominantly White due to the massive European immigration that occurred from the late 19th century to the mid-20th century. The rest of Latin America, including Mexico, northern Central America\u2014Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras\u2014 and central South America\u2014Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, Paraguay\u2014are dominated by mestizos but also have large white and indigenous minorities. Black people make up the majority of the French Caribbean, but it is generally not considered part of Latin America.\nIn the nineteenth century, a number of Latin American countries sought immigrants from Europe and Asia. With the abolition of black slavery in 1888, the Brazilian monarchy fell in 1889. By then, another source of cheap labor to work on coffee plantations was found in Japan. Chinese male immigrants arrived in Cuba, Mexico, Peru and elsewhere. With political turmoil in Europe during the mid-nineteenth century and widespread poverty, Germans, Spaniards, and Italians immigrated to Latin America in large numbers, welcomed by Latin American governments both as a source of labor as well as a way to increase the size of their white populations. In Argentina, many Afro-Argentines married Euro-Argentines.\nIn twentieth-century Brazil, sociologist Gilberto Freyre proposed that Brazil was a \"racial democracy\", with less discrimination against black people than in the United States. Even if a system of legal racial segregation was never implemented in Latin America, unlike the United States, subsequent research has shown that in Brazil there's discrimination against darker citizens, and that whites remain the elites in the country. In Mexico, the mestizo population was considered the true embodiment of \"the cosmic race\", according to Mexican intellectual Jos\u00e9 Vasconcelos, thus erasing other populations. There was considerable discrimination against Asians, with calls for the expulsion of Chinese in northern Mexico during the Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920) and racially motivated massacres. In a number of Latin American countries, Indigenous groups have organized explicitly as Indigenous, to claim human rights and influence political power. With the passage of anti-colonial resolutions in the United Nations General Assembly and the signing of resolutions for Indigenous rights, the Indigenous are able to act to guarantee their existence within nation-states with legal standing.\nLanguage.\nSpanish is the predominant language of Latin America. It is spoken as first language by about 60% of the population. Portuguese is spoken by about 30%, and about 10% speak other languages such as Quechua, Mayan languages, Guaran\u00ed, Aymara, Nahuatl, English, French, Dutch and Italian. Portuguese is spoken mostly in Brazil, the largest and most populous country in the region. Spanish is the official language of most of the other countries and territories on the Latin American mainland, as well as in Cuba, Puerto Rico (where it is co-official with English), and the Dominican Republic. French is spoken in Haiti and in the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe, Martinique, and French Guiana. It is also spoken by some Panamanians of Afro-Antillean descent. Dutch is the official language in Suriname, Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Bonaire. (As Dutch is a Germanic language, the territories are not necessarily considered part of Latin America.) However, the native and co-official language of Aruba, Bonaire, and Cura\u00e7ao, is Papiamento, a creole language largely based on Portuguese and Spanish that has had a considerable influence from Dutch and other Portuguese-based creole languages.\nAmerindian languages are widely spoken in Peru, Guatemala, Bolivia, Paraguay and Mexico, and to a lesser degree, in Panama, Ecuador, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, Argentina, and Chile. In other Latin American countries, the population of speakers of Indigenous languages tend to be very small or even non-existent, for example in Uruguay. Mexico is possibly contains more Indigenous languages than any other Latin American country, but the most-spoken Indigenous language there is Nahuatl.\nIn Peru, Quechua is an official language, alongside Spanish and other Indigenous languages in the areas where they predominate. In Ecuador, while Quichua holds no official status, it is a recognized language under the country's constitution; however, it is only spoken by a few groups in the country's highlands. In Bolivia, Aymara, Quechua and Guaran\u00ed hold official status alongside Spanish. Guaran\u00ed, like Spanish, is an official language of Paraguay, and is spoken by a majority of the population, which is, for the most part, bilingual, and it is co-official with Spanish in the Argentine province of Corrientes. In Nicaragua, Spanish is the official language, but on the country's Caribbean coast English and Indigenous languages such as Miskito, Sumo, and Rama also hold official status. Colombia recognizes all Indigenous languages spoken within its territory as official, though fewer than 1% of its population are native speakers of these languages. Nahuatl is one of the 62 Native languages spoken by Indigenous people in Mexico, which are officially recognized by the government as \"national languages\" along with Spanish.\nOther European languages spoken in Latin America include: English, by half of the current population in Puerto Rico, as well as in nearby countries that may or may not be considered Latin American, like Belize and Guyana, and spoken by descendants of British settlers in Argentina and Chile. German is spoken in southern Brazil, southern Chile, portions of Argentina, Venezuela and Paraguay; Italian in Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, and Uruguay; Ukrainian, Polish, and Russian in southern Brazil and Argentina; and Welsh, in southern Argentina. Non-European or Asian languages include Japanese in Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, and Paraguay, Korean in Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, and Chile, Arabic in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, and Chile, and Chinese throughout South America. Countries like Venezuela, Argentina and Brazil have their own dialects or variations of German and Italian.\nIn several nations, especially in the Caribbean region, creole languages are spoken. The most widely-spoken creole language in Latin America and the Caribbean is Haitian Creole, the predominant language of Haiti, derived primarily from French and certain West African tongues, with Amerindian, English, Portuguese and Spanish influences as well. Creole languages of mainland Latin America, similarly, are derived from European languages and various African tongues. The aforementioned Papiamento, commonly spoken on the Dutch Caribbean ABC Islands, is a Portuguese-based creole.\nThe Garifuna language is spoken along the Caribbean coast in Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Belize, mostly by the Garifuna people, a mixed-race Zambo people who were the result of mixing between Indigenous Caribbeans and escaped Black slaves. Primarily an Arawakan language, it has influences from Caribbean and European languages.\nArchaeologists have deciphered over 15 pre-Columbian distinct writing systems from Mesoamerican societies. Ancient Maya had the most sophisticated textually written language, but since texts were largely confined to the religious and administrative elite, traditions were passed down orally. Oral traditions also prevailed in other major Indigenous groups including, but not limited to the Aztecs and other Nahuatl speakers, Quechua and Aymara of the Andean regions, the Quich\u00e9 of Central America, the Tupi-Guaran\u00ed in today's Brazil, the Guaran\u00ed in Paraguay and the Mapuche in Chile.\nReligion.\nThe vast majority of Latin Americans are Christians (90%), mostly Roman Catholics belonging to the Latin Church. About 70% of the Latin American population considers itself Catholic. In 2012 Latin America constitutes in absolute terms the second world's largest Christian population, after Europe.\nAccording to the detailed Pew multi-country survey in 2014, 69% of the Latin American population is Catholic and 19% is Protestant. Protestants are 26% in Brazil and over 40% in much of Central America. More than half of these are converts from Roman Catholicism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFamily structure.\nLatin America has the highest rates of non-marital childbearing in the world, with 55\u201374% of all children in the region born to unmarried parents. In most countries in this traditionally Catholic region, children born outside marriage are now the norm. In 2014, non-marital births were 74% in Colombia, 70% in Paraguay, 69% in Peru, 63% in the Dominican Republic, 58% in Argentina, and 55% in Mexico. In Brazil, non-marital births increased to 65.8% in 2009, up from 56.2% in 2000. In Chile, non-marital births increased to 70.7% in 2013, up from 48.3% in 2000.\nLatin America also has relatively high teenage pregnancy rates, much higher than North America, Europe, and much of Asia, but lower than sub-Saharan Africa. \nMigration.\nThe entire hemisphere was settled by migrants from Asia, Europe, and Africa. Indigenous Amerindian populations settled throughout the hemisphere before the arrival of Europeans in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and the forced migration of slaves from Africa.\nIn the post-independence period, a number of Latin American countries sought to attract European immigrants as a source of labor as well as to deliberately change the proportions of racial and ethnic groups within their borders. Chile, Argentina, and Brazil actively recruited labor from Catholic southern Europe, where populations were poor and sought better economic opportunities. Many nineteenth-century immigrants went to the United States and Canada, but a significant number arrived in Latin America. Although Mexico tried to attract immigrants, it largely failed. As black slavery was abolished in Brazil in 1888, coffee growers recruited Japanese migrants to work in coffee plantations. There is a significant population of Japanese descent in Brazil. Cuba and Peru recruited Chinese labor in the late nineteenth century. Some Chinese immigrants who were excluded from immigrating to the United States settled in northern Mexico. When the United States acquired its southwest by conquest in the Mexican\u2013American War, Latin American populations did not cross the border to the United States, the border crossed them.\nIn the twentieth century there have been several types of migration. One is the movement of rural populations within a given country to cities in search of work, causing many Latin American cities to grow significantly. Another is international movement of populations, often fleeing repression or war. Other international migration is for economic reasons, often unregulated or undocumented. Mexicans immigrated to the U.S. during the violence of the Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920) and the religious Cristero War (1926\u201329); during World War II, Mexican men worked in the U.S. in the bracero program. Economic migration from Mexico followed the crash of the Mexican economy in the 1980s.\nSpanish refugees fled to Mexico following the fascist victory in the Spanish Civil War (1936\u201338), with some 50,000 exiles finding refuge at the invitation of President L\u00e1zaro C\u00e1rdenas. Following World War II a larger wave of refugees to Latin America, many of them Jews, settled in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Cuba, and Venezuela. Some were only transiting through the region, but others stayed and created communities. A number of Nazis escaped to Latin America, living under assumed names, in an attempt to avoid attention and prosecution.\nIn the aftermath of the Cuban Revolution, middle class and elite Cubans moved to the U.S., particularly to Florida. Some fled Chile for the U.S. and Europe after the 1973 military coup. Colombians migrated to Spain and the United Kingdom during the region's political turmoil, compounded by the rise of narcotrafficking and guerrilla warfare. During the Central American wars of the 1970s to the 1990s, many Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Hondurans migrated to the U.S. to escape narcotrafficking, gangs, and poverty. As living conditions deteriorated in Venezuela under Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, many left for neighboring Colombia and Ecuador. In the 1990s, economic stress in Ecuador during the La D\u00e9cada Perdida triggered considerable migration to Spain and to the U.S.\nSome Latin American countries seek to strengthen links between migrants and their states of origin, while promoting their integration in the receiving state. These emigrant policies focus on the rights, obligations and opportunities for participation of emigrated citizens who already live outside the borders of the country of origin. Research on Latin America shows that the extension of policies towards migrants is linked to a focus on civil rights and state benefits that can positively influence integration in recipient countries. In addition, the tolerance of dual citizenship has spread more in Latin America than in any other region of the world.\nEducation.\nDespite significant progress, education access and school completion remains unequal in Latin America. The region has made great progress in educational coverage; almost all children attend primary school, and access to secondary education has increased considerably. Quality issues such as poor teaching methods, lack of appropriate equipment, and overcrowding exist throughout the region. These issues lead to adolescents dropping out of the educational system early. Most educational systems in the region have implemented various types of administrative and institutional reforms that have enabled reach for places and communities that had no access to education services in the early 1990s. School meal programs are also employed to expand access to education, and at least 23 countries in the Latin America and Caribbean region have large-scale school feeding activities, altogether reaching 88% of primary school-age children in the region. Compared to prior generations, Latin American youth have seen an increase in their levels of education. On average, they have completed two more years of school than their parents.\nHowever, there are still 23\u00a0million children in the region between the ages of 4 and 17 outside of the formal education system. Estimates indicate that 30% of preschool age children (ages 4\u20135) do not attend school, and for the most vulnerable populations, the poor and rural, this proportion exceeds 40 percent. Among primary school age children (ages 6 to 12), attendance is almost universal; however there is still a need to enroll five million more children in the primary education system. These children mostly live in remote areas, are Indigenous or Afro-descendants and live in extreme poverty.\nAmong people between the ages of 13 and 17 years, only 80% are full-time students, and only 66% of these advance to secondary school. These percentages are lower among vulnerable population groups: only 75% of the poorest youth between the ages of 13 and 17 years attend school. Tertiary education has the lowest coverage, with only 70% of people between the ages of 18 and 25 years outside of the education system. Currently, more than half of low income or rural children fail to complete nine years of education.\nLife expectancy.\nList of countries by life expectancy at birth for 2023 according to the World Bank Group.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nPublic health.\nHealth Development in Latin America.\nLatin America has made notable progress in developing healthcare throughout the recent decades, and this is mostly driven even by both domestic policy and international collaborations. Some developments that were utilized:\nCrime and violence.\nLatin America has been cited by numerous sources to be the most dangerous region in the world. Studies have shown that Latin America contains the majority of the world's most dangerous cities.\nCrime and violence prevention and public security are now important issues for governments and citizens in the Latin America region. Homicide rates in Latin America are the highest in the world. From the early 1980s through the mid-1990s, homicide rates increased by 50 percent. Latin America experienced more than 2.5\u00a0million murders between 2000 and 2017. There were a total of 63,880 murders in Brazil in 2018.\nThe most frequent victims of such homicides are young men, 69 percent of them between the ages of 15 and 19. Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean with the highest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants in 2015 were: El Salvador 109, Honduras 64, Venezuela 57, Jamaica 43, Belize 34.4, St. Kitts and Nevis 34, Guatemala 34, Trinidad and Tobago 31, the Bahamas 30, Brazil 26.7, Colombia 26.5, the Dominican Republic 22, St. Lucia 22, Guyana 19, Mexico 16, Puerto Rico 16, Ecuador 13, Grenada 13, Costa Rica 12, Bolivia 12, Nicaragua 12, Panama 11, Antigua and Barbuda 11, and Haiti 10. Most of the countries with the highest homicide rates are in Africa and Latin America. Countries in Central America, like El Salvador and Honduras, top the list of homicides in the world.\nBrazil has more overall homicides than any country in the world, at 50,108, accounting for one in 10 globally. Crime-related violence is the biggest threat to public health in Latin America, striking more victims than HIV/AIDS or any other infectious disease. Countries with the lowest homicide rate per year per 100,000 inhabitants as of 2015 were: Chile 3, Peru 7, Argentina 7, Uruguay 8 and Paraguay 9.\nCulture.\nLatin American culture is a mixture of many influences:\nArt.\nBeyond the tradition of Indigenous art, the development of Latin American visual art owed much to the influence of Spanish, Portuguese and French Baroque painting, which in turn often followed the trends of the Italians. In general, artistic Eurocentrism began to wane in the early twentieth century with the increased appreciation for indigenous forms of representation.\nFrom the early twentieth century, the art of Latin America was greatly inspired by the Constructivist Movement. The movement rapidly spread from Russia to Europe and then into Latin America. Joaqu\u00edn Torres Garc\u00eda and Manuel Rend\u00f3n have been credited with bringing the Constructivist Movement into Latin America from Europe.\nAn important artistic movement generated in Latin America is \"muralism\" represented by Diego Rivera, David Alfaro Siqueiros, Jos\u00e9 Clemente Orozco and Rufino Tamayo in Mexico, Santiago Martinez Delgado and Pedro Nel G\u00f3mez in Colombia and Antonio Berni in Argentina. Some of the most impressive \"Muralista\" works can be found in Mexico, Colombia, New York City, San Francisco, Los Angeles and Philadelphia.\nPainter Frida Kahlo, one of the most famous Mexican artists, painted about her own life and the Mexican culture in a style combining Realism, Symbolism and Surrealism. Kahlo's work commands the highest selling price of all Latin American paintings.\nThe Venezuelan Armando Rever\u00f3n, whose work begins to be recognized internationally, is one of the most important artists of the 20th century in South America; he is a precursor of Arte Povera and Happening. In the 60s kinetic art emerged in Venezuela. Its main representatives are Jes\u00fas Soto, Carlos Cruz-Diez, Alejandro Otero and Gego.\nColombian sculptor and painter Fernando Botero has gained regional and international recognition for his works which, on first examination, are noted for their exaggerated proportions and the corpulence of the human and animal figures.\nThe Ecuadorian Oswaldo Guayasam\u00edn, considered one of the most important and seminal artists in Ecuador and South America. In his life, he made over 13,000 paintings and held more than 180 exhibitions all over the world, including Paris, Barcelona, New York, Buenos Aires, Moscow, Prague, and Rome. He brought his unique style of expressionism and cubism to the collection of Ecuador artwork during the Age of Anger which relates to the period of the Cold War when the United States opposed communist presence in South America. Social criticism of human and social inequality was central to his artwork.\nFilm.\nLatin American film is both rich and diverse. Historically, the main centers of production have been Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, and Cuba. Latin American film flourished after sound was introduced in cinema, which added a linguistic barrier to the export of Hollywood film south of the border.\nMexican cinema began in the silent era from 1896 to 1929 and flourished in the Golden Era of the 1940s. It boasted a huge industry comparable to Hollywood at the time, with stars such as Mar\u00eda F\u00e9lix, Dolores del R\u00edo, and Pedro Infante. In the 1970s, Mexico was the location for many cult horror and action movies. More recently, films such as \"Amores Perros\" (2000) and \"Y tu mam\u00e1 tambi\u00e9n\" (2001) enjoyed box office and critical acclaim and propelled Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n and Alejandro Gonz\u00e1lez I\u00f1\u00e1rritu to the front rank of Hollywood directors. I\u00f1\u00e1rritu in 2010 directed \"Biutiful\" and \"Birdman\" (2014), Alfonso Cuar\u00f3n directed \"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban\" in 2004 and \"Gravity\" in 2013. A close friend of both, Guillermo del Toro, a top rank Hollywood director in Hollywood and Spain, directed \"Pan's Labyrinth\" (2006) and produced \"El Orfanato\" (2007). Carlos Carrera (\"The Crime of Father Amaro)\", and screenwriter Guillermo Arriaga are also some of the best known modern Mexican film makers. \"Rudo y Cursi\" released in December (2008) in Mexico, was directed by Carlos Cuar\u00f3n.\nArgentine cinema has also been prominent since the first half of the 20th century and today averages over 60 full-length titles yearly. The industry suffered during the 1976\u20131983 military dictatorship; but re-emerged to produce the Academy Award winner \"The Official Story\" in 1985. A wave of imported US films again damaged the industry in the early 1990s, though it soon recovered, thriving even during the Argentine economic crisis around 2001. Many Argentine movies produced during recent years have been internationally acclaimed, including \"Nueve reinas\" (2000), \"Son of the Bride\" (2001), \"El abrazo partido\" (2004), \"El otro\" (2007), the 2010 Foreign Language Academy Award winner \"El secreto de sus ojos\", \"Wild Tales\" (2014) and \"Argentina, 1985\" (2022).\nIn Brazil, the \"Cinema Novo\" movement created a particular way of making movies with critical and intellectual screenplays, clearer photography related to the light of the outdoors in a tropical landscape, and a political message. The modern Brazilian film industry has become more profitable inside the country, and some of its productions have received prizes and recognition in Europe and the United States, with movies such as \"Central do Brasil\" (1999), \"Cidade de Deus\" (2002) and \"Tropa de Elite\" (2007).\nPuerto Rican cinema has produced some notable films, such as \"Una Aventura Llamada Menudo\", \"Los Diaz de Doris\" and \"Casi Casi\". An influx of Hollywood films affected the local film industry in Puerto Rico during the 1980s and 1990s, but several Puerto Rican films have been produced since and it has been recovering.\nCuban cinema has enjoyed much official support since the Cuban revolution and important film-makers include Tom\u00e1s Guti\u00e9rrez Alea.\nVenezuelan television has also had a great impact in Latin America, is said that whilst \"Venezuelan cinema began sporadically in the 1950s[, it] only emerged as a national-cultural movement in the mid-1970s\" when it gained state support and auteurs could produce work. International co-productions with Latin America and Spain continued into this era and beyond, and Venezuelan films of this time were counted among the works of New Latin American Cinema. This period is known as Venezuela's Golden Age of cinema, having massive popularity even though it was a time of much social and political upheaval.\nOne of the most famous Venezuelan films, even to date, is the 1976 film Soy un delincuente by Clemente de la Cerda, which won the Special Jury Prize at the 1977 Locarno International Film Festival. Soy un delincuente was one of nine films for which the state gave substantial funding to produce, made in the year after the Venezuelan state began giving financial support to cinema in 1975. The support likely came from increased oil wealth in the early 1970s, and the subsequent 1973 credit incentive policy. At the time of its production the film was the most popular film in the country, and took a decade to be usurped from this position, even though it was only one in a string of films designed to tell social realist stories of struggle in the 1950s and '60s. Equally famous is the 1977 film El Pez que Fuma (Rom\u00e1n Chalbaud). In 1981 FONCINE (the Venezuelan Film Fund) was founded, and this year it provided even more funding to produce seventeen feature films. A few years later in 1983 with Viernes Negro, oil prices dropped and Venezuela entered a depression which prevented such extravagant funding, but film production continued; more transnational productions occurred, many more with Spain due to Latin America's poor economic fortune in general, and there was some in new cinema, as well: Fina Torres' 1985 Oriana won the Cam\u00e9ra d'Or Prize at the 1985 Cannes Film Festival as the best first feature. Film production peaked in 1984\u20135,:37 with 1986 considered Venezuelan cinema's most successful year by the state, thanks to over 4 million admissions to national films, according to Venezuelanalysis. The Venezuelan capital of Caracas hosted the Ibero-American Forum on Cinematography Integration in 1989, from which the pan-continental IBERMEDIA was formed; a union which provides regional funding.\nLiterature.\nPre-Columbian cultures were primarily oral, although the Aztecs and Maya, for instance, produced elaborate codices. Oral accounts of mythological and religious beliefs were also sometimes recorded after the arrival of European colonizers, as was the case with the Popol Vuh. Moreover, a tradition of oral narrative survives to this day, for instance among the Quechua-speaking population of Peru and the Quich\u00e9 (K'iche') of Guatemala.\nFrom the very moment of Europe's discovery of the continents, early explorers and conquistadores produced written accounts and cr\u00f3nicas of their experience\u00a0\u2013 such as Columbus's letters or Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo's description of the conquest of Mexico. During the colonial period, written culture was often in the hands of the church, within which context Sor Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz wrote memorable poetry and philosophical essays. Towards the end of the 18th century and the beginning of the 19th, a distinctive criollo literary tradition emerged, including the first novels such as Lizardi's \"El Periquillo Sarniento\" (1816).\nThe 19th century was a period of \"foundational fictions\" in critic Doris Sommer's words, novels in the Romantic or Naturalist traditions that attempted to establish a sense of national identity, and which often focussed on the Indigenous question or the dichotomy of \"civilization or barbarism\" (for which see, say, Domingo Sarmiento's \"Facundo\" (1845), Juan Le\u00f3n Mera's \"Cumand\u00e1\" (1879), or Euclides da Cunha's \"Os Sert\u00f5es\" (1902)). The 19th century also witnessed the realist work of Machado de Assis, who made use of surreal devices of metaphor and playful narrative construction, much admired by critic Harold Bloom.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, \"modernismo\" emerged, a poetic movement whose founding text was Nicaraguan poet Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo's \"Azul\" (1888). This was the first Latin American literary movement to influence literary culture outside of the region, and was also the first truly Latin American literature, in that national differences were no longer so much at issue. Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed, for instance, though a Cuban patriot, also lived in Mexico and the United States and wrote for journals in Argentina and elsewhere.\nHowever, what really put Latin American literature on the global map was no doubt the literary boom of the 1960s and 1970s, distinguished by daring and experimental novels (such as Julio Cort\u00e1zar's \"Rayuela\" (1963)) that were frequently published in Spain and quickly translated into English. The Boom's defining novel was Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez's \"Cien a\u00f1os de soledad\" (1967), which led to the association of Latin American literature with magic realism, though other important writers of the period such as the Peruvian Mario Vargas Llosa and Carlos Fuentes do not fit so easily within this framework. Arguably, the Boom's culmination was Augusto Roa Bastos's monumental \"Yo, el supremo\" (1974). In the wake of the Boom, influential precursors such as Juan Rulfo, Alejo Carpentier, and above all Jorge Luis Borges were also rediscovered.\nContemporary literature in the region is vibrant and varied, ranging from the best-selling Paulo Coelho and Isabel Allende to the more avant-garde and critically acclaimed work of writers such as Diamela Eltit, Giannina Braschi, Ricardo Piglia, or Roberto Bola\u00f1o. There has also been considerable attention paid to the genre of testimonio, texts produced in collaboration with subaltern subjects such as Rigoberta Mench\u00fa. Finally, a new breed of chroniclers is represented by the more journalistic Carlos Monsiv\u00e1is and Pedro Lemebel.\nThe region boasts six Nobel Prize winners: in addition to the two Chilean poets Gabriela Mistral (1945) and Pablo Neruda (1971), there is also the Guatemalan novelist Miguel \u00c1ngel Asturias (1967), the Colombian writer Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez (1982), the Mexican poet and essayist Octavio Paz (1990), and the Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa (2010).\nMusic and dance.\nLatin America has produced many successful worldwide artists in terms of recorded global music sales. Among the most successful have been Juan Gabriel (Mexico) only Latin American musician to have sold over 200\u00a0million records worldwide, Gloria Estefan (Cuba), Carlos Santana, Luis Miguel (Mexico) of whom have sold over 90\u00a0million records, Shakira (Colombia) and Vicente Fern\u00e1ndez (Mexico) with over 50\u00a0million records sold worldwide. Enrique Iglesias, although not a Latin American, has also contributed for the success of Latin music.\nOther notable successful mainstream acts through the years, include RBD, Celia Cruz, Soda Stereo, Thal\u00eda, Ricky Martin, Man\u00e1, Marc Anthony, Ricardo Arjona, Selena, and Menudo.\nLatin Caribbean music, such as merengue, bachata, salsa, and more recently reggaeton, from such countries as the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and Panama, has been strongly influenced by African rhythms and melodies.\nAnother well-known Latin American musical genre includes the Argentine and Uruguayan tango (with Carlos Gardel as the greatest exponent), as well as the distinct nuevo tango, a fusion of tango, acoustic and electronic music popularized by bandone\u00f3n virtuoso \u00c1stor Piazzolla. Samba, North American jazz, European classical music and choro combined to form \"bossa nova\" in Brazil, popularized by guitarist Jo\u00e3o Gilberto with singer Astrud Gilberto and pianist Antonio Carlos Jobim.\nOther influential Latin American sounds include the Colombian cumbia and vallenato, the Chilean cueca, the Ecuadorian boleros and rockoleras, the Honduran punta, the Mexican ranchera and the mariachi, which is the epitome of Mexican soul, the Nicaraguan palo de Mayo, the Peruvian marinera and tondero, the Uruguayan candombe and the various styles of music from pre-Columbian traditions that are widespread in the Andean region.\nThe classical composer Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887\u20131959) worked on the recording of Native musical traditions within his homeland of Brazil. The traditions of his homeland heavily influenced his classical works. Also notable is the recent work of the Cuban Leo Brouwer, Uruguayan-American Miguel del \u00c1guila, guitar works of the Venezuelan Antonio Lauro and the Paraguayan Agust\u00edn Barrios. Latin America has also produced world-class classical performers such as the Chilean pianist Claudio Arrau, Brazilian pianist Nelson Freire and the Argentine pianist and conductor Daniel Barenboim. Brazilian opera soprano Bidu Say\u00e3o, one of Brazil's most famous musicians, was a leading artist of the Metropolitan Opera in New York City from 1937 to 1952.\nArguably, the main contribution to music entered through folklore, where the true soul of the Latin American and Caribbean countries is expressed. Musicians such as Yma S\u00famac, Chabuca Granda, Atahualpa Yupanqui, Violeta Parra, V\u00edctor Jara, Jorge Cafrune, Facundo Cabral, Mercedes Sosa, Jorge Negrete, Luiz Gonzaga, Caetano Veloso, Susana Baca, Chavela Vargas, Simon Diaz, Julio Jaramillo, Toto la Momposina, Gilberto Gil, Maria Beth\u00e2nia, Nana Caymmi, Nara Le\u00e3o, Gal Costa, Ney Matogrosso as well as musical ensembles such as Inti Illimani and Los Kjarkas are magnificent examples of the heights that this soul can reach.\nLatin pop, including many forms of rock, is popular in Latin America today (see Spanish language rock and roll). A few examples are Caf\u00e9 Tacuba, Soda Stereo, Man\u00e1, Los Fabulosos Cadillacs, Rita Lee, Mutantes, Secos e Molhados Legi\u00e3o Urbana, Tit\u00e3s, Paralamas do Sucesso, Cazuza, Bar\u00e3o Vermelho, Skank, Miranda!, Cansei de Ser Sexy or CSS, and Bajo Fondo.\nMore recently, reggaeton, which blends Jamaican reggae and dancehall with Latin America genres such as bomba and plena, as well as hip hop, is becoming more popular, in spite of the controversy surrounding its lyrics, dance steps (Perreo) and music videos. It has become very popular among populations with a \"migrant culture\" influence\u00a0\u2013 both Latino populations in the United States, such as southern Florida and New York City, and parts of Latin America where migration to the United States is common, such as Trinidad and Tobago, Dominican Republic, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, and Mexico.\nWorld Heritage Sites.\nThe following is a list of the ten countries with the most UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Latin America.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18525", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18525", "title": "Latin-America", "text": ""}
{"id": "18526", "revid": "873372899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18526", "title": "Latin-American", "text": ""}
{"id": "18528", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18528", "title": "Lucifer Calaritanus", "text": ""}
{"id": "18529", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18529", "title": "Lynx (web browser)", "text": "Text-based, cross-platform web browser\nLynx is a customizable text-based web browser for use on cursor-addressable character cell terminals. As of 2025[ [update]], it is the oldest web browser still being maintained, having started in 1992.\nHistory.\nLynx was a product of the Distributed Computing Group within Academic Computing Services of the University of Kansas. It was initially developed in 1992 by a team of students and staff at the university (Lou Montulli, Michael Grobe and Charles Rezac) as a hypertext browser used solely to distribute campus information as part of a \"Campus-Wide Information System\" and for browsing the Gopher space. Beta availability was announced to Usenet on 22 July 1992. In 1993, Montulli added an Internet interface and released a new version (2.0) of the browser.\n, the support of communication protocols in Lynx is implemented using a version of libwww, forked from the library's code base in 1996. The supported protocols include Gopher, HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, NNTP and WAIS. Support for NNTP was added to libwww from ongoing Lynx development in 1994. Support for HTTPS was added to Lynx's fork of libwww later, initially as patches due to concerns about encryption.\nGarrett Blythe created DosLynx in April 1994 and later joined the Lynx effort as well. Foteos Macrides ported much of Lynx to VMS and maintained it for a time. In 1995, Lynx was released under the GNU General Public License, and is now maintained by a group of volunteers led by Thomas Dickey.\nFeatures.\nBrowsing in Lynx consists of highlighting the chosen link using cursor keys, or having all links on a page numbered and entering the chosen link's number. Current versions support SSL and many HTML features. Tables are formatted using spaces, while frames are identified by name and can be explored as if they were separate pages. Lynx is not inherently able to display various types of non-text content on the web, such as images and video, but it can launch external programs to handle it, such as an image viewer or a video player.\nUnlike most web browsers, Lynx does not support JavaScript, which many websites require to work correctly.\nThe speed benefits of text-only browsing are most apparent when using low bandwidth internet connections, or older computer hardware that may be slow to render image-heavy content.\nPrivacy.\nBecause Lynx does not support graphics, web bugs that track user information are not fetched, meaning that web pages can be read without the privacy concerns of graphic web browsers. However, Lynx does support HTTP cookies, which can also be used to track user information. Lynx therefore supports cookie whitelisting and blacklisting, or alternatively cookie support can be disabled permanently.\nAs with conventional browsers, Lynx also supports browsing histories and page caching, both of which can raise privacy concerns.\nConfigurability.\nLynx supports both command-line options and configuration files. There are 142 command-line options according to its help message. The template configuration file codice_1 lists 233 configurable features. There is some overlap between the two approaches to configuration, although there are command-line options such as codice_2 which are not matched in codice_1. In addition to pre-set options by command-line and configuration file, Lynx's behavior can be adjusted at runtime using its options menu. Again, there is some overlap between the settings. Lynx implements many of these runtime optional features, optionally (controlled through a setting in the configuration file) allowing the choices to be saved to a separate writable configuration file. The reason for restricting the options which can be saved originated in a usage of Lynx which was more common in the mid-1990s, i.e., using Lynx itself as a front-end application to the Internet accessed by dial-in connections.\nAccessibility.\nBecause Lynx is a text-based browser, it can be used for internet access by visually impaired users on a refreshable braille display and is easily compatible with text-to-speech software. As Lynx substitutes images, frames and other non-textual content with the text from codice_4, codice_5 and codice_6 HTML attributes and allows hiding the user interface elements, the browser becomes specifically suitable for use with cost-effective general purpose screen reading software. A version of Lynx specifically enhanced for use with screen readers on Windows was developed at Indian Institute of Technology Madras.\nRemote access.\nLynx is also useful for accessing websites from a remotely connected system in which no graphical display is available. Despite its text-only nature and age, it can still be used to effectively browse much of the modern web, including performing interactive tasks such as editing Wikipedia.\nWeb design and robots.\nSince Lynx will take keystrokes from a text file, it is still very useful for automated data entry, web page navigation, and web scraping. Consequently, Lynx is used in some web crawlers. Web designers may use Lynx to determine the way in which search engines and web crawlers see the sites that they develop. Online services that provide Lynx's view of a given web page are available.\nLynx is also used to test websites' performance. As one can run the browser from different locations over remote access technologies like Telnet and SSH, one can use Lynx to test the website's connection performance from different geographical locations simultaneously. Another possible web design application of the browser is quick checking of the site's links.\nSupported platforms.\nLynx was originally designed for Unix-like operating systems. It was ported to VMS soon after its public release and to other systems, including DOS, Microsoft Windows, Classic Mac OS and OS/2. It was included in the default OpenBSD installation from OpenBSD 2.3 (May 1998) to 5.5 (May 2014), being in the main tree prior to July 2014, subsequently being made available through the ports tree. Lynx can also be found in the repositories of most Linux distributions, as well as in the Homebrew, Fink, and MacPorts repositories for macOS. Ports to BeOS, MINIX, QNX, AmigaOS and OS/2 are also available.\nThe sources can be built on many platforms, such as Google's Android operating system.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18530", "revid": "41526883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18530", "title": "Lynx (programming language)", "text": "Programming language for large distributed networks\nLynx is a programming language for large distributed networks, using remote procedure calls. It was developed by the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison in 1984 for the Charlotte multicomputer operating system. \nIn 1986, at the University of Rochester, Lynx was ported to the Chrysalis operating system running on a BBN Butterfly multiprocessor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nM. L. Scott, \"The Lynx Distributed Programming Language: Motivation, Design, and Experience,\" \"Computer Languages\" 16:3/4 (1991), pp. 209-233. http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/scott91lynx.html"}
{"id": "18531", "revid": "45108142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18531", "title": "L'H\u00f4pital's rule", "text": "Mathematical rule for evaluating some limits\nL'H\u00f4pital's rule (, ), also known as Bernoulli's rule, is a mathematical theorem that allows evaluating limits of indeterminate forms using derivatives. Application (or repeated application) of the rule often converts an indeterminate form to an expression that can be easily evaluated by substitution. The rule is named after the 17th-century French mathematician Guillaume de l'H\u00f4pital. Although the rule is often attributed to de l'H\u00f4pital, the theorem was first introduced to him in 1694 by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.\nL'H\u00f4pital's rule states that for functions f and g which are defined on an open interval I and differentiable on formula_1 for a (possibly infinite) accumulation point c of I, if formula_2 and formula_3 for all x in formula_1, and formula_5 exists, then\nformula_6\nThe differentiation of the numerator and denominator often simplifies the quotient or converts it to a limit that can be directly evaluated by continuity.\nHistory.\nGuillaume de l'H\u00f4pital (also written l'Hospital) published this rule in his 1696 book \"Analyse des Infiniment Petits pour l'Intelligence des Lignes Courbes\" (literal translation: \"Analysis of the Infinitely Small for the Understanding of Curved Lines\"), the first textbook on differential calculus. However, it is believed that the rule was discovered by the Swiss mathematician Johann Bernoulli.\nGeneral form.\nThe general form of l'H\u00f4pital's rule covers many cases. Let \"c\" and \"L\" be extended real numbers: real numbers, as well as positive and negative infinity. Let \"I\" be an open interval containing \"c\" (for a two-sided limit) or an open interval with endpoint \"c\" (for a one-sided limit, or a limit at infinity if \"c\" is infinite). \nAssumption 1: On formula_7, the real-valued functions \"f\" and \"g\" are differentiable with formula_8.\nAssumption 2: formula_9, a finite or infinite limit. \nIf eitherformula_10 or formula_11thenformula_12Although we have written \"x\" \u2192 \"c\" throughout, the limits may also be one-sided limits (\"x\" \u2192 \"c\"+ or \"x\" \u2192 \"c\"\u2212), when \"c\" is a finite endpoint of \"I\".\nIn the second case b), the hypothesis that \"f\" diverges to infinity is not necessary; in fact, it is sufficient that formula_13\nThe hypothesis that formula_14 appears most commonly in the literature, but some authors sidestep this hypothesis by adding other hypotheses which imply formula_14. For example, one may require in the definition of the limit formula_9 that the function formula_17 must be defined everywhere on an interval formula_7. Another method is to require that both \"f\" and \"g\" be differentiable everywhere on an interval containing \"c\".\nNecessity of conditions: Counterexamples.\nAll four conditions for l'H\u00f4pital's rule are necessary:\nWhere one of the above conditions is not satisfied, l'H\u00f4pital's rule is not valid in general, and its conclusion may be false in certain cases.\n1. Form is not indeterminate.\nThe necessity of the first condition can be seen by considering the counterexample where the functions are formula_31 and formula_32 and the limit is formula_33.\nThe first condition is not satisfied for this counterexample because formula_34 and formula_35. This means that the form is not indeterminate.\nThe second and third conditions are satisfied by formula_21 and formula_22. The fourth condition is also satisfied with\nformula_38\nBut the conclusion fails, since formula_39\n2. Differentiability of functions.\nDifferentiability of functions is a requirement because if a function is not differentiable, then the derivative of the function is not guaranteed to exist at each point in formula_23. The fact that formula_23 is an open interval is grandfathered in from the hypothesis of the Cauchy's mean value theorem. The notable exception of the possibility of the functions being not differentiable at formula_24 exists because l'H\u00f4pital's rule only requires the derivative to exist as the function approaches formula_24; the derivative does not need to be taken at formula_24. \nFor example, let formula_45 , formula_46, and formula_47. In this case, formula_21 is not differentiable at formula_24. However, since formula_21 is differentiable everywhere except formula_24, then formula_52 still exists. Thus, since \nformula_53 and formula_54 exists, l'H\u00f4pital's rule still holds.\n3. Derivative of denominator is zero.\nThe necessity of the condition that formula_14 near formula_56 can be seen by the following counterexample due to Otto Stolz. Let formula_57 and formula_58 Then there is no limit for formula_59 as formula_60 However,\nformula_61\nwhich tends to 0 as formula_62, although it is undefined at infinitely many points. Further examples of this type were found by Ralph P. Boas Jr.\n4. Limit of derivatives does not exist.\nThe requirement that the limit formula_63 exists is essential; if it does not exist, the original limit formula_64 may nevertheless exist. Indeed, as formula_65 approaches formula_56, the functions formula_67 or formula_68 may exhibit many oscillations of small amplitude but steep slope, which do not affect formula_64 but do prevent the convergence of formula_63. \nFor example, if formula_71, formula_72 and formula_73, then formula_74which does not approach a limit since cosine oscillates infinitely between 1 and \u22121. But the ratio of the original functions does approach a limit, since the amplitude of the oscillations of formula_67 becomes small relative to formula_68:\nformula_77\nIn a case such as this, all that can be concluded is that\n formula_78\nso that if the limit of formula_79 exists, then it must lie between the inferior and superior limits of formula_80 . In the example, 1 does indeed lie between 0 and 2.)\nNote also that by the contrapositive form of the Rule, if formula_64 does not exist, then formula_63 also does not exist.\nExamples.\nIn the following computations, each application of l'H\u00f4pital's rule is indicated by the symbol formula_83. \nComplications.\nSometimes L'H\u00f4pital's rule does not reduce to an obvious limit in a finite number of steps, unless some intermediate simplifications are applied. Examples include the following:\nA common logical fallacy is to use L'H\u00f4pital's rule to prove the value of a derivative by computing the limit of a difference quotient. Since applying l'H\u00f4pital requires knowing the relevant derivatives, this amounts to circular reasoning or begging the question, assuming what is to be proved. For example, consider the proof of the derivative formula for powers of \"x\":\nformula_107\nApplying L'H\u00f4pital's rule and finding the derivatives with respect to \"h\" yields \n\"nx\"\"n\"\u22121 as expected, but this computation requires the use of the very formula that is being proven. Similarly, to prove formula_108, applying L'H\u00f4pital requires knowing the derivative of formula_109 at formula_110, which amounts to calculating formula_111 in the first place; a valid proof requires a different method such as the squeeze theorem. \nOther indeterminate forms.\nOther indeterminate forms, such as 1\u221e, 00, \u221e0, 0 \u00b7 \u221e, and \u221e \u2212 \u221e, can sometimes be evaluated using L'H\u00f4pital's rule. We again indicate applications of L'Hopital's rule by formula_83.\nFor example, to evaluate a limit involving \u221e \u2212 \u221e, convert the difference of two functions to a quotient:\nformula_113\nL'H\u00f4pital's rule can be used on indeterminate forms involving exponents by using logarithms to \"move the exponent down\". Here is an example involving the indeterminate form 00:\nformula_114\nIt is valid to move the limit inside the exponential function because this function is continuous. Now the exponent formula_65 has been \"moved down\". The limit formula_116 is of the indeterminate form 0 \u00b7 \u221e dealt with in an example above: L'H\u00f4pital may be used to determine that\nformula_117\nThus\nformula_118\nThe following table lists the most common indeterminate forms and the transformations which precede applying l'H\u00f4pital's rule:\nStolz\u2013Ces\u00e0ro theorem.\nThe Stolz\u2013Ces\u00e0ro theorem is a similar result involving limits of sequences, but it uses finite difference operators rather than derivatives.\nGeometric interpretation: parametric curve and velocity vector.\nConsider the parametric curve in the \"xy\"-plane with coordinates given by the continuous functions formula_119 and formula_120, the locus of points formula_121, and suppose formula_122. The slope of the tangent to the curve at formula_123 is the limit of the ratio formula_124 as \"t\" \u2192 \"c\". The tangent to the curve at the point formula_121 is the velocity vector formula_126 with slope formula_127. L'H\u00f4pital's rule then states that the slope of the curve at the origin (\"t\" = \"c\") is the limit of the tangent slope at points approaching the origin, provided that this is defined.\nProof of L'H\u00f4pital's rule.\nSpecial case.\nThe proof of L'H\u00f4pital's rule is simple in the case where \"f\" and \"g\" are continuously differentiable at the point \"c\" and where a finite limit is found after the first round of differentiation. This is only a special case of L'H\u00f4pital's rule, because it only applies to functions satisfying stronger conditions than required by the general rule. However, many common functions have continuous derivatives (e.g. polynomials, sine and cosine, exponential functions), so this special case covers most applications.\nSuppose that \"f\" and \"g\" are continuously differentiable at a real number \"c\", that formula_128, and that formula_129. Then\n formula_130\nThis follows from the difference quotient definition of the derivative. The last equality follows from the continuity of the derivatives at \"c\". The limit in the conclusion is not indeterminate because formula_131.\nThe proof of a more general version of L'H\u00f4pital's rule is given below.\nGeneral proof.\nThe following proof is due to , where a unified proof for the formula_132 and formula_133 indeterminate forms is given. Taylor notes that different proofs may be found in and .\nLet \"f\" and \"g\" be functions satisfying the hypotheses in the General form section. Let formula_134 be the open interval in the hypothesis with endpoint \"c\". Considering that formula_14 on this interval and \"g\" is continuous, formula_134 can be chosen smaller so that \"g\" is nonzero on formula_134.\nFor each \"x\" in the interval, define formula_138 and formula_139 as formula_140 ranges over all values between \"x\" and \"c\". (The symbols inf and sup denote the infimum and supremum.)\nFrom the differentiability of \"f\" and \"g\" on formula_134, Cauchy's mean value theorem ensures that for any two distinct points \"x\" and \"y\" in formula_134 there exists a formula_143 between \"x\" and \"y\" such that formula_144. Consequently, formula_145 for all choices of distinct \"x\" and \"y\" in the interval. The value \"g\"(\"x\")-\"g\"(\"y\") is always nonzero for distinct \"x\" and \"y\" in the interval, for if it was not, the mean value theorem would imply the existence of a \"p\" between \"x\" and \"y\" such that \"g' \"(\"p\")=0.\nThe definition of \"m\"(\"x\") and \"M\"(\"x\") will result in an extended real number, and so it is possible for them to take on the values \u00b1\u221e. In the following two cases, \"m\"(\"x\") and \"M\"(\"x\") will establish bounds on the ratio .\nCase 1: formula_146\nFor any \"x\" in the interval formula_134, and point \"y\" between \"x\" and \"c\",\nformula_148\nand therefore as \"y\" approaches \"c\", formula_149 and formula_150 become zero, and so\nformula_151\nCase 2: formula_152\nFor every \"x\" in the interval formula_134, define formula_154. For every point \"y\" between \"x\" and \"c\",\n formula_155\nAs \"y\" approaches \"c\", both formula_156 and formula_157 become zero, and therefore\n formula_158\nThe limit superior and limit inferior are necessary since the existence of the limit of has not yet been established.\nIt is also the case that \nformula_159\nand\nformula_160 and formula_161\nIn case 1, the squeeze theorem establishes that formula_64 exists and is equal to \"L\". In the case 2, and the squeeze theorem again asserts that formula_163, and so the limit formula_64 exists and is equal to \"L\". This is the result that was to be proven.\nIn case 2 the assumption that \"f\"(\"x\") diverges to infinity was not used within the proof. This means that if |\"g\"(\"x\")| diverges to infinity as \"x\" approaches \"c\" and both \"f\" and \"g\" satisfy the hypotheses of L'H\u00f4pital's rule, then no additional assumption is needed about the limit of \"f\"(\"x\"): It could even be the case that the limit of \"f\"(\"x\") does not exist. In this case, L'Hopital's theorem is actually a consequence of Ces\u00e0ro\u2013Stolz.\nIn the case when |\"g\"(\"x\")| diverges to infinity as \"x\" approaches \"c\" and \"f\"(\"x\") converges to a finite limit at \"c\", then L'H\u00f4pital's rule would be applicable, but not absolutely necessary, since basic limit calculus will show that the limit of \"f\"(\"x\")/\"g\"(\"x\") as \"x\" approaches \"c\" must be zero.\nCorollary.\nA simple but very useful consequence of L'Hopital's rule is that the derivative of a function cannot have a removable discontinuity. That is, suppose that \"f\" is continuous at \"a\", and that formula_165 exists for all \"x\" in some open interval containing \"a\", except perhaps for formula_166. Suppose, moreover, that formula_167 exists. Then formula_168 also exists and\nformula_169\nIn particular, \"f\"' is also continuous at \"a\". \nThus, if a function is not continuously differentiable near a point, the derivative must have an essential discontinuity at that point.\nProof.\nConsider the functions formula_170 and formula_171. The continuity of \"f\" at \"a\" tells us that formula_172. Moreover, formula_173 since a polynomial function is always continuous everywhere. Applying L'Hopital's rule shows that formula_174.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18532", "revid": "50171107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18532", "title": "Lexicology", "text": "Linguistic discipline studying words\nLexicology is the branch of linguistics that analyzes the lexicon of a specific language. A word is the smallest meaningful unit of a language that can stand on its own, and is made up of small components called morphemes. Lexicology examines every feature of a word \u2013 including formation, spelling, origin, usage, and definition.\nLexicology also considers the relationships that exist between words. In linguistics, the lexicon of a language is composed of lexemes, which are abstract units of meaning that correspond to a set of related forms of a word. Lexicology looks at how words can be broken down as well as identifies common patterns they follow.\nLexicology is associated with lexicography, which is the practice of compiling dictionaries.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"lexicology\" derives from the Greek word \u03bb\u03b5\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03bd \"lexicon\" (neuter of \u03bb\u03b5\u03be\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 \"lexikos\", \"of or for words\", from \u03bb\u03ad\u03be\u03b9\u03c2 \"lexis\", \"speech\" or \"word\") and -\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1 \"-logia\", \"the study of\" (a suffix derived from \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2 \"logos\", amongst others meaning \"learning, reasoning, explanation, subject-matter\").\nEtymology as a science is actually a focus of lexicology. Since lexicology studies the meaning of words and their semantic relations, it often explores the history and development of a word. Etymologists analyze related languages using the comparative method, which is a set of techniques that allow linguists to recover the ancestral phonological, morphological, syntactic, etc., components of modern languages by comparing their cognate material. This means many word roots from different branches of the Indo-European language family can be traced back to single words from the Proto-Indo-European language. The English language, for instance, contains more borrowed words (or loan words) in its vocabulary than native words. Examples include \"parkour\" from French, \"karaoke\" from Japanese, \"coconut\" from Portuguese, \"mango\" from Hindi, etc. A lot of music terminology, like \"piano\", \"solo\", and \"opera\", is borrowed from Italian. These words can be further classified according to the linguistic element that is borrowed: phonemes, morphemes, and semantics.\nApproach.\nGeneral lexicology is the broad study of words regardless of a language's specific properties. It is concerned with linguistic features that are common among all languages, such as phonemes and morphemes. Special lexicology, on the other hand, looks at what a particular language contributes to its vocabulary, such as grammars. Altogether lexicological studies can be approached two ways:\nThese complementary perspectives were proposed by Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure. Lexicology can have both comparative and contrastive methodologies. Comparative lexicology searches for similar features that are shared among two or more languages. Contrastive lexicology identifies the linguistic characteristics which distinguish between related and unrelated languages.\nSemantics.\nThe subfield of semantics that pertains especially to lexicological work is called lexical semantics. In brief, lexical semantics contemplates the significance of words and their meanings through several lenses, including synonymy, antonymy, hyponymy, and polysemy, among others. Semantic analysis of lexical material may involve both the contextualization of the word(s) and syntactic ambiguity. Semasiology and onomasiology are relevant linguistic disciplines associated with lexical semantics.\nA word can have two kinds of meaning: grammatical and lexical. Grammatical meaning refers to a word's function in a language, such as tense or plurality, which can be deduced from affixes. Lexical meaning is not limited to a single form of a word, but rather what the word denotes as a base word. For example, the verb \"to walk\" can become \"walks\", \"walked\", and \"walking \u2013\" each word has a different grammatical meaning, but the same lexical meaning (\"to move one's feet at a regular pace\").\nPhraseology.\nAnother focus of lexicology is phraseology, which studies multi-word expressions, or idioms, like 'raining cats and dogs.' The meaning of the phrase as a whole has a different meaning than each word does on its own and is often unpredictable when considering its components individually. Phraseology examines how and why such meanings exist, and analyzes the laws that govern these word combinations.\nIdioms and other phraseological units can be classified according to content and/ or meaning. They are difficult to translate word-for-word from one language to another."}
{"id": "18534", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18534", "title": "Lake Abitibi", "text": "Lake on Ontario / Quebec border, Canada\nLake Abitibi (, ) is a shallow lake in northeastern Ontario and western Quebec, Canada. The lake, which lies within the vast Clay Belt, is separated in two distinct portions by a short narrows, making it actually two lakes. Its total area is , and net area . The lake is shallow and studded with islands. Its shores and vicinity are covered with small timber.\nIts outlet is the Abitibi River, a tributary of the Moose River, which empties into James Bay. The lake takes its name from the river. \"Abitibi\" comes from the Algonquin words \"abitah\", meaning middle and \"nipi\" meaning water, possibly a reference to its geographic location between the Harricana (from the Algonquin word \"Nanikana\", meaning \"the main way\") to the east and the Kapuskasing\u2013Mattagami river system to the west.\nWater levels on the lake are influenced by the Twin Falls Dam on the Abitibi River.\nPortions of Lake Abitibi's southern shores and a section of the Abitibi River are part of the Abitibi-de-Troyes Provincial Park. The islands in Ontario's portion of the lake are protected in the Lake Abitibi Islands Provincial Park. The entire McDougall Point Peninsula, that separates the lake in two, is part of the Mcdougal Point Peninsula Conservation Reserve.\nPointe Abitibi at the mouth of the Duparquet River is a National Historic Site of Canada. This site, known as Apitipik National Historic Site of Canada, was a summer gathering place for the Abitibiwinnik until 1956 and the location of several trading posts between 1686 and 1922.\nHistory.\nArtifacts dating to the Late Archaic period have been found at Lake Abitibi.\nApplication of \"Abitibi\" to describe the lake and the people living in the area around it was first noted in The Jesuit Relations in 1640. One of the first Europeans in this area was Pierre de Troyes, who built a post on Lake Abitibi when he was on his way to capture English HBC posts on James Bay in 1686. The Abitibi Post lay halfway between trading posts on James Bay and those on the Ottawa River and was in continuous existence throughout the French period.\nThe lake was part of the canoe route from James Bay to Montreal, via the Moose and Abitibi Rivers, then a series of intermediate streams and portages to Lake Temiskaming and the Ottawa River.\nAfter the British conquered Canada in 1763, free traders either took over the French fort or built another post on the lake, providing strong trading competition to the main Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) fort at Moose Factory and the HBC outpost at Frederick House. This moved the HBC to set up a post, called Abitibi House, on Lake Abitibi in 1794, located on the peninsula at the mouth of the Duparquet River. In subsequent decades this post, as well as competing posts of the North West Company, were rebuilt or moved to various locations around the lake and its islands. Being unproductive due to competition, the HBC abandoned Abitibi House in 1811. When two companies merged in 1821, the HBC took over the trading post of the North West Company on Lake Abitibi.\nThe construction of the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway (now Canadian National Railway) through this district made it of some importance at the start of the 20th century.\nLake Abitibi Islands.\nThe Lake Abitibi Islands Provincial Park protects nearly all the islands on the Ontario side of Lake Abitibi. It includes 786 islands, from tiny shoals to large islands of up to . Some of the larger islands are Deer, Dominion, and St. Patrick, as well as the Mistaken Islands (the largest island in the lake, Nepawa Island, is not part of the park since it is in Clerval, Quebec). The park was created in 2005 when the Abitibi-De-Troyes Provincial Park was reconfigured.\nThe park is an important nesting habitat for many bird species, including great blue heron, bald eagle, osprey, and double-crested cormorant. The vegetation is characterized by intolerant hardwood and mixedwood forests, with black spruce, white spruce, and white birch as the common tree species.\nIt is a non-operating park, meaning that there are no facilities or services, and only accessible via air or water.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18538", "revid": "50651086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18538", "title": "Lansing, Michigan", "text": "Capital city of Michigan, United States\nLansing () is the capital city of the U.S. state of Michigan. The most populous city in Ingham County, parts of the city extend into Eaton County and north into Clinton County. It is the sixth-most populous city in Michigan with a population of 112,644 at the 2020 census. The Lansing\u2013East Lansing metropolitan area has an estimated 473,000 residents and is the third largest in the state after metropolitan Detroit and Grand Rapids. Lansing benefits from its central location within Mid-Michigan and serves as a regional hub for government, education, insurance and commerce.\nFounded in 1835 and designated as Michigan's state capital in 1847, Lansing was selected for its more central location after concerns about Detroit's vulnerability to British attack in the War of 1812. The city's history is closely tied to the rise of industry in Michigan. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Lansing became a prominent center in the automobile industry. Oldsmobile and REO Motor Car Company, both founded by Ransom E. Olds, were among its most prominent manufacturers.\nLansing's economy is diverse, driven by state government operations, higher education, health care, and insurance. Neighboring East Lansing is home to Michigan State University, one of the largest and most prominent research universities in the U.S. Major companies based in the city include Jackson National Life and Auto-Owners Insurance. Cultural attractions include the Michigan State Capitol building, the Impression 5 Science Center, and Library of Michigan. Lansing is the only U.S. state capital (among the 47 located in counties) that is not also a county seat. The seat of government of Ingham County is Mason, but the county maintains some offices in Lansing.\nHistory.\nExploration by Europeans.\nThe first recorded person of European descent to travel through the area that is now Lansing was British fur trader Hugh Heward and his French-Canadian team on April 24, 1790, while canoeing the Grand River. The land that was to become Lansing was surveyed as \"Township 4 North Range 2 West\" in February 1827 in what was then dense forest. It was the last of the county's townships to be surveyed, and the land was not offered for sale until October 1830. There would be no roads to this area for decades to come.\nFounding myth.\nHistorians have lamented the persistence of a myth about Lansing's founding.\nThe incorrect story of Lansing's beginnings states that in the winter of 1835 and early 1836, two brothers from New York plotted the area now known as REO Town just south of downtown Lansing and named it \"Biddle City\". This land lay in a floodplain and was underwater during the majority of the year. Nevertheless, the brothers went back to Lansing, New York, to sell plots for the town that did not exist. They told the New Yorkers this new \"city\" had an area of 65 blocks, a church and a public and academic square. 16 men bought plots in the nonexistent city, and upon reaching the area later that year found they were the victims of the scam. Many in the group, disappointed and now without funds to move on again, opted to stay and ended up settling around what is now metropolitan Lansing.\nThe story has persisted due to a 1904 newspaper article, which cited a memoir told by Daniel W. Buck, a respected Lansing mayor and son of one of the early pioneers. His story was cited in Michigan pioneer papers and retold in newspaper articles multiple times in the decades that followed. His characterization of the city as being born from a \"land scam\" was incorrect, though his story had some elements of truth as well.\nOrigins as a town.\nThe brothers were William and Jerry Ford. Although they were originally from New York, they were well-respected businessmen who hailed from Jackson and were instrumental during its earliest years.\nIn 1836, they bought 290 acres in the northwest corner of Ingham County. They platted the land and hoped to build a community they named Biddle City, located south of the convergence of the Grand River and the Red Cedar River, in Lansing's present-day REO Town neighborhood. Biddle City's plat map included plans for a public square, church square and academy square. They sold 21 parcels of it\u00a0\u2013 mostly to other Michiganders, not New Yorkers\u00a0\u2013 and buyers understood that it was not yet a real city. Unfortunately, Biddle City never took off. The financial Panic of 1837 forced the brothers to heavily mortgage the property, and the city never materialized.\nBiddle City was not Lansing's original name, nor a precursor to it, as the plat was located outside of Lansing's original city limits.\nOriginally, all that existed was Lansing Township, named in 1842 by an early settler, Joseph E. North Sr., after Lansing in Tompkins County, NY, where he was from.\nThe settlement of fewer than 20 people that would become the City of Lansing remained quiet until the winter of 1847. The state constitution required the capital be moved from Detroit to a more central and safer location in the state's interior in 1847; many were concerned about Detroit's proximity to British-controlled Canada, which had captured Detroit in the War of 1812. The United States had recaptured the city in 1813, but these events led to the dire need to have the center of government relocated further away from hostile British territory. There was also concern with Detroit's strong influence over Michigan politics, being the state's largest city as well as the capital city.\nDuring the multi-day session to determine a new location for the state capital, many cities, including Ann Arbor, Marshall, and Jackson, lobbied hard to win this designation. Unable to publicly reach a consensus because of constant political wrangling, the Michigan House of Representatives privately chose the Township of Lansing out of frustration. When announced, many present openly laughed that such an insignificant settlement was now Michigan's capital. Two months later, Governor William L. Greenly signed into law the act of the legislature making Lansing Township the state capital.\nWith the announcement that Lansing Township had been made the capital, the small settlement quickly transformed into the seat of state government. Within months after it became the capital city, further individual settlements began to develop around it, along three key points along the Grand River in the township:\nThe collection of original settlements (\"Upper Town\", \"Lower Town\" and \"Middle Town\") had for some years been collectively referred to as the \"Village of Michigan\". On February 16, 1842, Alaiedon township was split into the townships of Lansing, Delhi and Meridian (originally suggested as \"Genoa\") based on a petition submitted in December 1841 by Henry North, Roswell Everett and Zalmon Holmes. Henry North proposed the name \"Lansing\" for the township at the request of his father, who wanted it named after their old town of Lansing, New York.\nOn February 15, 1859, the settlement, having grown to nearly 3,000 and encompassing about in area, was incorporated as a city, carving off a section of seven square miles from Lansing Township. The boundaries of the original city were Douglas Avenue to the north, Wood and Regent streets to the east, Mount Hope Avenue to the south, and Jenison Avenue to the west. These boundaries would remain until 1916. Lansing began to grow steadily over the next two decades with the completion of the railroads through the city, a plank road, and the completion of the current capitol building in 1878.\nMost of what is known as Lansing today is the result of the city becoming an industrial powerhouse which began with the founding of Olds Motor Vehicle Company in August 1897. The company went through many changes, including a buyout, between its founding to 1905 when founder Ransom E. Olds started his new REO Motor Car Company, which would last in Lansing for another 70 years. Olds would be joined by the less successful Clarkmobile around 1903. Over the next decades, the city would be transformed into a major American industrial center for the manufacturing of automobiles and parts, among other industries. The city also continued to grow in area. By 1956, the city had grown to , and doubled in size over the next decade to its current size of roughly .\nToday, the city's economy is diversified among government service, healthcare, manufacturing, insurance, banking, and education.\nNotable events.\nAnti-slavery movement.\nIn the late 1840s to early 1850s, the citizens of Lansing were unified against slavery, and the city became a secondary stop on the Underground Railroad, as one of the last steps of an escape route that led through Battle Creek, Schoolcraft and Cassopolis. From Lansing, the route led to Durand, and then to either Port Huron or Detroit.\nMajor fires.\nThe Kerns Hotel fire on December 11, 1934, was the deadliest in the city's history. Perhaps thirty-four people died in the fire, although the hotel register was also destroyed making an exact count impossible.\nOn February 8, 1951, the Lewis Cass Building was intentionally set on fire by a state office employee. The following morning, the seventh floor collapsed down to the next level, which destroyed a large number of state historical records.\nElephant incident.\nOn September 26, 1963, a 12-year-old, 3,000-pound female dancing elephant named Rajje (alternately reported as Raji and Little Rajjee, among other variations) rebelled against her trainer during a performance in a shopping-center circus near what was then Logan Street and Holmes Road in Lansing, and escaped into the streets, aggravated by the frenzied pursuit of nearly 4,000 local residents. The incident ended with the shooting of the elephant by Lansing police. Provoked by the growing crowd, Rajje's rampage took her through the men's wear, sporting goods and gift departments of a local Arlan's discount store before leading police on a two-mile chase in which she knocked down and injured a 67-year-old man, tried to move a car, and caused thousands of dollars in damage before being killed.\n\"Life Magazine\" quoted Rajje's trainer, William Pratt, as shouting at the scene, \"Damn these people [...] They wouldn't leave her alone.\"\nThe incident was widely reported, including a photospread in \"Life\". While the \"Lansing State Journal\" coverage stressed the danger of the incident, the \"Detroit Free Press\" noted that witnesses cried out \"Murderers! Murderers!\" as police fired eight shots.\nAuthor Nelson Algren cites the injustice and sad end of the pursuit of \"Raji, the Pixie-Eared Elephant\" in continuity with the ambush of Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow in his introduction to a 1968 biography of the outlaws. Then teenage Lansing residents who had goaded the elephant later on recalled the incident with sober regret in a local newspaper retrospective in 2011.\nGeography.\nLansing is the centerpiece of a region of Michigan known as Mid-Michigan.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. This figure includes two 425 Agreements with Alaiedon Township and Meridian Township, and the four 425 Agreements with Delta Township since 2000.\nSince the 2010 census, the city has entered into two additional 425 Agreements. The first agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of 1,888.2 acres of Lansing Capital Region International Airport to the city from DeWitt Township in 2011. The second agreement consisted of the temporary transfer of in Alaiedon Township for the expansion of the headquarters of Jackson National Life Insurance Company in 2013 bringing the area either fully or conditionally under control of the city to .\nUnder Michigan law, 425 Agreements are only temporary land sharing agreements and do not count as official annexations. The Census Bureau, however, for statistical purposes does count these as annexations. Not counting the temporary 425 Agreements, Lansing administers total.\nLansing is located in the south-central part of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan, where the Grand River meets the Red Cedar River. The city occupies most of what had formerly been part of Lansing Charter Township. It has also annexed adjacent tracts of land in Delta Charter Township and Windsor Township in Eaton County to the west, Delhi Charter Township in Ingham County to the south, and in DeWitt Charter Township in Clinton County to the north. The city also controls three non-contiguous tracts of land through 425 Agreements (conditional land transfer agreements) with Meridian Charter Township, Delta Charter Township, and Alaiedon Township in Ingham County to the southeast. It is also located between the state's two largest cities, Detroit and Grand Rapids.\nThe Grand River, the largest river in Michigan, flows through downtown Lansing, and the Red Cedar River, a tributary of the Grand, flows through the campus of Michigan State University to its confluence with the Grand in Lansing. Sycamore Creek, a tributary of the Red Cedar, flows northward through the southeastern part of the city. There are two lakes in the area, Park Lake and Lake Lansing, both northeast of the city. Lake Lansing is approximately in size and is a summer favorite for swimmers, boaters, and fishermen. Michigan State University Sailing Club and the Lansing Sailing Club are located on Lake Lansing, where sailing regattas are hosted throughout the summer.\nThe City of Lansing operates a total of of parkland, of which is parkland, are golflands, and are cemetery lands. However, this figure includes the Waverly Hills Golf Course and adjacent Michigan Avenue Park, whose are located within neighboring Lansing Township, but operated by the City of Lansing, and does not include the of the combined Hawk Island County Park and adjacent Soldan Dog Park operated by Ingham County within the city of Lansing. All together then, of the city (or approximately 10%) is publicly administered open space.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe city's downtown is dominated by state government buildings, especially the State Capitol; but downtown has also experienced recent growth in new restaurants, retail stores and residential developments. Downtown Lansing had a historic city market that was one of the oldest continuously operating farmers' markets in the United States, until it closed in 2019. Downriver and north of downtown is historic Old Town Lansing with many architecturally significant buildings dating to the mid-19th century. Directly south of downtown on the other side of I-496 along Washington Avenue lies \"REO Town\", the birthplace of the automobile in the United States, is where Ransom Eli Olds built factories along Washington Avenue. Ransom Eli Olds' home, which once overlooked the factories along Washington Avenue, was displaced by I-496.\nLansing is generally divided into four sections: the Eastside, Westside, Northwestside, and Southside. Each section contains a diverse array of neighborhoods. The Eastside, located east of the Grand River and north of the Red Cedar River, is the most ethnically diverse side of Lansing, with foreign-born citizens making up more of its population than any other side in the city. The Eastside's commercial districts are located mainly along Michigan Avenue, and to a lesser extent along Kalamazoo Street. It is anchored by Frandor Shopping Center on the very eastern edge of the eastside.\nThe Westside, roughly located north, west, and south of the Grand River as it curves through the city, is sometimes regarded as the city's most socio-economically diverse section. This side also contains Lansing's downtown area, though this neighborhood is often included as an area all its own. Outside downtown, this side is largely a collection of residential neighborhoods and is served by only one other commercial area along Saginaw Street. However, it also includes a small part of the Old Town Commercial Association.\nThe Northwestside, generally located north of the Grand River, with the city limits defining its north and western borders, is physically the smallest side of the city. This part of the city includes moderate-density residential areas and some green areas. North of Grand River Avenue, the main street of the side, lie warehouses and light industrial areas served by a major rail line that runs through Lansing. The most notable landmark of this side is Lansing's airport: Capital Region International Airport.\nThe Southside, usually described as the neighborhoods located south of the Grand and Red Cedar rivers and the I-496 freeway, is physically the largest and most populous side of the city. The area is largely residential in nature (south of Mount Hope Road near the northern edge) and is served by numerous commercial strips along Cedar Street, Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard, Pennsylvania Avenue, and Waverly Road, which run north\u2013south. The large Edgewood District is located in the southernmost part of the Southside and is sometimes referred to as South Lansing. Though it is the largest area of the city by both physical size and population, it has often been regarded by Southside citizens as Lansing's most overlooked and forgotten area, as most of Lansing's attention in recent decades has been put into the revitalization of the city's historic core located mostly on small parts of both the East and Westside.\nThe middle of the Southside\u2014South-Central Lansing\u2014contains the Old Everett Area. This location once contained the Everett School District and was annexed into the city in 1948.\nUnincorporated areas adjacent to Lansing include parts of Lansing Charter Township, such as the unincorporated community of Edgemont Park, as well as parts of Delta Charter Township, such as the unincorporated community of Waverly. Though they are not part of the City of Lansing, these unincorporated communities often use Lansing mailing addresses.\nClimate.\nLansing has a Midwestern humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb/Dfa\") that is influenced by the Great Lakes, and is part of USDA Hardiness zone 5b. Winters are cold with moderate to heavy snowfall, while summers are very warm and humid. The monthly daily average temperature in July is , while the same figure for January is ; the annual mean is . On average, temperatures reach or exceed on 8.8 days of the year and drop to or below on 10.5 nights. Precipitation is generally greatest during summer but still frequent and significant in winter. Snowfall, which normally occurs from November to April, averages per season, significantly less than areas to the west such as Grand Rapids as Lansing is relatively immune to lake-effect snows; seasonal snowfall has historically ranged from in 1863\u221264 to in 1880\u221281. The highest and lowest officially recorded temperatures were on July 6, 2012, and on February 2, 1868, with the last or colder reading occurred on February 27, 1994; the record low maximum is on January 22, 1883, while, conversely, the record high minimum is on August 1, 2006, and July 18, 1942. Freezing temperatures in June are exceedingly rare and have not occurred in July or August since the 19th century; on average, they arrive on October 4 and depart on May 7, allowing a growing season of 149 days. The average window for measurable snow (\u2265) is November 4 through April 6.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 114,297 people, 48,450 households, and 26,234 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 54,181 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 61.2% White (55.5% non-Hispanic White), 23.7% African American, 0.8% Native American, 3.7% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 4.3% from other races, and 6.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12.5% of the population. Foreign-born residents made up 8.3% of the population.\nThe median age in the city was 32.2 years. 24.2% of residents were under the age of 18; 12.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 30.2% were from 25 to 44; 23.8% were from 45 to 64; and 9.7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.4% male and 51.6% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 119,128 people, 49,505 households, and 28,366 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 53,159 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 65.28% White (61.4% non-Hispanic White), 21.91% African American, 0.80% Native American, 2.83% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 4.54% from other races, and 4.60% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.0% of the population. The city's foreign-born population stood at 5.9%.\nAs of 2000, the city's population rose by 32,293 (27%) to 151,421 during the day due to the influx of workers.\nThere were 49,505 households, out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.8% were married couples living together, 17.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.7% were non-families. 33.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.1% had someone living alone who was 65\u00a0 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.08.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 26.8% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 32.7% from 25 to 44, 19.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65\u00a0 years of age or older. The median age was 31\u00a0 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.9 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $34,833, and the median income for a family was $41,283. Males had a median income of $32,648 versus $27,051 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,924. About 13.2% of families and 16.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 9.0% of those age 65 or over.\nImmigration and refugee resettlement.\nThe Brookings Institution has ranked Greater Lansing among the top 10 \"medium-sized metropolitan areas\" in the United States for refugee resettlement, with 5,369 refugees resettled from 1983 to 2004. St. Vincent Catholic Charities and Lutheran Social Services handle the adult and unaccompanied minor resettlement processes, respectively, while other organizations, such as the Refugee Development Center, focus on providing educational and social support services to refugees in the Lansing area. Nearby Michigan State University provides a source of volunteers for many of these programs.\nAs of 2005[ [update]], the Lansing area has about 2,000 Arab Americans, mostly second-generation Christian Lebanese Americans as well as some Palestinian Americans.\nThe city is also home to a large number of temporary foreign residents enrolled as international students at Lansing Community College and nearby Michigan State University, with the city's visitors bureau specifically promoting Mandarin-language video tours of Lansing, touting the \"more than 6,000\" Chinese students enrolled at MSU. The Lansing School District offers language immersion programs for its students in both Spanish and Chinese.\nEconomy.\nThe Lansing metropolitan area's major industries are government, education, insurance, healthcare, and automobile manufacturing. Being the state capital, many state government workers reside in the area.\nMichigan State University, Thomas M. Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College are significant employers in the region.\nGeneral Motors has offices and a hi-tech manufacturing facility in Lansing and several manufacturing facilities immediately outside the city, as well, in nearby Lansing and Delta townships. The Lansing area is headquarters to four major national insurance companies: Auto-Owners Insurance Company, Jackson National Life, the Accident Fund, and Michigan Millers Insurance Company. Other insurers based in Lansing include Farm Bureau Insurance of Michigan.\nLocally owned and operated convenience store chain Quality Dairy is a significant presence in the Lansing market. The first Quality Dairy Store opened in 1936 and as of 2023 there are 26 retail locations in the Mid-Michigan area. Quality Dairy Company's headquarters is located near REO Town in Lansing and operates its Dairy Plant and Bakery Plant from central Lansing as well.\nThe recent decline of the auto industry in the region has increased the region's awareness of the importance of a strategy to foster the high-technology sector.\nEarly availability of high-speed Internet in 1996, as well as the MSU, Cooley Law School, and Lansing Community College student body population, fostered an intellectual environment for information technology companies to incubate. Lansing has a number of technology companies in the fields of information technology and biotechnology.\nHealthcare.\nUniversity of Michigan Health - Sparrow Lansing is a 740-bed hospital affiliated with Michigan State University and its College of Human Medicine and College of Osteopathic Medicine. It offers a Level I Trauma Center and its own helicopter service.\nMcLaren\u2013Greater Lansing Hospital enjoys a special affiliation in radiation oncology with the University of Michigan and Michigan State University; McLaren\u2013Greater Lansing is part of the Great Lakes Cancer Institute (GLCI).\nUrban renewal and downtown redevelopment.\nSeveral urban renewal projects by private developers are adding higher end apartments and condominiums to the Lansing market. The Arbaugh, a former department store across from Cooley Law School, was converted into apartments in 2005. Motor Wheel Lofts, a former industrial site, was converted into loft-style living spaces in mid-2006. A combination retail and residential complex immediately south of Cooley Law School Stadium (formerly \"Oldsmobile Park\") called \"The Stadium District\", was completed in 2007. The Stadium District was redeveloped using a grant from the Michigan State Housing Development Authority through the Cool Cities Initiative.\nIn May 2006 the historically significant Mutual Building located on Capitol Avenue was purchased by The Christman Company to be renovated back to its original grandeur and used as the company's headquarters. Additional downtown developments include the renovation of the historic Hollister Building and the expansion of the former Abrams Aerial Building. As of August 2008, an 18-story condominium high-rise called Capitol Club Tower was in the design phase with the adjacent parking structure having been approved by city council and purchased by the developer. The city market, in existence since 1909, was approved to be sold for a multi-building mixed-use development called MarketPlace, right next to the current market on the adjacent riverfront. The MarketPlace project was redeveloped along with BallPark North, another mixed-use development that will be immediately north of Oldsmobile Stadium. A new city market was built north of the Lansing Center, but closed in 2019. Across the river, the Accident Fund Insurance Company renovated the former (art deco) Ottawa Street Powerplant into their new headquarters. In addition to the renovation, Accident Fund Insurance Company built a modern addition to the north of the historic portion that is connected by an atrium for more office space, as well as a parking structure. In 2009, the restaurant Troppo began construction on a new 2-story building that will have an open-air patio on the roof facing the Capitol building. Developer Eyde Co. announced plans on April 6, 2010, to renovate the historical and prominent Knapp's building in downtown Lansing for first floor retail, office space and apartments/condos on the top floor (5th) in a $22\u201324 million project.\nRetail.\nThe Lansing area has two major malls: Lansing Mall and Meridian Mall. Other major retail centers include Eastwood Towne Center and Frandor Shopping Center.\nArts and culture.\nFarmers' markets.\nLansing has several farmers' markets throughout the city in the summer months. These markets include the Allen Street Farmer's Market on the city's eastside, the Westside Farmers' Market, the Old Town Farmer's Market, and the South Lansing Farmer's Market.\nFestivals.\nThe African American Parade occurs in Lansing's Westside as part of the annual Juneteenth Celebration Each year in August, the Michigan Pride festival includes an LGBT pride parade from Riverfront Park to the capitol. The annual Silver Bells in the City Electric Light Parade proceeds through the streets of downtown Lansing every November, the Friday before Thanksgiving. It is followed by the lighting of Michigan's official Christmas tree in front of the State Capitol and a firework show (weather permitting) over the State Capitol.\nMusic.\nLansing has a rich musical heritage, highlighted by the Lansing Symphony Orchestra, which has entertained the region since 1929. The city hosts numerous music festivals throughout the year, including the Lansing JazzFest and Old Town BluesFest, which attract leading musicians and large crowds. The Common Ground Music Festival is held over a week every July at the Adado Riverfront Park in downtown Lansing, pulling in crowds over 90,000 for the week.\nLibraries.\nThe Library of Michigan and Historical Center is a state library and research center. The library is one of the top five genealogical research facilities in the United States. The Capital Area District Library has 13 branches within Ingham County, some of these include the Main Library downtown, the Foster Library on the east side, and the South Lansing Library on the south side.\nMuseums.\nLansing is home to a number of small, specialized museums:\nTheatre.\nThe Riverwalk Theatre, (formerly the Okemos Barn Theatre), the Lansing Civic Players, and the now defunct BoarsHead Theater are or were all located in downtown. Peppermint Creek Theatre Company is a well established \"new\" theater company. Happendance, Michigan's longest-running professional modern dance company, has been based in Greater Lansing since 1976. The Greater Lansing Ballet Company is a ballet and dance company. The Creole Gallery brings in various musicians and hosts the Icarus Falling Theater group.\nPotter Park Zoo.\nThe historic Potter Park Zoo, located along the Red Cedar River in Lansing, is a 102-acre park that has more than 160 species of animals. The park holds numerous programs and events for children and families to enjoy. With annual attendance increasing every year since 2006 (110,167 in 2006, 137,237 in 2008, and 167,000 in 2009) there are $667,100 in capital improvements planned for 2009 including a giant walk-in aviary and a new female tiger. In 2009 the zoo began a $1.4 million renovation to its rhinoceros exhibit. This is in addition to $1.3 million spent on capital improvements in 2008. In 2011 the Black Rhino exhibit opened; and three tiger cubs were born. In 2016 a 3-acre moose exhibit opened in the park.\nOther area destinations.\nIn October 2009 the Wharton Center for Performing Arts completed a , $18.5 million expansion and renovation, having already spent over $1.3 million in 2008. Many Broadway shows come to The Wharton Center before traveling to theaters in larger places such as Chicago. The Kresge Art Museum, the MSU Museum, and the Abrams Planetarium are highly acclaimed cultural destinations located on the campus of Michigan State University in East Lansing. In June 2007 MSU announced the plans to build a new art museum after a $26 million gift from Eli and Edythe Broad. Internationally known Pritzker Prize winning architect Zaha Hadid of London won the design competition for the East Lansing museum that was completed in November 2012.\nSports.\nThe Lansing Lugnuts are a Midwest League, Minor League Baseball team, currently affiliated with the Athletics. The team plays its home games at Jackson Field, which was built at a cost of $12.7\u00a0million and opened in 1996 in downtown Lansing. It was partially renovated in 2006. Jackson Field has a seating capacity of 11,215 fans, and was built to accommodate additional expansion. Previously known as \"Oldsmobile Park\", the facility was renamed \"Thomas M. Cooley Law School Stadium\" in April 2010, in reference to the park's new sponsor. It was renamed again to \"Jackson Field\" after a change in sponsorship to Jackson National Life.\nMichigan State University, located in East Lansing, is the largest university in the State of Michigan. MSU sponsors both men's and women's sports, usually competing as a member of the Big Ten Conference. The Spartans have won National Titles in Men's Basketball, Football, Men's Boxing, Men's Cross Country, Men's Gymnastics, Men's Ice Hockey, Men's Soccer, and Men's Wrestling. Lansing Community College also sponsors many sports, competing as members of the Michigan Community College Athletic Association. The Stars have won NJCAA titles in the following sports: Women's Softball, Men's Basketball, Women's Basketball, Men's Cross Country, Women's Cross Country, Women's Marathon and Men's Marathon.\nThe Lansing area is also known for its many golf courses, with two courses owned by Michigan State University, four municipal courses, and many additional public and private courses in the area. The former Walnut Hills Country Club in nearby East Lansing formerly hosted the LPGA's Oldsmobile Classic from 1992 to 2000. The Michigan PGA recently relocated from the Detroit area to Bath, Michigan, which is on the northern edge of Lansing.\nOther past sports teams include the Lansing Lancers (International Hockey League \u2013 1974\u20131975), Lansing United (USL PDL \u2013 2014\u20132018), Lansing Ignite (USL League One \u2013 2018\u20132019) and Lansing Sting (American Basketball Association \u2013 2013\u20132014).\nGovernment.\nLansing is administered under a mayor\u2013council government, more specifically a strong mayor form in which the mayor is the city's chief executive officer. The mayor is obligated to appoint department heads and draft and administer a city budget among other responsibilities. The mayor may also veto legislation from council, though the veto can be overridden by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the council. The mayor and city clerk are elected at-large every four years.\nThe city council is the legislative body of the city and consists of eight members. Four members are elected from four single-member districts using the first-past-the-post method in the city's wards, and four members are elected at-large using the block voting method. Members of the council serve staggered four-year terms. Half the council is up for election every two years, including two ward seats and two at-large seats. At its first meeting of the year, the council chooses from amongst its members a president and vice president. The president is the council's presiding officer, and also chooses the chairs of council committees. In the absence of the president and vice president, the city clerk chairs the council.\nThe city largely supports the Democratic Party. It has not had a Republican mayor in office since 1993 when then-Democratic state representative David Hollister defeated incumbent Mayor Jim Crawford, who had formerly served as a Republican member on the Ingham County Board of Commissioners. However, all city elections are held on an officially nonpartisan basis.\nSince given the ability to do so by the state in 1964, the city has levied an income tax of 1 percent on residents. 0.5 percent on non-residents, and 1.0 percent on corporations.\nState and federal representation.\nSince the 2022 redistricting cycle, Lansing is part of Michigan's 7th congressional district, which is represented by Republican Tom Barrett. At the state level, Lansing is located in Michigan's 21st Senate district, represented by Democrat Sarah Anthony, and Michigan's 28th Senate district, represented by Democrat Sam Singh. The city lies in the 73rd, 74th, 75th, 76th and 77th districts of the Michigan State House of Representatives, represented by state representatives Julie Brixie, Kara Hope, Penelope Tsernoglou, Angela Witwer and Emily Dievendorf, all Democrats.\nThough Lansing is not the designated county seat, some Ingham County offices are located in downtown Lansing, including a branch office of the county clerk, the county personnel office, and some courtrooms.\nEducation.\nMichigan State University is known as \"the pioneer land grant college\" and located in neighboring East Lansing. MSU has one of the largest land campuses in the United States and is home to several nationally and internationally recognized academic and research-oriented programs. Michigan State offers over 200 programs of study and is home to fourteen different degree-granting schools and colleges including two medical schools, a veterinary school, a law school, and numerous PhD programs.\nLansing Community College offers more than 500 areas of study to over 18,000 students at its main facilities in Lansing, and another 5,000 students at twenty-nine extension centers and a site in Otsu, Japan. The University Center stands on the former site of \"Old Central\", Lansing's first public high school, which was established in 1875 as Lansing High School. Other institutions of higher education include Western Michigan University (branch campus in Delta Township), Davenport University in Downtown Lansing, Central Michigan University (branch campus), and Great Lakes Christian College (campus in Delta Township).\nWithin Ingham County, most of Lansing is in Lansing School District. Some portions are in East Lansing School District, Holt Public Schools, Mason Public Schools, Okemos Public Schools, and Waverly Community Schools. Within Clinton County, school districts which include parts of Lansing are Lansing School District and DeWitt Public Schools. In Eaton County, school districts serving parts of Lansing include Lansing School District, Holt Public Schools, and Grand Ledge Public Schools.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nCable slots listed reflect the Comcast cable system in Lansing.\nRadio.\nNote: If the station has no city listed before the format, it is licensed to Lansing.\nRadio stations from Ann Arbor, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Saginaw, and Flint can also be heard in the Lansing area.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nScheduled commercial airline service is offered from Capital Region International Airport (formerly known as \"Capital City Airport\"). Delta Air Lines maintains a route to Detroit, while American Airlines offers non-stop flights to both Chicago O'Hare and Washington, D.C. Apple Vacations provides seasonal flights to Canc\u00fan, Mexico; Montego Bay, Jamaica; and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. UPS has a freight hub at Capital Region International Airport making up part of the 42 million pounds of annual cargo moving through the airport. In 2008 the airport received a port of entry designation \u2013 known as \"Port Lansing\" \u2013 and now has a permanent customs facility, thus changing its name to reflect the port of entry status. The same year a extension to the largest of the three runways \u2013 now \u2013 was completed to allow for larger aircraft to use the airport.\nRailways.\nAmtrak provides intercity passenger rail service at a stop in nearby East Lansing, on the \"Blue Water\" line from Chicago to Port Huron. Three freight railroads serve Lansing, including Canadian National Railway, CSX Transportation, and the Jackson &amp; Lansing Railroad.\nPublic transportation.\nCapital Area Transportation Authority (CATA) provides public transit bus service to the Lansing-East Lansing Metropolitan area on 33 routes. CATA boasts the second highest ridership in Michigan at in 2024.23 Greyhound Lines provides intercity bus service. CATA and Greyhound are both located in the CATA Transportation Center in downtown Lansing. Several taxicab companies serve the area. The Michigan Flyer provides bus service between Lansing and Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport 12 times daily, with a stop in Ann Arbor along the way.\nBicycling.\nThe , non-motorized Lansing River Trail runs along the Grand River and the Red Cedar River. It extends as far east as Michigan State University, passing Potter Park Zoo, the Capitol Loop, and several other destinations of interest, and runs as far west as Moores Park. The trail can be reached using many dedicated access points, including eight with parking lots nearby. The trail's breadth is extended from time to time. Currently, the trailheads are: North \u2013 Dietrich Park; East \u2013 Kircher Park; South \u2013 Maguire Park; West \u2013 Moores Park. All segments are hard-surfaced. The River Trail connects to other pathways/trails in the Lansing-metro area: East \u2013 Michigan State University path system; South \u2013 Sycamore Trail. Since the trail follows a river, most street crossings use platforms under existing street bridges to provide an uncommon amount of grade separation.\nUtilities.\nWater supply, power and steam are municipally owned utilities which are provided by Lansing Board of Water &amp; Light. In 2008 the Lansing BWL constructed Michigan's largest solar array towards the goal of increasing renewable energy in the energy grid. Natural gas is provided by Consumers Energy.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nSister cities.\nLansing's sister cities are:\nLansing was a sister city of Kubyashi District in Saint Petersburg, Russia. The agreement began in 1992 and ended in practice when a change to the political structure of Saint Petersburg cancelled the district. The relations were officially severed by Lansing in 2013 as a protest of the laws against LGBT rights in Russia.\nFriendship cities.\nLansing's friendship cities are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18539", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18539", "title": "Leukemia", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLeukemia (also spelled leukaemia; pronounced ) is a group of blood cancers that usually begin in the bone marrow and produce high numbers of abnormal blood cells. These blood cells are not fully developed and are called \"blasts\" or \"leukemia cells\". Symptoms may include bleeding and bruising, bone pain, fatigue, fever, and an increased risk of infections. These symptoms occur due to a lack of normal blood cells. Diagnosis is typically made by blood tests or bone marrow biopsy.\nThe exact cause of leukemia is unknown. A combination of genetic factors and environmental (non-inherited) factors are believed to play a role. Risk factors include smoking, ionizing radiation, petrochemicals (such as benzene), prior chemotherapy, and Down syndrome. People with a family history of leukemia are also at higher risk. There are four main types of leukemia\u2014acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)\u2014and a number of less common types. Leukemias and lymphomas both belong to a broader group of tumors that affect the blood, bone marrow, and lymphoid system, known as tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues.\nTreatment may involve some combination of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, targeted therapy, and bone marrow transplant, with supportive and palliative care provided as needed. Certain types of leukemia may be managed with watchful waiting. The success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. Five-year survival rate was 67% in the United States in the period from 2014 to 2020. In children under 15 in first-world countries, the five-year survival rate is greater than 60% or even 90%, depending on the type of leukemia. For infants (those diagnosed under the age of 1), the survival rate is around 40%. In children who are cancer-free five years after diagnosis of acute leukemia, the cancer is unlikely to return.\nIn 2015, leukemia was present in 2.3 million people worldwide and caused 353,500 deaths. In 2012, it had newly developed in 352,000 people. It is the most common type of cancer in children, with three-quarters of leukemia cases in children being the acute lymphoblastic type. However, over 90% of all leukemias are diagnosed in adults, CLL and AML being most common. It occurs more commonly in the developed world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nClassification.\nGeneral classification.\nClinically and pathologically, leukemia is subdivided into a variety of large groups. The first division is between its \"acute\" and \"chronic\" forms:\nAdditionally, the diseases are subdivided according to which kind of blood cell is affected. This divides leukemias into lymphoblastic or \"lymphocytic leukemias\" and myeloid or \"myelogenous leukemias\":\nCombining these two classifications provides a total of four main categories. Within each of these main categories, there are typically several subcategories. Finally, some rarer types are usually considered to be outside of this classification scheme.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most common symptoms in children are easy bruising, pale skin, fever, and an enlarged spleen or liver.\nDamage to the bone marrow, by way of displacing the normal bone marrow cells with higher numbers of immature white blood cells, results in a lack of blood platelets, which are important in the blood clotting process. This means people with leukemia may easily become bruised, bleed excessively, or develop pinprick bleeds (petechiae).\nWhite blood cells, which are involved in fighting pathogens, may be suppressed or dysfunctional. This could cause the person's immune system to be unable to fight off a simple infection or to start attacking other body cells. Because leukemia prevents the immune system from working normally, some people experience frequent infection, ranging from infected tonsils, sores in the mouth, or diarrhea to life-threatening pneumonia or opportunistic infections.\nFinally, the red blood cell deficiency leads to anemia, which may cause dyspnea and pallor.\nSome people experience other symptoms, such as fevers, chills, night sweats, weakness in the limbs, feeling fatigued and other common flu-like symptoms. Some people experience nausea or a feeling of fullness due to an enlarged liver and spleen; this can result in unintentional weight loss. Blasts affected by the disease may come together and become swollen in the liver or in the lymph nodes causing pain and leading to nausea.\nIf the leukemic cells invade the central nervous system, then neurological symptoms (notably headaches) can occur. Uncommon neurological symptoms like migraines, seizures, or coma can occur as a result of brain stem pressure. All symptoms associated with leukemia can be attributed to other diseases. Consequently, leukemia is always diagnosed through medical tests.\nThe word \"leukemia\", which means 'white blood', is derived from the characteristic high white blood cell count that presents in most affected people before treatment. The high number of white blood cells is apparent when a blood sample is viewed under a microscope, with the extra white blood cells frequently being immature or dysfunctional. The excessive number of cells can also interfere with the level of other cells, causing further harmful imbalance in the blood count.\nSome people diagnosed with leukemia do not have high white blood cell counts visible during a regular blood count. This less-common condition is called \"aleukemia\". The bone marrow still contains cancerous white blood cells that disrupt the normal production of blood cells, but they remain in the marrow instead of entering the bloodstream, where they would be visible in a blood test. For a person with aleukemia, the white blood cell counts in the bloodstream can be normal or low. Aleukemia can occur in any of the four major types of leukemia, and is particularly common in hairy cell leukemia.\nCauses.\nStudies in 2009 and 2010 have shown a positive correlation between exposure to formaldehyde and the development of leukemia, particularly myeloid leukemia. The different leukemias likely have different causes.\nLeukemia, like other cancers, results from mutations in the DNA. Certain mutations can trigger leukemia by activating oncogenes or deactivating tumor suppressor genes, and thereby disrupting the regulation of cell death, differentiation or division. These mutations may occur spontaneously or as a result of exposure to radiation or carcinogenic substances.\nAmong adults, the known causes are natural and artificial ionizing radiation and petrochemicals, notably benzene and alkylating chemotherapy agents for previous malignancies. Use of tobacco is associated with a small increase in the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia in adults. Cohort and case-control studies have linked exposure to some petrochemicals and hair dyes to the development of some forms of leukemia. Diet has very limited or no effect, although eating more vegetables may confer a small protective benefit.\nViruses have also been linked to some forms of leukemia. For example, human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) causes adult T-cell leukemia.\nA few cases of maternal-fetal transmission (a baby acquires leukemia because its mother had leukemia during the pregnancy) have been reported. Children born to mothers who use fertility drugs to induce ovulation are more than twice as likely to develop leukemia during their childhoods than other children.\nIn a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of any type of leukemia in neonates using phototherapy, typically to treat neonatal jaundice, a statistically significant association was detected between using phototherapy and myeloid leukemia. However, it is still questionable whether phototherapy is genuinely the cause of cancer or simply a result of the same underlying factors that gave rise to cancer.\nRadiation.\nLarge doses of Sr-90 (called a bone seeking radioisotope) from nuclear reactor accidents, increases the risk of bone cancer and leukemia in animals and is presumed to do so in people.\nGenetic conditions.\nSome people have a genetic predisposition towards developing leukemia. This predisposition is demonstrated by family histories and twin studies. The affected people may have a single gene or multiple genes in common. In some cases, families tend to develop the same kinds of leukemia as other members; in other families, affected people may develop different forms of leukemia or related blood cancers.\nIn addition to these genetic issues, people with chromosomal abnormalities or certain other genetic conditions have a greater risk of leukemia. For example, people with Down syndrome have a significantly increased risk of developing forms of acute leukemia (especially acute myeloid leukemia), and Fanconi anemia is a risk factor for developing acute myeloid leukemia. Mutation in SPRED1 gene has been associated with a predisposition to childhood leukemia.\nInherited bone marrow failure syndromes represent a kind of premature aging of the bone marrow. In people with these syndromes and in older adults, mutations associated with clonal hematopoiesis may arise as an adaptive response to a progressively deteriorating hematopoietic niche, i.e., a depleting pool of Hematopoietic stem cells. The mutated stem cells then acquire a self-renewal advantage.\nChronic myelogenous leukemia is associated with a genetic abnormality called the Philadelphia translocation; 95% of people with CML carry the Philadelphia mutation, although this is not exclusive to CML and can be observed in people with other types of leukemia.\nNon-ionizing radiation.\nWhether or not non-ionizing radiation causes leukemia has been studied for several decades. The International Agency for Research on Cancer expert working group undertook a detailed review of all data on static and extremely low frequency electromagnetic energy, which occurs naturally and in association with the generation, transmission, and use of electrical power. They concluded that there is limited evidence that high levels of ELF magnetic (but not electric) fields might cause some cases of childhood leukemia. No evidence for a relationship to leukemia or another form of malignancy in adults has been demonstrated. Since exposure to such levels of ELFs is relatively uncommon, the World Health Organization concludes that ELF exposure, if later proven to be causative, would account for just 100 to 2400 cases worldwide each year, representing 0.2 to 4.9% of the total incidence of childhood leukemia for that year (about 0.03 to 0.9% of all leukemias).\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis is usually based on repeated complete blood counts and a bone marrow examination following observations of the symptoms. Sometimes, blood tests may not show that a person has leukemia, especially in the early stages of the disease or during remission. A lymph node biopsy can be performed to diagnose certain types of leukemia in certain situations.\nFollowing diagnosis, blood chemistry tests can be used to determine the degree of liver and kidney damage or the effects of chemotherapy on the person. When concerns arise about other damages due to leukemia, doctors may use an X-ray, MRI, or ultrasound. These can potentially show leukemia's effects on such body parts as bones (X-ray), the brain (MRI), or the kidneys, spleen, and liver (ultrasound). CT scans can be used to check lymph nodes in the chest, though this is uncommon.\nDespite the use of these methods to diagnose whether or not a person has leukemia, many people have not been diagnosed because many of the symptoms are vague, non-specific, and can refer to other diseases. For this reason, the American Cancer Society estimates that at least one-fifth of the people with leukemia have not yet been diagnosed.\nTreatment.\nMost forms of leukemia are treated with pharmaceutical medication, typically combined into a multi-drug chemotherapy regimen. Some are also treated with radiation therapy. In some cases, a bone marrow transplant is effective.\nAcute lymphoblastic.\nManagement of ALL is directed towards control of bone marrow and systemic (whole-body) disease. Additionally, treatment must prevent leukemic cells from spreading to other sites, particularly the central nervous system (CNS); periodic lumbar punctures are used for diagnostic purposes and to administer intrathecal prophylactic methotrexate. In general, ALL treatment is divided into several phases:\nChronic lymphocytic.\nDecision to treat.\nHematologists base CLL treatment on both the stage and symptoms of the individual person. A large group of people with CLL have low-grade disease, which does not benefit from treatment. Individuals with CLL-related complications or more advanced disease often benefit from treatment. In general, the indications for treatment are:\nTreatment approach.\nMost CLL cases are incurable by present treatments, so treatment is directed towards suppressing the disease for many years, rather than curing it. The primary chemotherapeutic plan is combination chemotherapy with chlorambucil or cyclophosphamide, plus a corticosteroid such as prednisone or prednisolone. The use of a corticosteroid has the additional benefit of suppressing some related autoimmune diseases, such as immunohemolytic anemia or immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In resistant cases, single-agent treatments with nucleoside drugs such as fludarabine, pentostatin, or cladribine may be successful. Younger and healthier people may choose allogeneic or autologous bone marrow transplantation in the hope of a permanent cure.\nAcute myelogenous.\nMany different anti-cancer drugs are effective for the treatment of AML. Treatments vary somewhat according to the age of the person and according to the specific subtype of AML. Overall, the strategy is to control bone marrow and systemic (whole-body) disease, while offering specific treatment for the central nervous system (CNS), if involved.\nIn general, most oncologists rely on combinations of drugs for the initial, \"induction phase\" of chemotherapy. Such combination chemotherapy usually offers the benefits of early remission and a lower risk of disease resistance. \"Consolidation\" and \"maintenance\" treatments are intended to prevent disease recurrence. Consolidation treatment often entails a repetition of induction chemotherapy or the intensification of chemotherapy with additional drugs. By contrast, maintenance treatment involves drug doses that are lower than those administered during the induction phase.\nChronic myelogenous.\nThere are many possible treatments for CML, but the standard of care for newly diagnosed people is imatinib (Gleevec) therapy. Compared to most anti-cancer drugs, it has relatively few side effects and can be taken orally at home. With this drug, more than 90% of people will be able to keep the disease in check for at least five years, so that CML becomes a chronic, manageable condition.\nIn a more advanced, uncontrolled state, when the person cannot tolerate imatinib, or if the person wishes to attempt a permanent cure, then an allogeneic bone marrow transplantation may be performed. This procedure involves high-dose chemotherapy and radiation followed by infusion of bone marrow from a compatible donor. Approximately 30% of people die from this procedure.\nHairy cell.\nDecision to treat\nPeople with hairy cell leukemia who are symptom-free typically do not receive immediate treatment. Treatment is generally considered necessary when the person shows signs and symptoms such as low blood cell counts (e.g., infection-fighting neutrophil count below 1.0\u00a0K/\u03bcL), frequent infections, unexplained bruises, anemia, or fatigue that is significant enough to disrupt the person's everyday life.\nTypical treatment approach\nPeople who need treatment usually receive either one week of cladribine, given daily by intravenous infusion or a simple injection under the skin, or six months of pentostatin, given every four weeks by intravenous infusion. In most cases, one round of treatment will produce a prolonged remission.\nOther treatments include rituximab infusion or self-injection with Interferon-alpha. In limited cases, the person may benefit from \"splenectomy\" (removal of the spleen). These treatments are not typically given as the first treatment because their success rates are lower than cladribine or pentostatin.\nT-cell prolymphocytic.\nMost people with T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia, a rare and aggressive leukemia with a median survival of less than one year, require immediate treatment.\nT-cell prolymphocytic leukemia is difficult to treat, and it does not respond to most available chemotherapeutic drugs. Many different treatments have been attempted, with limited success in certain people: purine analogues (pentostatin, fludarabine, cladribine), chlorambucil, and various forms of combination chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone CHOP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone [COP], vincristine, doxorubicin, prednisone, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, bleomycin VAPEC-B). Alemtuzumab (Campath), a monoclonal antibody that attacks white blood cells, has been used in treatment with greater success than previous options.\nSome people who successfully respond to treatment also undergo stem cell transplantation to consolidate the response.\nJuvenile myelomonocytic.\nTreatment for juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia can include splenectomy, chemotherapy, and bone marrow transplantation.\nPrognosis.\nThe success of treatment depends on the type of leukemia and the age of the person. Outcomes have improved in the developed world. The average five-year survival rate is 65% in the United States. In children under 15, the five-year survival rate is greater (60 to 85%), depending on the type of leukemia. In children with acute leukemia who are cancer-free after five years, the cancer is unlikely to return.\nOutcomes depend on whether it is acute or chronic, the specific abnormal white blood cell type, the presence and severity of anemia or thrombocytopenia, the degree of tissue abnormality, the presence of metastasis and lymph node and bone marrow infiltration, the availability of therapies and the skills of the health care team. Treatment outcomes may be better when people are treated at larger centers with greater experience.\nEpidemiology.\nIn 2010, globally, approximately 281,500 people died of leukemia. In 2000, approximately 256,000 children and adults around the world developed a form of leukemia, and 209,000 died from it. This represents about 3% of the almost seven million deaths due to cancer that year, and about 0.35% of all deaths from any cause. Of the sixteen separate sites the body compared, leukemia was the 12th most common class of neoplastic disease and the 11th most common cause of cancer-related death. Leukemia occurs more commonly in the developed world.\nUnited States.\nAbout 245,000 people in the United States are affected with some form of leukemia, including those that have achieved remission or cure. Rates from 1975 to 2011 have increased by 0.7% per year among children. Approximately 44,270 new cases of leukemia were diagnosed in the year 2008 in the US. This represents 2.9% of all cancers (excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers) in the United States, and 30.4% of all blood cancers.\nAmong children with some form of cancer, about a third have a type of leukemia, most commonly acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A type of leukemia is the second most common form of cancer in infants (under the age of 12 months) and the most common form of cancer in older children. Boys are somewhat more likely to develop leukemia than girls, and white American children are almost twice as likely to develop leukemia than black American children. Only about 3% cancer diagnoses among adults are for leukemias, but because cancer is much more common among adults, more than 90% of all leukemias are diagnosed in adults.\nRace is a risk factor in the United States. Hispanics, especially those under the age of 20, are at the highest risk for leukemia, while whites, Native Americans, Asian Americans, and Alaska Natives are at higher risk than African Americans.\nMore men than women are diagnosed with leukemia and die from the disease. Around 30 percent more men than women have leukemia.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, leukemia is the eleventh most common cancer. In 2014\u20132018, Australians diagnosed with leukemia had a 64% chance (65% for males and 64% for females) of surviving for five years compared to the rest of the Australian population\u2013there was a 21% increase in survival rates between 1989 and 1993.\nUK.\nOverall, leukemia is the eleventh most common cancer in the UK (around 8,600 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011), and it is the ninth most common cause of cancer death (around 4,800 people died in 2012).\nHistory.\nLeukemia was first described by anatomist and surgeon Alfred-Armand-Louis-Marie Velpeau in 1827. A more complete description was given by pathologist Rudolf Virchow in 1845. Around ten years after Virchow's findings, pathologist Franz Ernst Christian Neumann found that the bone marrow of a deceased person with leukemia was colored \"dirty green-yellow\" as opposed to the normal red. This finding allowed Neumann to conclude that a bone marrow problem was responsible for the abnormal blood of people with leukemia.\nBy 1900, leukemia was viewed as a family of diseases as opposed to a single disease. By 1947, Boston pathologist Sidney Farber believed from past experiments that aminopterin, a folic acid mimic, could potentially cure leukemia in children. The majority of the children with ALL who were tested showed signs of improvement in their bone marrow, but none of them were actually cured. Nevertheless, this result did lead to further experiments.\nIn 1962, researchers Emil J. Freireich Jr. and Emil Frei III used combination chemotherapy to attempt to cure leukemia. The tests were successful with some people surviving long after the tests.\nEtymology.\nObserving an abnormally large number of white blood cells in a blood sample from a person, Virchow called the condition \"Leuk\u00e4mie\" in German, which he formed from the two Greek words \"leukos\" (\u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2), meaning 'white', and \"haima\" (\u03b1\u1f37\u03bc\u03b1), meaning 'blood'. It was formerly also called \"leucemia\".\nSociety and culture.\nAccording to Susan Sontag, leukemia was often romanticized in 20th-century fiction, portrayed as a joy-ending, clean disease whose fair, innocent and gentle victims die young or at the wrong time. As such, it was the cultural successor to tuberculosis, which held this cultural position until it was discovered to be an infectious disease. The 1970 romance novel \"Love Story\" is an example of this romanticization of leukemia.\nIn the United States, around $5.4 billion is spent on treatment a year.\nResearch directions.\nSignificant research into the causes, prevalence, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of leukemia is being performed. Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time. Studies may focus on effective means of treatment, better ways of treating the disease, improving the quality of life for people, or appropriate care in remission or after cures.\nIn general, there are two types of leukemia research: clinical or translational research and basic research. Clinical/translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately applicable way, such as testing a new drug in people. By contrast, basic science research studies the disease process at a distance, such as seeing whether a suspected carcinogen can cause leukemic changes in isolated cells in the laboratory or how the DNA changes inside leukemia cells as the disease progresses. The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to people with the disease.\nTreatment through gene therapy is currently being pursued. One such approach used genetically modified T cells, known as chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T cells), to attack cancer cells. In 2011, a year after treatment, two of the three people with advanced chronic lymphocytic leukemia were reported to be cancer-free and in 2013, three of five subjects who had acute lymphocytic leukemia were reported to be in remission for five months to two years. Subsequent studies with a variety of CAR-T types continue to be promising. As of 2018, two CAR-T therapies have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. CAR-T treatment has significant side effects, and loss of the antigen targeted by the CAR-T cells is a common mechanism for relapse. The stem cells that cause different types of leukemia are also being researched.\nPregnancy.\nLeukemia is rarely associated with pregnancy, affecting only about 1 in 10,000 pregnant women. How it is handled depends primarily on the type of leukemia. Nearly all leukemias appearing in pregnant women are acute leukemias. Acute leukemias normally require prompt, aggressive treatment, despite significant risks of pregnancy loss and birth defects, especially if chemotherapy is given during the developmentally sensitive first trimester. Chronic myelogenous leukemia can be treated with relative safety at any time during pregnancy with Interferon-alpha hormones. Treatment for chronic lymphocytic leukemias, which are rare in pregnant women, can often be postponed until after the end of the pregnancy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18542", "revid": "45179772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18542", "title": "Length", "text": "Measure of distance in physical space\nLength is a measure of distance. In the International System of Quantities, length is a quantity with dimension distance. In most systems of measurement a base unit for length is chosen, from which all other units are derived. In the International System of Units (SI) system, the base unit for length is the metre.\nLength is commonly understood to mean the most extended dimension of a fixed object. However, this is not always the case and may depend on the position the object is in.\nVarious terms for the length of a fixed object are used, and these include height, which is vertical length or vertical extent, width, breadth, and depth. \"Height\" is used when there is a base from which vertical measurements can be taken. \"Width\" and \"breadth\" usually refer to a shorter dimension than \"length\". \"Depth\" is used for the measure of a third dimension.\nLength is the measure of one spatial dimension, whereas area is a measure of two dimensions (length squared) and volume is a measure of three dimensions (length cubed).\nHistory.\nMeasurement has been important ever since humans settled from nomadic lifestyles and started using building materials, occupying land and trading with neighbours. As trade between different places increased, the need for standard units of length increased. And later, as society has become more technologically oriented, much higher accuracy of measurement is required in an increasingly diverse set of fields, from micro-electronics to interplanetary ranging.\nUnder Einstein's special relativity, length can no longer be thought of as being constant in all reference frames. Thus a ruler that is one metre long in one frame of reference will not be one metre long in a reference frame that is moving relative to the first frame. This means the length of an object varies depending on the speed of the observer.\nUse in mathematics.\nEuclidean geometry.\nIn Euclidean geometry, length is measured along straight lines unless otherwise specified and refers to segments on them. Pythagoras's theorem relating the length of the sides of a right triangle is one of many applications in Euclidean geometry. Length may also be measured along other types of curves and is referred to as arclength.\nIn a triangle, the length of an altitude, a line segment drawn from a vertex perpendicular to the side not passing through the vertex (referred to as a base of the triangle), is called the height of the triangle.\nThe area of a rectangle is defined to be length\u2009\u00d7\u2009width of the rectangle. If a long thin rectangle is stood up on its short side then its area could also be described as its height\u2009\u00d7\u2009width.\nThe volume of a solid rectangular box (such as a plank of wood) is often described as length\u2009\u00d7\u2009height\u2009\u00d7\u2009depth.\nThe perimeter of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of its sides.\nThe circumference of a circular disk is the length of the boundary (a circle) of that disk.\nOther geometries.\nIn other geometries, length may be measured along possibly curved paths, called geodesics. The Riemannian geometry used in general relativity is an example of such a geometry. In spherical geometry, length is measured along the great circles on the sphere and the distance between two points on the sphere is the shorter of the two lengths on the great circle, which is determined by the plane through the two points and the center of the sphere.\nGraph theory.\nIn an unweighted graph, the length of a cycle, path, or walk is the number of edges it uses. In a weighted graph, it may instead be the sum of the weights of the edges that it uses.\nLength is used to define the shortest path, girth (shortest cycle length), and longest path between two vertices in a graph.\nMeasure theory.\nIn measure theory, length is most often generalised to general sets of formula_1 via the Lebesgue measure. In the one-dimensional case, the Lebesgue outer measure of a set is defined in terms of the lengths of open intervals. Concretely, the length of an open interval is first defined as\n formula_2 of a general set formula_3 may then be defined as\n formula_4\nComputer science.\nIn computer science, the length of a string is the number of characters that comprise the string. For example, the bit string formula_5 has length 11.\nMany programming languages have a string data type with a method for length to retrieve the length of a string.\nString s = \"Hello, world!\";\nint len = s.length(); // len = 13\nThe \"length\" of a sequential data structure, such as a dynamic array, can be described as the number of elements contained in it.\nimport java.util.List;\nint[] a = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};\nint len = a.length; // len = 5\nList&lt;Integer&gt; list = List.of(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8);\nint len = list.size(); // len = 8\nUnits.\nIn the physical sciences and engineering, when one speaks of units of length, the word length is synonymous with distance. There are several units that are used to measure length. Historically, units of length may have been derived from the lengths of human body parts, the distance travelled in a number of paces, the distance between landmarks or places on the Earth, or arbitrarily on the length of some common object.\nIn the International System of Units (SI), the base unit of length is the metre (symbol, m), now defined in terms of the speed of light (about 300 million metres per second). The millimetre (mm), centimetre (cm) and the kilometre (km), derived from the metre, are also commonly used units. In U.S. customary units, English or imperial system of units, commonly used units of length are the inch (in), the foot (ft), the yard (yd), and the mile (mi). A unit of length used in navigation is the nautical mile (nmi).\n1.609344 km = \n1 miles \nUnits used to denote distances in the vastness of space, as in astronomy, are much longer than those typically used on Earth (metre or kilometre) and include the astronomical unit (au), the light-year, and the parsec (pc).\nUnits used to denote sub-atomic distances, as in nuclear physics, are much smaller than the millimetre. Examples include the fermi (fm).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18543", "revid": "42601261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18543", "title": "Louis Ginzberg", "text": "Russian-born American Conservative rabbi and Talmudic scholar (1873-1953)\nLouis Ginzberg (, \"Levy Gintzburg\"; , \"Levy Ginzberg\"; November 28, 1873 \u2013 November 11, 1953) was a Russian-born American rabbi and Talmudic scholar of Lithuanian-Jewish descent, contributing editor to numerous articles of \"The Jewish Encyclopedia\" (1906), and leading figure in the Conservative movement of Judaism during the early 20th century.\nEarly life.\nGinzberg was born in Kaunas, Vilna Governorate (then called Kovno). His religious Lithuanian-Jewish family's piety and erudition were renowned, seeing that they traced their lineage back to the Gaon of Vilna's brother. Ginzberg received a traditional Jewish education, and later studied in German universities.\nCareer.\nGinzberg first arrived in the United States in 1899. He began teaching the Talmud at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTS) from its reorganization in 1902 until his death in 1953. During this time, he trained two generations of future Conservative rabbis, influencing almost every rabbi of the Conservative movement in a personal way. Ginzberg was highly praised by his colleagues; JTS leader Louis Finkelstein described him as a \"living symbol of love for Torah\". Leading Israeli Conservative posek David Golinkin has written prolifically on Ginzberg and published a collection of his responsa.\nGinzberg's knowledge made him the expert to defend Judaism both in national and international affairs. In 1906, he defended the Jewish community against anti-Semitic accusations that Jews ritually slaughtered Gentiles. In 1913, Louis Marshall requested that Ginzberg refute the Beilis blood libel charge in Kyiv. On account of his impressive scholarship in Jewish studies, Ginzberg was one of 66 scholars honored with a doctorate by Harvard University in celebration of its tercentenary in 1936.\nViews.\nIn his opening address to students, Ginzberg spoke of the need to keep Conservative Jewry under the rubric of \"Halakha\". \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The conception that in religious matters anyone, however ignorant, can judge for himself, is the direct denial of the old Jewish maxim, 'The ignorant cannot be pious' (Avot 2:5) ... The majority vote of a Board of Directors of a synagogue is, after all, a negligible quantity when it is in opposition to the vote of historical Judaism with its myriad of Saints and thousands of Sages ... The sorting, distributing, selecting, harmonizing and completing can only be done by experienced hands.\nGinzberg's initiative to make halakhic decisions with law committees of rabbis, rather than with laypeople, is the method the Conservative movement describes as its present approach to this day.\nIn 1918, at the Sixth Annual Convention, Ginzberg, as the acting president, declared that United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism stood for \"historical Judaism\" and thus elaborated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now let us understand the exact meaning of the expression historical Judaism ... Looking at Judaism from a historical point of view, we become convinced that there is no one aspect deep enough to exhaust the content of such a complex phenomenon as Judaism ... Accordingly, Torah-less Judaism ... would be an entirely new thing and not the continuation of something given ...\nGinzberg sought to emulate the Vilna Gaon's intermingling of \"academic knowledge\" in Torah studies under the label \"historical Judaism\"; for example, in his book \"Students, Scholars and Saints\", Ginzberg quotes the Vilna Gaon's instruction, \"Do not regard the views of the \"Shulchan Aruch\" as binding if you think that they are not in agreement with those of the Talmud.\"\nIn 1943, Ginzberg predicted that after the war, only two centers of Jewish culture would remain in the world: The United States and Palestine\u2014with the latter depending upon the former for support. He foresaw problems for the Jews remaining in Europe due to their being perceived as those who caused Germany to lose the war.\nResponsa.\nOne of Ginzberg's responsa concerns the use of wine in the Jewish community during the Prohibition Era. The Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ratified on January 16, 1920, declared that \"the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors within ... the United States ... for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.\" The subsequent Volstead Act defined \"intoxicating liquors\" and provided for several exceptions, one of which as for sacramental use. The Christian Church was able to successfully regulate the use of ceremonial wine. The clergy could easily monitor the nominal amount of sacramental wine that each worshipper drank, especially because it was usually drunk only in Church and only on Sundays (for the communion or Eucharist ceremony). This was not the case for the Jews, who needed a greater quantity of wine per person. Furthermore, the wine was drunk in the privacy of the home on Shabbat, Jewish holidays, weddings, and \"brit milah\" (circumcision) ceremonies. This alone would have made the regulation of ceremonial wine complicated. It was not difficult for crooks to rig illegal \"wine synagogues\" to trick the government to receive their wine which would then be bootlegged.\nWhile contemporary Orthodox Jewish authorities are generally permissive of grape juice as a wine substitute, Orthodox rabbis of the 1920s soundly rejected its use. The Reform movement in 1920 proclaimed that grape juice be used instead of wine to eliminate future complaints. Shortly afterwards, on January 24, 1922, the Conservative movement publicized the 71-page response written by Ginzberg tackling the \"halakhic\" aspects of drinking grape juice instead of wine in light of the historical circumstances. Besides Ginzberg's well-grounded decision to permit grape juice, he includes meta-\"halakhic\" reasoning:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The decision of the author of Magen Abraham that the commandment is honored best by the use of old wine is rejected. Even this authority would admit that it is better to pronounce the \"kiddush\" over new wine than to desecrate the Divine Name and to disgrace the Jewish people, and we well know the damage caused the Jewish people by the trafficking in sacramental wine.\nAt the time of Ginzburg's responsum, the Orthodox rabbinate had exclusive authority to sanction sacramental wine for Jews, and the responsum was thought by the Orthodox community to be tainted by self-interest.\nWorks.\nGinzberg was the author of a number of scholarly Jewish works, including a commentary on the Jerusalem Talmud and his six-volume (plus a one-volume index) \"The Legends of the Jews,\" (1909) which combined hundreds of legends and parables from a lifetime of midrash research.\n\"The Legends of the Jews\" is an original synthesis of a vast amount of \"aggadah\" from all of classical rabbinic literature, as well as apocryphal, pseudopigraphical and even early Christian literature, with legends ranging from the creation of the world and the fall of Adam, through a huge collection of legends on Moses, and ending with the story of Esther and the Jews in Persia.\nGinzberg also write \"Geonica\" (1909), an account of the Babylonian Geonim containing lengthy extracts from their responsa, as discovered in the form of fragments in the Cairo Genizah. He continued this work in the similar collection entitled \"Ginze Schechter\" (1929).\nGinzberg wrote 406 articles and several monograph-length entries for the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" (Levy 2002), some later collected in his \"Legend and Lore.\" He was also founder and president of the American Academy of Jewish Research.\nMany of his \"halakhic\" responsa are collected in \"The Responsa of Professor Louis Ginzberg,\" edited by David Golinkin.\nPersonal life.\nGinzberg had a long-term platonic relationship with Henrietta Szold, his editor at the Jewish Publication Society. She was in love with him but 13 years his senior.\nGinzberg visited Berlin in 1908 and became engaged to Adele Katzenstein while there. Katzenstein was about 22 at the time. They had two children: a son, Eli Ginzberg (1911\u20132002), who was a professor of economics at Columbia University, and a daughter, Sophie Ginzberg Gould (1914\u20131985).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18544", "revid": "7609619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18544", "title": "Left-arm unorthodox spin", "text": "Type of spin bowling in cricket\nLeft-arm unorthodox spin, also known as slow left-arm wrist spin, is a type of spin bowling in the sport of cricket. Left-arm unorthodox spin bowlers use wrist spin to spin the ball and make it deviate from left to right after pitching. The direction of turn is the same as that of a traditional right-handed off spin bowler, although the ball will usually turn more sharply due to the spin being imparted predominantly by the wrist.\nSome left-arm unorthodox bowlers also bowl what has historically been referred to as a chinaman. It is the left-arm equivalent of a googly or 'wrong'un' and turns from right to left on the pitch, going away from a right-handed batsman as if the bowler were an orthodox left-arm spinner.\nNotable left-arm unorthodox spin bowlers.\nThe first cricketer known to bowl the style of delivery was 19th-century South African bowler Charlie Llewellyn. Llewellyn toured North America with Bernard Bosanquet, the originator of the googly delivery, and it is likely that Llewellyn learned the googly-style of delivery from him, bowling it with his left-arm.\nAmong noted players who have bowled the delivery are Denis Compton, who originally bowled orthodox slow-left arm deliveries but developed left-arm wrist spin, taking most of his 622 first-class wickets using the delivery. Chuck Fleetwood-Smith used the delivery in the 1930s, including in his 10 Test matches. Although better known for fast bowling and orthodox slow left-arm, Garfield Sobers could also use it to good effect. In cricket's modern era, Australian Brad Hogg brought the delivery to wider notice and had one of the most well-disguised wrong'uns. Kuldeep Yadav, who debuted for India in March 2017, bowls left-arm wrist spin, and Paul Adams played 45 Test matches and 24 One-day internationals for South Africa between 1995 and 2004 using the delivery. Michael Bevan and Dave Mohammed are also considered to be \"among the better known\" bowlers to use the style.\nIn 2021 \"The Guardian\" claimed that Kuldeep, Tabraiz Shamsi of South Africa and the Afghan bowler Noor Ahmad were \"probably the foremost left-arm wrist-spinners in world cricket\", while in 2022 Michael Rippon was reported as \"the first specialist left-arm wristspinner\" to play for New Zealand. In the women's game, Kary Chan of Hong Kong uses left-arm wrist spin deliveries.\nInstances of left-arm unorthodox spinners taking a ten-wicket haul in a Test match are rare. Examples include Chuck Fleetwood-Smith against England in 1936\u201337, Michael Bevan against the West Indies in 1996\u201397, and Paul Adams against Bangladesh in 2002\u201303.\nIn 2007 CricInfo suggested that left-arm wrist-spin bowlers are uncommon because it is \"difficult to control left-arm wrist spin. And [...] the ball coming in to a right-hander is considered less dangerous than the one leaving him\". A left-arm wrist spin bowler's standard delivery will turn towards a right-handed batsman, as opposed to a right-arm leg spin bowler who will turn the ball away from them. In 2024 Cameron Ponsonby reiterated this view on The Final Word podcast, stating in jest of the success of Kuldeep Yadav,\n\"The hardest thing in the world, in this sport, is to bowl wrist spin. The reason why right arm leg spin works and is effective is because it spins the ball away from the bat. That's the positive. The negative side of that is you have less control. [...] What's bad about off spin? You spin the ball into the right-hander. What's good about off spin? You have control. Left arm wrist spin: what's good about it? Nothing, because you spin the ball into the right-hander without control.\"\nHistorical use of the term 'chinaman'.\nHistorically the term \"chinaman\" was sometimes used to describe the googly delivery or other unusual deliveries, whether bowled by right or left-arm bowlers. The left-arm wrist spinner's delivery that is the equivalent of the googly eventually became known as the \"chinaman\".\nThe origin of the term is unclear, although it is known to have been in use in Yorkshire during the 1920s and may have been first used in reference to Roy Kilner. It is possible that it is a guarded reference to Charlie Llewellyn, the first left-arm bowler to bowl the equivalent of the googly. It is first known to have been used in print in \"The Guardian\" in 1926 in reference to the possibility of Yorkshire bowler George Macaulay bowling a googly, but the term became more widely used after a Test match between England and West Indies at Old Trafford in 1933. Ellis Achong, a player of Chinese origin who bowled slow left-arm orthodox spin, had Walter Robins stumped off a surprise delivery that spun into the right-hander from outside the off stump. As he walked back to the pavilion, Robins reportedly said to the umpire, \"fancy being done by a bloody Chinaman!\", leading to the more widespread use of the term.\nIn 2017, Australian journalist Andrew Wu, who is of Chinese descent, raised concerns about the use of the term as \"racially offensive\", arguing the term itself \"has historically been used in a contemptuous manner to describe the Chinese\". \"Wisden\" formally changed their wording of the term to slow left-arm wrist-spin in the 2018 edition of the Almanack, describing chinaman as \"no longer appropriate\". CricInfo followed suit in 2021, noting that although some argued that its use in cricket \"was not meant to be derogatory\", that its continued use was inappropriate. Some writers continue to use the term.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18546", "revid": "461300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18546", "title": "Lists of newspapers", "text": "Below are lists of newspapers organized by continent.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "18549", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18549", "title": "Louis IX of France", "text": "King of France from 1226 to 1270; Catholic saint\nLouis IX (25 April 1214 \u2013 25 August 1270), also known as Saint Louis, was King of France from 1226 until his death in 1270. He is widely recognized as the most distinguished of the Direct Capetians. Following the death of his father, Louis VIII, he was crowned in Reims at the age of 12. His mother, Blanche of Castile, effectively ruled the kingdom as regent until he came of age, and continued to serve as his trusted adviser until her death. During his formative years, Blanche successfully confronted rebellious vassals and championed the Capetian cause in the Albigensian Crusade, which had been ongoing for the past two decades.\nAs an adult, Louis IX grappled with persistent conflicts involving some of the most influential nobles in his kingdom, including Hugh X of Lusignan and Peter I of Brittany. Concurrently, England's Henry III sought to reclaim the Angevin continental holdings, only to be decisively defeated at the Battle of Taillebourg. Louis expanded his territory by annexing several provinces, including parts of Aquitaine, Maine, and Provence. Keeping a promise he made while praying for recovery from a grave illness, Louis led the ill-fated Seventh and Eighth Crusades against the Muslim dynasties that controlled North Africa, Egypt, and the Holy Land. He was captured and ransomed during the Seventh Crusade, and later succumbed to dysentery during the Eighth Crusade. His son, Philip III, succeeded him.\nLouis instigated significant reforms in the French legal system, creating a royal justice mechanism that allowed petitioners to appeal judgments directly to the monarch. He abolished trials by ordeal, endeavored to terminate private wars, and incorporated the presumption of innocence into criminal proceedings. To implement his new legal framework, he established the offices of provosts and bailiffs. Louis IX's reign is often marked as an economic and political zenith for medieval France, and he held immense respect throughout Christendom. His reputation as a fair and judicious ruler led to his being solicited to mediate disputes beyond his own kingdom. Louis IX expanded upon the work of his predecessors, especially his grandfather Philip II of France and reformed the administrative institutions of the French crown. He re-introduced, and expanded the scope of, the \"enqu\u00eates\" commissioned to investigate governmental abuses and provide monetary restitutions for the crown.\nLouis's admirers through the centuries have celebrated him as the quintessential Christian monarch. His skill as a knight and engaging manner with the public contributed to his popularity. Saint Louis was extremely pious, earning the moniker of a \"monk king\". Louis was a staunch Christian and rigorously enforced Catholic orthodoxy. He enacted harsh laws against blasphemy, and he also launched actions against France's Jewish population, including ordering them to wear a yellow badge of shame, as well as the notorious burning of the Talmud following the Disputation of Paris. Louis IX holds the distinction of being the sole canonized king of France and is also the direct ancestor of all subsequent French kings.\nSources.\nMuch of what is known of Louis's life comes from Jean de Joinville's famous \"Life of Saint Louis\". Joinville was a close friend, confidant, and counselor to the king. He participated as a witness in the papal inquest into Louis's life that resulted in his canonization in 1297 by Pope Boniface VIII. Two other important biographies were written by the king's confessor, Geoffrey of Beaulieu, and his chaplain, William of Chartres. While several individuals wrote biographies in the decades following the king's death, only Jean of Joinville, Geoffrey of Beaulieu, and William of Chartres wrote from personal knowledge of the king and of the events they describe, and all three are biased favorably to the king. The fourth important source of information is William of Saint-Parthus's 19th-century biography, which he wrote using material from the papal inquest mentioned above.\nEarly life.\nLouis was born on 25 April 1214 at Poissy, near Paris, the son of then-Prince Louis \"the Lion\" (later Louis VIII of France) and Blanche of Castile, during the reign of his paternal grandfather, Philip II \"Augustus\" of France, and was baptized in Poissy in \"La Coll\u00e9giale Notre-Dame\" church. His maternal grandfather was King Alfonso VIII of Castile. Tutors of Blanche's choosing taught him Latin, public speaking, writing, military arts, and government. His father succeeded to the throne upon Philip II's death in 1223, when then-Prince Louis was nine years old.\nMinority (1226\u20131234).\nLouis was 12 years old when his father died on 8 November 1226. His coronation as king took place on 29 November 1226 at Reims Cathedral, officiated by the bishop of Soissons. Louis's mother, Queen Blanche, ruled France as regent during his minority. Louis's mother instilled in him her devout Christianity. She is once recorded to have said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I love you, my dear son, as much as a mother can love her child; but I would rather see you dead at my feet than that you should ever commit a mortal sin.\nLouis's younger brother Charles I of Sicily (1227\u201385) was created count of Anjou, thus founding the Capetian Angevin dynasty.\nIn 1229, when Louis was 15, his mother ended the Albigensian Crusade by signing an agreement with Raymond VII of Toulouse. Raymond VI of Toulouse had been suspected of ordering the assassination of Pierre de Castelnau, a Catholic preacher who attempted to convert the Cathars.\nOn 27 May 1234, Louis married Margaret of Provence (1221\u20131295); she was crowned queen in Sens Cathedral the next day. Margaret was the sister of Eleanor of Provence, who later married Henry III of England. The new Queen Margaret's religious zeal made her a well-suited partner for the king, and they are attested to have got on well, enjoying riding together, reading, and listening to music. His closeness to Margaret aroused jealousy in his mother, who tried to keep the couple apart as much as she could.\nWhile his contemporaries viewed Louis's reign as co-rule between him and his mother, historians generally believe Louis began ruling personally in 1234, with his mother then assuming a more advisory role. She continued to have a strong influence on the king until her death in 1252.\nLouis as king.\nArts.\nLouis's patronage of the arts inspired much innovation in Gothic art and architecture. The style of his court was influential throughout Europe, both because of artwork purchased from Parisian masters for export, and by the marriage of the king's daughters and other female relatives to foreigners. They became emissaries of Parisian models and styles elsewhere. Louis's personal chapel, the \"Sainte-Chapelle\" in Paris, which was known for its intricate stained-glass windows, was copied more than once by his descendants elsewhere. Louis is believed to have ordered the production of the Morgan Bible and the Arsenal Bible, both deluxe illuminated manuscripts.\nDuring the golden century of Saint Louis, the kingdom of France was at its height in Europe, both politically and economically. Saint Louis was regarded as \"\"primus inter pares\",\" first among equals, among the kings and rulers of the continent. He commanded the largest army and ruled the largest and wealthiest kingdom, the European centre of arts and intellectual thought at the time. The foundations for the notable college of theology, later known as the Sorbonne, were laid in Paris about the year 1257.\nArbitration.\nThe prestige and respect felt by Europeans for King Louis IX were due more to the appeal of his personality than to military domination. For his contemporaries, he was the quintessential example of the Christian prince and embodied the whole of Christendom in his person. His reputation for fairness and even saintliness was already well established while he was alive, and on many occasions he was chosen as an arbiter in quarrels among the rulers of Europe.\nShortly before 1256, Enguerrand IV, Lord of Coucy, arrested and without trial hanged three young squires of Laon, whom he accused of poaching in his forest. In 1256 Louis had the lord arrested and brought to the Louvre by his sergeants. Enguerrand demanded judgment by his peers and trial by battle, which the king refused because he thought it obsolete. Enguerrand was tried, sentenced, and ordered to pay 12,000 livres. Part of the money was to pay for masses to be said in perpetuity for the souls of the men he had hanged.\nIn 1258, Louis and James I of Aragon signed the Treaty of Corbeil to end areas of contention between them. By this treaty, Louis renounced his feudal overlordship over the County of Barcelona and Roussillon, which was held by the King of Aragon. James in turn renounced his feudal overlordship over several counties in southern France, including Provence and Languedoc. In 1259 Louis signed the Treaty of Paris, by which Henry III of England was confirmed in his possession of territories in southwestern France, and Louis received the provinces of Anjou, Normandy (Normandie), Poitou, Maine, and Touraine.\nReligion.\nThe perception of Louis IX by his contemporaries as the exemplary Christian prince was reinforced by his religious zeal. Louis was an extremely devout Catholic, and he built the \"Sainte-Chapelle\" (\"Holy Chapel\"), located within the royal palace complex (now the Paris Hall of Justice), on the \"\u00cele de la Cit\u00e9\" in the centre of Paris. The \"Sainte Chapelle\", a prime example of the Rayonnant style of Gothic architecture, was erected as a shrine for the crown of thorns and a fragment of the True Cross, precious relics of the Passion of Christ. He acquired these in 1239\u201341 from Emperor Baldwin II of the Latin Empire of Constantinople by agreeing to pay off Baldwin's debt to the Venetian merchant Niccolo Quirino, for which Baldwin had pledged the Crown of Thorns as collateral. Louis IX paid the exorbitant sum of 135,000 livres to clear the debt.\nIn 1230, the king forbade all forms of usury, defined at the time as any taking of interest and therefore covering most banking activities. Louis used these anti-usury laws to extract funds from Jewish and Lombard moneylenders, with the hopes that it would help pay for a future crusade. Louis also oversaw the Disputation of Paris in 1240, in which Paris's Jewish leaders were imprisoned and forced to admit to anti-Christian passages in the Talmud, the major source of Jewish commentaries on the Bible and religious law. As a result of the disputation, Pope Gregory IX declared that all copies of the Talmud should be seized and destroyed. In 1242, Louis ordered the burning of 12,000 copies of the Talmud, along with other important Jewish books and scripture. The edict against the Talmud was eventually overturned by Gregory IX's successor, Innocent IV.\nLouis also expanded the scope of the Inquisition in France. He set the punishment for blasphemy to mutilation of the tongue and lips. The area most affected by this expansion was southern France, where the Cathar sect had been strongest. The rate of confiscation of property from the Cathars and others reached its highest levels in the years before his first crusade and slowed upon his return to France in 1254.\nIn 1250, Louis headed a crusade to Egypt and was taken prisoner. During his captivity, he recited the Divine Office every day. After his release against ransom, he visited the Holy Land before returning to France. In these deeds, Louis IX tried to fulfill what he considered the duty of France as \"the eldest daughter of the Church\" (\"la fille a\u00een\u00e9e de l'\u00c9glise\"), a tradition of protector of the Church going back to the Franks and Charlemagne, who had been crowned by Pope Leo III in Rome in 800. The kings of France were known in the Church by the title \"most Christian king\" (\"Rex Christianissimus\").\nLouis founded many hospitals and houses: the House of the Filles-Dieu for reformed prostitutes; the Quinze-Vingt for 300 blind men (1254), and hospitals at Pontoise, Vernon, and Compi\u00e8gne.\nSt. Louis installed a house of the Trinitarian Order at Fontainebleau, his chateau and estate near Paris. He chose Trinitarians as his chaplains and was accompanied by them on his crusades. In his spiritual testament he wrote, \"My dearest son, you should permit yourself to be tormented by every kind of martyrdom before you would allow yourself to commit a mortal sin.\"\nLouis authored and sent the \"Enseignements\", or teachings, to his son Philip III. The letter outlined how Philip should follow the example of Jesus Christ in order to be a moral leader. The letter is estimated to have been written in 1267, three years before Louis's death.\nLegal reforms.\nLouis IX's most enduring domestic achievements came through his comprehensive reform of the French legal system. He created mechanisms that allowed subjects to appeal judicial decisions directly to the monarch, establishing a precedent for royal courts as the ultimate arbiters of justice in the kingdom.\u00a0One of his most significant legal innovations was the abolition of trials by ordeal and combat, practices that had determined guilt or innocence through physical tests rather than evidence. Louis was the second European monarch after Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor to outlaw trial by ordeal, and in its place, Louis introduced the groundbreaking concept of presumption of innocence in criminal proceedings, fundamentally altering how justice was administered throughout the kingdom.\u00a0These reforms collectively established a more rational and equitable legal framework that would influence French jurisprudence for centuries.\nPrior to his departure on crusade in 1248, Louis had sent \"enqu\u00eateurs\" across the kingdom to receive complaints about royal injustice, investigate those claims, and provide restitutions to deserving petitioners. Based on the evidence of administrative corruption and malfeasance compiled in the enqu\u00eateurs' reports, as well as the disastrous failure of the crusade itself, in the last sixteen years of his reign Louis initiated a sweeping series of reforms. This reform program was highlighted by the promulgation in December 1254 of what is known as the Great Reform Ordinance, a wide-ranging set of ethical principles and practical rules concerning the conduct and moral integrity of royal officers including \"baillis\" and \"enqu\u00eateurs\". To ensure that the ordinance's precepts were upheld and enforced, the crown simultaneously relied upon a broad array of preventive strategies, intensive supervision, and accountability procedures, chief among them the reintroduction of the \"enqu\u00eates\". A 1261 inquest into the conduct of Mathieu de Beaune,\u00a0bailli\u00a0of Vermandois, illustrates Louis's commitment to accountability: testimonies from 247 witnesses were collected to investigate corruption allegations, showcasing the crown's rigorous oversight mechanisms and its mission to create a more transparent judiciary. Such measures reduced localized abuses of power and standardized legal proceedings across the realm.\nPerhaps most emblematic of Louis's commitment to justice was his personal involvement in judicial proceedings. According to many local legends and contemporary accounts, the king frequently sat under a great oak tree in the forest of Vincennes near Paris, where he would personally hear cases and render judgements.\nScholarship and learning.\nThe reign of Louis IX coincided with a remarkable intellectual flourishing in France, particularly in Paris, which emerged as Europe's pre-eminent center of learning during Louis's reign. Scholars like William of Auvergne played a crucial role in shaping the intellectual landscape of Europe during his reign. William of Auvergne's monumental\u00a0\"Magisterium divinale\"\u00a0(1223\u20131240) attempted to reconcile Aristotelian philosophy with Christian doctrine, particularly challenges posed by Arabic commentaries on Aristotle. He was greatly favored by the crown and also served as a member of the regency council that ruled France in absence of the king during the seventh crusade.\nPerhaps greatest of all the intellectual minds active in France during Louis's reign was the theologian Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas's association with Paris represents one of the most fruitful collaborations between scholasticism and intellectual endeavor. Though Italian by birth, Aquinas conducted his most important work at the University of Paris, where he held the Dominican chair in theology twice (1256\u20131259 and 1269\u20131272). His\u00a0Summa Theologica, widely considered to be the epitome of medieval scholastic theology, synthesized Aristotelian philosophy with Christian theology in an unprecedented systematic framework at a time when Aristotle was just regaining popularity in Europe.\nAnother major scholastic figure, the German Dominican Albertus Magnus,\u00a0was also active at the University of Paris from 1245 to 1248. His experimental approach to natural sciences, exemplified by botanical studies and mineralogical investigations, prefigured later scientific methods while maintaining a theological framework. Louis IX's support for Dominican institutions facilitated Albertus's work, which helped transform Paris into the primary center for Aristotelian studies.\nPersonal reign (1235\u20131266).\nConstruction of the Sainte-Chapelle.\nThe construction of Sainte-Chapelle was inspired by earlier Carolingian royal chapels, most notably the Palatine Chapel of Charlemagne at Aix-la-Chapelle (modern-day Aachen).\u00a0Before embarking on this ambitious project, Louis had already built a royal chapel at the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye in 1238.\u00a0This earlier, single-level chapel's plan would be adapted for Sainte-Chapelle, though on a much grander scale.\nThe primary motivation for building Sainte-Chapelle was to create a suitable sanctuary for Louis IX's collection of precious Christian relics including the crown of thorns. The foundation of the Chapelle was laid in 1241 and construction proceeded rapidly into the decade. On April 26, 1248 the Saint-Chapelle was consecrated as a private royal chapel for King Louis IX.\nThe completed structure was remarkable in size, measuring 36 meters (118\u00a0ft) long, 17 meters (56\u00a0ft) wide, and 42.5 meters (139\u00a0ft) high - dimensions that rivaled contemporary Gothic cathedrals.\u00a0The chapel featured two distinct levels of equal size but different purposes, the upper level housed the sacred relics and was reserved exclusively for the royal family and their guests, while the lower level served courtiers, servants, and palace\nSeventh Crusade.\nThe Seventh Crusade was formally inaugurated by Pope Innocent IV\u2019s issuance of the bull\u00a0Terra Sancta Christi in 1245, which called for a renewed effort to secure Jerusalem by targeting Egypt, the economic and military linchpin of the Ayyubid Sultanate. This papal directive built upon a century of crusading precedent, particularly the Fifth Crusade (1217\u20131221), which had similarly sought to leverage control over the Nile Delta to pressure Muslim powers in Syria and Palestine. Louis and his followers landed in Egypt on 4 or 5 June 1249 and began their campaign with the capture of the port of Damietta. This attack caused some disruption in the Muslim Ayyubid empire, especially as the current sultan, Al-Malik as-Salih Najm al-Din Ayyub, was on his deathbed. However, the march of Europeans from Damietta toward Cairo through the Nile River Delta went slowly. The seasonal rising of the Nile and the summer heat made it impossible for them to advance. During this time, the Ayyubid sultan died, and the sultan's wife Shajar al-Durr set in motion a shift in power that would make her Queen and eventually result in the rule of the Egyptian army of the Mamluks.\nOn 8 February 1250, Louis lost his army at the Battle of Fariskur and was captured by the Egyptians. His release was eventually negotiated in return for a ransom of 400,000 bezants or about 200,000 livres tournois, a little less than the French crown's annual income, and the surrender of the city of Damietta.\nFour years in the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nUpon his liberation from captivity in Egypt, Louis IX devoted four years to fortifying the Kingdom of Jerusalem, focusing his efforts in Acre, Caesarea, and Jaffa. He used his resources to aid the Crusaders in reconstructing their defenses and actively engaged in diplomatic endeavors with the Ayyubid dynasty. In the spring of 1254, Louis and his remaining forces made their return to France.\nLouis maintained regular correspondence and envoy exchanges with the Mongol rulers of his era. During his first crusade in 1248, he received envoys from Eljigidei, the Mongol military leader stationed in Armenia and Persia. Eljigidei proposed that Louis should launch an offensive in Egypt while he targeted Baghdad to prevent the unification of the Muslim forces in Egypt and Syria. In response, Louis sent Andr\u00e9 de Longjumeau, a Dominican priest, as a delegate to the Khagan G\u00fcy\u00fck Khan (r.\u20091246\u00a0\u2013\u00a01248) in Mongolia. However, G\u00fcy\u00fck's death preceded the arrival of the emissary, and his widow and acting regent, Oghul Qaimish, rejected the diplomatic proposition.\nLouis sent another representative, the Franciscan missionary and explorer William of Rubruck, to the Mongol court. Rubruck visited the Khagan M\u00f6ngke (r.\u20091251\u00a0\u2013\u00a01259) in Mongolia and spent several years there. In 1259, Berke, the leader of the Golden Horde, demanded Louis's submission. In contrast, Mongol emperors M\u00f6ngke and Khubilai's brother, the Ilkhan Hulegu, sent a letter to the French king, soliciting his military aid; this letter, however, never reached France.\nReturn to France.\nLouis IX returned to France in 1254 after spending four years in the Holy Land following his release from captivity during the failed Seventh Crusade. He set out from Acre on April 24, 1254, and arrived back in France in July of that year. The kingdom had been ruled by a regency in his absence, headed by the king's mother Blanche of Castile until her death in November 1252.\nJean de Joinville's narrative of the king's return home from crusade in July 1254 is marked by two fateful meetings. Upon disembarking at Hy\u00e8res, forty miles east along the coast from Marseille, Louis and his entourage were met almost immediately by the abbot of Cluny, who presented him and the queen with two palfreys that Joinville estimated to be worth, by the standards of the first decade of the 1300s, five hundred livre tournois. The next day, the abbot returned to tell the king of his troubles, to which the king patiently and attentively listened. After the abbot's departure, Joinville posed to Louis whether the gift of the palfreys had made the king more favorable to the abbot's petition, and, when Louis replied in the affirmative, advised him that those men entrusted with administering the king's justice should be forbidden from accepting gifts, lest they \"listen more willingly and with greater attention to those who gave them.\"\nWhile still at Hy\u00e8res, the king heard of a renowned Franciscan named Hugues de Digne active in the area and, ever the enthusiast for sermons, requested that the friar attend the court so that Louis might hear him preach.\nDiplomatic relations and treaties.\nAfter returning to France in 1254, Louis IX prioritized diplomatic settlements to resolve many longstanding territorial disputes and stabilize his kingdom's borders. In 1258, he concluded the Treaty of Corbeil with James I of Aragon. According to the terms of this treaty, Louis IX renounced ancient French claims of feudal overlordship over Catalonia (the Hispanic March), while James had to renounce all claims to several territories in southern France, including Languedoc, Provence, Toulouse, Quercy, and others, except for Montpellier and Carlat. Isabella, daughter of James I, was also betrothed to Philip, son of Louis IX securing peace with Aragon.\nIn 1259, Louis concluded the Treaty of Paris with Henry III of England. Henry III formally renounced all claims to Normandy, Anjou, Maine, Touraine, and Poitou-territories lost by his predecessors.\nIn return, Louis IX recognized Henry III as Duke of Aquitaine and his vassal for Guyenne and Gascony, with Henry retaining control over these regions but under French suzerainty. The Treaty of Paris had already positioned Louis as a respected mediator in European affairs, and in January 1264, Henry III formally requested Louis IX to arbitrate the dispute between the crown and the barons. Louis convened the Mise of Amiens, a judgement that annulled the Provisions of Oxford and sided decisively with Henry, rejecting the baronial reforms.\u00a0This ruling emboldened Henry's position but also deepened the conflict, as the barons, led by Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, refused to accept the decision, which led to renewed warfare after 1264.\nLouis IX's diplomatic reach extended across Western Europe and even into the Near East and Central Asia, earning him a reputation as one of the foremost arbitrators of his age. The king maintained diplomatic relations with the Mongols even after returning to France and in 1260, as the Mongols under Hulagu Khan sacked Baghdad and advanced into Syria, Louis maintained correspondence with Ilkhanate leaders, hoping to coordinate attacks against their mutual Mamluk adversaries.\nKing Louis IX also maintained diplomatic relations with Emperor Frederick II and frequently corresponded with him, but their relationship was far from cordial. The contemporary Arab historian Ibn Wasil mentions a letter that the emperor sent to Louis, after the latter's release from captivity, in order \"to remind him of his (own) sound advice and the consequences of his obstinacy and recalcitrance, and to upbraid him for it\". There is no other record of this letter, but Frederick did write to King Ferdinand III of Castile blaming the pope for a disaster that could have been avoided; in this letter, the emperor links \"papal cunning\" to \"the fate of our beloved friend, the illustrious King of France\". Frederick II also allegedly sent secret letters and envoys to Sultan As-Salih Ayyub of Egypt, warning him of Louis IX's impending crusade and offering to delay or disrupt the French king's campaign.\nKing Louis IX enjoyed unparalleled prestige throughout Christendom and was respected even by his opponents as he was considered to be the 'Most Christian King' (rex \"Christianissimus\"). This title adopted by the French kings was later confirmed by the pope, while further papal concessions cemented France as the \"eldest daughter of the church\". The king's influence was rooted not in military dominance but in widespread respect for his fairness, personal integrity, and reputation as a Christian ruler.\u00a0European monarchs and nobles frequently sought his judgment in disputes, viewing him as an impartial and principled mediator.\nLater reign (1267\u20131270).\nEighth Crusade and death.\nIn a parliament held at Paris, 24 March 1267, Louis and his three sons \"took the cross\". On hearing the reports of the missionaries, Louis resolved to land at Tunis, and he ordered his younger brother, Charles of Anjou, to join him there. The crusaders, among whom was the English prince Edward Longshanks, landed at Carthage 17 July 1270, but disease broke out in the camp.\nLouis died at Tunis on 25 August 1270, during an epidemic of dysentery that swept through his army. According to European custom, his body was subjected to the process known as \"mos Teutonicus\" prior to most of his remains being returned to France. Louis was succeeded as King of France by his son, Philip III.\nLouis's younger brother, Charles I of Naples, preserved his heart and intestines, and conveyed them for burial in the Cathedral of Monreale near Palermo.\nLouis's bones were carried overland in a lengthy processional across Sicily, Italy, the Alps, and France, until they were interred in the royal necropolis at Saint-Denis in May 1271. Charles and Philip III later dispersed a number of relics to promote Louis's veneration.\nChildren.\nLouis and Margaret's two children who died in infancy were first buried at the Cistercian abbey of Royaumont. In 1820 they were transferred and reinterred to Saint-Denis Basilica.\nVeneration as a saint.\nPope Boniface VIII proclaimed the canonization of Louis in 1297; he is the only French king to be declared a saint. Louis IX is often considered the model of the ideal Christian monarch.\nNamed in his honour, the Sisters of Charity of St. Louis is a Roman Catholic religious order founded in Vannes, France, in 1803. A similar order, the Sisters of St Louis, was founded in Juilly in 1842.\nHe is honoured as co-patron of the Third Order of St. Francis, which claims him as a member of the Order. When he became king, over a hundred poor people were served meals in his house on ordinary days. Often the king served these guests himself. His acts of charity, coupled with his devout religious practices, gave rise to the legend that he joined the Third Order of St. Francis, though it is unlikely that he ever actually joined the order.\nThe Catholic Church and Episcopal Church honor him with a feast day on 25 August.\nThings named after Saint Louis.\nPlaces.\nMany countries in which French speakers and Catholicism were prevalent named places after King Louis:\nNotable portraits.\nFrance\nUnited States\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18551", "revid": "36873915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18551", "title": "Linear B", "text": "Syllabic script used for writing Mycenaean Greek\nLinear B is a syllabic script that was used for writing in Mycenaean Greek, the earliest attested form of the Greek language. The script predates the Greek alphabet by several centuries, the earliest known examples dating to around 1450 BC. It is adapted from the earlier Linear A, an undeciphered script perhaps used for writing the Minoan language, as is the later Cypriot syllabary, which also recorded Greek. Linear B, found mainly in the palace archives at Knossos, Kydonia, Pylos, Thebes and Mycenae, disappeared with the fall of the Mycenaean civilization during the Late Bronze Age collapse. The succeeding period, known as the Greek Dark Ages, provides no evidence of the use of writing.\nLinear B was deciphered in 1952 by English architect and self-taught linguist Michael Ventris based on the research of the American classicist Alice Kober. It is the only Bronze Age Aegean script to have been deciphered, with Linear A, Cypro-Minoan, and Cretan hieroglyphic remaining unreadable.\nLinear B consists of around 87 syllabic signs and over 100 ideographic signs. These ideograms or \"signifying\" signs symbolize objects or commodities. They have no phonetic value and are never used as word signs in writing a sentence.\nThe application of Linear B texts appear to have been mostly confined to administrative contexts, mainly at Mycenaean palatial sites. In the handwriting of all the thousands of clay tablets, a relatively small number of scribes have been detected: 45 in Pylos (west coast of the Peloponnese, in Southern Greece) and 66 in Knossos (Crete). The use of Linear B signs on trade objects like amphora was more widespread. Once the palaces were destroyed, the script disappeared.\nScript.\nLinear B has roughly 200 signs, divided into syllabic signs with phonetic values and ideograms with semantic values. The representations and naming of these signs have been standardized by a series of international colloquia starting in Paris in 1956. After the third meeting in 1961 at the Wingspread Conference Center in Racine, Wisconsin, a standard proposed primarily by Emmett L. Bennett, Jr. became known as the Wingspread Convention, which was adopted by a new organization, the (CIPEM: Permanent International Committee of Mycenaean Studies), affiliated in 1970 by the fifth colloquium with UNESCO. Colloquia continue: the 13th occurred in 2010 in Paris.\nMany of the signs are identical or similar to those in Linear A; however, Linear A encodes an as yet unknown language, and it is uncertain whether similar signs had the same phonetic values.\nSyllabic signs.\nThe grid developed during decipherment by Michael Ventris and John Chadwick of phonetic values for syllabic signs is shown below. (Note that \"q\" represents the labialized velar stops , not the uvular stop of the IPA, whereas \"j\" does represent the IPA voiced palatal approximant [j], represented by the letter \"y\" in English words such as \"yes\" and \"yoke\".)\nInitial consonants are in the leftmost column; vowels are in the top row beneath the title. The transcription of the syllable, which may not have been pronounced that way, is listed next to the sign along with Bennett's identifying number for the sign preceded by an asterisk (as was Ventris' and Chadwick's convention). If the transcription of the sign remains uncertain, Bennett's number serves to identify the sign. The signs on the tablets and sealings often show considerable variation from each other and from the representations below. Discovery of the reasons for the variation and possible semantic differences is a topic of ongoing debate in Mycenaean studies.\nSpecial and unknown signs.\nIn addition to the grid, the first edition of \"Documents in Mycenaean Greek\" contained a number of other signs termed \"homophones\" because they appeared at that time to resemble the sounds of other syllables and were transcribed accordingly: \"pa2\" and \"pa3\" were presumed homophonous to \"pa\". Many of these were identified by the second edition and are shown in the \"special values\" below. The second edition relates: \"It may be taken as axiomatic that there are no true homophones.\" The unconfirmed identifications of \"*34\" and \"*35\" as \"ai2\" and \"ai3\" were removed. \"pa2\" became \"qa\".\nOther values remain unknown, mainly because of scarcity of evidence concerning them. Note that *34 and *35 are mirror images of each other, but whether this graphic relationship indicates a phonetic one remains unconfirmed.\nCIPEM inherited the former authority of Bennett and the Wingspread convention in deciding what signs are \"confirmed\" and how to officially represent the various sign categories. In editions of Mycenaean texts, the signs whose values have not been confirmed by CIPEM are always transcribed as numbers preceded by an asterisk (e.g., \"*64\"). CIPEM also allocates the numerical identifiers, and until such allocation, new signs (or obscured or mutilated signs) are transcribed as a bullet-point enclosed in square brackets: [\u2022].\nSpelling and pronunciation.\nThe signs are approximations, since each may be used to represent a variety of about 70 distinct combinations of sounds within rules and conventions. The grid presents a system of monosyllabic signs of the type V/CV. Clarification of the 14 or so special values tested the limits of the grid model, but Chadwick eventually concluded that even with the ramifications, the syllabic signs can unexceptionally be considered monosyllabic.\nPossible exceptions, Chadwick goes on to explain, include the two diphthongs, \ud800\udc40\u00a0(\"ai\") and \ud800\udc41\u00a0(\"au\"), as in \ud800\udc40\ud800\udc13\ud800\udc20\ud800\udc34\ud800\udc0d, \"ai-ku-pi-ti-jo\", for \"Aiguptios\" (, \"Egyptian\") and \ud800\udc41\ud800\udc10\ud800\udc37, \"au-ke-wa\", for \"Augew\u0101s\" ( \"Augeas\"). However, a diphthong is by definition two vowels united into a single sound and therefore might be typed as just V. Thus \ud800\udc49\u00a0(\"rai\"), as in \ud800\udc01\ud800\udc49\ud800\udc3a,\u00a0\"e-rai-wo\", for \"elaiwon\" (), is of the type CV. Diphthongs are otherwise treated as two monosyllables: \ud800\udc00\ud800\udc2b\ud800\udc04\ud800\udc28, \"a-ro-u-ra\", for \"arourans\" (accusative plural of , \"tamarisk trees\"), of the types CV and V. Lengths of vowels and accents are not marked.\n\ud800\udc4c\u00a0(\"Twe\"), \ud800\udc4d\u00a0(\"two\"), \ud800\udc43\u00a0(\"dwe\"), \ud800\udc44\u00a0(\"dwo\"), \ud800\udc45\u00a0(\"nwa\") and the more doubtful \ud800\udc58\u00a0(\"swi\") and \ud800\udc59\u00a0(\"swa\") may be regarded as beginning with labialized consonants, rather than two consonants, even though they may alternate with a two-sign form: \"o-da-twe-ta\" and \"o-da-tu-we-ta\" for \"Odatwenta\"; \"a-si-wi-jo\" and \"a-swi-jo\" for \"Aswios\" (). Similarly, \ud800\udc48\u00a0(\"rya\"), \ud800\udc4a\u00a0(\"ryo\") and \ud800\udc4b\u00a0(\"tya\") begin with palatalized consonants rather than two consonants: \"-ti-ri-ja\" for \"-trja\" (-).\nThe one sign Chadwick tags as the exception to the monosyllabic rule is \ud800\udc47\u00a0(\"pte\"), but this he attributes to a development \"pte\"&lt;\"*pje\" as in \"kleptei\"&lt;\"*klep-jei\".\nLinear B does not consistently distinguish between voiced and unvoiced stop consonants or between aspirated and unaspirated stops, even though these distinctions are phonemic in Mycenaean Greek. (The exception is the dental series, where syllables starting with the voiced dental stop are written differently from syllables starting with the voiceless unaspirated or voiceless aspirated dental stop.) For example, \"pa-te\" is \"pat\u0113r\" (), \"pa-si\" is \"ph\u0101si\" (), \"ko-ru\" is \"korus\" (, \"helmet\"), \"ka-ra-we\" is \"gr\u0101wes\" (plural of ), \"ko-no\" is \"skhoinos\" (\"rope\"), \"to-so\" is \"tosos\" ( or ), \"to-ra-ke\" is \"th\u014dr\u0101kes\" (plural of , \"breastplate\"). The exceptional \"d\"-series for voiced dentals is illustrated by \"do-ra\" for \"d\u014dra\" (plural of , \"gift\").\nIn some cases aspiration may be marked, but this is optional: \"pu-te\" for \"phut\u0113r\" (\"planter\", from ), but \"phu-te-re\" for \"phut\u0113res\" (\"planters\"). Initial /h/ may be marked only when followed by \"a\", and only rarely: \"ha-te-ro\" for \"hateron\" (masculine ), and yet \"a-ni-ja\" for \"h\u0101niai\" ().\nThe \"q\"-series is used for syllables beginning with labialized velar consonants (see under Mycenaean Greek), a class of consonants that disappeared from classical Greek by regular phonetic change (becoming in various circumstances , , , or , , ). These consonants had various sources: inheritance from Proto-Indo-European, assimilation, borrowing of foreign words, especially names. In Mycenaean they are /k\u02b7/, /g\u02b7/, and rarely /k\u02b7h/ in names and a few words: \"a-pi-qo-ro\" for \"amphiquoloi\" (); \"qo-u-ko-ro\" for \"guoukoloi\" (, \"cowherders\"); \"qa-si-re-u\" for \"guasileus\" (, \"basileus\", meaning in this period \"court official or local chieftain\"), \"-qo-i-ta\" for -.\nThe \"j\"-series represents the semivowel equivalent to English \"y\", and is used word-initially and as an intervocalic glide after a syllable ending in \"i\": \"-a-jo\" for (\"-aios\"); \"a-te-mi-ti-jo\" for (\"Artemitios\"). The \"w\"-series similarly are semivowels used word-initially and intervocalically after a syllable ending in \"u\": \"ku-wa-no\" for \"kuanos\" (, \"blue\").\nThe \"r\"-series includes both the /r/ and /l/ phonemes: \"ti-ri-po\" for \"tripos\" (, i.e. ) and \"tu-ri-so\" for \"Tulisos\" ().\nSome consonants in some contexts are not written (but are understood to be present), such as word-initial \"s-\" and \"-w\" before a consonant, as in \"pe-ma\" for \"sperma\" (, \"seed\"). The \"pe-\", which was primarily used as its value \"pe\" of grid class CV, is here being used for \"sper-\". This was not an innovative or exceptional use, but followed the stated rules. Syllable-final \"-l\", \"-m\", \"-n\", \"-r\" and \"-s\" are also not written out, and only word-final velars are notated by plene writing: \"a-to-ro-qo\" for \"anthr\u014dquos\" (, \"human being, person\"). Here \"a\", being primarily of grid class V, is being used as \"an-\" and could be used for \"al\", \"am\", \"ar\", and so on.\nIn the case of clusters of two or three consonants that do not follow the initial \"s-\" and \"-w\" rule or the double consonants: \u00a0(\"ks\" or \"x\"), \u00a0(\"ps\") and \"qus\" (which later did not exist in classical Greek), each consonant in the cluster is represented by a type CV sign that shares its consonant value: \"ko-no-so\" for \"Kn\u014dsos\", or \"ku-ru-so\" for \"khrusos\" (, \"gold\"). The vowels of these signs have been called \"empty\", \"null\", \"extra\", \"dead\", \"dummy\" and other terms by various writers as they represent no sound. There were rules though, that governed the selection of the \"empty\" vowel and therefore determined which sign was to be used. The vowel had to be the same as that of the first syllable following the cluster or, if at the end of the word, preceding: \"ti-ri-po\" with \"ti-\" (instead of \"ta-\", \"te-\" and so on) to match \"-ri-\". A rare exception occurs in words formed from \"wa-na-ka\", \"wanax\" (\u03dd\u03ac\u03bd\u03b1\u03be, Homeric and Classical \u1f04\u03bd\u03b1\u03be): \"wa-na-ka-te\" for \"wanaktei\" (dative), and \"wa-na-ka-te-ro\" for \"wanakteros\", the adjectival form. This exception may not have applied to all contexts, as an example of \"wa-na-ka\" that follows standard rules has emerged in Agios Vasileios in Laconia. The text reads \"wa-na-ko-to\" (genitive) and is written on a sealing nodule dating to the late 14th or early 13th century, slightly earlier than other Linear B texts found on mainland Greece.\nIdeograms.\nLinear B also uses a large number of ideograms. They express:\nThey have no phonetic value and are never used as word signs in writing a sentence, unlike Japanese kanji or Hittite cuneiform. Ideograms are typically at the end of a line before a number and appear to signify to which object the number applies. Many of the values remain unknown or disputed. Some commodities such as cloth and containers are divided into many different categories represented by distinct ideograms. Livestock may be marked with respect to sex.\nThe numerical references for the ideograms were originally devised by Ventris and Bennett and divided into functional groups corresponding to the breakdown of Bennett's index. The groups are numbered beginning 100, 110, 120 etc., with some provision of spare numbers for future additions; the official CIPEM numberings used today are based on Ventris and Bennett's numbering, with the provision that three or four letter codes (written in small capitals), based on Latin words that seemed relevant at the time, are used where the meanings are known and agreed. Unicode (as of version 5.0) encodes 123 Linear\u00a0B ideograms.\nThe ideograms are symbols, not pictures of the objects in question; for example, one tablet records a tripod with missing legs, but the ideogram used is of a tripod with three legs. In modern transcriptions of Linear B tablets, it is typically convenient to represent an ideogram by its Latin or English name or by an abbreviation of the Latin name. Ventris and Chadwick generally used English; Bennett, Latin. Neither the English nor the Latin can be relied upon as an accurate name of the object; in fact, the identification of some of the more obscure objects is a matter of exegesis.\nArchives.\nCorpus.\nInscriptions in Linear B have been found on tablets, stirrup jars and other objects. Two kinds of tablets have been found: \"palm-leaf\" shaped tablets, with inscriptions parallel to the long side, and larger \"page\" shaped tablets, divided into multiple lines. \"Palm-leaf\" tablets typically record a single transaction, and \"page\" tablets record a summary of multiple transactions.\nInscriptions are catalogued and classified by, inter alia, the location of the excavation they were found in.\nAnother 170 inscriptions in Linear B have been found on various vessels, for a total of some 6,058 known inscriptions. The primary source of vessel markings are on Inscribed Stirrup Jars, with most found at Thebes, Mycenae, Tiryns, and Khania.\nFor several decades scholars have worked to join tablet fragments together, thus making the tablets and their information more complete while reducing their numbers as a whole.\nThe oldest Linear B tablets are probably those from the Room of Chariot Tablets at Knossos, and date to the latter half of the 15th century BC. The Kafkania pebble, though from an earlier context, is not genuine. The earliest inscription from the mainland is an inscribed clay tablet found at Iklaina dating to between 1400 and 1350 BC.\nTablets are divided into series, based on the most common ideogram used in the tablet. For example, the E series deals with grain (gra). The X series is used for tablets with no ideograms, the W series is used for labels and sealings, and Z for inscribed objects other than tablets. When it is possible to identify a subgrouping of the series, based on shape, vocabulary, format, or scribal hand, it is marked by a lowercase letter (for example, the Er series).\nAn amber seal incised with Linear B signs was found in 2000 at Bernstorf near Kranzberg, southern Germany, and is of much debated authenticity.\nChronology.\nTimeline of Bronze Age eastern Mediterranean scripts.\nThe Aegean is responsible for many of the early Greek language words that have to do with daily life such as words for tools and items that are seen every day. The sequence and the geographical spread of Cretan hieroglyphs, Linear A, and Linear B, the three overlapping, but distinct, writing systems on Bronze Age Crete, the Aegean islands, and mainland Greece are summarized as follows:\nTimeline of Linear B.\nThe main archives for Linear B are associated with these stages of Late Minoan and Helladic pottery:\nSixteen tablets found at the Megaron at Pylos are also thought to be dated to LHIIIA.\nControversy on the date of the Knossos tablets.\nThe Knossos archive was dated by Arthur Evans to the destruction by conflagration of about 1400 BC, which would have baked and preserved the clay tablets. He dated this event to the LM II period. This view stood until Carl Blegen excavated the site of ancient Pylos in 1939 and uncovered tablets inscribed in Linear B. They were fired in the conflagration that destroyed Pylos about 1200 BC, at the end of LHIIIB. With the decipherment of Linear B by Michael Ventris in 1952, serious questions about Evans's date began to be considered. Most notably, Blegen said that the inscribed stirrup jars, which are oil flasks with stirrup-shaped handles imported from Crete around 1200, were of the same type as those dated by Evans to the destruction of 1400. Blegen found a number of similarities between 1200 BC Pylos and 1400 BC Knossos and suggested the Knossian evidence be reexamined, as he was sure of the 1200 Pylian date.\nThe examination uncovered a number of difficulties. The Knossos tablets had been found at various locations in the palace. Evans had not kept exact records. Recourse was had to the day books of Evans's assistant, Duncan Mackenzie, who had conducted the day-to-day excavations. There were discrepancies between the notes in the day books and Evans's excavation reports. Moreover, the two men had disagreed over the location and strata of the tablets. The results of the reinvestigation were eventually published by Palmer and Boardman, \"On the Knossos Tablets\". It contains two works, Leonard Robert Palmer's \"The Find-Places of the Knossos Tablets\" and John Boardman's \"The Date of the Knossos Tablets,\" representing Blegen's and Evans's views respectively. Consequently, the dispute was known for a time as \"the Palmer\u2013Boardman dispute\". There has been no generally accepted resolution to it yet.\nContents.\nThe major cities and palaces used Linear B for records of disbursements of goods. Wool, sheep, and grain were some common items, often given to groups of religious people. A number of tablets also deal with military matters.\nAs is often the case with cuneiform tablets, when the buildings they were housed in were destroyed by fire many of the tablets were baked which preserved them.\nDiscovery and decipherment.\nAncient Greece.\nThe Greeks of the historical era were unable to decipher Linear B, but its ideograms are sometimes mentioned by ancient authors. For example, Plutarch gives an account of the Spartan king Agesilaus II (r. 400\u2013360 BC) sending a bronze tablet with \"many letters marvellously old, for nothing could be made of them\" to Egyptian priests in the hope they could understand them.\nArthur Evans's classification of scripts.\nThe British archaeologist Arthur Evans, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, was presented by Greville Chester in 1886 with a sealstone from Crete engraved with a writing he took to be Mycenaean. Heinrich Schliemann had encountered signs similar to these, but had never identified the signs clearly as writing, relating in his major work on Mycenae that \"of combinations of signs resembling inscriptions I have hitherto only found three or four ...\" In 1893 Evans purchased more sealstones in Athens, verifying from the antiquarian dealers that the stones came from Crete. During the next year he noticed the script on other artefacts in the Ashmolean. In 1894 he embarked for Crete in search of the script. Soon after arrival, at Knossos he saw the sign of the double axe on an excavated wall, considering this the source of the script. Subsequently, he found more stones from the various ruins being worn by Cretan women as amulets called \"milk-stones\", thought to encourage the production of breast milk.\nStarting in 1894, Evans published his theories that the signs evidenced various phases in the development of a writing system in \"The Journal of Hellenic Studies\", the first article being \"Primitive Pictographs and a Prae-Phoenician Script from Crete\". In these articles Evans distinguished between \"pictographic writing\" and \"a linear system of writing\". He did not explicitly define these terms, causing some confusion among subsequent writers concerning what he meant, but in 1898 he wrote \"These linear forms indeed consist of simple geometrical figures which unlike the more complicated pictorial class were little susceptible to modification,\" and \"That the linear or quasi-alphabetic signs ... were in the main ultimately derived from the rudely scratched line pictures belonging to the infancy of art can hardly be doubted.\"\nMeanwhile, Evans began to negotiate for the land purchase of the Knossos site. He established the Cretan Exploration Fund, with only his own money at first, and by 1896 the fund had purchased one-fourth of Kephala Hill, on which the ruins were located, with first option to buy the rest. However, he could not obtain a firman excavation permit from the Ottoman government. He returned to Britain. In January 1897, the Christian population of Crete staged its final insurrection against the Ottoman Empire. The last Ottoman troops were ferried off the island by the British fleet on 5 December 1898. In that year also, Evans and his friends returned to complete purchase of the site. By this time, the Fund had other contributors as well. In 1899, the Constitution of a new Cretan Republic went into effect. Once Evans had received permission to excavate from the local authorities, excavation on the hill began on 23 March 1900.\nAccording to Evans's report to the British School at Athens for that year, on 5 April, the excavators discovered the first large cache ever of Linear B tablets among the remains of a wooden box in a disused terracotta bathtub. Subsequently, caches turned up at multiple locations, including the Room of the Chariot Tablets, where over 350 pieces from four boxes were found. The tablets were to long by to wide and were scored with horizontal lines over which text was written in about 70 characters. Even in this earliest excavation report, Evans could tell that \"a certain number of quasi-pictorial characters also occur which seem to have an ideographic or determinative meaning.\"\nThe excavation was over for that year by 2 June. Evans reported: \"only a comparatively small proportion of the tablets were preserved in their entirety,\" the causes of destruction being rainfall through the roof of the storage room, crumbling of small pieces, and being thrown away by workmen who failed to identify them. A report on 6 September to the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland began to use some of the concepts characteristic of Evans's later thought: \"palace of Knossos\" and \"palace of Minos\". \"Appletons' Cyclop\u00e6dia of American Biography\", 1900, notes that Evans took up Stillman's theme that the palace was the labyrinth of mythology in which the half-bovine son of King Minos lurked. In the report, the tablets are now called a \"linear script\" as opposed to the \"hieroglyphic or conventionalized pictographic script\". The linear script has characters that are \"of a free, upright, European character\" and \"seem to have been for the most part syllabic\". Evans reasserts the ideographic idea: \"a certain number are unquestionably ideographic or determinative.\"\nThe years after 1900 were consumed by excavations at Knossos and the discovery and study by Evans of tablets, with a projected comprehensive work on Cretan scripts to be called \"Scripta Minoa\". A year before the publication of volume I, he began to drop hints that he now believed the linear script was two scripts, to be presented in the forthcoming book.\nIn \"Scripta Minoa I\", which appeared in 1909, he explained that the discovery of the Phaistos Disc in July 1908 had caused him to pull the book from the presses so that he could include the disk by permission, as it had not yet been published. On the next page he mentioned that he was also including by permission of Federico Halbherr of the Italian Mission in Crete unpublished tablets from Hagia Triada written in a linear script of \"Class A\". To what degree if any Halbherr was responsible for Evans's division of the \"linear script\" into \"Class A\" and \"Class B\" is not stated. The Knossos tablets were of Class B, so that Evans could have perceived Class A only in tablets from elsewhere, and so recently that he needed permission to include the examples.\nEvans summarized the differences between the two scripts as \"type\" or \"form of script;' that is, varieties in the formation and arrangement of the characters. For example, he says \"the clay documents belonging to Class A show a certain approximation in their forms to those presenting the hieroglyphic inscriptions ... the system of numerals is also in some respects intermediate between that of the hieroglyphic documents and that of the linear Class B.\"\nThe first volume covered \"the Hieroglyphic and Primitive Linear Classes\" in three parts: the \"pre-Phoenician Scripts of Crete\", the \"Pictorial Script\" and \"the Phaistos Disk\". One or two more volumes publishing the Linear A and Linear B tablets were planned, but Evans ran out of time; the project required more than one man could bring to it. For a good many of the years left to him, he was deeply enmeshed in war and politics in the Balkans. When he did return to Knossos, completion and publication of the palace excavations took priority. His greatest work, \"Palace of Minos\", came out in 1935. It did include scattered descriptions of tablets. He died in 1941, soon after Nazi forces invaded Crete.\nThe Knossos tablets had remained in the museum at Irakleion, Crete, where many of them now were missing. The unpublished second volume consisted of notes by Evans and plates and fonts created by Clarendon Press. In 1939, Carl Blegen had uncovered the Pylos Tablets; pressure was mounting to finish \"Scripta Minoa II.\" After Evans's death, Alice Kober, assistant to John Myres and a major transcriber of the Knossos tablets, prompted Myres to come back from retirement and finish the work. Emmett L. Bennett, Jr. added more transcriptions. The second volume came out in 1952 with Evans cited as author and Myres as editor, just before the discovery that Linear B writes an early form of Greek. An impatient Ventris and Chadwick declared: \"Two generations of scholars had been cheated of the opportunity to work constructively on the problem.\"\nEarly attempts.\nDespite the limited source materials, during this time there were efforts to decipher the newly discovered Cretan script. Australian classicist Florence Stawell published an interpretation of the Phaistos Disc in the April 1911 issue of \"The Burlington Magazine\". She followed this with the book \"A Clue to the Cretan Scripts\", published in 1931. Stawell declared all three Cretan script forms to represent early Homeric Greek, and offered her attempts at translations. Also in 1931, F. G. Gordon's \"Through Basque to Minoan\" was published by the Oxford University Press. Gordon attempted to prove a close link between the Basque language and Linear B, without lasting success.\nIn 1949, Bed\u0159ich Hrozn\u00fd published \"Les Inscriptions Cr\u00e9toises, Essai de d\u00e9chiffrement\", a proposed decipherment of the Cretan scripts. Hrozny was internationally renowned as the translator of Hittite cuneiform decades previously. His Minoan translations into academic French, though, proved to be considerably subjective, and incorrect.\nFrom the 1930s to 1950s there was correspondence between, and papers published by, various international academic figures. These included Johannes Sundwall, K. D. Ktistopoulos, Ernst Sittig, and V. I. Georgiev. None of them succeeded with decipherment, yet they added to knowledge and debate.\nAlice Kober's triplets.\nAbout the same time, Alice Kober studied Linear B and managed to construct grids, linking similar symbols in groups of threes. Kober noticed that a number of Linear B words had common roots and suffixes. This led her to believe that Linear B represented an inflected language, with nouns changing their endings depending on their case. However, some characters in the middle of the words seemed to correspond with neither a root nor a suffix. Because this effect was found in other known languages, Kober surmised that the odd characters were bridging syllables, with the beginning of the syllable belonging to the root and the end belonging to the suffix. This was a reasonable assumption, since Linear B had far too many characters to be considered alphabetic and too few to be logographic; therefore, each character should represent a syllable. Kober's systematic approach allowed her to demonstrate the existence of three grammatical cases and identify several pairs of signs that shared vowels or consonants with one another.\nKober also showed that the two-symbol word for 'total' at the end of livestock and personnel lists, had a different symbol for gender. This gender change with one letter, usually a vowel, is most frequent in Indo-European languages. Kober had rejected any speculation on the language represented, preferring painstaking cataloguing and analysis of the actual symbols, though she did believe it likely that Linear A and Linear B represented different languages.\nEmmett L. Bennett's transcription conventions.\nThe convention for numbering the symbols still in use today was first devised by Emmett L. Bennett Jr. Working alongside fellow academic Alice Kober, by 1950 Bennett had deciphered the metrical system, based on his intensive study of Linear B tablets unearthed at Pylos. He concluded that those tablets contained exactly the same script as the Linear B found at Knossos, and he classified and assigned identification numbers to the Linear B signs as he prepared a publication on the Pylos tablets. Like Kober, Bennett was also an early proponent of the idea that Linear A and B represented different languages. His book \"The Pylos Tablets\" became a crucial resource for Michael Ventris, who later described it as \"a wonderful piece of work\".\nMichael Ventris' identification as Greek.\nIn 1935, the British School at Athens was celebrating its fiftieth anniversary with an exhibition at Burlington House, London. Among the speakers was Arthur Evans, then 84 years old; a teenage Michael Ventris was present in the audience. In 1940, the 18-year-old Ventris had an article \"Introducing the Minoan Language\" published in the \"American Journal of Archaeology\". After wartime service as a navigator with RAF Bomber Command, and a post-war year in Occupied Germany, he returned to civilian life, and completed qualification as an architect. Ventris continued with his interest in Linear B, corresponding with known scholars, who usually but not always replied.\nVentris and John Chadwick, a university lecturer in Ancient Greek philology, performed the bulk of the decipherment of Linear B between 1951 and 1953. At first Ventris chose his own numbering method, but later switched to Bennett's system. His initial decipherment was achieved using Kober's classification tables, to which he applied his own theories. Some Linear B tablets had been discovered on the Greek mainland. Noticing that certain symbol combinations appeared only on the tablets found in Crete, he conjectured that these might be names of places on the island. This proved to be correct. Working with the symbols he could decipher from this, Ventris soon unlocked much text and determined that the underlying language of Linear B was in fact Greek. This contradicted general scientific views of the time, and indeed Ventris himself had previously agreed with Evans's hypothesis that Linear B was not Greek. Ventris's first public announcement of his breakthrough came on 1 July 1952, on BBC Radio, with Ventris describing the language of Linear B as \"A difficult and archaic Greek, seeing that it's five hundred years older than Homer, and written in a rather abbreviated form, but Greek nevertheless.\" Ventris' discovery was of significance in demonstrating a Greek-speaking Minoan-Mycenaean culture on Crete, and thus presenting Greek in writing centuries earlier than had been previously accepted. Chadwick, who helped Ventris develop his decipherment of the text and discover the vocabulary and grammar of Mycenaean Greek, noted:That any Linear B tablets are written in a language other than Greek still remains to be demonstrated; but that words and usages not exactly paralleled in later Greek occur is both certain and to be expected. But we must not resort to \"non-Greek\" whenever we come up against an insoluble problem.\nThe first edition of their book, \"Documents in Mycenaean Greek\", was published in 1956, shortly after Ventris's death in an automobile accident.\nThe Ventris decipherment did not immediately meet with universal approval, and was initially viewed with some scepticism. Professor A. J. Beattie of Edinburgh published his doubts in the later 1950s. Saul Levin of the State University of New York considered that Linear B was partly Greek but with an earlier substrate, in his 1964 book \"The Linear B controversy reexamined\". Nevertheless, starting from the mid-50s onward the Ventris discovery came to be viewed favourably by scholars, such as professors Carl Blegen and Sterling Dow, which along with Ventris' 1954 article, resulted to the discovery's wide acceptance.\nUnicode.\nLinear B was added to the Unicode Standard in April 2003 with the release of version 4.0.\nThe Linear B Syllabary block is U+10000\u2013U+1007F.\nThe Linear B Ideograms block is U+10080\u2013U+100FF.\nThe Unicode block for the related Aegean Numbers is U+10100\u2013U+1013F.\nA variety of fonts encode Linear B.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18552", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18552", "title": "Larousse Gastronomique", "text": "1938 book by Prosper Montagn\u00e9\n () is an encyclopedia of gastronomy first published by \u00c9ditions Larousse in Paris in 1938. The majority of the book is about French cuisine, and contains recipes for French dishes and cooking techniques. The first edition included few non-French dishes and ingredients; later editions include many more.\nBackground.\nThe first edition (1938) was edited by Prosper Montagn\u00e9, with the collaboration of Dr Alfred Gottschalk, with prefaces by each of the author-chefs Georges Auguste Escoffier and Phil\u00e9as Gilbert (1857\u20131942). Gilbert was a collaborator in the creation of this book as well as \"Le Guide Culinaire\" (1903) with Escoffier, leading to some cross-over with the two books. It caused Escoffier to note when he was asked to write the preface that he could \"see with my own eyes\", and \"Montagn\u00e9 cannot hide from me the fact that he has used \"Le Guide\" as a basis for his new book, and certainly used numerous recipes.\"\nThe third English edition (2001), which runs to approximately 1,350 pages, has been modernized and includes additional material on other cuisines. It is also available in a concise edition (2003). A new, updated and revised edition was released in October 2009, published by Hamlyn in the UK.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18553", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18553", "title": "Louis XIV", "text": "King of France from 1643 to 1715\nLouisXIV (Louis-Dieudonn\u00e9; 5 September 1638\u00a0\u2013 1 September 1715), also known as Louis the Great ( ) or the Sun King ( ), was King of France from 1643 until his death in 1715. His reign of 72 years and 110 days is the longest of any monarch in history. An emblem of the age of absolutism in Europe, Louis XIV's legacy includes French colonial expansion, the conclusion of the Thirty Years' War involving the Habsburgs, and a controlling influence on the style of fine arts and architecture in France, including the transformation of the Palace of Versailles into a center of royal power and politics. Louis XIV's pageantry and opulence helped define the French Baroque style of art and architecture and promoted his image as supreme leader of France in the early modern period.\nLouis XIV began his personal rule of France in 1661 after the death of his chief minister Cardinal Mazarin. A believer in the divine right of kings, Louis XIV continued Louis XIII's work of creating a centralized state governed from a capital. Louis XIV sought to eliminate the remnants of feudalism persisting in parts of France by compelling many members of the nobility to reside at his lavish Palace of Versailles. In doing so, he succeeded in pacifying the aristocracy, many of whom had participated in the Fronde rebellions during his minority. He consolidated a system of absolute monarchy in France that endured until the French Revolution. Louis XIV enforced uniformity of religion under the Catholic Church. His revocation of the Edict of Nantes abolished the rights of the Huguenot Protestant minority and subjected them to a wave of dragonnades, effectively forcing Huguenots to emigrate or convert, virtually destroying the French Protestant community.\nDuring Louis' long reign, France emerged as the leading European power and regularly made war. A conflict with Spain marked his entire childhood, while during his personal rule, Louis fought three major continental conflicts, each against powerful foreign alliances: the Franco-Dutch War, the Nine Years' War, and the War of the Spanish Succession. In addition, France contested shorter wars such as the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. Warfare defined Louis's foreign policy, impelled by his personal ambition for glory and power: \"a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique\". His wars strained France's resources to the utmost, while in peacetime he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military. Upon his death in 1715, LouisXIV left his great-grandson and successor, Louis XV, a powerful but war-weary kingdom, in major debt after the War of the Spanish Succession that had raged on since 1701.\nSome of his other notable achievements include the construction of the 240\u00a0km (150\u00a0mi) Canal du Midi in Southern France, the patronage of artists (the playwrights Moli\u00e8re, Racine, the man of letters Boileau, the composer and dancer Lully, the painter Le Brun and the landscape architect Le N\u00f4tre, all contributed to the apogee of French classicism, described during his lifetime as the \"Grand Si\u00e8cle\", or even \"the century of Louis XIV\"), and the founding of the French Academy of Sciences.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly years.\nLouisXIV was born on 5 September 1638 in the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, to Louis\u00a0XIII and Anne of Austria. He was named Louis Dieudonn\u00e9 (Louis the God-given) and bore the traditional title of French heirs apparent: \"Dauphin\". At the time of his birth, his parents had been married for 23 years. His mother had experienced four stillbirths between 1619 and 1631. Leading contemporaries thus regarded him as a divine gift and his birth a miracle.\nLouis' relationship with his mother was uncommonly affectionate for the time. Contemporaries and eyewitnesses claimed that the Queen would spend all her time with Louis. Both were greatly interested in food and theatre. This long-lasting and loving relationship can be evidenced by excerpts in Louis' journal entries, such as:\n\"Nature was responsible for the first knots which tied me to my mother. But attachments formed later by shared qualities of the spirit are far more difficult to break than those formed merely by blood.\"\nIt was his mother who gave Louis his belief in the absolute and divine power of his monarchical rule.\nDuring his childhood, he was taken care of by the governesses Fran\u00e7oise de Lansac and Marie-Catherine de Senecey. In 1646, Nicolas\u00a0V de Villeroy became the young king's tutor. LouisXIV became friends with Villeroy's young children, particularly Fran\u00e7ois de Villeroy, and divided his time between the Palais-Royal and the nearby Hotel de Villeroy.\nMinority and the \"Fronde\".\nAccession.\nSensing imminent death in the spring of 1643, King Louis XIII decided to put his affairs in order for his four-year-old son LouisXIV. Not trusting the judgement of his Spanish wife Queen Anne, who would normally have become the sole regent of France, the king decreed that a regency council would rule on his son's behalf, with Anne at its head.\nLouis XIII died on 14 May 1643. On 18 May Queen Anne had her husband's will annulled by the \"Parlement de Paris\", a judicial body of nobles and high-ranking clergy, and she became sole regent. She exiled her husband's ministers Chavigny and Bouthilier and appointed the Count of Brienne as her minister of foreign affairs. Anne kept the direction of religious policy strongly in hand until her son's majority in 1661.\nShe appointed Cardinal Mazarin as chief minister, giving him the daily administration of policy. She continued the policies of her late husband and Cardinal Richelieu, despite their persecution of her, in order to win absolute authority in France and victory abroad for her son. Anne protected Mazarin by exiling her followers the Duke of Beaufort and Marie de Rohan, who conspired against him in 1643.\nThe best example of Anne's loyalty to France was her treatment of one of Richelieu's men, the Chancellor Pierre S\u00e9guier. S\u00e9guier had brusquely interrogated Anne in 1637 (like a \"common criminal\", as she recalled) following the discovery that she was giving military secrets to her father in Spain, and Anne was virtually under house arrest for years. By keeping the effective S\u00e9guier in his post, Anne sacrificed her own feelings for the interests of France and her son Louis.\nThe Queen sought a lasting peace between Catholic nations, but only after a French victory over her native Spain. She also gave a partial Catholic orientation to French foreign policy. This was felt by the Netherlands, France's Protestant ally, which negotiated a separate peace with Spain in 1648.\nIn 1648, Anne and Mazarin successfully negotiated the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War in which France had actively taken part to further its interests. Its terms formally confirmed the extensive autonomy that the various states of the Holy Roman Empire had enjoyed before the war. It granted Sweden seats on the Imperial Diet and territories controlling the mouths of the Oder, Elbe, and Weser Rivers. France, however, profited most from the settlement. Austria, ruled by the Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand III, ceded all Habsburg lands and claims in Alsace to France and acknowledged her \"de facto\" sovereignty over the Three Bishoprics of Metz, Verdun, and Toul. Moreover, many petty German states sought French protection, eager to emancipate themselves from Habsburg domination. This anticipated the formation of the 1658 League of the Rhine, which further diminished Imperial power.\nEarly acts.\nAs the Thirty Years' War came to an end, a civil war known as the Fronde erupted in France. It effectively checked France's ability to exploit the Peace of Westphalia. Anne and Mazarin had largely pursued the policies of Cardinal Richelieu, augmenting the Crown's power at the expense of the nobility and the \"\". Anne was more concerned with internal policy than foreign affairs; she was a very proud queen who insisted on the divine rights of the King of France.\nAll this led her to advocate a forceful policy in all matters relating to the King's authority, in a manner that was much more radical than the one proposed by Mazarin. The Cardinal depended totally on Anne's support and had to use all his influence on the Queen to temper some of her radical actions. Anne imprisoned any aristocrat or member of parliament who challenged her will; her main aim was to transfer to her son an absolute authority in the matters of finance and justice. One of the leaders of the Parlement of Paris, whom she had jailed, died in prison.\nThe ', political heirs of the disaffected feudal aristocracy, sought to protect their traditional feudal privileges from the increasingly centralized royal government. Furthermore, they believed their traditional influence and authority was being usurped by the recently ennobled bureaucrats (the ', or \"nobility of the robe\"), who administered the kingdom and on whom the monarchy increasingly began to rely. This belief intensified the nobles' resentment.\nIn 1648, Anne and Mazarin attempted to tax members of the '. The members refused to comply and ordered all of the king's earlier financial edicts burned. Buoyed by the victory of (later known as ') at the Battle of Lens, Mazarin, on Queen Anne's insistence, arrested certain members in a show of force. The most important arrest, from Anne's point of view, concerned Pierre Broussel, one of the most important leaders in the \"\".\nPeople in France were complaining about the expansion of royal authority, the high rate of taxation, and the reduction of the authority of the Parlement de Paris and other regional representative entities. Paris erupted in rioting as a result, and Anne was forced, under intense pressure, to free Broussel. Moreover, on the night of 9\u201310 February 1651, when Louis was twelve, a mob of angry Parisians broke into the royal palace and demanded to see their king. Led into the royal bed-chamber, they gazed upon Louis, who was feigning sleep, were appeased, and then quietly departed. The threat to the royal family prompted Anne to flee Paris with the king and his courtiers.\nShortly thereafter, the conclusion of the Peace of Westphalia allowed Cond\u00e9's army to return to aid Louis and his court. Cond\u00e9's family was close to Anne at that time, and he agreed to help her attempt to restore the king's authority. The queen's army, headed by Cond\u00e9, attacked the rebels in Paris; the rebels were under the political control of Anne's old friend Marie de Rohan. Beaufort, who had escaped from the prison where Anne had incarcerated him five years before, was the military leader in Paris, under the nominal control of Conti. After a few battles, a political compromise was reached; the Peace of Rueil was signed, and the court returned to Paris.\nUnfortunately for Anne, her partial victory depended on Cond\u00e9, who wanted to control the queen and destroy Mazarin's influence. It was Cond\u00e9's sister who pushed him to turn against the queen. After striking a deal with her old friend Marie de Rohan, who was able to impose the nomination of as minister of justice, Anne arrested Cond\u00e9, his brother Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and the husband of their sister Anne Genevieve de Bourbon, duchess of Longueville. This situation did not last long, and Mazarin's unpopularity led to the creation of a coalition headed mainly by Marie de Rohan and the duchess of Longueville. This aristocratic coalition was strong enough to liberate the princes, exile Mazarin, and impose a condition of virtual house arrest on Queen Anne.\nAll these events were witnessed by Louis and largely explained his later distrust of Paris and the higher aristocracy. \"In one sense, Louis's childhood came to an end with the outbreak of the Fronde. It was not only that life became insecure and unpleasant \u2013 a fate meted out to many children in all ages \u2013 but that Louis had to be taken into the confidence of his mother and Mazarin on political and military matters of which he could have no deep understanding\". \"The family home became at times a near-prison when Paris had to be abandoned, not in carefree outings to other chateaux but in humiliating flights\". The royal family was driven out of Paris twice in this manner, and at one point LouisXIV and Anne were held under virtual arrest in the royal palace in Paris. The Fronde years planted in Louis a hatred of Paris and a consequent determination to move out of the ancient capital as soon as possible, never to return.\nJust as the first ' (the ' of 1648\u20131649) ended, a second one (the ' of 1650\u20131653) began. Unlike that which preceded it, tales of sordid intrigue and half-hearted warfare characterized this second phase of upper-class insurrection. To the aristocracy, this rebellion represented a protest for the reversal of their political demotion from vassals to courtiers. It was headed by the highest-ranking French nobles, among them Louis's uncle Gaston, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans and first cousin Anne Marie Louise d'Orl\u00e9ans, Duchess of Montpensier, known as '; Princes of the Blood such as Cond\u00e9, his brother Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and their sister the Duchess of Longueville; dukes of legitimised royal descent, such as Henri, Duke of Longueville, and Fran\u00e7ois, Duke of Beaufort; so-called \"foreign princes\" such as Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Maurice, Duke of Bouillon, his brother Marshal Turenne, and Marie de Rohan, Duchess of Chevreuse; and scions of France's oldest families, such as Fran\u00e7ois de La Rochefoucauld.\nQueen Anne played the most important role in defeating the Fronde because she wanted to transfer absolute authority to her son. In addition, most of the princes refused to deal with Mazarin, who went into exile for a number of years. The \"\" claimed to act on Louis's behalf, and in his real interest, against his mother and Mazarin.\nQueen Anne had a very close relationship with the Cardinal, and many observers believed that Mazarin became LouisXIV's stepfather by a secret marriage to Queen Anne. However, Louis's coming-of-age and subsequent coronation deprived them of the '' pretext for revolt. The ' thus gradually lost steam and ended in 1653, when Mazarin returned triumphantly from exile. From that time until his death, Mazarin was in charge of foreign and financial policy without the daily supervision of Anne, who was no longer regent.\nDuring this period, Louis fell in love with Mazarin's niece Marie Mancini, but Anne and Mazarin ended the king's infatuation by sending Mancini away from court to be married in Italy. While Mazarin might have been tempted for a short time to marry his niece to the King of France, Queen Anne was absolutely against this; she wanted to marry her son to the daughter of her brother, Philip IV of Spain, for both dynastic and political reasons. Mazarin soon supported the Queen's position because he knew that her support for his power and his foreign policy depended on making peace with Spain from a strong position and on the Spanish marriage. Additionally, Mazarin's relations with Marie Mancini were not good, and he did not trust her to support his position. All of Louis's tears and his supplications to his mother did not make her change her mind. The Spanish marriage would be very important both for its role in ending the war between France and Spain, because many of the claims and objectives of Louis's foreign policy for the next 50 years would be based upon this marriage, and because it was through this marriage that the Spanish throne would ultimately be delivered to the House of Bourbon.\nPersonal reign and reforms.\nComing of age and early reforms.\nLouis XIV was declared to have reached the age of majority on the 7th of September 1651. On the death of Mazarin, in March 1661, Louis personally took the reins of government and astonished his court by declaring that he would rule without a chief minister: Up to this moment I have been pleased to entrust the government of my affairs to the late Cardinal. It is now time that I govern them myself. You [secretaries and ministers] will assist me with your counsels when I ask for them. I request and order you to seal no orders except by my command . . . I order you not to sign anything, not even a passport . . . without my command; to render account to me personally each day and to favor no one. Capitalizing on the widespread public yearning for peace and order after decades of foreign and civil strife, the young king consolidated central political authority at the expense of the feudal aristocracy. Praising his ability to choose and encourage men of talent, the historian Chateaubriand noted: \"it is the voice of genius of all kinds which sounds from the tomb of Louis\".\nLouis began his personal reign with administrative and fiscal reforms. In 1661, the treasury verged on bankruptcy. To rectify the situation, Louis chose Jean-Baptiste Colbert as Controller-General of Finances in 1665. However, Louis first had to neutralize Nicolas Fouquet, the powerful Superintendent of Finances. Although Fouquet's financial indiscretions were not very different from Mazarin's before him or Colbert's after him, his ambition worried Louis. He lavishly entertained the king at the opulent ch\u00e2teau of Vaux-le-Vicomte, flaunting a wealth which could hardly have accumulated except through embezzlement of government funds.\nFouquet appeared eager to succeed Mazarin and Richelieu in power, and he indiscreetly purchased and privately fortified the remote island of Belle \u00cele. These acts sealed his doom. Fouquet was charged with embezzlement; the \"Parlement\" found him guilty and sentenced him to exile; and finally Louis altered the sentence to life imprisonment.\nFouquet's downfall gave Colbert a free hand to reduce the national debt through more efficient taxation. The principal taxes included the \"aides\" and \"douanes\" (both customs duties), the \"gabelle\" (salt tax), and the \"taille\" (land tax). The \"taille\" was reduced at first, and certain tax-collection contracts were auctioned instead of being sold privately to a favoured few. Financial officials were required to keep regular accounts, revising inventories and removing unauthorized exemptions: up to 1661 only 10 per cent of income from the royal domain reached the king. Reform had to overcome vested interests: the \"taille\" was collected by officers of the Crown who had purchased their post at a high price, and punishment of abuses necessarily lowered the value of the purchase. Nevertheless, Colbert achieved excellent results, with the deficit of 1661 turning into a surplus by 1666, with interest on the debt decreasing from 52\u00a0million to 24\u00a0million livres. The \"taille\" was reduced to 42\u00a0million in 1661 and 35\u00a0million in 1665, while revenue from indirect taxation progressed from 26\u00a0million to 55\u00a0million. The revenues of the royal domain were raised from 80,000 livres in 1661 to 5.5\u00a0million in 1671. In 1661, the receipts were equivalent to 26\u00a0million British pounds, of which 10\u00a0million reached the treasury. The expenditure was around 18\u00a0million pounds, leaving a deficit of 8\u00a0million. In 1667, the net receipts had risen to 20\u00a0million pounds sterling, while expenditure had fallen to 11\u00a0million, leaving a surplus of 9\u00a0million pounds.\nMoney was the essential support of the reorganized and enlarged army, the panoply of Versailles, and the growing civil administration. Finance had always been the weakness of the French monarchy: tax collection was costly and inefficient; direct taxes dwindled as they passed through the hands of many intermediate officials; and indirect taxes were collected by private contractors called tax farmers who made a handsome profit.\nThe main economic weakness arose from an old bargain between the French crown and nobility: the king might raise taxes on the nation without consent if only he exempted the nobility. Only the \"unprivileged\" classes paid direct taxes, which came to mean the peasants only, as most bourgeois finagled exemptions in one way or another. The system laid the whole burden of state expenses on the backs of the poor and powerless. After 1700, with the support of Louis's pious secret wife Madame de Maintenon, the king was persuaded to change his fiscal policy. Though willing enough to tax the nobles, Louis feared the political concessions which they would demand in return. Only towards the close of his reign under the extreme exigency of war, was he able, for the first time in French history, to impose direct taxes on the aristocracy. This was a step toward equality before the law and toward sound public finance, though it was predictably diminished by concessions and exemptions won by the insistent efforts of nobles and bourgeois.\nLouis and Colbert also had wide-ranging plans to grow French commerce and trade. Colbert's mercantilist administration established new industries and encouraged manufacturers and inventors, such as the Lyon silk manufacturers and the Gobelins tapestry manufactory. He invited manufacturers and artisans from all over Europe to France, such as Murano glassmakers, Swedish ironworkers, and Dutch shipbuilders. He aimed to decrease imports while increasing French exports, hence reducing the net outflow of precious metals from France.\nLouis instituted reforms in military administration through Michel le Tellier and his son Fran\u00e7ois-Michel le Tellier, successive Marquis de Louvois. They helped to curb the independent spirit of the nobility, imposing order on them at court and in the army. Gone were the days when generals protracted war at the frontiers while bickering over precedence and ignoring orders from the capital and the larger strategic picture, with the old military aristocracy (\"noblesse d'\u00e9p\u00e9e\", nobility of the sword) monopolizing senior military positions and the higher ranks. Louvois modernized the army and reorganised it into a professional, disciplined, well-trained force. He was devoted to the soldiers' material well-being and morale, and even tried to direct campaigns.\nRelations with the major colonies.\nLouis's legal reforms were enacted in his numerous Great Ordinances. Prior to that, France was a patchwork of legal systems, with as many traditional legal regimes as there were provinces, and two co-existing legal systems\u2014customary law in the north and Roman civil law in the south. The \"Grande Ordonnance de Proc\u00e9dure Civile\" of 1667, the \"Code Louis\", was a comprehensive legal code imposing a uniform regulation of civil procedure throughout the kingdom. Among other things, it prescribed baptismal, marriage and death records in the state's registers, not the church's, and it strictly regulated the right of the \"Parlements\" to remonstrate. The \"Code Louis\" later became the basis for the Napoleonic Code, which in turn inspired many modern legal codes.\nOne of Louis's more infamous decrees was the \"Grande Ordonnance sur les Colonies\" of 1685, the \"Code Noir\" (black code). Although it sanctioned slavery, it attempted to humanise the practice by prohibiting the separation of families. Additionally, in the colonies, only Roman Catholics could own slaves, and these had to be baptised.\nLouis ruled through a number of councils:\nEarly wars in the Low Countries.\nSpain.\nThe death of Louis's maternal uncle King Philip\u00a0IV of Spain in 1665 precipitated the War of Devolution. In 1660, Louis had married PhilipIV's eldest daughter, Maria Theresa, as one of the provisions of the 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees. The marriage treaty specified that Maria Theresa was to renounce all claims to Spanish territory for herself and all her descendants. Mazarin and Lionne, however, made the renunciation conditional on the full payment of a Spanish dowry of 500,000 \u00e9cus. The dowry was never paid and would later play a part persuading his maternal first cousin Charles\u00a0II of Spain to leave his empire to Philip, Duke of Anjou (later Philip\u00a0V of Spain), the grandson of LouisXIV and Maria Theresa.\nThe War of Devolution did not focus on the payment of the dowry; rather, the lack of payment was what LouisXIV used as a pretext for nullifying Maria Theresa's renunciation of her claims, allowing the land to \"devolve\" to him. In Brabant (the location of the land in dispute), children of first marriages traditionally were not disadvantaged by their parents' remarriages and still inherited property. Louis's wife was PhilipIV's daughter by his first marriage, while the new king of Spain, CharlesII, was his son by a subsequent marriage. Thus, Brabant allegedly \"devolved\" to Maria Theresa, justifying France to attack the Spanish Netherlands.\nRelations with the Dutch.\nDuring the Eighty Years' War with Spain, France supported the Dutch Republic as part of a general policy of opposing Habsburg power. Johan de Witt, Dutch Grand Pensionary from 1653 to 1672, viewed this as crucial for Dutch security and a counterweight against his domestic Orangist opponents. Louis provided support in the 1665-1667 Second Anglo-Dutch War but used the opportunity to launch the War of Devolution in 1667. This captured Franche-Comt\u00e9 and much of the Spanish Netherlands; French expansion in this area was a direct threat to Dutch economic interests.\nThe Dutch opened talks with Charles\u00a0II of England on a common diplomatic front against France, leading to the Triple Alliance, between England, the Dutch and Sweden. The threat of an escalation and a secret treaty to divide Spanish possessions with Emperor Leopold, the other major claimant to the throne of Spain, led Louis to relinquish many of his gains in the 1668 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.\nLouis placed little reliance on his agreement with Leopold and as it was now clear French and Dutch aims were in direct conflict, he decided to first defeat the Republic, then seize the Spanish Netherlands. This required breaking up the Triple Alliance; he paid Sweden to remain neutral and signed the 1670 Secret Treaty of Dover with Charles, an Anglo-French alliance against the Dutch Republic. In May 1672, France invaded the Republic, supported by M\u00fcnster and the Electorate of Cologne.\nRapid French advance led to a coup that toppled De Witt and brought William\u00a0III to power. Leopold viewed French expansion into the Rhineland as an increasing threat, especially after they seized the strategic Duchy of Lorraine in 1670. The prospect of Dutch defeat led Leopold to an alliance with Brandenburg-Prussia on 23 June, followed by another with the Republic on 25th. Although Brandenburg was forced out of the war by the June 1673 Treaty of Vossem, in August an anti-French alliance was formed by the Dutch, Spain, Emperor Leopold and the Duke of Lorraine.\nThe French alliance was deeply unpopular in England, and only more so after the disappointing battles against Michiel de Ruyter's fleet. CharlesII of England made peace with the Dutch in the February 1674 Treaty of Westminster. However, French armies held significant advantages over their opponents; an undivided command, talented generals like Turenne, Cond\u00e9 and Luxembourg and vastly superior logistics. Reforms introduced by Louvois, the Secretary of War, helped maintain large field armies that could be mobilised much more quickly, allowing them to mount offensives in early spring before their opponents were ready.\nThe French were nevertheless forced to retreat from most of the Dutch Republic, which deeply shocked Louis; he retreated to St Germain for a time, where no one, except a few intimates, was allowed to disturb him. French military advantages allowed them however to hold their ground in Alsace and the Spanish Netherlands while retaking Franche-Comt\u00e9. By 1678, mutual exhaustion led to the Treaty of Nijmegen, which was generally settled in France's favour and allowed Louis to intervene in the Scanian War. Despite the military defeat, his ally Sweden regained much of what it had lost under the 1679 treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Fontainebleau and Lund imposed on Denmark\u2013Norway and Brandenburg. Yet Louis's two primary goals, the destruction of the Dutch Republic and the conquest of the Spanish Netherlands, had failed.\nLouis was at the height of his power, but at the cost of uniting his opponents; this increased as he continued his expansion. In 1679, he dismissed his foreign minister Simon Arnauld, marquis de Pomponne, because he was seen as having compromised too much with the allies. Louis maintained the strength of his army, but in his next series of territorial claims avoided using military force alone. Rather, he combined it with legal pretexts in his efforts to augment the boundaries of his kingdom. Contemporary treaties were intentionally phrased ambiguously. Louis established the Chambers of Reunion to determine the full extent of his rights and obligations under those treaties.\nCities and territories, such as Luxembourg and Casale, were prized for their strategic positions on the frontier and access to important waterways. Louis also sought Strasbourg, an important strategic crossing on the left bank of the Rhine and theretofore a Free Imperial City of the Holy Roman Empire, annexing it and other territories in 1681. Although a part of Alsace, Strasbourg was not part of Habsburg-ruled Alsace and was thus not ceded to France in the Peace of Westphalia.\nFollowing these annexations, Spain declared war, precipitating the War of the Reunions. However, the Spanish were rapidly defeated because the Emperor (distracted by the Great Turkish War) abandoned them, and the Dutch only supported them minimally. By the Truce of Ratisbon, in 1684, Spain was forced to acquiesce in the French occupation of most of the conquered territories, for 20 years.\nLouis's policy of the \"R\u00e9unions\" may have raised France to its greatest size and power during his reign, but it alienated much of Europe. This poor public opinion was compounded by French actions off the Barbary Coast and at Genoa. First, Louis had Algiers and Tripoli, two Barbary pirate strongholds, bombarded to obtain a favourable treaty and the liberation of Christian slaves. Next, in 1684, a punitive mission was launched against Genoa in retaliation for its support for Spain in previous wars. Although the Genoese submitted, and the Doge led an official mission of apology to Versailles, France gained a reputation for brutality and arrogance. European apprehension at growing French might and the realisation of the extent of the dragonnades' effect (discussed below) led many states to abandon their alliances with France. Accordingly, by the late 1680s, France became increasingly isolated in Europe.\nNon-European relations and the colonies.\nFrench colonies multiplied in Africa, the Americas, and Asia during Louis's reign, and French explorers made important discoveries in North America. In 1673, Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette discovered the Mississippi River. In 1682, Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, followed the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico and claimed the vast Mississippi basin in Louis's name, calling it \"Louisiane\". French trading posts were also established in India, at Chandernagore and Pondicherry, and in the Indian Ocean at \u00cele Bourbon. Throughout these regions, Louis and Colbert embarked on an extensive program of architecture and urbanism meant to reflect the styles of Versailles and Paris and the 'gloire' of the realm.\nMeanwhile, diplomatic relations were initiated with distant countries. In 1669, Suleiman Aga led an Ottoman embassy to revive the old Franco-Ottoman alliance. Then, in 1682, after the reception of the Moroccan embassy of Mohammed Tenim in France, Moulay Ismail, Sultan of Morocco, allowed French consular and commercial establishments in his country. In 1699, Louis once again received a Moroccan ambassador, Abdallah bin Aisha, and in 1715, he received a Persian embassy led by Mohammad Reza Beg.\nFrom farther afield, Siam dispatched an embassy in 1684, reciprocated by the French magnificently the next year under Alexandre, Chevalier de Chaumont. This, in turn, was succeeded by another Siamese embassy under Kosa Pan, superbly received at Versailles in 1686. Louis then sent another embassy in 1687, under Simon de la Loub\u00e8re, and French influence grew at the Siamese court, which granted Mergui as a naval base to France. However, the death of Narai, King of Ayutthaya, the execution of his pro-French minister Constantine Phaulkon, and the siege of Bangkok in 1688 ended this era of French influence.\nFrance also attempted to participate actively in Jesuit missions to China. To break the Portuguese dominance there, Louis sent Jesuit missionaries to the court of the Kangxi Emperor in 1685: Jean de Fontaney, Joachim Bouvet, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Gerbillon, Louis Le Comte, and Claude de Visdelou. Louis also received a Chinese Jesuit, Michael Shen Fu-Tsung, at Versailles in 1684. Furthermore, Louis's librarian and translator Arcadio Huang was Chinese.\nHeight of power.\nCentralisation of power.\nBy the early 1680s, Louis had greatly augmented French influence in the world. Domestically, he successfully increased the influence of the crown and its authority over the church and aristocracy, thus consolidating absolute monarchy in France.\nLouis initially supported traditional Gallicanism, which limited papal authority in France, and convened an Assembly of the French clergy in November 1681. Before its dissolution eight months later, the Assembly had accepted the Declaration of the Clergy of France, which increased royal authority at the expense of papal power. Without royal approval, bishops could not leave France, and appeals could not be made to the pope. Additionally, government officials could not be excommunicated for acts committed in pursuance of their duties. Although the king could not make ecclesiastical law, all papal regulations without royal assent were invalid in France. Unsurprisingly, the Pope repudiated the Declaration.\nBy attaching nobles to his court at Versailles, Louis achieved increased control over the French aristocracy. According to historian Philip Mansel, the king turned the palace into:\nan irresistible combination of marriage market, employment agency and entertainment capital of aristocratic Europe, boasting the best theatre, opera, music, gambling, sex and (most important) hunting.\nApartments were built to house those willing to pay court to the king. However, the pensions and privileges necessary to live in a style appropriate to their rank were only possible by waiting constantly on Louis. For this purpose, an elaborate court ritual was created wherein the king became the centre of attention and was observed throughout the day by the public. With his excellent memory, Louis could then see who attended him at court and who was absent, facilitating the subsequent distribution of favours and positions. Another tool Louis used to control his nobility was censorship, which often involved the opening of letters to discern their author's opinion of the government and king. Moreover, by entertaining, impressing, and domesticating them with extravagant luxury and other distractions, Louis not only cultivated public opinion of him, but he also ensured the aristocracy remained under his scrutiny.\nLouis's extravagance at Versailles extended far beyond the scope of elaborate court rituals. He took delivery of an African elephant as a gift from the king of Portugal. He encouraged leading nobles to live at Versailles. This, along with the prohibition of private armies, prevented them from passing time on their own estates and in their regional power bases, from which they historically waged local wars and plotted resistance to royal authority. Louis thus compelled and seduced the old military aristocracy (the \"nobility of the sword\") into becoming his ceremonial courtiers, further weakening their power. In their place, he raised commoners or the more recently ennobled bureaucratic aristocracy (the \"nobility of the robe\"). He judged that royal authority thrived more surely by filling high executive and administrative positions with these men because they could be more easily dismissed than nobles of ancient lineage and entrenched influence. It is believed that Louis's policies were rooted in his experiences during the \"Fronde\", when men of high birth readily took up the rebel cause against their king, who was actually the kinsman of some. This victory over the nobility may thus have ensured the end of major civil wars in France until the French Revolution about a century later.\nFrance as the pivot of warfare.\nUnder Louis, France was the leading European power, and most wars pivoted around its aggressiveness. No European state exceeded it in population, and no one could match its wealth, central location, and very strong professional army. It had largely avoided the devastation of the Thirty Years' War. Its weaknesses included an inefficient financial system that was hard-pressed to pay for its military adventures, and the tendency of most other powers to gang up against it.\nDuring Louis's reign, France fought three major wars: the Franco-Dutch War, the Nine Years' War, and the War of the Spanish Succession. There were also two lesser conflicts: the War of Devolution and the War of the Reunions. The wars were very expensive but defined LouisXIV's foreign policy, and his personality shaped his approach. Impelled \"by a mix of commerce, revenge, and pique\", Louis sensed that war was the ideal way to enhance his glory. In peacetime, he concentrated on preparing for the next war. He taught his diplomats that their job was to create tactical and strategic advantages for the French military. By 1695, France retained much of its dominance but had lost control of the seas to England and Holland, and most countries, both Protestant and Catholic, were in alliance against it. S\u00e9bastien Le Prestre de Vauban, France's leading military strategist, warned Louis in 1689 that a hostile \"Alliance\" was too powerful at sea. He recommended that France fight back by licensing French merchant ships to privateer and seize enemy merchant ships while avoiding its navies:\nFrance has its declared enemies Germany and all the states that it embraces; Spain with all its dependencies in Europe, Asia, Africa and America; the Duke of Savoy [in Italy], England, Scotland, Ireland, and all their colonies in the East and West Indies; and Holland with all its possessions in the four corners of the world where it has great establishments. France has ... undeclared enemies, indirectly hostile, hostile, and envious of its greatness, Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, Venice, Genoa, and part of the Swiss Confederation, all of which states secretly aid France's enemies by the troops that they hire to them, the money they lend them and by protecting and covering their trade.\nVauban was pessimistic about France's so-called friends and allies:\nFor lukewarm, useless, or impotent friends, France has the Pope, who is indifferent; the King of England [JamesII] expelled from his country; the Grand Duke of Tuscany; the Dukes of Mantua, Modena, and Parma [all in Italy]; and the other faction of the Swiss. Some of these are sunk in the softness that comes of years of peace, the others are cool in their affections...The English and Dutch are the main pillars of the Alliance; they support it by making war against us in concert with the other powers, and they keep it going by means of the money that they pay every year to... Allies... We must therefore fall back on privateering as the method of conducting war which is most feasible, simple, cheap, and safe, and which will cost least to the state, the more so since any losses will not be felt by the King, who risks virtually nothing...It will enrich the country, train many good officers for the King, and in a short time force his enemies to sue for peace.\nEdict of Fontainebleau.\nLouis decided to persecute Protestants and revoke the 1598 Edict of Nantes, which awarded Huguenots political and religious freedom. He saw the persistence of Protestantism as a disgraceful reminder of royal powerlessness. After all, the Edict was the pragmatic concession of his grandfather Henry\u00a0IV to end the longstanding French Wars of Religion. An additional factor in Louis's thinking was the prevailing contemporary European principle to assure socio-political stability, \"cuius regio, eius religio\" (\"whose realm, his religion\"), the idea that the religion of the ruler should be the religion of the realm (as originally confirmed in central Europe in the Peace of Augsburg of 1555).\nResponding to petitions, Louis initially excluded Protestants from office, constrained the meeting of synods, closed churches outside of Edict-stipulated areas, banned Protestant outdoor preachers, and prohibited domestic Protestant migration. He also disallowed Protestant-Catholic intermarriages to which third parties objected, encouraged missions to the Protestants, and rewarded converts to Catholicism. This discrimination did not encounter much Protestant resistance, and a steady conversion of Protestants occurred, especially among the noble elites.\nIn 1681, Louis dramatically increased his persecution of Protestants. The principle of \"cuius regio, eius religio\" generally also meant that subjects who refused to convert could emigrate, but Louis banned emigration and effectively insisted that all Protestants must be converted. Secondly, following the proposal of Ren\u00e9 de Marillac and the Marquis of Louvois, he began quartering dragoons in Protestant homes. Although this was within his legal rights, the \"dragonnades\" inflicted severe financial strain on Protestants and atrocious abuse. Between 300,000 and 400,000 Huguenots converted, as this entailed financial rewards and exemption from the \"dragonnades\".\nOn 15 October 1685, Louis issued the Edict of Fontainebleau, which cited the redundancy of privileges for Protestants given their scarcity after the extensive conversions. The Edict of Fontainebleau revoked the Edict of Nantes and repealed all the privileges that arose therefrom. By his edict, Louis no longer tolerated the existence of Protestant groups, pastors, or churches in France. No further churches were to be constructed, and those already existing were to be demolished. Pastors could choose either exile or secular life. Those Protestants who had resisted conversion were now to be baptised forcibly into the established church.\nHistorians have debated Louis's reasons for issuing the Edict of Fontainebleau. He may have been seeking to placate Pope Innocent XI, with whom relations were tense and whose aid was necessary to determine the outcome of a succession crisis in the Electorate of Cologne. He may also have acted to upstage Emperor Leopold\u00a0I and regain international prestige after the latter defeated the Turks without Louis's help. Otherwise, he may simply have desired to end the remaining divisions in French society dating to the Wars of Religion by fulfilling his coronation oath to eradicate heresy.\nMany historians have condemned the Edict of Fontainebleau as gravely harmful to France. In support, they cite the emigration of about 200,000 highly skilled Huguenots (roughly one quarter of the Protestant population, or 1% of the French population) who defied royal decrees and fled France for various Protestant states, weakening the French economy and enriching that of Protestant states. On the other hand, some historians view this as an exaggeration. They argue that most of France's preeminent Protestant businessmen and industrialists converted to Catholicism and remained.\nWhat is certain is that the reaction to the Edict was mixed. Even while French Catholic leaders exulted, Pope InnocentXI still argued with Louis over Gallicanism and criticized the use of violence. Protestants across Europe were horrified at the treatment of their co-religionists, but most Catholics in France applauded the move. Nonetheless, it is indisputable that Louis's public image in most of Europe, especially in Protestant regions, was dealt a severe blow.\nIn the end, however, despite renewed tensions with the Camisards of south-central France at the end of his reign, Louis may have helped ensure that his successor would experience fewer instances of the religion-based disturbances that had plagued his forebears. French society would sufficiently change by the time of his descendant, Louis XVI, to welcome tolerance in the form of the 1787 Edict of Versailles, also known as the Edict of Tolerance. This restored to non-Catholics their civil rights and the freedom to worship openly. With the advent of the French Revolution in 1789, Protestants were granted equal rights with their Roman Catholic counterparts.\nNine Years' War.\nCauses and conduct of the war.\nThe Nine Years' War, which lasted from 1688 to 1697, initiated a period of decline in Louis's political and diplomatic fortunes. It arose from two events in the Rhineland. First, in 1685, the Elector Palatine Charles\u00a0II died. All that remained of his immediate family was Louis's sister-in-law, Elizabeth Charlotte. German law ostensibly barred her from succeeding to her brother's lands and electoral dignity, but it was unclear enough for arguments in favour of Elizabeth Charlotte to have a chance of success. Conversely, the princess was demonstrably entitled to a division of the family's personal property. Louis pressed her claims to land and chattels, hoping the latter, at least, would be given to her. Then, in 1688, Maximilian Henry of Bavaria, Archbishop of Cologne, an ally of France, died. The archbishopric had traditionally been held by the Wittelsbachs of Bavaria, but the Bavarian claimant to replace Maximilian Henry, Prince Joseph Clemens of Bavaria, was at that time not more than 17 years old and not even ordained. Louis sought instead to install his own candidate, Wilhelm Egon von F\u00fcrstenberg, to ensure the key Rhenish state remained an ally.\nIn light of his foreign and domestic policies during the early 1680s, which were perceived as aggressive, Louis's actions, fostered by the succession crises of the late 1680s, created concern and alarm in much of Europe. This led to the formation of the 1686 League of Augsburg by the Holy Roman Emperor, Spain, Sweden, Saxony, and Bavaria. Their stated intention was to return France to at least the borders agreed to in the Treaty of Nijmegen. Emperor LeopoldI's persistent refusal to convert the Truce of Ratisbon into a permanent treaty fed Louis's fears that the Emperor would turn on France and attack the Reunions after settling his affairs in the Balkans.\nAnother event Louis found threatening was England's Glorious Revolution of 1688. Although King James\u00a0II was Catholic, his two Anglican daughters, Mary and Anne, ensured the English people a Protestant succession. But when JamesII's son James Francis Edward Stuart was born, he took precedence in succession over his sisters. This seemed to herald an era of Catholic monarchs in England. Protestant lords called on the Dutch Prince William\u00a0III of Orange, grandson of Charles\u00a0I of England, to come to their aid. He sailed for England with troops despite Louis's warning that France would regard it as a provocation. Witnessing numerous desertions and defections, even among those closest to him, JamesII fled England. Parliament declared the throne vacant, and offered it to James's daughter MaryII and his son-in-law and nephew William. Vehemently anti-French, William (now WilliamIII of England) pushed his new kingdoms into war, thus transforming the League of Augsburg into the Grand Alliance. Before this happened, Louis expected William's expedition to England to absorb his energies and those of his allies, so he dispatched troops to the Rhineland after the expiry of his ultimatum to the German princes requiring confirmation of the Truce of Ratisbon and acceptance of his demands about the succession crises. This military manoeuvre was also intended to protect his eastern provinces from Imperial invasion by depriving the enemy army of sustenance, thus explaining the preemptive scorched earth policy pursued in much of southwestern Germany (the \"Devastation of the Palatinate\").\nFrench armies were generally victorious throughout the war because of Imperial commitments in the Balkans, French logistical superiority, and the quality of French generals such as Cond\u00e9's famous pupil, Fran\u00e7ois Henri de Montmorency-Bouteville, duc de Luxembourg. He triumphed at the Battles of Fleurus in 1690, Steenkerque in 1692, and Landen in 1693, although, the battles proved to be of little of strategic consequence, mostly due to the nature of late 17th-century warfare.\nAlthough an attempt to restore James II failed at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690, France accumulated a string of victories from Flanders in the north, Germany in the east, and Italy and Spain in the south, to the high seas and the colonies. Louis personally supervised the captures of Mons in 1691 and Namur in 1692. Luxembourg gave France the defensive line of the Sambre by capturing Charleroi in 1693. France also overran most of the Duchy of Savoy after the battles of Marsaglia and Staffarde in 1693. While naval stalemate ensued after the French victory at the Battle of Beachy Head in 1690 and the Allied victory at Barfleur-La Hougue in 1692, the Battle of Torroella in 1694 exposed Catalonia to French invasion, culminating in the capture of Barcelona. The Dutch captured Pondich\u00e9ry in 1693, but a 1697 French raid on the Spanish treasure port of Cartagena, Spain, yielded a fortune of 10,000,000 livres.\nIn July 1695, the city of Namur, occupied for three years by the French, was besieged by an allied army led by WilliamIII. LouisXIV ordered the surprise destruction of a Flemish city to divert the attention of these troops. This led to the bombardment of Brussels, in which more than 4,000 buildings were destroyed, including the entire city centre. The strategy failed, as Namur fell three weeks later, but harmed LouisXIV's reputation: a century later, Napoleon deemed the bombardment \"as barbarous as it was useless\".\nPeace was broached by Sweden in 1690. By 1692, both sides evidently wanted peace, and secret bilateral talks began, but to no avail. Louis tried to break up the alliance against him by dealing with individual opponents but did not achieve his aim until 1696 when the Savoyards agreed to the Treaty of Turin and switched sides. Thereafter, members of the League of Augsburg rushed to the peace table, and negotiations for a general peace began in earnest, culminating in the Peace of Ryswick of 1697.\nPeace of Ryswick.\nThe Peace of Ryswick ended the War of the League of Augsburg and disbanded the Grand Alliance. By manipulating their rivalries and suspicions, Louis divided his enemies and broke their power.\nThe treaty yielded many benefits for France. Louis secured permanent French sovereignty over all of Alsace, including Strasbourg, and established the Rhine as the Franco-German border (as it is to this day). Pondich\u00e9ry and Acadia were returned to France, and Louis's \"de facto\" possession of Saint-Domingue was recognised as lawful. However, he returned Catalonia and most of the Reunions.\nFrench military superiority might have allowed him to press for more advantageous terms. Thus, his generosity to Spain with regard to Catalonia has been read as a concession to foster pro-French sentiment and may ultimately have induced King Charles\u00a0II to name Louis's grandson Philip, Duke of Anjou, heir to the Spanish throne. In exchange for financial compensation, France renounced its interests in the Electorate of Cologne and the Palatinate. Lorraine, which had been occupied by the French since 1670, was returned to its rightful Duke Leopold, albeit with a right of way to the French military. William and Mary were recognised as joint sovereigns of the British Isles, and Louis withdrew support for JamesII. The Dutch were given the right to garrison forts in the Spanish Netherlands that acted as a protective barrier against possible French aggression. Though in some respects the Treaty of Ryswick may appear a diplomatic defeat for Louis since he failed to place client rulers in control of the Palatinate or the Electorate of Cologne, he did fulfil many of the aims laid down in his 1688 ultimatum. In any case, peace in 1697 was desirable to Louis, since France was exhausted from the costs of the war.\nWar of the Spanish Succession.\nCauses and build-up to the war.\nBy the time of the Peace of Ryswick, the Spanish succession had been a source of concern to European leaders for well over forty years. King Charles\u00a0II ruled a vast empire comprising Spain, Naples, Sicily, Milan, the Spanish Netherlands, and numerous Spanish colonies. He produced no children, however, and consequently had no direct heirs.\nThe principal claimants to the throne of Spain belonged to the ruling families of France and Austria. The French claim derived from LouisXIV's mother Anne of Austria (the older sister of Philip\u00a0IV of Spain) and his wife Maria Theresa (PhilipIV's eldest daughter). Based on the laws of primogeniture, France had the better claim as it originated from the eldest daughters in two generations. However, their renunciation of succession rights complicated matters. In the case of Maria Theresa, nonetheless, the renunciation was considered null and void owing to Spain's breach of her marriage contract with Louis. In contrast, no renunciations tainted the claims of Emperor LeopoldI's son Charles, Archduke of Austria, who was a grandson of Philip\u00a0III's youngest daughter Maria Anna. The English and Dutch feared that a French or Austrian-born Spanish king would threaten the balance of power and thus preferred the Bavarian Prince Joseph Ferdinand, a grandson of LeopoldI through his first wife Margaret Theresa of Spain (the younger daughter of PhilipIV).\nIn an attempt to avoid war, Louis signed the Treaty of the Hague with WilliamIII of England in 1698. This agreement divided Spain's Italian territories between Louis's son \"le Grand Dauphin\" and Archduke Charles, with the rest of the empire awarded to Joseph Ferdinand. WilliamIII consented to permitting the Dauphin's new territories to become part of France when the latter succeeded to his father's throne. The signatories, however, omitted to consult the ruler of these lands, and CharlesII was passionately opposed to the dismemberment of his empire. In 1699, he re-confirmed his 1693 will that named Joseph Ferdinand as his sole successor.\nSix months later, Joseph Ferdinand died. Therefore, in 1700, Louis and WilliamIII concluded a fresh partitioning agreement, the Treaty of London. This allocated Spain, the Low Countries, and the Spanish colonies to the Archduke. The Dauphin would receive all of Spain's Italian territories. CharlesII acknowledged that his empire could only remain undivided by bequeathing it entirely to a Frenchman or an Austrian. Under pressure from his German wife, Maria Anna of Neuburg, CharlesII named Archduke Charles as his sole heir.\nAcceptance of the will of Charles II and consequences.\nOn his deathbed in 1700, CharlesII of Spain unexpectedly changed his will. The clear demonstration of French military superiority for many decades before this time, the pro-French faction at the court of Spain, and even Pope Innocent\u00a0XII convinced him that France was more likely to preserve his empire intact. He thus offered the entire empire to the Dauphin's second son Philip, Duke of Anjou, provided it remained undivided. Anjou was not in the direct line of French succession, thus his accession would not cause a Franco-Spanish union. If Anjou refused, the throne would be offered to his younger brother Charles, Duke of Berry. If the Duke of Berry declined it, it would go to Archduke Charles, then to the distantly related House of Savoy if Charles declined it.\nLouis was confronted with a difficult choice. He could agree to a partition of the Spanish possessions and avoid a general war, or accept CharlesII's will and alienate much of Europe. He may initially have been inclined to abide by the partition treaties, but the Dauphin's insistence persuaded him otherwise. Moreover, Louis's foreign minister, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Torcy, pointed out that war with the Emperor would almost certainly ensue whether Louis accepted the partition treaties or CharlesII's will. He emphasised that, should it come to war, WilliamIII was unlikely to stand by France since he \"made a treaty to avoid war and did not intend to go to war to implement the treaty\". Indeed, in the event of war, it might be preferable to be already in control of the disputed lands. Eventually, therefore, Louis decided to accept CharlesII's will. Philip, Duke of Anjou, thus became PhilipV, King of Spain.\nMost European rulers accepted Philip as king, some reluctantly. Depending on one's views of the war's inevitability, Louis acted reasonably or arrogantly. He confirmed that PhilipV retained his French rights despite his new Spanish position. Admittedly, he may only have been hypothesising a theoretical eventuality and not attempting a Franco-Spanish union. But his actions were certainly not read as disinterested. Moreover, Louis sent troops to the Spanish Netherlands to evict Dutch garrisons and secure Dutch recognition of PhilipV. In 1701, Philip transferred the \"asiento\" (the right to supply slaves to Spanish colonies) to France, as a sign of the two nations' growing connections. As tensions mounted, Louis decided to acknowledge James Stuart, the son of JamesII, as King of England, Scotland and Ireland on the latter's death, infuriating WilliamIII. These actions enraged Britain and the Dutch Republic. With the Holy Roman Emperor and the petty German states, they formed another Grand Alliance and declared war on France in 1702. French diplomacy secured Bavaria, Portugal, and Savoy as Franco-Spanish allies.\nCommencement of fighting.\nEven before war was officially declared, hostilities began with Imperial aggression in Italy. Once finally declared, the War of the Spanish Succession lasted almost until Louis's death, at great cost to him and France.\nThe war began with French successes, but the talents of John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, and Eugene of Savoy checked these victories and broke the myth of French invincibility. The duo allowed the Palatinate and Austria to occupy Bavaria after their victory at the Battle of Blenheim. Maximilian\u00a0II Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria, had to flee to the Spanish Netherlands. The impact of this victory won the support of Portugal and Savoy. Later, the Battle of Ramillies delivered the Low Countries to the Allies, and the Battle of Turin forced Louis to evacuate Italy, leaving it open to Allied forces. Marlborough and Eugene met again at the Battle of Oudenarde, which enabled them to invade France.\nFrance established contact with Francis\u00a0II R\u00e1k\u00f3czi and promised support if he took up the cause of Hungarian independence.\nDefeats, famine, and mounting debt greatly weakened France. Between 1693 and 1710, over two million people died in two famines, made worse as foraging armies seized food supplies from the villages. In desperation, Louis ordered a disastrous invasion of the English island of Guernsey in the autumn of 1704 with the aim of raiding their successful harvest. By the winter of 1708\u201309, he was willing to accept peace at nearly any cost. He agreed that the entire Spanish empire should be surrendered to Archduke Charles, and also consented to return to the frontiers of the Peace of Westphalia, giving up all the territories he had acquired over 60 years. But he could not promise that PhilipV would accept these terms, so the Allies demanded that Louis single-handedly attack his grandson to force these terms on him. If he could not achieve this within the year, the war would resume. Louis would not accept these terms.\nTurning point.\nLouis XIV depicted on a Louis d'or in 1709\nThe final phases of the War of the Spanish Succession demonstrated that the Allies could not maintain Archduke Charles in Spain just as surely as France could not retain the entire Spanish inheritance for PhilipV. The Allies were definitively expelled from central Spain by the Franco-Spanish victories at the Battles of Villaviciosa and Brihuega in 1710. French forces elsewhere remained obdurate despite their defeats. The Allies suffered a Pyrrhic victory at the Battle of Malplaquet with 21,000 casualties, twice that of the French. Eventually, France recovered its military pride with the decisive victory at Denain in 1712.\nFrench military successes near the end of the war took place against the background of a changed political situation in Austria. In 1705, Emperor LeopoldI died. His elder son and successor, Joseph\u00a0I, followed him in 1711. His heir was none other than Archduke Charles, who secured control of all of his brother's Austrian landholdings. If the Spanish empire then fell to him, it would have resurrected a domain as vast as Holy Roman Emperor Charles\u00a0V's in the 16th century. To the maritime powers of Great Britain and the Dutch Republic, this would have been as undesirable as a Franco-Spanish union.\nConclusion of peace.\nAs a result of the fresh British perspective on the European balance of power, Anglo-French talks began, culminating in the 1713 Peace of Utrecht between Louis, Philip\u00a0V of Spain, Anne of Great Britain, and the Dutch Republic. In 1714, after losing Landau and Freiburg, the Holy Roman Emperor also made peace with France in the Treaties of Rastatt and Baden.\nIn the general settlement, PhilipV retained Spain and its colonies, while Austria received the Spanish Netherlands and divided Spanish Italy with Savoy. Britain kept Gibraltar and Menorca. Louis agreed to withdraw his support for James Stuart, son of JamesII and pretender to the thrones of Great Britain and Ireland, and ceded Newfoundland, Rupert's Land, and Acadia in the Americas to Anne. Britain gained the most from the treaty, but the final terms were much more favourable to France than those being discussed in peace negotiations in 1709 and 1710. France retained \u00cele-Saint-Jean and \u00cele Royale, and Louis acquired a few minor European territories, such as the Principality of Orange and the Ubaye Valley, which covered transalpine passes into Italy. Thanks to Louis, his allies the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne were restored to their prewar status and returned their lands.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nLouis and his wife Maria Theresa of Spain had six children from the marriage contracted for them in 1660. However, only one child, the eldest, survived to adulthood: Louis, \"le Grand Dauphin\", known as \"Monseigneur\". Maria Theresa died in 1683, whereupon Louis remarked that she had never caused him unease on any other occasion.\nDespite evidence of affection early on in their marriage, Louis was never faithful to Maria Theresa. He took a series of mistresses, both official and unofficial. Among the better documented are Louise de La Valli\u00e8re (with whom he had five children; 1661\u20131667), Bonne de Pons d'Heudicourt (1665), Catherine Charlotte de Gramont (1665), Fran\u00e7oise-Ath\u00e9na\u00efs, Marquise de Montespan (with whom he had seven children; 1667\u20131680), Anne de Rohan-Chabot (1669\u20131675), Claude de Vin des \u0152illets (one child born in 1676), Isabelle de Ludres (1675\u20131678), and Marie Ang\u00e9lique de Scorailles (1679\u20131681), who died at age 19 in childbirth. Through these liaisons, he produced numerous illegitimate children, most of whom he married members of cadet branches of the royal family.\nLouis proved relatively more faithful to his second wife, Fran\u00e7oise d'Aubign\u00e9, Marquise de Maintenon. He first met her through her work caring for his children by Madame de Montespan, noting the care she gave to his favourite, Louis Auguste, Duke of Maine. The king was, at first, put off by her strict religious practice, but he warmed to her through her care for his children.\nWhen he legitimized his children by Madame de Montespan on 20 December 1673, Fran\u00e7oise d'Aubign\u00e9 became the royal governess at Saint-Germain. As governess, she was one of very few people permitted to speak to him as an equal, without limits. It is believed that they were married secretly at Versailles on or around 10 October 1683 or January 1684. This marriage, though never announced or publicly discussed, was an open secret and lasted until his death.\nPiety and religion.\nLouis was a pious and devout king who saw himself as the head and protector of the Catholic Church in France. He made his devotions daily regardless of where he was, following the liturgical calendar regularly. Under the influence of his very religious second wife, he became much stronger in the practice of his Catholic faith. This included banning opera and comedy performances during Lent.\nTowards the middle and the end of his reign, the centre for the King's religious observances was usually the Chapelle Royale at Versailles. Ostentation was a distinguishing feature of his daily Mass, annual celebrations (such as those of Holy Week), and special ceremonies. Louis established the Paris Foreign Missions Society, but his informal alliance with the Ottoman Empire was criticised for undermining Christendom.\nPatronage of the arts.\nLouis supported the royal court of France and those who worked under him. He brought the under his patronage and became its \"Protector\". He promoted classical French literature by protecting such writers as Moli\u00e8re, Racine, and La Fontaine. Louis also patronised the visual arts by funding and commissioning artists such as Charles Le Brun, Pierre Mignard, Antoine Coysevox, and Hyacinthe Rigaud. Composers and musicians such as Jean-Baptiste Lully, Jacques Champion de Chambonni\u00e8res, and Fran\u00e7ois Couperin thrived. In 1661, Louis founded the Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Danse, and in 1669, the Acad\u00e9mie d'Op\u00e9ra, important events in the evolution of ballet. He also attracted, supported and patronized such artists as Andr\u00e9 Charles Boulle, who revolutionised marquetry with his art of inlay, today known as \"Boulle work\". Always on the lookout for new talent, the king launched music competitions: in 1683, Michel-Richard de Lalande thus became deputy master of the Royal Chapel, composing his \"Symphonies for the Soupers du Roy\" along with 77 large scale \"Grand Motets\".\nOver the course of four building campaigns, Louis converted a hunting lodge commissioned by LouisXIII into the spectacular Palace of Versailles. Except for the current Royal Chapel (built near the end of his reign), the palace achieved much of its current appearance after the third building campaign, which was followed by an official move of the royal court to Versailles on 6 May 1682. Versailles became a dazzling, awe-inspiring setting for state affairs and the reception of foreign dignitaries. At Versailles, the king alone commanded attention.\nSeveral reasons have been suggested for the creation of the extravagant and stately palace, as well as the relocation of the monarchy's seat. The memoirist Saint-Simon speculated that Louis viewed Versailles as an isolated power centre where treasonous cabals could be more readily discovered and foiled. There has also been speculation that the revolt of the \"Fronde\" caused Louis to hate Paris, which he abandoned for a country retreat, but his sponsorship of many public works in Paris, such as the establishment of a police force and of street-lighting, lend little credence to this theory. As a further example of his continued care for the capital, Louis constructed the , a military complex and home to this day for officers and soldiers rendered infirm either by injury or old age. While pharmacology was still quite rudimentary in his day, the \"Invalides\" pioneered new treatments and set new standards for hospice treatment. The conclusion of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1668 also induced Louis to demolish Paris's northern walls in 1670 and replace them with wide tree-lined boulevards.\nLouis renovated and improved the Louvre and other royal residences. Gian Lorenzo Bernini was originally to plan additions to the Louvre; however, his plans would have meant the destruction of much of the existing structure, replacing it with an Italian summer villa in the centre of Paris. Bernini's plans were eventually shelved in favour of the elegant Louvre Colonnade designed by three Frenchmen: Louis Le Vau, Charles Le Brun, and Claude Perrault. With the relocation of the court to Versailles, the Louvre was given over to the arts and the public.\nDuring his visit from Rome, Bernini also executed a renowned portrait bust of the king.\nImage and depiction.\nFew rulers in world history have commemorated themselves in as grand a manner as Louis. He cultivated his image as the Sun King (\"le Roi Soleil\"), the centre of the universe \"without equal\". Louis used court ritual and the arts to validate and augment his control over France. With his support, Colbert established from the beginning of Louis's personal reign a centralised and institutionalised system for creating and perpetuating the royal image. The King was thus portrayed largely in majesty or at war, notably against Spain. This portrayal of the monarch was to be found in numerous media of artistic expression, such as painting, sculpture, theatre, dance, music, and the almanacs that diffused royal propaganda to the population at large.\nEvolution of royal portraiture.\nOver his lifetime, Louis commissioned numerous works of art, including over 300 formal portraits. The earliest portrayals of Louis already followed the pictorial conventions of the day in depicting the child king as the majestically royal incarnation of France. This idealisation of the monarch continued in later works, which avoided depictions of the effect of smallpox that Louis contracted in 1647. In the 1660s, Louis began to be shown as a Roman emperor, the god Apollo, or Alexander the Great, as can be seen in many works of Charles Le Brun, such as sculpture, paintings, and the decor of major monuments.\nGrandiose images of the king in allegorical or mythological guises followed conventions of historiated portraiture that had been common since the Renaissance. There is no better illustration of this than Hyacinthe Rigaud's 1701 Portrait of LouisXIV, where a 63-year-old Louis appears to stand on a set of unnaturally young legs.\nRigaud's portrait exemplified the height of royal portraiture during Louis's reign. Although Rigaud crafted a credible likeness of Louis, the portrait was neither meant as an exercise in realism nor to explore Louis's character. Certainly, Rigaud was concerned with detail and depicted the king's costume with great precision, down to his shoe buckle.\nHowever, Rigaud intended to glorify the monarchy. Rigaud's original, now housed in the Louvre, was originally meant as a gift to Louis's grandson, Philip\u00a0V of Spain. However, Louis was so pleased with the work that he kept the original and commissioned a copy to be sent to his grandson. That became the first of many copies, both in full and half-length formats, to be made by Rigaud, often with the help of his assistants. The portrait also became a model for French royal and imperial portraiture down to the time of Charles\u00a0X over a century later. In his work, Rigaud proclaims Louis's exalted royal status through his elegant stance and haughty expression, the royal regalia and throne, rich ceremonial fleur-de-lys robes, as well as the upright column in the background, which, together with the draperies, serves to frame this image of majesty.\nOther works of art.\nIn addition to portraits, Louis commissioned at least 20 statues of himself in the 1680s, to stand in Paris and provincial towns as physical manifestations of his rule. He also commissioned \"war artists\" to follow him on campaigns to document his military triumphs. To remind the people of these triumphs, Louis erected permanent triumphal arches in Paris and the provinces for the first time since the decline of the Roman Empire.\nLouis's reign marked the birth and infancy of the art of medallions. Sixteenth-century rulers had often issued medals in small numbers to commemorate the major events of their reigns. Louis, however, struck more than 300 to celebrate the story of the king in bronze, that were enshrined in thousands of households throughout France.\nHe also used tapestries as a medium of exalting the monarchy. Tapestries could be allegorical, depicting the elements or seasons, or realist, portraying royal residences or historical events. They were among the most significant means to spread royal propaganda prior to the construction of the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles.\nBallet.\nLouis loved ballet and frequently danced in court ballets during the early half of his reign. In general, Louis was an eager dancer who performed 80 roles in 40 major ballets. This approaches the career of a professional ballet dancer.\nHis choices were strategic and varied. He danced four parts in three of Moli\u00e8re's com\u00e9dies-ballets, which are plays accompanied by music and dance. Louis played an Egyptian in \"Le Mariage forc\u00e9\" in 1664, a Moorish gentleman in \"Le Sicilien\" in 1667, and both Neptune and Apollo in \"Les Amants magnifiques\" in 1670.\nHe sometimes danced leading roles that were suitably royal or godlike (such as Neptune, Apollo, or the Sun). At other times, he would adopt mundane roles before appearing at the end in the lead role. It is considered that, at all times, he provided his roles with sufficient majesty and drew the limelight with his flair for dancing. For Louis, ballet may not have merely been a tool for manipulation in his propaganda machinery. The sheer number of performances he gave as well as the diversity of roles he played may serve to indicate a deeper understanding and interest in the art form.\nBallet dancing was used by Louis as a political tool to hold power over his state. He integrated ballet deeply into court social functions and fixated his nobles' attention on upholding standards in ballet dancing, effectively distracting them from political activities. In 1661, the Royal Academy of Dance was founded by Louis to further his ambition. Pierre Beauchamp, his private dance instructor, was ordered by Louis to come up with a notation system to record ballet performances, which he did with great success. His work was adopted and published by Feuillet in 1700 as \"Choregraphie\". This major development in ballet played an important role in promoting French culture and ballet throughout Europe during Louis's time.\nLouis greatly emphasized etiquettes in ballet dancing, evidently seen in \"La belle danse\" (the French noble style). More challenging skills were required to perform this dance with movements very much resembling court behaviours, as a way to remind the nobles of the king's absolute power and their own status. All the details and rules were compressed in five positions of the bodies codified by Beauchamp.\nUnofficial image.\nBesides the official depiction and image of Louis, his subjects also followed a non-official discourse consisting mainly of clandestine publications, popular songs, and rumours that provided an alternative interpretation of Louis and his government. They often focused on the miseries arising from poor government, but also carried the hope for a better future when Louis escaped the malignant influence of his ministers and mistresses, and took the government into his own hands. On the other hand, petitions addressed either directly to Louis or to his ministers exploited the traditional imagery and language of monarchy. These varying interpretations of Louis abounded in self-contradictions that reflected the people's amalgamation of their everyday experiences with the idea of monarchy.\nHealth and death.\nDespite the image of a healthy and virile king that Louis sought to project, evidence exists to suggest that his health was not very good. He had many ailments: for example, symptoms of diabetes, as confirmed in reports of suppurating periostitis in 1678, dental abscesses in 1696, along with recurring boils, fainting spells, gout, dizziness, hot flushes, and headaches.\nFrom 1647 to 1711, the three chief physicians to the king (Antoine Vallot, Antoine d'Aquin, and Guy-Crescent Fagon) recorded all of his health problems in the \"Journal de Sant\u00e9 du Roi\" (\"Journal of the King's Health\"), a daily report of his health. On 18 November 1686, Louis underwent a painful operation for an anal fistula that was performed by the surgeon Charles-Fran\u00e7ois F\u00e9lix de Tassy, who prepared a specially shaped curved scalpel for the occasion. The wound took more than two months to heal.\nLouis died of gangrene at Versailles on 1 September 1715, four days before his 77th birthday, after 72 years on the throne. Enduring much pain in his last days, he finally \"yielded up his soul without any effort, like a candle going out\", while reciting the psalm \"Deus, in adjutorium me festina\" (\"O Lord, make haste to help me\"). His body was laid to rest in the Basilica of Saint-Denis outside Paris. It remained there undisturbed for about 80 years until revolutionaries . In 1848, at Nuneham House, a piece of Louis's mummified heart, taken from his tomb and kept in a silver locket by Lord Harcourt, Archbishop of York, was shown to the Dean of Westminster, William Buckland, who ate a part of it.\nCardinal Armand Gaston Maximilien de Rohan gave Last Rites (confession, viaticum, and unction) to king LouisXIV.\nSuccession.\nLouis outlived most of his immediate legitimate family. His last surviving legitimate son, Louis, Dauphin of France, died in 1711 of smallpox and barely a year later, Louis, Duke of Burgundy, the eldest of the Dauphin's three sons and then heir-apparent to Louis, died of measles. Burgundy's elder son, Louis, Duke of Brittany, died of the same disease a few weeks later. Thus, on his deathbed, Louis's heir-apparent was his five-year-old great-grandson, Louis, Duke of Anjou, Burgundy's younger son.\nLouis foresaw that his successor would not yet be mature and sought to restrict the power of his nephew Philippe II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, who, as his closest surviving legitimate relative in France, would probably become regent to the prospective Louis XV. Accordingly, the king created a regency council as LouisXIII had in anticipation of LouisXIV's own minority, with some power vested in his illegitimate son Louis-Auguste de Bourbon, Duke of Maine. Orl\u00e9ans, however, had Louis's will annulled by the Parlement of Paris after his death and made himself sole regent. He stripped Maine and his brother, Louis-Alexandre, Count of Toulouse, of the rank of Prince of the Blood that Louis had granted them and significantly reduced Maine's power and privileges.\nLine of succession in 1715.\nBelow is the line of succession to the French throne at the time of the death of LouisXIV in 1715. LouisXIV's only surviving legitimate grandson, PhilipV, was not included in the line of succession because he had renounced the French throne after the war of the Spanish Succession, a 13-year conflict following the death of Charles II of Spain in 1700.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther down the French line of succession in 1715 was the House of Cond\u00e9, followed by the House of Conti (a cadet branch of the House of Cond\u00e9). Both of these royal houses were descended in the male line from Henri II, Prince of Cond\u00e9, a second cousin of French King LouisXIII (the father of LouisXIV) in the male line.\nLegacy.\nReputation.\nAccording to Philippe de Courcillon's \"Journal\", Louis on his deathbed advised his heir with these words: Do not follow the bad example which I have set you; I have often undertaken war too lightly and have sustained it for vanity. Do not imitate me, but be a peaceful prince, and may you apply yourself principally to the alleviation of the burdens of your subjects.\nSome historians point out that it was a customary demonstration of piety in those days to exaggerate one's sins. Thus they do not place much emphasis on Louis's deathbed declarations in assessing his accomplishments. Rather, they focus on military and diplomatic successes, such as how he placed a French prince on the Spanish throne. This, they contend, ended the threat of an aggressive Spain that historically interfered in domestic French politics. These historians also emphasise the effect of Louis's wars in expanding France's boundaries and creating more defensible frontiers that preserved France from invasion until the Revolution.\nArguably, Louis also applied himself indirectly to \"the alleviation of the burdens of [his] subjects.\" For example, he patronised the arts, encouraged industry, fostered trade and commerce, and sponsored the founding of an overseas empire. Moreover, the significant reduction in civil wars and aristocratic rebellions during his reign are seen by these historians as the result of Louis's consolidation of royal authority over feudal elites. In their analysis, his early reforms centralised France and marked the birth of the modern French state. They regard the political and military victories as well as numerous cultural achievements as how Louis helped raise France to a preeminent position in Europe. Europe came to admire France for its military and cultural successes, power, and sophistication. Europeans generally began to emulate French manners, values, goods, and deportment. French became the universal language of the European elite.\nLouis's detractors have argued that his considerable foreign, military and domestic expenditure impoverished and bankrupted France. His supporters, however, distinguish the state, which was impoverished, from France, which was not. As supporting evidence, they cite the literature of the time, such as the social commentary in Montesquieu's \"Persian Letters\".\nAlternatively, Louis's critics attribute the social upheaval culminating in the French Revolution to his failure to reform French institutions while the monarchy was still secure. Other scholars counter that there was little reason to reform institutions that largely worked well under Louis. They also maintain that events occurring almost 80 years after his death were not reasonably foreseeable to Louis and that in any case, his successors had sufficient time to initiate reforms of their own.\nLouis has often been criticised for his vanity. The memoirist Saint-Simon, who claimed that Louis slighted him, criticised him thus: There was nothing he liked so much as flattery, or, to put it more plainly, adulation; the coarser and clumsier it was, the more he relished it. For his part, Voltaire saw Louis's vanity as the cause for his bellicosity:It is certain that he passionately wanted glory, rather than the conquests themselves. In the acquisition of Alsace and half of Flanders, and of all of Franche-Comt\u00e9, what he really liked was the name he made for himself.\nOn the other hand, Saint-Simon pointed out that, in contrast to the situation at the other European courts, Louis's birthday and that of the members of his family always went unobserved \"to the point that there never was even the slightest mention of it, that day being no different from all the other days of the year\".\nNonetheless, Louis has also received praise. The anti-Bourbon Napoleon described him not only as \"a great king\", but also as \"the only King of France worthy of the name\". Leibniz, the German Protestant philosopher, commended him as \"one of the greatest kings that ever was\". And Lord Acton admired him as \"by far the ablest man who was born in modern times on the steps of a throne\". The historian and philosopher Voltaire wrote: \"His name can never be pronounced without respect and without summoning the image of an eternally memorable age\". Voltaire's history, \"The Age of Louis\u00a0XIV\", named Louis's reign as not only one of the four great ages in which reason and culture flourished, but the greatest ever.\nQuotes.\nNumerous quotes have been attributed to LouisXIV by legend. The well-known \"I am the state\" (\"L'\u00c9tat, c'est moi\") was reported from at least the late 18th century. It was widely repeated but also denounced as apocryphal by the early 19th century. He did say, \"Every time I appoint someone to a vacant position, I make a hundred unhappy and one ungrateful.\" Louis is recorded by numerous eyewitnesses as having said on his deathbed: \"\" (\"I depart, but the State shall always remain.\")\nOrder of Saint Louis.\nOn 5 April 1693, Louis also founded the Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis (), a military order of chivalry. He named it after Louis\u00a0IX and intended it as a reward for outstanding officers. It is notable as the first decoration that could be granted to non-nobles and is roughly the forerunner of the \"L\u00e9gion d'honneur\", with which it shares the red ribbon (though the \"L\u00e9gion d'honneur\" is awarded to military personnel and civilians alike).\nFamily.\nIssue.\nThis is an incomplete list of LouisXIV's illegitimate children. He reputedly had more, but the difficulty in fully documenting all such births restricts the list only to the better-known or legitimised.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18554", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18554", "title": "Ludwig Ritter von K\u00f6chel", "text": "Austrian musicologist and writer (1800\u20131877)\nLudwig Ritter von K\u00f6chel (; born Ludwig Alois Friedrich K\u00f6chel; 14 January 1800 \u2013 3 June 1877) was an Austrian musicologist, writer, composer, botanist, and publisher. He is best known for cataloguing the works of Mozart and originating the 'KV-numbers' by which they are known (\"KV\" for \"K\u00f6chel-Verzeichnis\").\nLife.\nLudwig Alois Friedrich K\u00f6chel was born in the town of Stein, Lower Austria. He studied law in Vienna and graduated with a PhD in 1827. For fifteen years, he was tutor to the four sons of Archduke Charles of Austria. K\u00f6chel was rewarded with a knighthood and a generous financial settlement, permitting him to spend the rest of his life as a private scholar. Contemporary scientists were greatly impressed by his botanical researches in North Africa, the Iberian Peninsula, the United Kingdom, the North Cape, and Russia. In addition to botany, he was interested in geology and mineralogy, but also loved music, and was a member of the Mozarteum Salzburg. He died of cancer at age 77 in Vienna.\nK\u00f6chel catalogue.\nIn 1862 he published the K\u00f6chel catalogue, a chronological and thematic register of the works of Mozart. This catalogue was the first on such a scale and with such a level of scholarship behind it; it has since undergone revisions. Mozart's works are often referred to by their KV-numbers (\"cf.\" opus number); for example, the \"Jupiter\" symphony, \"Symphony No. 41\", KV. 551. At the same time that K\u00f6chel was writing his catalogue Otto Jahn was making a comprehensive collection of Mozart works and writing a scholarly biography of Mozart. When Jahn learned of K\u00f6chel's work he turned over his collection to him. K\u00f6chel dedicated his catalogue to Jahn.\nOther works.\nMoreover, K\u00f6chel arranged Mozart's works into twenty-four categories, which were used by Breitkopf &amp; H\u00e4rtel when they published the first complete edition of Mozart's works from 1877 to 1910, a venture partly funded by K\u00f6chel.\nHe also catalogued the works of Johann Fux.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18555", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18555", "title": "LEO (computer)", "text": "1951 British computer\nThe LEO (Lyons Electronic Office) was a series of early computer systems created by J. Lyons and Co. The first in the series, the LEO I, was the first computer used for commercial business applications.\nThe prototype LEO I was modelled closely on the Cambridge EDSAC. Its construction was overseen by Oliver Standingford, Raymond Thompson and David Caminer of J. Lyons and Co. LEO I ran its first business application in 1951. In 1954 Lyons formed LEO Computers Ltd to market LEO\u00a0I and its successors LEO\u00a0II and LEO\u00a0III to other companies. LEO Computers eventually became part of English Electric Company (EEL), (EELM), then English Electric Computers (EEC), where the same team developed the faster LEO\u00a0360 and even faster LEO\u00a0326 models. It then passed to International Computers Limited (ICL) and ultimately Fujitsu.\nLEO series computers were still in use until 1981.\nOrigins and initial design.\nJ. Lyons and Co. was one of the UK's leading catering and food manufacturing companies in the first half of the 20th century. In 1947, two of its senior managers, Oliver Standingford and Raymond Thompson, were sent to the United States to look at new business methods developed during World War II. During the visit, they met Herman Goldstine who was one of the original developers of ENIAC, the first general-purpose electronic computer. Standingford and Thompson saw the potential of computers to help solve the problem of administering a major business enterprise. They also learned from Goldstine that, back in the UK, Douglas Hartree and Maurice Wilkes were actually building another such machine, the pioneering EDSAC computer, at the University of Cambridge.\nOn their return to the UK, Standingford and Thompson visited Hartree and Wilkes in Cambridge and were favourably impressed with their technical expertise and vision. Hartree and Wilkes estimated that EDSAC was 12\u201318 months from completion, but said that this interval could be shortened by additional funding. Standingford and Thompson wrote a report to the Lyons' board recommending that Lyons should acquire or build a computer to meet their business needs. The board agreed that, as a first step, Lyons would provide Hartree and Wilkes with \u00a32,500 for the EDSAC project, and would also provide them with the services of a Lyons electrical engineer, Ernest Lenaerts. EDSAC was completed and ran its first program in May 1949.\nFollowing the successful completion of EDSAC, the Lyons board agreed to start the construction of their own machine, expanding on the EDSAC design. The LEO computer room, which took up around 2,500 square feet of floor space, was at Cadby Hall in Hammersmith.\nThe Lyons machine was christened Lyons Electronic Office, or LEO. On the recommendation of Wilkes, Lyons recruited John Pinkerton, a radar engineer and research student at Cambridge, as team leader for the project. Lenaerts returned to Lyons to work on the project, and Wilkes provided training for Lyons' engineer Derek Hemy, who would be responsible for writing LEO's programs. On 15 February 1951 the computer, carrying out a simple test program, was shown to HRH Princess Elizabeth. The first business application to be run on LEO was Bakery Valuations, which computed the costs of ingredients used in bread and cakes. This was successfully run on 5 September 1951, and LEO took over Bakery Valuations calculations completely on 29\u201330 November 1951.\nMary Coombs was employed in 1952 as the first female programmer to work on LEO, and as such she is recognized as the first female commercial programmer.\nFive files of archive material on the LEO Computer patent are held at the British Library and can be accessed through the British Library Archives catalogue.\nDesign.\nLEO I's clock speed was 500\u00a0kHz, with most instructions taking about 1.5\u00a0ms to execute. To be useful for business applications, the computer had to be able to handle a number of data streams, input and output, simultaneously. Therefore, its chief designer, John Pinkerton, designed the machine to have multiple input/output buffers. In the first instance, these were linked to fast paper tape readers and punches, fast punched card readers and punches, and a 100-line-per-minute tabulator. Later, other devices, including magnetic tape, were added. Its ultrasonic delay-line memory based on tanks of mercury, with 2K (2048) 35-bit words (i.e., 8&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 kilobytes), was four times as large as that of EDSAC. The systems analysis was carried out by David Caminer.\nApplications and successors.\nLyons used LEO I initially for valuation jobs, but its role was extended to include payroll, inventory, and so on. One of its early tasks was the elaboration of daily orders, which were phoned in every afternoon by the shops and used to calculate the overnight production requirements, assembly instructions, delivery schedules, invoices, costings, and management reports. This was the first instance of an integrated management information system. The LEO project was also a pioneer in outsourcing: in 1956, Lyons started doing the payroll calculations for Ford UK and others on the LEO I machine. The success of this led to the company dedicating one of its LEO II machines to bureau services. Later, the system was used for scientific computations as well. Met Office staff used a LEO I before the Met Office bought its own computer, a Ferranti Mercury, in 1959.\nIn 1954, with the decision to proceed with LEO II and interest from other commercial companies, Lyons formed LEO Computers Ltd.\nThe first LEO III was completed in 1961; it was a solid-state machine with a 13.2\u00a0\u03bcs cycle time ferrite core memory. It was microprogrammed and was controlled by a multitasking \"Master program\" operating system, which allowed concurrent running of as many as 12 application programs.\nUsers of LEO computers programmed in two coding languages: Intercode, a low-level assembler type language; and CLEO (acronym: Clear Language for Expressing Orders), the COBOL equivalent.\nOne of the features that LEO III shared with many computers of the day was a loudspeaker connected to the central processor via a divide-by-100 circuit and an amplifier which enabled operators to tell whether a program was looping by the distinctive sound it made. Another quirk was that many intermittent faults were due to faulty connectors and could be temporarily fixed by briskly strumming the card handles.\nSome LEO III machines purchased in the mid-to-late 1960s remained in commercial use at GPO Telephones, the forerunner of British Telecom, until 1981, primarily producing telephone bills. They were kept running using parts from redundant LEOs purchased by the GPO.\nFate and legacy.\nIn 1963, LEO Computers Ltd was merged into English Electric Company and this led to the breaking up of the team that had inspired LEO computers. The company continued to build the LEO III, and went on to build the faster LEO\u00a0360 and even faster LEO\u00a0326 models, which had been designed by the LEO team before the takeover.\nEnglish Electric LEO Computers (EEL) (1963), then English Electric Leo Marconi (EELM) (1964), later English Electric Computers (EEC) (1967), eventually merged with International Computers and Tabulators (ICT) and others to form International Computers Limited (ICL) in 1968. In the 1980s, there were still ICL 2900 mainframes running LEO programs, using an emulator written in ICL\u00a02960 microcode at the Dalkeith development centre. At least one modern emulator has been developed which can run some original LEO III software on a modern server. ICL was bought by Fujitsu in 1990.\nWhether its investment in LEO actually benefited J. Lyons is unclear. Nick Pelling notes that before LEO I the company already had a proven, industry-leading system using clerks that gave it \"near-real-time management information on more or less all aspects of its business\", and that no jobs were lost when the system was computerized. In addition, LEO Computers lost money on many of its sales because of unrealistically low prices.\nIn 2018, the Centre for Computing History along with LEO Computers Society were awarded funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund for their project aiming to bring together, preserve, archive and digitise a range of LEO Computers artefacts, and documents. The Centre's museum gallery has an area dedicated to LEO, and as of 2021[ [update]] they are also working on a LEO virtual reality project. In November 2021, to coincide with the 70th anniversary of the first successful full program run on LEO I, the project released a film about the history of LEO, which went on to win Video of the Year in the Association of British Science Writers Awards in July 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18557", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18557", "title": "Laurence of Canterbury", "text": "Archbishop of Canterbury from 604 to 619, Christian saint\nLaurence (died 2 February 619) was the second Archbishop of Canterbury, serving from about 604 to 619. He was a member of the Gregorian mission sent from Italy to England to Christianise the Anglo-Saxons from their native Anglo-Saxon paganism, although the date of his arrival is disputed. He was consecrated archbishop by his predecessor, Augustine of Canterbury, during Augustine's lifetime, to ensure continuity in the office. While archbishop, he attempted unsuccessfully to resolve differences with the native British bishops by corresponding with them about points of dispute. Laurence faced a crisis following the death of King \u00c6thelberht of Kent, when the king's successor abandoned Christianity; he eventually reconverted. Laurence was revered as a saint after his death in 619.\nEarly life.\nLaurence was part of the Gregorian mission originally dispatched from Rome in 595 to convert the Anglo-Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity; he landed at Thanet, Kent, with Augustine in 597, or, as some sources state, first arrived in 601 and was not a part of the first group of missionaries. He had been a monk in Rome before his travels to England, but nothing else is known of his history or background. The medieval chronicler Bede says that Augustine sent Laurence back to Pope Gregory I to report on the success of converting King \u00c6thelberht of Kent and to carry a letter with questions for the pope. Accompanied by Peter of Canterbury, another missionary, he set off sometime after July 598, and returned by June 601. He brought back with him Gregory's replies to Augustine's questions, a document commonly known as the \"Libellus responsionum\", that Bede incorporated in his \"Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum\". Laurence is probably the Laurence referred to in the letter from Gregory to Bertha, queen of Kent. In that letter, Gregory praises Bertha for her part in the conversion of her husband, details of which Gregory says he received from Laurence the priest. It is known that Laurence returned to England with Mellitus and others of the second group of missionaries in the summer of 601, but there is no record of Peter being with them.\nArchbishop.\nLaurence succeeded Augustine to the see of Canterbury in about 604, and ruled until his death on 2\u00a0February 619. To secure the succession, Augustine had consecrated Laurence before he died, even though that was prohibited by canon law. Augustine was afraid though that if someone did not step into the office immediately, it would damage the missionary efforts in Britain. However, Laurence never received a pallium from Rome, so he may have been considered uncanonical by the papacy. Bede makes a point of comparing Augustine's action in consecrating Laurence to Saint Peter's action of consecrating Clement as Bishop of Rome during Peter's lifetime, which the theologian J. Robert Wright believes may be Bede's way of criticising the practices of the church in his day.\nIn 610 Laurence received letters from Pope Boniface IV, addressed to him as archbishop and Augustine's successor. The correspondence was in response to Laurence having sent Mellitus to Rome earlier in 610, to solicit advice from the papacy on matters concerning the English Church. While in Rome Mellitus attended a synod and brought the synodical decrees back with him to Laurence.\nIn 613 Laurence consecrated the monastery church built by Augustine in Canterbury, and dedicated it to saints Peter and Paul; it was later re-consecrated as St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury. Laurence also wrote to the bishops in the lands held by the Scots and by the Britons, urging them to hold Easter on the day that the Roman church celebrated it, instead of their traditional date, as part of the Easter controversy. The letter is also preserved in Bede's history. Laurence in 609 stated that Dagan, a native bishop, would not eat with Laurence or share a roof with the archbishop, due to the differences between the two Churches.\nPagan reaction.\n\u00c6thelberht died in 616, during Laurence's tenure; his son Eadbald abandoned Christianity in favour of Anglo-Saxon paganism, forcing many of the Gregorian missionaries to flee the pagan backlash that followed \u00c6thelberht's death. Among them in Gaul were Mellitus, who was Bishop of London, and Justus, who was Bishop of Rochester. Remaining in Britain, Laurence succeeded in reconverting Eadbald to Christianity. Bede relates the story that Laurence had been prepared to give up when he was visited by St Peter in a dream or vision. St Peter chastised Laurence and whipped him, and the marks of the whipping remained after the vision or dream ended. Laurence then displayed them to Eadbald, and the king was converted on the spot. Bede, however, hints that it was the death of some of the leaders of the pagan party in battle that really persuaded Laurence to stay. According to Benedicta Ward, a historian of Christianity, Bede uses the story of the whipping as an example of how suffering was a reminder of Christ's suffering for humans, and how that example could lead to conversion. Wright argues that another point Bede is making is that it is because of the intercession of St Peter himself that the mission continued. David Farmer, in the \"Oxford Dictionary of Saints\", suggests that the whipping story may have been a blending of the \"Quo vadis\" story with some information given by Jerome in a letter.\nModern historians have seen political overtones in the pagan reaction. The historian D. P. Kirby sees Eadbald's actions as a repudiation of his father's pro-Frankish policies. Alcuin, a later medieval writer, wrote that Laurence was \"censured by apostolic authority\". This may have been a letter from Pope Adeodatus\u00a0I, commanding Laurence to stay in Kent. Kirby goes on to argue that it was Justus, not Laurence, who converted Eadbald, and this while Justus was archbishop, sometime around 624. Not all historians agree with this argument, however. Nicholas Brooks states that the king was converted during Laurence's archiepiscopate, within a year of him succeeding his father. The historian Barbara Yorke argues that there were two co-rulers of Kent after \u00c6thelberht's death, Eadbald and a \u00c6thelwald, and that Eadbald was converted by Laurence while \u00c6thelwald was converted by Justus after his return to Rochester. Another factor in the pagan reaction was Laurence's objection to Eadbald's marriage to his father's widow, something that Christians considered to be unlawful.\nAll efforts to extend the church beyond Kent encountered difficulties due to the attitude of King R\u00e6dwald of East Anglia, who had become the leading king in the south after \u00c6thelberht's death. R\u00e6dwald was converted before the death of \u00c6thelberht, perhaps at the urging of \u00c6thelberht, but his kingdom was not, and R\u00e6dwald seems to have converted only to the extent of placing a Christian altar in his pagan temple. It proved impossible for Mellitus to return to London as bishop, although Justus did resume his duties at Rochester.\nDeath and legacy.\nLaurence died on 2\u00a0February 619, and was buried in the abbey of St Peter and Paul in Canterbury, later renamed St Augustine's; his relics, or remains, were moved, or translated, to the new church of St Augustine's in 1091. His shrine was in the axial chapel of the abbey church, flanking the shrine of Augustine, his predecessor. Laurence came to be regarded as a saint, and was given the feast day of 3\u00a0February. The ninth century Stowe Missal commemorates his feast day, along with Mellitus and Justus. A \"Vita\" (or \"Life\") was written about the time of his translation, by Goscelin, but it is mainly based on information in Bede. His tomb was opened in 1915. Besides his feast day, the date of his translation, 13\u00a0September, was also celebrated after his death. Laurence's tenure as archbishop is mainly remembered for his failure to secure a settlement with the Celtic church and for his reconversion of Eadbald following \u00c6thelbert's death. He was succeeded as archbishop by Mellitus, the Bishop of London.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18559", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18559", "title": "La Banda Sinaloense", "text": ""}
{"id": "18560", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18560", "title": "Leaf by Niggle", "text": "Short story by J. R. R. Tolkien\n\"Leaf by Niggle\" is a short story written by J. R. R. Tolkien in 1938\u201339 and first published in the \"Dublin Review\" in January 1945. It was reprinted in Tolkien's book \"Tree and Leaf\", and in several later collections. Contrary to Tolkien's claim that he despised allegory in any form, the story is an allegory of Tolkien's own creative process, and, to an extent, of his own life, following the structure of Dante's \"Purgatorio\". It also expresses his philosophy of divine creation and human sub-creation. The story came to him in a dream.\nContext.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien was a scholar of English literature, a philologist and medievalist interested in language and poetry from the Middle Ages, especially that of Anglo-Saxon England and Northern Europe. His professional knowledge of works such as \"Beowulf\" shaped his fictional world of Middle-earth, including his high fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nPlot summary.\nIn this story, an artist named Niggle lives in a society that does not value art. Working only to please himself, he paints a canvas of a great tree with a forest in the distance. He invests each and every leaf of his tree with obsessive attention to detail, making every leaf uniquely beautiful. Niggle ends up discarding all his other artworks, or tacks them onto the main canvas, which becomes a single vast embodiment of his vision.\nHowever, mundane duties constantly prevent Niggle from giving his work the attention it deserves, so it remains incomplete and is not fully realised. At the back of his head, Niggle knows that he has a great trip looming, and he must prepare for it, but Niggle's next door neighbour, a gardener named Parish, frequently drops by asking for assistance. Parish is lame, has a sick wife, and genuinely needs help. Niggle, having a good heart, takes time out to help\u2014but he is also reluctant because he would rather work on his painting. Niggle has other pressing work duties as well that require his attention. Then Niggle himself catches a chill doing errands for Parish in the rain.\nEventually, Niggle is forced to take his trip, and cannot get out of it. He has not prepared, and as a result the trip goes wrong, and he ends up in a kind of institution, in which he must perform menial labour each day. Back at the home to which he cannot return, Niggle's painting is abandoned, used to patch a damaged roof, and all but destroyed (except for the one perfect leaf of the story's title, which is placed in the local museum).\nIn time, Niggle is paroled from the institution, and he is sent to a place \"for a little gentle treatment\". He discovers that this new place is the country of the tree and forest of his great painting. This place is the true realisation of his vision, not the flawed and incomplete version in his painting.\nNiggle is reunited with his old neighbour, Parish, who now proves his worth as a gardener, and together they make the tree and forest even more beautiful. Finally, Niggle journeys farther and deeper into the Forest, and beyond into the great mountains that he only faintly glimpsed in his painting.\nLong after both Niggle and Parish have taken their journeys, the place that they created together becomes a destination for many travellers to visit before their final voyage into the mountains, and it earns the name \"Niggle's Parish\".\nPublication history.\n\"Leaf by Niggle\" was first published in the \"Dublin Review\" in 1945. It first appeared in a book in 1964 alongside \"On Fairy-Stories\" in \"Tree and Leaf\". It has been republished in the collections \"The Tolkien Reader\" (1966), \"Poems &amp; Stories\" (1980), \"A Tolkien Miscellany\" (2002), and \"Tales from the Perilous Realm\" (2021).\nAnalysis.\nAllegory.\nTolkien made the general statement \"I dislike allegory\" in one of his letters, but in specific references to \"Leaf by Niggle\", he wrote that \"It is not really or properly an 'allegory' so much as 'mythical'\", and \"I tried to show allegorically how [sub-creation] might come to be taken up into Creation in some plane in my 'purgatorial' story \"Leaf by Niggle\".\"\nOf the journey of death.\nThe Tolkien scholar and fellow-philologist Tom Shippey states categorically that the story is \"quite certainly\" an allegory, and that its first words recall \"to any Anglo-Saxonist\" the opening lines of the Old Northumbrian poem \"Bede's Death Song\". Those lines, he states, equate death to a journey, hinting to the reader to continue making such \"equations\" of things in the world to elements of the story; and further, that the reader of the story is meant to interpret the story in this way, every tiny detail exactly and entertainingly fitting the pattern.\nA religious reading could lead to the conclusion that the allegory of \"Leaf by Niggle\" is life, death, purgatory and paradise. Niggle is not prepared for his unavoidable trip, as humans often are not prepared for death. His time in the institution and subsequent discovery of his Tree represent purgatory and heaven; Sebastian Knowles writes that the story \"follows Dante's 'Purgatorio' in its general structure and in its smallest detail.\"\nMichael Milburn argues that Charles Williams's view of Dante as romantic theology \u2013 which Milburn glosses as the serious theology of romantic experiences, including romantic love \u2013 can be applied to Tolkien's story. Dante, he writes, has a \"glorious vision\" of Beatrice that is \"as real\" as the actual Beatrice. She dies, leaving Dante with the inspiration to \"\"be\" love\", to stay faithful to his vision of her. This can be applied to art with \"a source text that not only takes art for its subject but locates the vision of great art in the afterlife with Beatrice, includes an experience analogous to the death of Beatrice, and explores the relationship between artistic beauty and \"caritas\". Milburn states that Tolkien's \"Leaf by Niggle\" is just such a text, because Niggle's allegorical \"journey\" signifies death, the \"Workhouse\" signifies purgatory, and the place Niggle reaches after that is the Earthly Paradise, the place for Tolkien as for Dante of final purification before heaven, Niggle's \"mountains\". Tolkien had met Williams, as they were both members of the Inklings literary group. Further, Milburn notes, Tolkien, despite denying that Williams had been an influence, wrote a poem about him, in which he praises William's understanding of Dante, his romantic theology: \"But heavenly footsteps, too, can Williams trace, / and after Dante, plunging, soaring, race / up to the threshold of Eternal Grace\".\nOf Tolkien's life.\nAn autobiographical interpretation places Tolkien himself as Niggle\u2014in mundane matters as well as spiritual ones. Tolkien was compulsive in his writing, his endless revisions, his desire for perfection in form and in the \"reality\" of his invented world, its languages, its chronologies, its existence. Like Niggle, Tolkien came to abandon other projects or graft them onto his \"Tree\", Middle-earth. Like Niggle, Tolkien faced many chores and duties that kept him from the work he loved; and like Niggle, Tolkien was a confirmed procrastinator. Shippey comments that whereas Tolkien had once felt that one could return to Fa\u00ebrie in some way, later in his life he came to doubt that he would \"[rejoin] his own creations after death, like Niggle; he felt they were lost, like the Silmarils.\" He adds that when Tolkien presents images of himself in his writings, as with Niggle and Smith, there is \"a persistent streak of alienation\". Shippey lists several elements of the allegory in \"Leaf by Niggle\".\nOf creation and sub-creation.\n\"Leaf by Niggle\" can be interpreted, too, as an illustration of Tolkien's religious philosophy of creation and sub-creation. In this philosophy, true creation is the exclusive province of God, and those who aspire to creation can only make echoes (good) or mockeries (evil) of truth. The sub-creation of works that echo the true creations of God is one way that mortals honour God. This philosophy is evident in Tolkien's other works, especially \"The Silmarillion\"\u2014one Vala, Morgoth, creates the Orc race as a foul mockery of the Elves. Another Vala, Aul\u00eb, creates the Dwarf race as an act of subcreation that honoured Eru Il\u00favatar (the analogue of God in Tolkien's writings), and which Eru accepted and made real, just as Niggle's Tree was made real. Niggle's yearnings after truth and beauty (God's creations) are echoed in his great painting. After death, Niggle is rewarded with the realisation (the making-real) of his yearning; or, alternatively, Niggle's Tree always existed and he simply echoed it in his art. From a metanarrative viewpoint, Tolkien's Arda is itself a subcreation designed to honour the true stories of the real world. Thus, \"The Lord of the Rings\", despite its lack of overt religious elements, can be interpreted as a profoundly religious work.\nSurrealistic dream memory.\nMichael Organ, writing in the \"Journal of Tolkien Research\", notes that Tolkien stated in a letter that the story came to him one morning in 1939, shortly before the start of the Second World War, when he woke up with the story, which he called \"that odd thing\", in his mind \"virtually\" complete. Tolkien stated in another letter that he then wrote it out \"almost in a sitting and very nearly in the form in which it now appears\", commenting that looking back at the story, he thought it \"arose\" from a combination of his love of trees and his concern that \"The Lord of the Rings\" would never be finished. Organ describes the birth of \"Leaf by Niggle\" as \"a frenzy of activity\" resembling the automatic writing \"popularised by proponents of Dada and Surrealism\" in the early 20th century. He notes, too, that Tolkien knew that dreams had an irrational side, and had commented that it was \"exceptional\" for fantasy to appear in dreams, as \"Fantasy is a rational, not an irrational, activity\". Organ comments that Tolkien may have resisted \"what he saw as the morbidity of surrealism\" in connection with his story, precisely because \"Leaf by Niggle\"'s message is so positive.\nVisual imagery.\nJeffrey MacLeod and Anna Smol write in \"Mythlore\" that while Tolkien defines sub-creation \"in linguistic terms\", he often links such verbal creation to visual images. For instance, in his poem \"Mythopoeia\", he mentions \"script and limning packed of various hue\", which they gloss as \"writing and drawing, alphabet and image, the linguistic and the visual ... side by side.\" Similarly, they comment, in \"Leaf by Niggle\", the allegory uses the image of a painter. In his own life, Tolkien combined the writing of fiction with his artwork, while he defined imagination visually as the \"mental power of image-making\".\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18562", "revid": "980331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18562", "title": "Leet", "text": "Online slang and alternative orthography\nLeet (or \"1337\"), also known as \"eleet\", \"leetspeak\", or simply \"hacker speech\", is a system of modified spellings used primarily on the Internet. It often uses character replacements in ways that play on the similarity of their glyphs via reflection or other resemblance. Additionally, it modifies certain words on the basis of a system of suffixes and alternative meanings. There are many dialects or linguistic varieties in different online communities.\nThe term \"leet\" is derived from the word \"elite\", used as an adjective to describe skill or accomplishment, especially in the fields of online gaming and computer hacking. The leet lexicon includes spellings of the word as \"1337\" or \"leet\".\nHistory.\nLeet originated within bulletin board systems (BBS) in the 1980s, where having \"elite\" status on a BBS allowed a user access to file folders, games, and special chat rooms. The Cult of the Dead Cow hacker collective has been credited with the original coining of the term, in their text-files of that era. One theory is that it was developed to defeat text filters created by BBS or Internet Relay Chat system operators for message boards to discourage the discussion of forbidden topics, like cracking and hacking.\nOnce reserved for hackers, crackers, and script kiddies, leet later entered the mainstream. Some consider emoticons and ASCII art, like smiley faces, to be leet, while others maintain that leet consists of only symbolic word obfuscation. More obscure forms of leet, involving the use of symbol combinations and almost no letters or numbers, continue to be used for its original purpose of obfuscated communication. It is also sometimes used as a scripting language. Variants of leet have been used to evade censorship for many years; for instance \"@$$\" (ass) and \"$#!+\" (shit) are frequently seen to make a word appear censored to the untrained eye but obvious to a person familiar with leet. This enables coders and programmers especially to circumvent filters and speak about topics that would usually get banned. \"Hacker\" would end up as \"H4x0r\", for example.\nLeet symbols, especially the number 1337, are Internet memes that have spilled over into some culture. Signs that show the numbers \"1337\" are popular motifs for pictures and are shared widely across the Internet.\nAlgospeak.\nAlgospeak shares conceptual similarities with leet, albeit with its primary purpose to circumvent algorithmic censorship online, \"algospeak\" deriving from \"algo\" of \"algorithm\" and \"speak\". These are euphemisms that aim to evade automated online moderation techniques, especially those that are considered unfair or hindering free speech. One prominent example is using the term \"unalive\" as opposed to the verb \"kill\" or even \"suicide\". Other examples include using \"restarted\" or \"regarded\" instead of \"retarded\" and \"seggs\" in place of \"sex\". These phrases are easily understandable to humans, providing either the same general meaning, pronunciation, or shape of the original word. It is furthermore often employed as a more contemporary alternative to leet. The approach has gained more popularity in 2023 and 2024 with pro-Palestinian social media users as the Gaza war intensified, in order to circumvent algorithms used by platforms such as Meta and TikTok.\nOrthography.\nOne of the hallmarks of leet is its unique approach to orthography, using substitutions of other letters, or indeed of characters other than letters, to represent letters in a word. For more casual use of leet, the primary strategy is to use quasi-homoglyphs, symbols that closely resemble (to varying degrees) the letters for which they stand. \nThe choice of symbol is not fixed: anything the reader can make sense of is valid in leet-speak. Sometimes, a gamer would work around a nickname being already taken (and maybe abandoned as well) by replacing a letter with a similar-looking digit.\nAnother use for leet orthographic substitutions is the creation of paraphrased passwords. Limitations imposed by websites on password length (usually no more than 36) and the characters permitted (e.g. alphanumeric and symbols) require less extensive forms when used in this application.\nSome examples of leet orthography include:\nHowever, leetspeak should not be confused with SMS-speak, characterized by using \"4\" as \"for\", \"2\" as \"to\", \"b&amp;\" as \"ban'd\" (e.g. \"banned\"), \"gr8 b8, m8, appreci8, no h8\" as \"great bait, mate, appreciate, no hate\", and so on.\nTable of leet-speak substitutes for normal letters.\n &lt;br&gt; |] &lt;/code&gt;\n3 &lt;br&gt; 4\nMorphology.\nText rendered in leet is often characterized by distinctive, recurring forms.\nThe meaning of this suffix is parallel with the English \"-er\" and \"-or\" suffixes (seen in \"hacker\" and \"lesser\") in that it derives agent nouns from a verb stem. It is realized in two different forms: \"-xor\" and \"-zor\", and , respectively. For example, the first may be seen in the word \"hax(x)or\" (\"H4x0r\" in leet) and the second in \"pwnzor\" . Additionally, this nominalization may also be inflected with all of the suffixes of regular English verbs. The letter 'o' is often replaced with the numeral 0.\nDerivation of a noun from a verb stem is possible by attaching \"-age\" to the base form of any verb. Attested derivations are \"pwnage\", \"skillage\", and \"speakage\". However, leet provides exceptions; the word \"leetage\" is acceptable, referring to actively being \"leet\". These nouns are often used with a form of \"to be\" rather than \"to have,\" e.g., \"that was pwnage\" rather than \"he has pwnage\". Either is a more emphatic way of expressing the simpler \"he pwns,\" but the former implies that the person is \"embodying\" the trait rather than merely possessing it.\nDerivation of a noun from an adjective stem is done by attaching \"-ness\" to any adjective. This is entirely the same as the English form, except it is used much more often in Leet. Nouns such as \"lulzness\" and \"leetness\" are derivations using this suffix.\nWhen forming a past participle ending in \"-ed\", the Leet user may replace the \"-e\" with an apostrophe, as was common in poetry of previous centuries, (e.g. \"pwned\" becomes \"pwn'd\"). Sometimes, the apostrophe is removed as well (e.g. \"pwned\" becomes \"pwnd\"). The word ending may also be substituted by \"-t\" (e.g. \"pwned\" becomes \"pwnt\").\nWords ending in \"-and\", \"-anned\", \"-ant\", or a similar sound can sometimes be spelled with an ampersand (\"&amp;\") to express the ending sound (e.g. \"This is the s&amp;box\", \"I'm sorry, you've been b&amp;\", \"&amp;hill/&amp;farm\"). It is most commonly used with the word \"banned\". An alternative form of \"B&amp;\" is \"B7\", as the ampersand is with the \"7\" key on the standard US keyboard. It is often seen in the abbreviation \"IBB7\" (in before banned), which indicates that the poster believes that a previous poster will soon be banned from the site, channel, or board on which they are posting.\nGrammar.\nLeet can be pronounced as a single syllable, , rhyming with \"eat,\" by way of apheresis of the initial vowel of \"elite\". It may also be pronounced as two syllables, . In particular, speakers of leet are fond of verbing nouns, turning verbs into nouns (and back again) as forms of emphasis, e.g. \"Austin rocks\" is weaker than \"Austin roxxorz\" (note spelling), which is weaker than \"Au5t1N is t3h r0xx0rz\" (note grammar), which is weaker than something like \"0MFG D00D /\\\u00dc571N 15 T3H l_l83\u042f 1337 \u042f0XX0\u042fZ\" (OMG, dude, Austin is the \u00fcber-elite rocks-er!). In essence, all of these mean \"Austin rocks,\" not necessarily the other options. Added words and misspellings add to the speaker's enjoyment. Leet, like hacker slang, employs analogy in construction of new words. For example, if \"haxored\" is the past tense of the verb \"to hack\" (hack \u2192 haxor \u2192 haxored), then \"winzored\" would be easily understood to be the past tense conjugation of \"to win,\" even if the reader had not seen that particular word before.\nLeet has its own colloquialisms, many of which originated as jokes based on common typing errors, habits of new computer users, or knowledge of cyberculture and history. Leet is not solely based upon one language or character set. Greek, Russian, and other languages have leet forms, and leet in one language may use characters from another where they are available. As such, while it may be referred to as a \"cipher\", a \"dialect\", or a \"language\", leet does not fit squarely into any of these categories. The term \"leet\" itself is often written \"31337\", or \"1337\", and many other variations. After the meaning of these became widely familiar, \"10100111001\" came to be used in its place, because it is the binary form of \"1337\" decimal, making it more of a puzzle to interpret. An increasingly common characteristic of leet is the changing of grammatical usage so as to be deliberately incorrect. The widespread popularity of deliberate misspelling is similar to the cult following of the \"All your base are belong to us\" phrase. Indeed, the online and computer communities have been international from their inception, so spellings and phrases typical of non-native speakers are quite common.\nVocabulary.\nMany words originally derived from leet have now become part of modern Internet slang, such as \"pwned\". The original driving forces of new vocabulary in leet were common misspellings and typing errors such as \"teh\" (generally considered lolspeak), and intentional misspellings, especially the \"z\" at the end of words (\"skillz\"). Another prominent example of a surviving leet expression is \"w00t\", an exclamation of joy. w00t is sometimes used as a backronym for \"We owned the other team.\"\nNew words (or corruptions thereof) may arise from a need to make one's username unique. As any given Internet service reaches more people, the number of names available to a given user is drastically reduced. While many users may wish to have the username \"CatLover,\" for example, in many cases it is only possible for one user to have the moniker. As such, degradations of the name may evolve, such as \"C@7L0vr.\" As the leet cipher is highly dynamic, there is a wider possibility for multiple users to share the \"same\" name, through combinations of spelling and transliterations.\nAdditionally, \"leet\"\u2014the word itself\u2014can be found in the screen-names and gamertags of many Internet and video games. Use of the term in such a manner announces a high level of skill, though such an announcement may be seen as baseless hubris.[] \nTerminology and common misspellings.\n\"Warez\" (nominally ) is a plural shortening of \"software\", typically referring to cracked and redistributed software. \"Phreaking\" refers to the hacking of telephone systems and other non-Internet equipment. \"Teh\" originated as a typographical error of \"the\", and is sometimes spelled \"t3h\". \"j00\" takes the place of \"you\", originating from the affricate sound that occurs in place of the palatal approximant, , when \"you\" follows a word ending in an alveolar plosive consonant, such as or . Also, from German, is \"\u00fcber\", which means \"over\" or \"above\"; it usually appears as a prefix attached to adjectives, and is frequently written without the umlaut over the \"u\".\nHaxor and suxxor (suxorz).\n\"Haxor\", and derivations thereof, is leet for \"hacker\", and it is one of the most commonplace examples of the use of the \"-xor\" suffix. \"Suxxor\" (pronounced suck-zor) is a derogatory term which originated in warez culture and is currently used in multi-user environments such as multiplayer video games and instant messaging; it, like \"haxor\", is one of the early leet words to use the \"-xor\" suffix. \"Suxxor\" is a modified version of \"sucks\" (the phrase \"to suck\"), and the meaning is the same as the English slang. \"Suxxor\" can be mistaken with \"Succer/Succker\" if used in the wrong context. Its negative definition essentially makes it the opposite of \"roxxor\", and both can be used as a verb or a noun. The letters \"ck\" are often replaced with the Greek \u03a7 (chi) in other words as well.\nn00b.\nWithin leet, the term \"n00b\" (and derivations thereof) is used extensively. The term is derived from \"newbie\" (as in new and inexperienced, or uninformed), and is used to differentiate \"n00bs\" from the \"elite\" (or even \"normal\") members of a group.\n\"Owned\" and \"pwned\".\n\"Owned\" and \"pwned\" (generally pronounced ) both refer to the domination of a player in a video game or argument (rather than just a win), or the successful hacking of a website or computer. It is a slang term derived from the verb \"own\", meaning to appropriate or to conquer to gain ownership. As is a common characteristic of leet, the terms have also been adapted into noun and adjective forms, \"ownage\" and \"pwnage\", which can refer to the situation of \"pwning\" or to the superiority of its subject (e.g., \"He is a very good player. He is pwnage.\").\nThe term was created accidentally by the misspelling of \"own\" due to the keyboard proximity of the and keys. It implies domination or humiliation of a rival, used primarily in the Internet-based video game culture to taunt an opponent who has just been soundly defeated (e.g., \"You just got pwned!\"). In 2015 Scrabble added \"pwn\" to their Official Scrabble Words list.\nPr0n.\n\"Pr0n\" is slang for \"pornography\". This is a deliberately inaccurate spelling/pronunciation for \"porn\", where a zero is often used to replace the letter O. It is sometimes used in legitimate communications (such as email discussion groups, Usenet, chat rooms, and Internet web pages) to circumvent language and content filters, which may reject messages as offensive or spam. The word also helps prevent search engines from associating commercial sites with pornography, which might result in unwelcome traffic. \"Pr0n\" is also sometimes spelled backwards (n0rp) to further obscure the meaning to potentially uninformed readers. It can also refer to ASCII art depicting pornographic images, or to photos of the internals of consumer and industrial hardware. \"Prawn\", a spoof of the misspelling, has started to come into use, as well; in \"\", a pornographer films his movies on \"Prawn Island\". Conversely, in the RPG \"Kingdom of Loathing\", \"prawn\", referring to a kind of crustacean, is spelled \"pr0n\", leading to the creation of food items such as \"pr0n chow mein\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18563", "revid": "45061260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18563", "title": "Lud", "text": "Lud or LUD may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18564", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18564", "title": "Lois Lane", "text": "Fictional character in the Superman series\nLois Lane is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster, she first appeared in \"Action Comics\" #1 (June 1938). Lois is an award-winning journalist for the Metropolis newspaper the \"Daily Planet\" and the primary love interest of the superhero Superman and his alter ego, Clark Kent. In DC continuity, she is also his wife and the mother of their son, Jon Kent, the newest Superboy in the DC Universe.\nLois's physical appearance was originally based on Joanne Carter, a model hired by Joe Shuster. Jerry Siegel took her name from actress Lola Lane, while her character was inspired by actress Glenda Farrell's portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of 1930s self-titled films.\nDepictions of the character have varied spanning the comics and other media adaptations. The original Golden Age version of Lois Lane, as well as versions of her from the 1970s onwards, portrays Lois as a dauntless journalist and intellectually equal to Superman. During the Silver Age of Comics, she was the star of \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\", a comic book series that had a light and humorous tone. \nSince her debut in comic books in 1938, Lois has appeared in\u00a0various media adaptations and is among the best-known female comic book characters. Actresses who have portrayed Lois in live-action film and television include\u00a0Noel Neill,\u00a0Phyllis Coates,\u00a0Margot Kidder,\u00a0Teri Hatcher,\u00a0Erica Durance,\u00a0Kate Bosworth,\u00a0Amy Adams,\u00a0and Elizabeth Tulloch. In animation, the character has been voiced by Joan Alexander,\u00a0Dana Delany, and\u00a0Alice Lee. Rachel Brosnahan most recently played the character in the film \"Superman\" (2025).\nCreation.\nWriter Jerry Siegel first conceived Lois Lane in 1934, when Siegel and Joe Shuster were still developing Superman. A major influence on Lois's characterization was actress Glenda Farrell and her portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of Warner Bros. films. The Torchy Blane movies were popular second features during the later 1930s. On the conception of Lois Lane, Siegel stated in the 1988 \"Time\" magazine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My wife Joanne was Joe's original art model for Superman's girlfriend Lois Lane back in the 1930s. Our heroine was, of course, a working girl whose priority was grabbing scoops. What inspired me in the creation was Glenda Farrell, the movie star who portrayed Torchy Blane, a gutsy, beautiful headline-hunting reporter, in a series of exciting motion pictures. Because the name of the actress Lola Lane (who also played Torchy) appealed to me, I called my character Lois Lane. Strangely, the characterization of Lois is amazingly like the real-life personality of my lovely wife.\nArtist Joe Shuster based Lois's physical appearance on a model named Joanne Carter. Carter had placed an ad in the \"Cleveland Plain Dealer\" newspaper in the Situation Wanted column, advertising herself as a model. Shuster corresponded with her and hired her as the model for Lois Lane. Shuster's depiction of Lois was modeled on her hairstyle and facial features. \"To me she was Lois Lane. She was a great inspiration for me, though. She encouraged me, she was very enthusiastic about the strip; it meant a lot to me.\" Shuster said about Joanne Carter.\nJoanne Carter married co-creator Jerry Siegel in 1948. On working with Joe Shuster for Lois Lane, Carter said in the 1983 \"Nemo\" magazine interview: \"Joe was redrawing the strip, and it was going to be more realistic, rather than cartoony. I used to model for him every Saturday until he had enough drawings. He made so many stock drawings that it got to a point where he didn't need any more. We became such good friends by that time we decided we would always stay friends.\"\nPublication history.\nLois Lane made her debut in \"Action Comics\" #1 (June 1938), the first published Superman story. Lois is the daughter of Ella and Sam Lane, in earlier comics, her parents were farmers in a town called Pittsdale. The modern comics depicts Lois as a former Army brat, born at Ramstein Air Base with Lois having been trained by her father, a US Army General, in areas such as hand-to-hand combat and the use of firearms. She has one sibling, her younger sister Lucy Lane. Lois is a journalist for the \"Daily Planet\", one of the best investigative reporters and the best at the newspaper she works at. Lois has shown obtaining superpowers and becoming a superhero, some of her superhero identities are Superwoman and Red Tornado of Earth 2.\nAspects of Lois's personality have varied over the years, depending on the comic book writers handling of the character and American social attitudes toward women at the time. In most incarnations, she is shown to be an independent person who is smart, determined and strong-willed. Her physical appearance has varied over the years, depending either on contemporary fashion or media adaptations. In the 1990s, when the television series ' began airing Lois received a haircut that made her look more like actress Teri Hatcher, and her eyes were typically violet to match her character on '. From the late 1980s through the 1990s she was depicted with auburn hair in the comic books.\nIn the 1940s, Lois had a newspaper comic strip, \"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\", a direct spin-off of the Superman comic strip running at the time. A similarly titled comic series began appearing in the \"Superman\" comic book in 1944, starting with \"Superman\" #28. In 1958, DC Comics gave Lois a comic book series, \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\". The series focuses on her solo adventures and start publication in April 1958. In the 1960s, the series was one of DC's most popular titles and was the top ten best-selling comic books in America. She had a series featured in \"The Superman Family\" comic book from 1974 to 1982. Released in 2019, \"Lois Lane\", a 12-issue series by writer Greg Rucka and artist Mike Perkins investigates threats and conspiracies in the DC Universe. \nLois is the character most commonly associated with Superman, and throughout their long history, she has always been the most prominent love interest in Clark Kent/Superman's life. In the 1990s, after Clark proposes to Lois and reveals to her that he is Superman, she married him in the comic book \" (December 1996). The couple's biological child in DC Comics canon was born in \"Convergence: Superman\" #2 (July 2015) a son named Jonathan Samuel Kent, who eventually becomes Superboy.\nFictional character biography.\nGolden Age.\nIn her earliest appearances, Lois is a lovelorn columnist; she rises through the journalistic ranks, and throughout the\u00a0Golden Age\u00a0comics, her enduring depiction is as an aggressive, career-minded reporter for the\u00a0Daily Star\u00a0(later the\u00a0Daily Planet). Lois becomes attracted to Superman while holding a fierce journalistic rivalry with his alter ego, Clark Kent. Lois is often unscrupulous in her efforts to scoop Clark, using tactics such as intercepting his telephone messages, sending him on wild-goose chases, and even slipping him\u00a0knockout drops.\nIn stories published during the 1940s, Lois begins to suspect that Clark Kent is Superman, and makes various attempts at uncovering his secret identity, all of which backfire because of Superman's efforts. The first such story appears in \"Superman\" #17 (July\u2013August 1942). This theme became particularly pronounced in the 1950s and 1960s Silver Age comic books.\nLois gained her first series of stories (without Superman) starting with \"Superman\" #28 (May\u2013June 1944), \"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\", running in the \"Superman\" comic book for several years, had Lois defeating bad guys and getting front-page stories on her own, without any help from Superman.\nIn the Golden Age comics, Lois had a niece named Susie Tompkins, whose main trait was getting into trouble by telling exaggerated tall tales and fibs to adults. Susie's last appearance was in \"Superman\" #95 (February 1955). Subsequent comics presented Lois' only sibling, Lucy, as single and childless.\nSilver Age and Bronze Age.\nWhen the reading audience of superhero comic books became predominately young boys in the mid to late 1950s, the focus of Superman stories shifted toward science fiction inspired plots involving extraterrestrials, fantasy creatures, and bizarre plots.\nLois's main interests in various late 1950s and 1960s stories became vying with her rival Lana Lang for Superman's affections, attempting to prove Clark Kent and Superman were one and the same or otherwise getting Superman into marriage. Superman's rationale for resisting her matrimonial desires was that marrying her would put her in increased danger from his enemies and that she could not keep his secret identity hidden. Regardless, Lois married several times in the Superman stories of this era, including to a Superman impostor from Kandor, the villainous Zak-Kul, and a man from the future. All these marriages were either annulled or otherwise forgotten.\nLois became more and more popular during the 1950s, and after appearing as the lead character in two issues of DC Comics' \"Showcase\" in 1957, DC created an ongoing series for Lois, titled \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\". The series ran for 137 issues, beginning in April 1958 to October 1974. Most stories were about Lois' romance with Superman, and were drawn by artist Kurt Schaffenberger. Schaffenberger's rendition of Lois became cited by many as the \"definitive\" version of Lois, and he was often asked by DC editor Mort Weisinger to redraw other artists' depictions of Lois Lane in other DC titles where she appeared. So many stories depicted Lois and marriage that the cover of a 1968 80-Page Giant that reprinted several such stories, the \"All-Wedding Issue\", described the magazine as \"featuring Lois' schemes and dreams to marry Superman!\".\nThe series \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" became one of DC's most popular titles, the third best-selling comic in 1962 and 1965. The title featured the first appearance of the Silver Age Catwoman, after an absence from the comics for over a decade.\nWhile Lois is suspicious of Superman's secret identity as early as \"Superman\" #7 (1940), her suspicions grew during the early Silver Age, with many stories in her series focusing on her attempts to prove Superman and Clark Kent were one and the same. Stories showed Superman using various means to protect his secret identity from Lois, including his Superman robots or Batman disguising himself as Clark/Superman.\nBy the end of the 1960s, as attitudes toward women's role in American society changed, Lois' character changed as well. In \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" #80 (Jan. 1968), the character's fashions were updated to a then more contemporary look. Stories in the 1970s depicted Lois again as fully capable and less reliant on Superman. She engaged in more adventures without Superman being involved and was much less interested in discovering Superman's secret identity.\nLois had a series featured in \"The Superman Family\" (an anthology title started in the mid-1970s after the cancellation of \"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" and \"Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen\") from 1974 to 1982. In her series, Lois regularly battled criminals and often defeated them using her quick wits and considerable skill in the Kryptonian martial art of Klurkor, taught to her by Kryptonian survivors in the bottle city of Kandor. There were several cameos of the New Gods, including DeSaad and Darkseid. Lois Lane was the backup series in \"The Daring New Adventures of Supergirl\" in 1982 to 1983.\nDuring the Silver and Bronze Age, Lois' backstory became more fully fleshed out, with various stories explaining her life before becoming employed at the \"Daily Planet\". This backstory was attributed to the Lois Lane of Earth-One.\nAs summarized in various stories, Lois was born to Sam and Ella Lane and grew up on their farm in the small town of Pittsdale. At the age of two, Lois suffered measles, and at the age of three, whooping cough. At an unspecified time during Lois' childhood, her younger sister Lucy Lane was born. While Lois was a toddler, she encountered a rattlesnake in the woods near the Lane family farm. The snake was scared away by one of Kal-El's baby toys which had landed nearby in one of Jor-El's experimental rockets.\nDuring Lois' adolescence, she won a youth contest run by the \"Daily Planet\", with the prize being a trip to Metropolis to spend a week working as a cub reporter for the newspaper. There, she first met Clark Kent of Smallville, who was the other winner of the contest. Lois found Clark dull and became more interested in asking him for information about Superboy after learning Clark came from Smallville. During the week in Metropolis, Lois made a bet with Clark to see who would get the most scoops, which turned out to be Lois, as Clark was forced to constantly go into action as Superboy. Lois met Superboy for the first time while uncovering a criminal enterprise for one of her stories. At the end of the week, Clark paid off Lois' bet (an ice cream sundae), and the two returned to their respective hometowns. Lois would meet Superboy (but not Clark Kent) again during her adolescence while attending an all-girls summer camp near Smallville. There, Lois met Lana Lang, a fellow camper, for the first time. Lois would make further attempts at landing a job with the \"Daily Planet\" during her teenage years and spent time writing for her hometown's newspaper, the \"Pittsdale Star\".\nUpon finishing high school, Lois left Pittsdale and attended Raleigh College to study journalism. While in college, Lois worked for the student newspaper, the \"Raleigh Review\", as a reporter and eventually its co-editor. After graduating from college, Lois became permanently employed at the \"Daily Planet\". Clark Kent and Jimmy Olsen later joined the \"Planet\"'s staff but Lois remained the newspaper's star reporter, winning the Pulitzer Prize. She was very dependent on Superman, however; he told her that having to rescue her so often from problems she caused prevented him from helping others. For example, when late for a deadline Lois jumped off a cliff expecting Superman to catch her \"as he has done a thousand times\", and fly her to her destination. When asked on a Sunday morning talk show what she would do if trapped in an underground mine with rescue impossible before the air ran out, Lois admitted that she would impatiently await Superman because \"I've got a deadline to meet.\"\nEventually, Lois realized that she had wasted a good part of her career by staying in Metropolis for Superman's sake and left. As both a journalist and as a woman, she had to get on with her life.\nAfter the 1985\u20131986 miniseries \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" writer John Byrne revised the Superman legend and eliminated the Silver Age version of Lois from continuity. Before this happened, a final non-canonical imaginary story \"Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?\" was written by Alan Moore, meant as a send-off for the pre-Crisis versions of the characters, including Lois. Published at the same time but in Earth-One continuity was a two-issue miniseries, \"Lois Lane\", in which she investigates missing children.\nModern Age.\nLois underwent a character alteration beginning with John Byrne's \"The Man of Steel\" miniseries, which significantly rewrote Superman's origin and history. In this modern version of events, Lois was portrayed as a tough-as-nails reporter who rarely needed rescuing. She was depicted as strong, opinionated, yet sensitive.\nLois's first real relationship in this version was with Jose Delgado, who she later discovered acted as a vigilante. Jos\u00e9's legs are shattered in a battle with a Lexcorp cyborg/human hybrid gone amok. Delgado eventually recovered. He and Lois would have several on and off experiences together before the relationship completely disintegrated, due to Delgado accepting help from a Lexcorp subsidiary ARL.\nAnother major change made was that Lois did not fall in love with just Superman, although she was attracted to him. One reason was the revised nature of the Superman/Clark Kent relationship. In the original Silver Age stories, Superman had been the man who disguised himself as Clark Kent. In this newly revised concept, it was Clark Kent who lived a life in which his activity as Superman was decidedly secondary. Lois initially resented the rookie Clark Kent getting the story on Superman as his first piece when she had spent ages trying to get an interview. This sometimes ill-tempered rivalry remained the case until \"The Adventures of Superman\" #460\u2013463 and \"Action Comics\" #650.\nFollowing Clark's brief rampage under the influence of the Eradicator, Lois was hesitant to forgive Clark for \"selling out\" to Collin Thornton and running \"Newstime\" Magazine, but forgave him in a span of mere minutes when he returned to ask for his job back. Clark elected to repay Lois by finally letting go of his self-imposed inhibitions and passionately kissed her. The two became a couple, and eventually, Lois accepted a proposal of marriage. Clark shortly after revealed to her that he was Superman.\nDC Comics had planned on Lois and Clark being married in 1993's \"Superman vol. 2\" #75. With the then-upcoming television show \"\", DC decided they did not want to have the two married in the comics and not married on TV. Partially as a result of this, Superman was killed in \"Superman\" #75 instead, dying in Lois' arms after a battle with the monster Doomsday. After a period of time, Superman returned to life, and both he and Lois resumed their relationship, though not without a few problems (such as a brief reappearance of Clark's former college girlfriend, the mermaid Lori Lemaris). Lois eventually decided to take an overseas assignment to assert her independence and not be dependent on Clark, who had begun to overprotect her. When Clark became convinced Lois was in danger, he and her father Sam allied to aid her secretly.\nWhen Lois returned to Metropolis, she had been through several life-threatening exploits and was slightly amused when Clark informed her his powers had been depleted, and that he was her editor (due to Perry White's cancer). Upon discovering Clark still had her wedding ring within a handkerchief, Lois warmly broke down, teasing Clark and finally agreeing to become his wife.\nLois and Clark were finally married in the comic book ' (December 1996), which featured the work of nearly every living artist who had ever worked on Superman. The issue was published during the week of October 6, 1996, coinciding with an episode of the television series ', which featured the wedding of the two characters. \"The Wedding Album\" itself spent part of its opening pages accommodating and reconciling the then-current comic storyline of Lois and Clark having broken off their engagement.\nSince their marriage, Clark and Lois continue to be one of the strongest relationships in comics. In 2006, the couple took the next step in adopting a newly arrived Kryptonian boy, who they named Chris Kent. The boy is later discovered to be the son of Jor-El's foe, General Zod. Although initially uneasy about raising a super-powered child, Lois has shown immense aptitude of being 'Mommy Lois.' Following a devastating battle with Zod, Chris sacrificed himself to seal the Phantom Zone rift, trapping himself inside with Zod's forces, leaving Lois without her son.\nIn the second issue of \"Final Crisis\", Lois and Perry are caught in an explosion triggered by Clayface destroying the \"Daily Planet\" and Lois is critically injured. In the third issue, it is revealed that only Clark's heat vision is keeping her heart beating. Clark is visited by a mysterious phantom who insists that he must depart Earth immediately if he is to save his wife's life. The story is continued in the 3D tie-in comic \"Superman Beyond\", where the female Monitor Zillo Valla stops time around Lois, allowing Superman to leave her side for a while, recruiting him and several of his multiversal doppelgangers in a mission to save the entire Multiverse, promising care for Lois. After defeating the dark Monitor Mandrakk, Superman brings back a distilled drop of The Bleed and administers it to Lois through a kiss, restoring her to full health. Lois is later seen in \"Final Crisis\" #6, one of the few still free humans.\nAfter the events of \"\" Superman must leave Earth for an undetermined amount of time swearing off his Earthly connections in the eyes of his fellow Kryptonians to keep an eye on General Zod the New Kryptonian military commander, but he secretly tells Lois he still considers her his wife and will come back to her. In the issues of \"Action Comics\" Lois has reunited with Chris Kent, who has aged to adulthood in the past months and became the new Metropolis hero Nightwing. Supergirl and Lana visit Lois' apartment to tell her that her sister Lucy Lane was killed during a battle with Supergirl. Lois does not believe that her sister is dead and refuses to accept the news until she has irrefutable proof. Lois asks Supergirl for a recovered piece of Superwoman's costume.\nLois hands her expos\u00e9 in and the government is after her for treason. With agents on her tail, she makes a mad dash for it. When Lois is in custody, her father Sam Lane is there to greet her in an interview room in an unnamed facility. Sam tells Lois the only reason he has been lenient with her is because she is his daughter, while he does love her the planet will always come first over his family and threatens to make her disappear forever if she continues. Lois returns to the \"Daily Planet\" under cover of night and explains all to Perry. She points out the whole paper is at risk and everyone connected to it if her expos\u00e9 runs. Perry understands and though he must protect the paper he is first and foremost a good journalist and nudges Lois in the right direction; he will not run the story but noted it must get out to the people somehow. Enlightened, she quits the \"Daily Planet\", as Lois gets her edge back. It was later revealed she never really quit the \"Daily Planet\".\nLois learns her father's forces destroyed New Krypton. She is kidnapped by Lucy and taken to Sam's secret base. There, Lois argues with her father, countering his insistence on regarding the Kryptonians as \"rabid dogs\" by pointing out that they naturally regard \"him\" as a genocidal maniac after he destroyed their planet. In the war between New Krypton and Earth, Supergirl finds them and threatens to kill Sam. Lois stops her, saying her father will be judged for his war crimes. Refusing to go to trial, Sam takes a gun and commits suicide. Later, Lois visits the imprisoned Lucy. She expresses disbelief on what her sister has become. Lois says while she will not miss her father, she will miss her sister.\nIn \", Superman begins a journey through America to reconnect with the American people, and Lois, though confused at first, supports his choice. Lois later travels to Rushmark and finds an old college friend Brian, who invites her to have dinner with him and his wife. When Lois leaves Brian's home she is met by Superman. The two reaffirm their love to each other and go to Chicago. There, Lois helps Superman arrest a violent father who has been attacking his wife and son. Later, Lois and Superman investigate a factory in Des Moines. Lois wants to publish an article, which would reveal the workers' illegal activities, but Superman forces her not to. Feeling betrayed, Lois returns to Metropolis and does not speak to Superman for a while. When Lois is kidnapped by Lisa Jennings, a woman who wants to destroy Superman, he rescues her. With the danger over. Superman apologizes to Lois about what happened in Des Moines. Lois replies that she wrote the article anyway, saying that she was a reporter before she was his wife. Knowing that his wife did the right thing, Superman kisses her. The two then return home.\nThe New 52.\nIn 2011, DC Comics relaunched its titles and its main continuity was rebooted with the New 52. Lois now works for Morgan Edge heading up the media division of the \"Daily Planet\". She views Clark as a friend and is unaware that he is Superman.\nLois investigates the story of twenty people who developed metahuman powers after being kidnapped by Brainiac. Her search leads her to a U.S. senator, who revealed to be one of the Twenty. The senator dies, but not before transferring his powers to Lois, who falls into a coma. Lois later awakes from her coma at the hospital, with Jonathan Carroll at her side. Lois manifests psychic powers and helps Superman fight the Psychic Pirate. During the fight, Lois learns that Clark is Superman but falls back into a coma. After defeating the Psychic Pirate, Superman brings Lois back to the hospital. Later, the Parasite attacks the hospital and attempts to steal Lois' powers. Superman tricks the Parasite into absorbing Lois' psionic energy. The power overwhelms the Parasite, causing him to collapse. Lois awakens from her coma but she does not seem to remember Superman's identity.\nLois is the main character in the \"Superman: Lois Lane\" #1 one-shot. In this story, Lois' sister, Lucy, asks for her help in finding her roommate Amanda Suresh, who had been kidnapped by a mysterious group called \"the Cartel.\" According to Lucy, Amanda had been taking a drug that transformed her into a monster. As Lois investigates the Cartel, she gets captured and taken to the Cartel's headquarters. There, Lois finds out the Cartel had been capturing people who had been mutated by the drug. Lois escapes and rescues Amanda when the captured monsters cause a riot. As she returns home, Lois finds out Lucy had been taking the drug. As Lucy apologizes for putting all three in danger, Lois chooses to publish her story about the Cartel.\nSome time after this, an organisation led by the mysterious 'HODOR-ROOT' learn Superman's secret identity, prompting him to share that information with Lois. When HODOR-ROOT try to analyse Clark's new 'Super-Flare' power, Lois reveals his identity to the public in the hope of removing their blackmail card, but this forces Clark to go on the run, hunted by criminals and law enforcement as some apparent side-effect of his Super-Flare has depleted his powers. Superman eventually learns that his depleted powers are due to Vandal Savage infecting him with a form of radiation that inhibits his cells' ability to absorb solar radiation, subjecting himself to kryptonite as a form of chemotherapy. With his powers restored, Clark reconciles with Lois, accepting that she exposed his identity for good reasons.\nIn the \"\", set five years in the possible future of the New 52-verse. Lois is considered the most successful freelance reporter on the planet and her blog \"The Fast Lane\" is one of the most read and well-respected sources of news in the world.\nIn the miniseries \"Convergence\", which featured many Post-\"Crisis\" DC Universe characters, including a married Superman and his pregnant wife Lois Lane, deal with the impending birth of their child, as Superman is called to protect the city. \"Convergence\" shows the birth of their son, Jon Kent.\nFollowing \"Convergence\", DC announced the spin-off comic book series \"\", debuting in October 2015 by Dan Jurgens and Lee Weeks. The eight-issue series is set several years after the \"Convergence\" event, where Clark and Lois and their son Jon have been living and working in the New 52 universe. The couple now lives in California and has changed their last name to White (a tribute to Perry White). Lois has become an anonymous author, publishing several critically acclaimed books under the alias name \"Author X.\" While Clark continues his superhero duty, protecting cities and civilians quietly behind the scenes. Their son, Jonathan, eventually began to develop superpowers of his own (similar to those of his father Superman) and learned the truth about his parents' true origin.\nIn \"The Final Days of Superman\", the pre-\"Flashpoint\" Superman helps his \"New 52\" counterpart defeat a man who has become convinced that he is the 'true' Superman after exposure to some of Superman's excess energy. \"New 52\"-Lois is present when 'her' Superman expires as recent energy exposures catch up with him, after he tells her his life story for posterity.\nDC Rebirth.\nIn June 2016, DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic book titles with DC Rebirth. The publisher once again re-established the Post-\"Crisis\" Superman as the principal Superman in DC comics, along with his wife, Lois Lane, and their son, Jonathan.\nLois began to investigate the disappearance of her New 52 counterpart, and after learning the apparent death of her other-self, she returns to the \"Daily Planet\" posing as her counterpart. Following a confrontation with Mister Mxyzptlk, Lois and Superman's essence is merged with their New 52 counterpart, creating a new DC Universe.\nReleased in July 2019 to July 2020, Lois stars in a 12-issue limited series \"Lois Lane\" written by Greg Rucka and art by Mike Perkins. The series sees Lois as she investigates stories of conspiracy, intrigue and murder in the DC Universe. Writer Greg Rucka intended for the series to focus on Lois' legacy as a hard-boiled journalist and the investigative world which she inhabits, with the series reflecting the state of modern journalism in the world today.\nSuperhero identities.\nLois Lane has become a superhero and gained superpowers several times in the comics, animation, and live-action series.\nSuperwoman.\nLois was the first person to assume the Superwoman persona and has become the superheroine on several occasions. Her first appearance as Superwoman (as well as Superwoman's first appearance in DC Comics) was in \"Action Comics\" #60 (May 1943). The story is set in a dream sequence, where, after Lois is hit by a truck, she dreams a transfusion of Superman's blood gives her superpowers and she becomes Superwoman. In \"Superman\" #45, Lois believes Hocus and Pocus\u2014a pair of fraudulent magicians\u2014have given her superpowers, and with Superman's help and intervention, Lois once again becomes Superwoman. In \"Action Comics\" #156, Lois actually gains superpowers from one of Lex Luthor's inventions, which launches a short-lived career as \"Superwoman.\" In \"The Superman Family\" #207, the Earth-Two Lois gained superpowers from her husband, after Superman brought an extraterrestrial plant into their home, with Lois losing the powers after the death of the plant. Other stories have Lois transformed into Superwoman when Superman transfers some of his powers to Lois, or due to Mr. Mxyzptlk's interference. On \"Smallville\" in the episode \"Prophecy,\" Jor-El gives Lois all of Clark's powers for one day.\nIn the original Crime Syndicate of America on Earth-Three, Lois Lane and Superwoman were two separate individual characters. Superwoman is a supervillain and Lois married Earth-Three's greatest champion, Alexander Luthor. The pre-Crisis version of the characters perished when Earth-Three was destroyed during the events of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\". In the graphic novel \"\", Superwoman, a member of the Crime Syndicate is the alternate version of Lois Lane. She is an Amazon by birth and the chief editor of the \"Daily Planet\". She inhabits the same antimatter universe which contains the planet Qward. The New 52 version of Superwoman of Earth-3 is also named Lois Lane and is part of the Crime Syndicate.\nIn \"All-Star Superman\", the 12-issue comic book series by Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely, Lois becomes a Kryptonian Superwoman for 24 hours. In the story, Superman (who believed he was dying) revealed his secret identity to her and takes Lois to his Fortress of Solitude to spend her birthday. While at his Arctic sanctuary, he presents Lois with her birthday present, a formula called \"Exo-Genes\" created by Superman from his own DNA, that allows Lois to have his powers for twenty-four hours. With her new Kryptonian powers and new Superwoman costume (made by Superman), the two spend the whole day together on different adventures and shared a kiss on the moon. At the end of the story, Superman proclaims his love for Lois, before he flies off into the sun to repair it. Lois later appeared as Superwoman in the animated All-Star Superman film, voiced by Christina Hendricks.\nIn DC Rebirth, the \"New 52\" Lois and Lana gained superpowers due to the solar energy explosion caused by the death of the New 52 Superman. This results in both Lois and Lana becoming Superwoman, with Lois possessing all of Superman's traditional powers, while Lana has the ability to absorb solar energy and release it in other forms. Lois later dies at the hands of a female Bizarro, being overloaded with solar energy the same way Superman was killed.\nIn 2024, Lois returned as Superwoman in DC Comics in the\u00a0DC All In\u00a0initiative. She first appeared as Superwoman in\u00a0\"Superman\"\u00a0vol 6 #19. During the \"Absolute Power\" storyline, Amanda Waller's Amazo robots steal the powers of Earth's metahumans, among others. In\u00a0\"Superwoman Special\" #1, it was revealed that General Zod is among those affected, with Lois gaining his powers and becoming Superwoman again. Soon after, Lois loses her powers after using most of them up while battling X-El, a Bizarro clone of Lex Luthor.\nRed Tornado.\nFollowing the DC relaunch, the series \"\" debuted in 2012, set on the parallel world of that name. It depicts a modern take on the Golden Age world, starring the Justice Society of America and superheroes of that period.\nIn \"Earth 2\", Lois Lane is married to Superman. When Clark's cousin Kara arrived on earth, she stayed with Clark's parents, before moving in and living with Clark and Lois. Lois considers Kara as her daughter and Kara calls Lois mom. Five years prior to the start of the story, during the first Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois was killed by one of Darkseid's assassins at the \"Daily Planet\", she died in her husband's arms. Superman and many other heroes of Earth 2 are killed in the war.\nFive years later, as various heroes begin to rise and various gods from Apokolips begin to wreak havoc again. Lois' consciousness is revealed to have survived and was downloaded into the robot body of Red Tornado by her father Sam Lane and Robert Crane. Lois, now as Red Tornado, possessed the power of wind manipulation and cyclone generation abilities. Lois bands together with Green Lantern (Alan Scott), Batman (Thomas Wayne), Accountable (Jimmy Olsen) and the other gathered heroes to fight against the forces of Apokolips. After a protracted battle with what was thought to be a surviving brainwashed Superman, Lois realizes he is, in fact, a Bizarro, and takes advantage of his deteriorating form to disintegrate him with a cyclone blast. In the story, Lois is referred to by Doctor Fate as the \"Resurrection hope\".\nDuring Superman's rampage and destruction on Earth 2, Lois is among a group that discovers Val-Zod, a Kryptonian, hidden in a cell beneath Arkham. Lois helps Val feel accepted and welcomed on Earth 2, learn to control his superpower, and overcome his agoraphobia (due to his prolonged travel in space to Earth). Val-Zod eventually becomes the new Superman of Earth 2.\nIn the second Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois and Kara are reunited, after Kara and Huntress return to Earth 2 from Prime Earth. Lois, along with Kara, Val, Huntress, Batman and other heroes, fights against the armies of Apokolips and new villains appearing across Earth 2. While searching for Huntress beneath the fire pits of Earth 2 in DeSaad's cloning facility, Lois, Val, Kara and Batman found the real Superman who has been held captive for five years. He was revived by DeSaad and was used as the genetic source for the Kryptonian clones. The extraction of his DNA corrupted his body leaving him without any powers. Lois and Superman reunite briefly, before he sacrificed himself one last time, destroying the Parademon facilities using his corrupt DNA. After Superman's death, Lois gave Kara the symbol from his uniform, which was then worn by Kara in remembrance.\nIn the final days of Earth 2, Lois' instincts as a journalist lead her to attempt to preserve and record the history and stories of Earth 2 in her large memory bank in the hope that someday, someone will read the data and rebuild this world. After the destruction of Earth 2, Lois and the remaining civilians and heroes of Earth 2 relocated to a new world.\nThe writer of \"Earth 2\", Tom Taylor, specifically resurrected Lois Lane on Earth 2 after he was told to kill off the character in the \"Injustice\" comic series. Taylor stated \"bringing Lois in was quite a personal thing, because having to do such horrible, horrible things to her in Injustice, the first thing I asked when I got on the book was if I could bring back Lois. Then it was just a matter of working out exactly how.\" Taylor received \"Women in Refrigerators\" criticism for his \"Injustice\" comic stories. Bringing back Lois as Red Tornado was Taylor's way to \"unfridge\" Lois. As Taylor noted, in Lois' first appearance as Red Tornado, Lois literally came out of a blue refrigerator. Other reasons for bringing back Lois involve Superman, Taylor commented \"While evil bastard Superman is out there killing and maiming and destroying, I wanted Lois to exist as the counterpoint to this. She's the beating heart at the center. She's the good Ying to Superman's evil Yang. Where there's Lois, there's hope.\"\nNicola Scott, the long-time artist on Earth 2, on drawing Red Tornado Lois, \"I wanted Lois to be Lois, despite the fact that she's metal. I wanted to make sure she looked really feminine and really beautiful, so all she'd need is a flesh coating and a wig and she'd be good to go.\"\nEarth-Two version.\nDC Comics instituted its multiverse system in the early 1960s for organizing its continuity and introduced the Earth-Two Superman in \"Justice League of America\" #73 (August 1969). This retcon declared the Golden Age Superman and Lois Lane stories (i.e. comics published from 1938 through the early 1950s) as having taken place on the parallel world of \"Earth-Two\" versus the then mainstream (Silver Age) universe of \"Earth-One\".\nIn \"Action Comics\" #484 (June 1978), a flashback story reveals Earth-Two's Lois became infatuated with Clark Kent after the latter lost his memory of his superheroic identity (thanks to a spell cast by the old Justice Society of America enemy Wizard working for Colonel Future), with the result of Clark acting more aggressive and extroverted. Clark and Lois began to date each other and were soon married. During the honeymoon, Lois discovered that Clark was indeed Superman. After recruiting the aid of Wizard, Lois restored Clark's memory and Wizard surrendered to the authorities.\nThe now-married Lois and Clark appeared in a series of stories in \"The Superman Family\" #195\u2013199 and #201\u2013222 titled \"Mr and Mrs Superman\", which presented their further adventures early in their marriage. Susie Tompkins made a return as a recurring character. Years later, Lois and Clark acted as parental figures for Power Girl, Superman's cousin, after she arrived on Earth.\nDuring the \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" miniseries, the Earth-Two Lois Lane was seemingly seen for the final time, as Lois, the Earth-Two Superman, and the Superboy of Earth-Prime are, at the end of the story, taken by Earth-Three's Alexander Luthor Jr. into a paradise-like dimension. Following the events of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths,\" this version of Lois was retroactively removed from DC's continuity.\nIn 2005's \"Infinite Crisis\" miniseries, it is revealed that the Earth-Two Lois Lane Kent, along with Superboy, Alexander Luthor Jr., and Superman, have been watching the events of the post-\"Crisis\" DC Universe from their pocket dimension. Out of the four observers, she is the only one who still believes that the new universe is just going through a rough patch; Superboy-Prime and Alexander are convinced that Earth is corrupt, and Kal-L is slowly becoming swayed to their way of thinking. Kal-L is determined to restore Earth-Two and heal Lois, who is dying from an unknown illness. He believes that Lois' health will recover when she returns to her home universe. Despite the restoration of Earth-Two, Lois Lane dies in the arms of her husband Superman despite his protests that he cannot let her die. After Kal-L is mortally wounded by Superboy-Prime, he comments that he finally understood Lois' final words \"It's... not... going...\" as meaning that it would never end for them, and one day it would be understood that even the heroes who had been lost in the original Crisis were still out there somewhere. After his demise, Superman and Lois are shown reunited in the stars, while their bodies are buried on Earth alongside Superboy (Conner Kent), who gave his life to stop Superboy-Prime's attempts to restore his Earth.\nLois later returns as a sinister Black Lantern with her husband in the \"Blackest Night\" crossover. Her first task is to kidnap Martha Kent with her spouse and stating that she and Kal-L wish for Kal-El, Conner Kent, and Martha, to be reunited with Jonathan Kent in death. She proved unable to deal with the resourcefulness of Martha Kent, and was set ablaze by the widow, but kept regenerating until Krypto intervened, ripping the black ring out of her hand and preventing regeneration for long enough to allow Superman and Conner Kent to destroy the Black Lantern powerhouses attacking Smallville, and reaching town to aid others unhindered. Black Lantern Lois later appears to Power Girl, claiming that she has escaped the ring's corrupting influence, and needs her help. This was just a ploy to get close enough to her husband's body, which was being held in the JSA headquarters after his black ring had been removed. Black Lantern Lois sacrifices herself to resurrect Kal-L by giving her ring to him.\nIn other versions.\nDuring the years 1942\u20131985 Editora Brasil-Am\u00e9rica and Editora Abril which published the Brazilian versions of Superman comics, Lois Lane's name was translated to \"Miriam Lane\" and later to \"Miriam Lois Lane.\" In Spanish speaking countries, her name was translated to \"Luisa Lane\" in comics, TV series and movies.\n\"Flashpoint\".\nIn the alternate timeline of the \"Flashpoint\" event, a young Lois Lane sneaks into the facility where her father Sam Lane is stationed to bring him a birthday cake. During a breakout, Lois briefly encounters Kal-El and Neil Sinclair. Sinclair attempts to pursue revenge against her father for the experiments that were performed on him. Sam traps Sinclair and himself in the Phantom Zone.\nYears later, Lois is reporting on a fashion show in Montmartre when the Atlanteans flooded Europe. She is saved by the Amazons who take her to \"New Themiscyra\" (the United Kingdom). Once there, she learns that Jimmy Olsen, who dies in the flood while trying to save an old man, was an agent of Cyborg. Lois agrees to spy on the Amazons for Cyborg. When the time comes for her to undergo a near-fatal \"conversion\" into the Amazonian ranks, she escapes, aided by Penny Black, who is wounded by Artemis in the process.\nDuring this time, Lois walks through the remains of the London Underground and encounters Grifter and the Resistance. Lois soon joins the Resistance. After meeting up with the recovering Penny, she uses Cyborg's device to locate her missing armor at Westminster. Lois later broadcasts a message to the world that the Amazons have imprisoned people in internment. The Amazons in Westminster attempt to kill her. Lois is then rescued by Kal-El (who comes to protect her from Sinclair who has returned). During the fight, Kal-El manages to destroy Sinclair, but Lois is caught in the blast. Before Lois dies in the arms of Kal-El, she tells him to save the people.\n\"Injustice: Gods Among Us\".\nIn the digital prequel comic to the video game \"\", Lois is married to Superman and is pregnant with their child. While on a story at the docks with Jimmy Olsen, she is kidnapped by The Joker and Harley Quinn and taken to a submarine where they perform surgery on her. When the Joker is captured by the Justice League, he informs them he has planted a nuclear bomb in Metropolis and wired the detonator to Lois's heart, set to go off when she dies. While under the influence of Scarecrow's kryptonite-laced fear gas, Superman mistakes Lois for Doomsday and, in an attempt to protect his family, unknowingly flies up into space with her, killing both Lois and their unborn child in the process. When she dies, a nuclear bomb obliterates Metropolis. Superman, devastated by the death of Lois and their unborn child as well as his inadvertent role in destroying Metropolis, kills the Joker and begins his campaign for world domination. Her death serves as the catalyst for Superman's new outlook, as he becomes more willing to kill to protect the world.\nIn Year Three of the series, Superman is put in a magic comatose sleep, where events play out differently in his dream scenario. In this dream world, Superman imagines he had broken free of the fear gas in time to save Lois and their unborn child. Batman had killed Joker to prevent the possibility of another attack on Superman and his family. Lois eventually gives birth to their daughter Lara Lane-Kent. Superman and Lois live a happy and normal life, raising their daughter Lara, who eventually develops superpowers and with her father's guidance becomes a superhero of her own. Superman is eventually awakened from his slumber by Ares and is left feeling angrier and more bitter after realizing the life he could have had with Lois and their child. In Year Five, in an alternate world, Lois and Clark are shown happily visiting Clark's parents, telling them that she is pregnant.\n\"DC Comics Bombshells\".\n\"DC Comics Bombshells\", a comic book series set in an alternate history of World War II, Eloisa \"Lois\" Lane is a mixed-race 17-year-old newspaper hawker from Metropolis' Cuban district. When criminals working for Killer Frost kidnap her, she is rescued by the Batgirls (a group of female vigilantes) and partners with them to defeat Hugo Strange, the man who crippled her mother. Later in the series, she gets a job working at the \"Gotham Gazette\" for Vicki Vale and eventually begins dating Supergirl.\n\"Nightwing: The New Order\".\nIn an alternate reality, Nightwing activates a device ending an ongoing war between the super-powered beings and depowers ninety percent of the superhero population and leads to a future where superpower is outlawed. Lois is a Blue Lantern and a member of the Titans, who form a resistance against the anti-metahuman government.\n\"Superman: Secret Identity\".\nPublished in 2004, \"\" is a four-issue miniseries written by Kurt Busiek and art by Stuart Immonen. Set in the real world where superheroes only exist in comic books. Clark Kent, living in a small town in Kansas, discovers that he has the same powers as Superman, the superhero he was named after. Years later, Clark moves to New York, working as a writer and secretly saving people with his abilities. He meets Lois Chaudhari, an Indian American designer on a blind date (set up by friends because their names resemble the fictional couple Clark Kent and Lois Lane). The two quickly fall in love, get married and have twin daughters Jane and Carol Kent, who also inherit their father's powers.\n\"Gotham City Garage\".\n\"Gotham City Garage\", a digital-first comic book series written by Collin Kelly and Jackson Lanzing, reimagines DC superheroes and villains as bikers in a post-apocalyptic world. Governor Lex Luthor controls the modern utopia Gotham City and the rest of the continent is a wasteland. Lois Lane runs a rebel news radio station \"The Frequency\". When Barda asks for help, Lois and Jimmy Olsen join her in the resistance.\nTales from the Dark Multiverse.\n\"Tales from the Dark Multiverse: Death of Superman\", an anthology series that explores alternate takes on classic DC stories set in a different world in the Dark Multiverse. After Superman is killed by Doomsday, filled with anger and grief, Lois merges with the Eradicator and gains Kryptonian powers so she can take revenge on the corrupt world and those who let Superman die, including both heroes and villains.\n\"DC X Sonic the Hedgehog\".\nLois appears in the third issue of the intercompany crossover \"DC X Sonic the Hedgehog\", where she informs a Superman-suited Knuckles the Echidna that Lex Luthor wishes for an audience with him, while also saying Luthor is more dangerous than he appears.\nMarvel Comics cameos.\nLois Lane has had several (mostly cameo) appearances alongside Clark Kent in past works of Marvel Comics, namely in \"X-Men\" #98, \"Superman vs. The Amazing Spider-Man\" (1976), \"The Mighty Thor\" #341 (1984), \"Excalibur\" #8, \"Ghost Rider\" (vol. 3) #66 (1995), and \"Marvels Epilogue\" (September 2019).\nNewspaper comic strip.\n\"Lois Lane, Girl Reporter\" is a newspaper comic strip featuring Lois Lane, a spin-off from the Superman comic strip and topper to the Superman Sunday strip in the \"Cleveland Plain Dealer\". Twelve comic strips were produced and originally ran between October 24, 1943, to February 27, 1944. Lois also appears in the \"Superman\" daily newspaper comic strip, distributed by McClure Syndicate which ran continuously from January 1939 to May 1966 with a separate Sunday strip added on November 5, 1939.\nBooks.\nComic books.\nLois has appeared in several self-titled miniseries, one-shots and collected editions:\nGraphic novels.\n\"Lois Lane and the Friendship Challenge\".\nA graphic novel by writer Grace Ellis and artist Brittney Williams, and focus on a 13-year-old Lois Lane as she navigates the confusing worlds of social media and friendship during summer break in the sleepy town of Liberty View. Released in August 2020, it is part of DC's original graphic novels for young readers.\n\"Girl Taking Over: A Lois Lane Story\".\nDC graphic novels for young adults, \"Girl Taking Over: A Lois Lane Story\", written by Sarah Kuhn and art by Arielle Jovellanos was released in April 2023.\nNovels.\n\"Lois Lane\".\nLois is the protagonist in the young adult novel series, \"Lois Lane\", written by Gwenda Bond and published by Switch Press. The series follows the adventures of Lois Lane as a savvy, whip-smart, and unafraid contemporary teenage high school girl. The first book in the series, \"Fallout\", was revealed by the author in 2014 and was released on May 1, 2015. Bond revealed the second book, \"Double Down\", in July 2015, and the book was released on May 1, 2016.\nOn the series, Bond said: \"Lois is an icon, of course, a superhero without any superpowers\u00a0... except her unmatched bravery and smarts. Not to mention her sense of humor and her commitment to truth and justice. She's also one of my all-time favorite characters\u2014which is why I jumped at the chance to write a novel featuring a teen Lois, moving to Metropolis and becoming a reporter for the first time. And, most of all, to get to put Lois front and center in the starring role, obviously.\"\n\"Lois &amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman\".\nBased on the ABC television series \"\" four original novels were published in 1996:\nIn other media.\nLois Lane has appeared in various other media adaptations including radio, animations, films, television, video games and Broadway musical.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18566", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18566", "title": "Linker (computing)", "text": "Program that combines intermediate build files into an executable file\nA linker or link editor is a computer program that combines intermediate software build files such as object and library files into a single executable file such as a program or library. A linker is often part of a toolchain that includes a compiler and/or assembler that generates intermediate files that the linker processes. The linker may be integrated with other toolchain tools such that the user does not interact with the linker directly.\nA simpler version that writes its output directly to memory is called the \"loader\", though loading is typically considered a separate process.\nOverview.\nComputer programs typically are composed of several parts or modules; these parts/modules do not need to be contained within a single object file, and in such cases refer to each other using symbols as addresses into other modules, which are mapped into memory addresses when linked for execution.\nWhile the process of linking is meant to ultimately combine these independent parts, there are many good reasons to develop those separately at the source-level. Among these reasons are the ease of organizing several smaller pieces over a monolithic whole and the ability to better define the purpose and responsibilities of each individual piece, which is essential for managing complexity and increasing long-term maintainability in software architecture. \nTypically, an object file can contain three kinds of symbols:\nFor most compilers, each object file is the result of compiling one input source code file. When a program comprises multiple object files, the linker combines these files into a unified executable program, resolving the symbols as it goes along.\nLinkers can take objects from a collection called a library or runtime library. Most linkers do not include all the object files in a static library in the output executable; they include only those object files from the library that are referenced by other object files or libraries directly or indirectly. But for a shared library, the entire library has to be loaded during runtime as it is not known which functions or methods will be called during runtime. Library linking may thus be an iterative process, with some referenced modules requiring additional modules to be linked, and so on. Libraries exist for diverse purposes, and one or more system libraries are usually linked in by default.\nThe linker also takes care of arranging the objects in a program's address space. This may involve \"relocating\" code that assumes a specific base address into another base. Since a compiler seldom knows where an object will reside, it often assumes a fixed base location (for example, zero). Relocating machine code may involve re-targeting absolute jumps, loads, and stores.\nThe executable output by the linker may need another relocation pass when it is finally loaded into memory (just before execution). This pass is usually omitted on hardware offering virtual memory: every program is put into its own address space, so there is no conflict even if all programs load at the same base address. This pass may also be omitted if the executable is a position independent executable.\nAdditionally, in some operating systems, the same program handles both the jobs of linking and loading a program (dynamic linking).\nDynamic linking.\nMany operating system environments allow dynamic linking, deferring the resolution of some undefined symbols until a program is run. That means that the executable code still contains undefined symbols, plus a list of objects or libraries that will provide definitions for these. Loading the program will load these objects/libraries as well, and perform a final linking.\nThis approach offers two advantages:\nThere are also disadvantages:\nContained or virtual environments may further allow system administrators to mitigate or trade-off these individual pros and cons.\nStatic linking.\nStatic linking is the result of the linker copying all library routines used in the program into the executable image. This may require more disk space and memory than dynamic linking, but is more portable, since it does not require the presence of the library on the system where it runs. Static linking also prevents \"DLL hell\", since each program includes exactly the versions of library routines that it requires, with no conflict with other programs. A program using just a few routines from a library does not require the entire library to be installed.\nRelocation.\nAs the compiler has no information on the layout of objects in the final output, it cannot take advantage of shorter or more efficient instructions that place a requirement on the address of another object. For example, a jump instruction can reference an absolute address or an offset from the current location, and the offset could be expressed with different lengths depending on the distance to the target. By first generating the most conservative instruction (usually the largest relative or absolute variant, depending on platform) and adding \"relaxation hints\", it is possible to substitute shorter or more efficient instructions during the final link. In regard to jump optimizations this is also called \"automatic jump-sizing\". This step can be performed only after all input objects have been read and assigned temporary addresses; the linker relaxation pass subsequently reassigns addresses, which may in turn allow more potential relaxations to occur. In general, the substituted sequences are shorter, which allows this process to always converge on the best solution given a fixed order of objects; if this is not the case, relaxations can conflict, and the linker needs to weigh the advantages of either option.\nWhile instruction relaxation typically occurs at link-time, inner-module relaxation can already take place as part of the optimizing process at compile-time. In some cases, relaxation can also occur at load-time as part of the relocation process or combined with dynamic dead-code elimination techniques.\nLinkage editor.\nIn IBM System/360 through IBM Z mainframe operating systems such as OS/360 and its successors, this type of program is known as a \"linkage editor\". As the name implies a linkage \"editor\" has the additional capability of allowing the addition, replacement, and/or deletion of individual program sections. Operating systems such as OS/360 have format for executable load-modules containing supplementary data about the component sections of a program, so that an individual program section can be replaced, and other parts of the program updated so that relocatable addresses and other references can be corrected by the linkage editor, as part of the process.\nOne advantage of this is that it allows a program to be maintained without having to keep all of the intermediate object files, or without having to re-compile program sections that haven't changed. It also permits program updates to be distributed in the form of small files (originally card decks), containing only the object module to be replaced. In such systems, object code is in the form and format of 80-byte punched-card images, so that updates can be introduced into a system using that medium. In later releases of OS/360 and in subsequent systems, load-modules contain additional data about versions of components modules, to create a traceable record of updates. It also allows one to add, change, or remove an overlay structure from an already linked load module.\nThe term \"linkage editor\" should not be construed as implying that the program operates in a user-interactive mode like a text editor. It is intended for batch-mode execution, with the editing commands being supplied by the user in sequentially organized files, such as punched cards, DASD, or magnetic tape.\n\"Linkage editing\" (IBM nomenclature) or \"consolidation\" or \"collection\" (ICL nomenclature) refers to the \"linkage editor's\" or \"consolidator's\" act of combining the various pieces into a relocatable binary, whereas the loading and relocation into an absolute binary at the target address is normally considered a separate step.\nLinker control scripts.\nIn the beginning linkers gave users very limited control over the arrangement of generated output object files. As the target systems became complex with different memory requirements such as embedded systems, it became necessary to give users control to generate output object files with their specific requirements such as defining base addresses' of segments. Linkers control scripts were used for this.\nImplementations.\nNotable implementations:\nUnix &amp; Unix-like.\nOn Unix and Unix-like systems, the static linker is usually invoked via the command codice_1 which is an abbreviation of \"LoaDer\" or \"Link eDitor\". The term \"loader\" was used to describe the process of loading external symbols from other programs during the process of linking.\nFor example, on SINTRAN\u00a0III, linking (assembling object files into a program) was called \"loading\" \u2013 as in loading executable code onto a file. \nGNU.\nGNU ld, part of the GNU Binary Utilities (binutils), is the GNU Project version of the Unix static linker. A \"linker script\" may be passed to GNU ld to exercise fine grain control of the linking process. Two versions of ld are provided in binutils: the traditional GNU ld based on bfd, and a streamlined ELF-only version called gold.\nThe LLVM project's linker, \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;lld\", is designed to be drop-in compatible, and may be used directly with the GNU compiler. Another drop-in replacement, mold, is a highly parallelized and faster alternative which is also supported by GNU tools.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18567", "revid": "12923157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18567", "title": "Legendre symbol", "text": "Function in number theory\nIn number theory, the Legendre symbol is a function of formula_1 and formula_2 defined as\nformula_3\nwhere formula_2 is an odd prime number and formula_1 is a positive integer that may or may not be a quadratic residue mod\u00a0\"p\". The Legendre symbol is a multiplicative function \nThe Legendre symbol was introduced by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1797 or 1798 in the course of his attempts at proving the law of quadratic reciprocity. Generalizations of the symbol include the Jacobi symbol and Dirichlet characters of higher order. The notational convenience of the Legendre symbol inspired introduction of several other \"symbols\" used in algebraic number theory, such as the Hilbert symbol and the Artin symbol.\nDefinition.\nLegendre's original definition was by means of the explicit formula\nformula_6\nBy Euler's criterion, which had been discovered earlier and was known to Legendre, these two definitions are equivalent. Thus Legendre's contribution lay in introducing a convenient \"notation\" that recorded quadratic residuosity of \"a\"\u00a0mod\u00a0\"p\". For the sake of comparison, Gauss used the notation \"a\"R\"p\", \"a\"N\"p\" according to whether \"a\" is a residue or a non-residue modulo \"p\". For typographical convenience, the Legendre symbol is sometimes written as (\"a\"\u00a0|\u00a0\"p\") or (\"a\"/\"p\"). For fixed \"p\", the sequence formula_7 is periodic with period \"p\" and is sometimes called the Legendre sequence. Each row in the following table exhibits periodicity, just as described.\nProperties of the Legendre symbol.\nThere are a number of useful properties of the Legendre symbol which, together with the law of quadratic reciprocity, can be used to compute it efficiently.\n \"F\"2 \n 1, \"F\"\"n\"+1 \n \"Fn\" + \"F\"\"n\"\u22121. If \"p\" is a prime number then\nFor example, \nformula_27 \nSums of Legendre symbols.\nSums of the form formula_28, typically taken over all integers in the range formula_29 for some function formula_30, are a special case of character sums. They are of interest in the distribution of quadratic residues modulo a prime number.\nLegendre symbol and quadratic reciprocity.\nLet \"p\" and \"q\" be distinct odd primes. Using the Legendre symbol, the quadratic reciprocity law can be stated concisely:\n formula_31\nMany proofs of quadratic reciprocity are based on Euler's criterion\nformula_32\nIn addition, several alternative expressions for the Legendre symbol were devised in order to produce various proofs of the quadratic reciprocity law.\nformula_33\nin his fourth and sixth proofs of quadratic reciprocity.\nformula_34\n Reversing the roles of \"p\" and \"q\", he obtains the relation between () and ().\nformula_35\n Using certain elliptic functions instead of the sine function, Eisenstein was able to prove cubic and quartic reciprocity as well.\nComputational example.\nThe above properties, including the law of quadratic reciprocity, can be used to evaluate any Legendre symbol. For example:\nformula_37\nOr using a more efficient computation:\nformula_38\nThe article Jacobi symbol has more examples of Legendre symbol manipulation.\nSince no efficient factorization algorithm is known, but efficient modular exponentiation algorithms are, in general it is more efficient to use Legendre's original definition, e.g.\nformula_39\nusing repeated squaring modulo 331, reducing every value using the modulus after every operation to avoid computation with large integers.\nTable of values.\nThe following is a table of values of Legendre symbol formula_40 with \"p\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a0127, \"a\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a030, \"p\" odd prime.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18568", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18568", "title": "List of algorithms", "text": "An algorithm is fundamentally a set of rules or defined procedures that is typically designed and used to solve a specific problem or a broad set of problems.\nBroadly, algorithms define process(es), sets of rules, or methodologies that are to be followed in calculations, data processing, data mining, pattern recognition, automated reasoning or other problem-solving operations. With the increasing automation of services, more and more decisions are being made by algorithms. Some general examples are risk assessments, anticipatory policing, and pattern recognition technology.\nThe following is a list of well-known algorithms.\nComputational mathematics.\nOptimization algorithms.\nHybrid Algorithms\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18569", "revid": "27040623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18569", "title": "Laconia incident", "text": "War crime during the naval battles of the Second World War\nThe \"Laconia\" incident was a series of events surrounding the sinking of a British passenger ship in the Atlantic Ocean on 12\u00a0September 1942, during World War II, and a subsequent aerial attack on German and Italian submarines involved in rescue attempts. , carrying 2,732 crew, passengers, soldiers, and prisoners of war, was torpedoed and sunk by , a German U-boat, off the West African coast. Operating partly under the dictates of the old prize rules, the U-boat's commander, Werner Hartenstein, immediately commenced rescue operations. \"U-156\" broadcast her position on open radio channels to all Allied powers nearby, and was joined by several other U-boats in the vicinity.\nAfter surfacing and picking up survivors, who were accommodated on the foredeck, \"U-156\" headed on the surface under Red Cross banners to rendezvous with Vichy French ships and transfer the survivors. En route, the U-boat was spotted by a B-24 Liberator bomber of the US Army Air Forces. The aircrew, having reported the U-boat's location, declared intentions, and the presence of survivors, were then ordered to attack the sub. The B-24 killed dozens of \"Laconia\"'s survivors with bombs and strafing attacks, forcing \"U-156\" to cast into the sea the remaining survivors that she had rescued and crash dive to avoid being destroyed.\nRescue operations were continued by other vessels. Another U-boat, , was also attacked by US aircraft and forced to dive. A total of 976 to 1,083 people were eventually rescued; however, 1,658 to 1,757 were killed, mostly Italian POWs. The event changed the general attitude of Germany's naval personnel towards rescuing stranded Allied seamen. The commanders of the were quickly issued the Laconia Order by Grand Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz, which specifically forbade any such attempt and ushered in unrestricted submarine warfare for the remainder of the war.\nThe B-24 pilots mistakenly reported they had sunk \"U-156\", and were awarded medals for bravery. Neither the US pilots nor their commander were punished or investigated, and the matter was quietly forgotten by the US military. During the later Nuremberg trials, a prosecutor attempted to cite the Laconia Order as proof of war crimes by D\u00f6nitz and his submariners. The ploy backfired, causing much embarrassment to the United States after the incident's full report had emerged to the public and the reason for the \"Laconia order\" was known.\nRMS \"Laconia\".\n was built in 1921 as a civilian ocean liner by Swan, Hunter &amp; Wigham Richardson Ltd, Wallsend, Northumberland. In January 1923 Laconia began the first around-the-world cruise, which lasted 130 days and called at 22 ports. On 8 September 1925, Laconia collided with the British schooner Lucia P. Dow in the Atlantic Ocean east of Nantucket, Massachusetts, United States. Laconia towed the schooner for before handing the tow over to the American tug Resolute. In 1934, her code letters were changed to GJCD. On 24 September 1934, Laconia was involved in a collision off the US coast, while travelling from Boston to New York in dense fog. It rammed into the port side of Pan Royal, a US freighter. Both ships suffered serious damage but were able to proceed under their own steam. Laconia returned to New York for repairs, and resumed cruising in 1935. During World War II she was requisitioned for the war effort, and by 1942 had been converted into a troopship. At the time of the incident she was transporting mostly Italian prisoners of war from Cape Town to Freetown, under the command of Captain Rudolph Sharp. The ship was carrying 463\u00a0officers and crew, 87\u00a0civilians, 286\u00a0British soldiers, 1,793\u00a0Italian prisoners and 103\u00a0Polish soldiers acting as guards of the prisoners.\nSharp had previously commanded , which had been sunk by German bombs on 17\u00a0June 1940, off the French port of Saint-Nazaire, while taking part in Operation Aerial, the evacuation of British nationals and troops from France, two weeks after the Dunkirk evacuation.\nEvents.\nAttack on \"Laconia\".\nAt 10 p.m., on 12 September 1942, was on patrol off the coast of western Africa, midway between Liberia and Ascension Island. The submarine's commanding officer, Werner Hartenstein, spotted the large British ship sailing alone and attacked it. Armed ships, which meant most merchantmen and troop transport, constituted legitimate targets for attack without warning. Armed as such, the \"Laconia\" fell into this category, and at 10:22\u00a0p.m. she transmitted a message on the 600 m (500\u00a0kHz) band: \"SSS SSS 0434 South / 1125 West Laconia torpedoed.\" \"SSS\" was the code signifying \"under attack by submarine\". Additional messages were transmitted, but there is no record these were received by any other vessel or station.\nAlthough there were sufficient lifeboats for the entire ship's complement, including the Italian prisoners, heavy listing prevented half from being launched until the vessel had settled. The prisoners were abandoned in the locked cargo holds as the ship sank, but most managed to escape by breaking down hatches or climbing up ventilation shafts. Several were shot when a group of prisoners rushed a lifeboat, and a large number were bayoneted to death to prevent their boarding of one of the few lifeboats available. The Polish guards were armed with rifles with fixed bayonets; however, they were not loaded and the guards carried no ammunition. Witnesses indicate that few of the prisoners were shot. Instead, most of the casualties were bayoneted.\nBy the time the last lifeboats were launched most survivors had already entered the water, so some lifeboats had few passengers. Only one life raft left the ship with prisoners on board; the rest jumped into the ocean. Survivors later recounted how Italians in the water were either shot or had their hands severed by axes if they tried to climb into a lifeboat. The blood soon attracted sharks. Corporal Dino Monte, one of the few Italian survivors, stated \"...\u00a0sharks darted among us. Grabbing an arm, biting a leg. Other larger beasts swallowed entire bodies.\" As \"Laconia\" was going under, bow first, \"U-156\" surfaced to capture the ship's surviving senior officers. To their surprise, they saw over 2,000 people struggling in the water.\nRescue operation.\nRealising that the passengers were primarily POWs and civilians, Hartenstein immediately began rescue operations whilst flying the Red Cross flag. \"Laconia\" sank at 11:23\u00a0p.m., over an hour after the attack. At 1:25\u00a0a.m. on 13\u00a0September, Hartenstein sent a coded radio message to the alerting them to the situation. It read: \"Sunk by Hartenstein, British Laconia, Qu\u00a0FF7721, 310\u00a0deg. Unfortunately with 1,500 Italian POWs; 90 fished out of the water so far. Request orders.\"\nThe head of submarine operations, Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz, immediately ordered seven U-boats from the wolfpack Eisb\u00e4r, which had been gathering to take part in a planned surprise attack on Cape Town, to divert to the scene to pick up survivors. D\u00f6nitz then informed Berlin of the situation and actions he had taken. Hitler was furious and ordered that the rescue be abandoned. Admiral Erich Raeder ordered D\u00f6nitz to disengage the Eisb\u00e4r boats, which included Hartenstein's \"U-156\", and send them to Cape Town as per the original plan. Raeder then ordered , commanded by Erich W\u00fcrdemann, , under \"Korvettenkapit\u00e4n\" Harro Schacht, and the Italian submarine to intercept Hartenstein to take on his survivors and then to proceed to the \"Laconia\" site and rescue any Italians they could find. Raeder also requested the Vichy French to send warships from Dakar and Ivory Coast to collect the Italian survivors from the three submarines.\nThe Vichy French, in response, sent the 7,600-ton cruiser from Dakar, and two sloops, the fast 660-ton \"Annamite\" and the slower 2,000-ton , from Conakry, French Guinea, and Cotonou, Dahomey, respectively. D\u00f6nitz disengaged the Eisb\u00e4r boats and informed Hartenstein of Raeder's orders, but he substituted \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Helmut Witte's for \"U-156\" in the Eisb\u00e4r group and sent the order: \"All boats, including Hartenstein, only take as many men into the boat as will allow it to be fully ready for action when submerged.\"\n\"U-156\" was soon crammed above and below decks with nearly 200\u00a0survivors, including five women, and had another\u00a0200 in tow aboard four lifeboats. At 6\u00a0a.m. on 13\u00a0September, Hartenstein broadcast an uncoded message in English on the band to all shipping in the area, giving his position, requesting assistance with the rescue effort, and promising not to attack. It read: \"If any ship will assist the shipwrecked Laconia crew I will not attack her, providing I am not being attacked by ship or air force. I picked up 193\u00a0men. 4\u00b0-53\"\u00a0South, 11\u00b0-26\"\u00a0West.\u00a0\u2013 German submarine.\"\nThe British in Freetown intercepted this message but, believing it might be a ruse of war, refused to credit it. Two days later, on 15\u00a0September, a message was passed to the Americans that \"Laconia\" had been torpedoed and the British merchant ship was en route to pick up survivors. The \"poorly composed message\" implied that \"Laconia\" had only been sunk that day and made no mention that the Germans were involved in a rescue attempt under a cease-fire or that neutral French ships were also en route.\n\"U-156\" remained on the surface at the scene for the next two-and-a-half days. At 11:30\u00a0a.m. on 15\u00a0September, she was joined by \"U-506\", and a few hours later by both \"U-507\" and the \"Comandante Cappellini\". The four submarines, with lifeboats in tow and hundreds of survivors standing on their decks, headed for the African coastline and a rendezvous with the Vichy French surface warships that had set out from Senegal and Dahomey.\nFirst American attack.\nDuring the night the submarines became separated. On 16\u00a0September at 11:25\u00a0a.m., \"U-156\" was spotted by an American B-24\u00a0Liberator bomber flying from a secret airbase on Ascension. The submarine was travelling with a Red Cross flag draped across her gun deck. Hartenstein signalled to the pilot in both Morse code and English requesting assistance. A British officer also messaged the aircraft: \"RAF officer speaking from German submarine, \"Laconia\" survivors on board, soldiers, civilians, women, children.\"\nLieutenant James D. Harden of the US Army Air Forces did not respond to the messages; turning away, he notified his base of the situation. The senior officer on duty that day, Captain Robert C. Richardson III, who claimed that he did not know that this was a Red Cross-sanctioned German rescue operation, ordered the B-24 to \"sink the sub\". Richardson later claimed he believed that the rules of war at the time did not permit a combat ship to fly Red Cross flags. He feared that the German submarine would attack the two Allied freighters diverted by the British to the site. He assumed that the German submarine was rescuing only the Italian POWs. In his tactical assessment, he believed that the submarine might discover and shell the secret Ascension airfield and fuel tanks, thus cutting off a critical Allied resupply air route to British forces in Egypt and Soviet forces in Russia.\nHarden flew back to the scene of the rescue effort and, at 12:32\u00a0p.m., attacked with bombs and depth charges. One landed among the lifeboats in tow behind \"U-156\", killing dozens of survivors, while others straddled the submarine itself, causing minor damage. Hartenstein cast adrift those lifeboats still afloat and ordered the survivors on his deck into the water. The submarine submerged slowly to give those still on the deck a chance to get into the water and escape. According to Harden's report, he made four runs at the submarine. On the first three the depth charges and bombs failed to release, on the fourth he dropped two bombs. The crew of the Liberator were later awarded medals for the alleged sinking of \"U-156\", when they had in fact only sunk two lifeboats.\nIgnoring Hartenstein's request that they stay in the area to be rescued by the Vichy French, two lifeboats decided to head for Africa. One, which began the journey with 68\u00a0people on board, reached the African coast 27\u00a0days later with only 16\u00a0survivors. The other was rescued by a British trawler after 40\u00a0days at sea. Only four of its 52\u00a0occupants were still alive.\nUnaware of the attack, \"U-507\", \"U-506\", and \"Cappellini\" continued to pick up survivors. The following morning Commander Revedin of \"Cappellini\" found that he was rescuing survivors who had been set adrift by \"U-156.\" At 11:30\u00a0a.m. Revedin received the following message: \"Bordeaux to Cappellini: Reporting attack already undergone by other submarines. Be ready to submerge for action against the enemy. Put shipwrecked on rafts except women, children, and Italians, and make for minor grid-square\u00a056 of grid-square\u00a00971 where you will land remainder shipwrecked on to French ships. Keep British prisoners. Keep strictest watch enemy planes and submarines. End of message.\"\n\"U-507\" and \"U-506\" received confirmation from headquarters of the attack on \"U-156\" and were asked for the number of survivors rescued. Commander Schacht of \"U-507\" replied that he had\u00a0491, of whom 15\u00a0were women and\u00a016 were children. Commander Wurdemann of \"U-506\" confirmed\u00a0151, including nine women and children. The next message from headquarters ordered them to cast adrift all the British and Polish survivors, mark their positions and instruct them to remain exactly where they were, then proceed with all haste to the rescue rendezvous. The respective commanders chose not to cast any survivors adrift.\nThe order given by Richardson and the resulting attack by Harden have been called Allied war crimes. Under the conventions of war at sea, ships\u2014including submarines\u2014engaged in rescue operations are held to be immune from attack.\nSecond American attack.\nFive B-25s from Ascension's permanent squadron and Harden's B-24 continued to search for submarines from dawn till dusk. On 17\u00a0September, one B-25 sighted \"Laconia\"'s lifeboats and informed \"Empire Haven\" of their position. Harden's B-24 sighted \"U-506\", which had 151\u00a0survivors on board including nine women and children, and attacked. On the first run the bombs failed to drop, \"U-506\" crash dived and on the second run the B-24 dropped two bombs and two depth charges but they caused no damage.\nThat same day, the British at Freetown sent an ambiguous message to Ascension informing them that three French ships from Dakar were en route. Captain Richardson assumed the French intended to invade Ascension so the submarine hunting was cancelled in order to prepare for an invasion.\nThe French cruiser picked up 52\u00a0survivors, all British, while still from the rendezvous point. \"Gloire\" then met with the sloop \"Annamite\" with both meeting \"U-507\" and \"U-506\" at the rendezvous point at a little after 2\u00a0p.m. on 17\u00a0September. With the exception of two British officers kept aboard \"U-507,\" the survivors were all transferred to the rescue ships. \"Gloire\" sailed off on her own and within four hours rescued another 11\u00a0lifeboats. At 10\u00a0p.m., \"Gloire\" found another lifeboat and proceeded to a planned rendezvous with \"Annamite\".\nAt 1\u00a0a.m., a lookout spotted a light on the horizon, which was investigated despite this meaning \"Gloire\" would not be able to make the rendezvous, and a further 84\u00a0survivors were rescued. A new rendezvous was arranged, the ships meeting at 9:30\u00a0a.m. with \"Annamite\" transferring her survivors to \"Gloire\". A count was then taken: 373\u00a0Italians, 70\u00a0Poles and 597\u00a0British who included 48\u00a0women and children. \"Gloire\" arrived at Dakar on 21\u00a0September to resupply before sailing for Casablanca, arriving there on 25\u00a0September. On arrival, Colonel Baldwin, on behalf of all the British survivors, presented the captain of \"Cappellini\" with a letter that read as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We the undersigned officers of His Majesty's Navy, Army and Air Force and of the Merchant Navy, and also on behalf of the Polish detachment, the prisoners of war, the women and children, wish to express to you our deepest and sincerest gratitude for all you have done, at the cost of very great difficulties for your ship and her crew, in welcoming us, the survivors of His Majesty's transport-ship, the \"Laconia\".\nThe submarine \"Cappellini\" had been unable to find the French warships so radioed for instructions and awaited a response. The French sloop \"Dumont-d'Urville\" was sent to rendezvous with \"Cappellini\" and by chance rescued a lifeboat from the British cargo ship \"Trevilley\", which had been torpedoed on 12\u00a0September. After searching for other \"Trevilley\" survivors without luck, \"Dumont-d'Urville\" met \"Cappellini\" on 20\u00a0September. With the exception of six Italians and two British officers, the remaining survivors were transferred to \"Dumont-d'Urville\", which later transferred the Italians to \"Annamite\", which transported them to Dakar on 24\u00a0September. Of \"Laconia\"'s original complement of\u00a02,741, only 1,083\u00a0survived. Of the 1,658\u00a0who died, 1,420 were Italian POWs.\nConclusion.\nFrom Casablanca, most of the survivors were taken to Mediouna in Morocco to await transport to a prison camp in Germany. On 8\u00a0November, the Allied invasion of North Africa began liberating the survivors, who were taken aboard the ship \"Anton\" which landed them in the United States.\nDoris Hawkins, a missionary nurse, survived the \"Laconia\" incident and spent 27\u00a0days adrift in Lifeboat Nine, finally coming ashore on the coast of Liberia. She was returning to England after five years in Palestine with 14-month-old Sally Kay Readman, who was lost to the sea as they were transferred into the lifeboat.\nDoris Hawkins wrote a pamphlet titled \"Atlantic Torpedo\" after her eventual return to England, published by Victor Gollancz in 1943. In it she writes of the moments when Sally was lost: \"We found ourselves on top of the arms and legs of a panic-stricken mass of humanity. The lifeboat, filled to capacity with men, women and children, was leaking badly and rapidly filling with water; at the same time it was crashing against the ship's side. Just as Sally was passed over to me, the boat filled completely and capsized, flinging us all into the water. I lost her. I did not hear her cry even then, and I am sure that God took her immediately to Himself without suffering. I never saw her again.\"\nDoris Hawkins was one of 16 survivors (out of\u00a069 in the lifeboat when it was cast adrift from the U-boat). She spent the remaining war years personally visiting the families of people who perished in the lifeboat, returning mementos entrusted to her by them in their dying moments. In Doris's words, \"It is impossible to imagine why I should have been chosen to survive when so many did not. I have been reluctant to write the story of our experiences, but in answer to many requests I have done so; and if it strengthens someone's faith, if it is an inspiration to any, if it brings home to others, hitherto untouched, all that 'those who go down to the sea in ships' face for our sakes, hour by hour, day by day, year in and year out\u2014it will not have been written in vain\".\nSurvivor Jim McLoughlin states in \"One Common Enemy\" that after the incident Hartenstein asked him if he was in the Royal Navy, which he was, then why a passenger ship was armed, stating, \"If it wasn't armed, I would not have attacked.\" McLoughlin believes this indicates Hartenstein had thought it was a troop transport rather than a passenger ship; by signalling to the Royal Navy, \"Laconia\" was acting as a auxiliary ship.\nAftermath.\nThe \"Laconia\" incident had far-reaching consequences. Up until that point, it was common for U-boats to assist torpedoed survivors with food, water, simple medical care for the wounded, and a compass bearing to the nearest landmass. It was extremely rare for survivors to be brought on board, as space on a U-boat was barely enough for its own crew. On 17\u00a0September 1942, in response to the incident, Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz issued an order named \"Triton Null\", later known as the Laconia Order. In it, D\u00f6nitz prohibited U-boat crews from attempting rescues; survivors were to be left in the sea. Even afterwards, U-boats still occasionally provided aid for survivors.\nAt the Nuremberg trials held by the Allies in 1946, D\u00f6nitz was indicted for war crimes. The issuance of the Laconia Order was the centrepiece of the prosecution case, a decision that backfired badly. Its introduction allowed the defence to recount at length the numerous instances in which German submariners acted with humanity where in similar situations the Allies behaved callously. D\u00f6nitz pointed out that the order itself was a direct result of this callousness and the attack by US aircraft on a rescue operation.\nThe Americans had also practised unrestricted submarine warfare, under their own equivalent to the Laconia Order, which had been in force since they entered the war. Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz, the wartime commander-in-chief of the US Pacific Fleet, provided unapologetic written testimony on D\u00f6nitz's behalf at his trial that the US Navy had waged unrestricted submarine warfare in the Pacific against Japan from the very first day the United States entered the war. This testimony led the Nuremberg Tribunal not to impose a sentence upon D\u00f6nitz for this breach of law, even though he was convicted of the count.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Naval War College series International Law Studies covers interpretations of international law during armed conflicts and how these laws were applied by each party. In volume\u00a065, \"Targeting Enemy Merchant Shipping\", chapter three contains an examination of the \"Laconia\" incident in the context of the application of international law to World War II submarine warfare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The person who issued the order to attack and the aircraft commander who carried it out are both guilty of a war crime. The conduct of the aircraft commander appears to be entirely inexcusable since he must have observed the rescue operation. During the time that they are engaged in such an operation, enemy submarines are no longer lawful objects of attack. The fact that the US Army Air Force took no action to investigate this incident, and that no trials took place under the then-effective domestic criminal code, the Articles of War, is a serious reflection on the entire chain of military command.Another consequence of the incident was an order by Churchill that in future transports, there were to be no more than 500 prisoners on any one ship.189\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18571", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18571", "title": "Leon Theremin", "text": "Russian inventor (1896\u20131993)\nLev Sergeyevich Termen (27 August [O.S. 15 August] 1896\u00a0\u2013 3 November 1993), better known as Leon Theremin, was a Russian inventor, most famous for his invention of the theremin, one of the first electronic musical instruments and the first to be mass-produced. He also worked on early television research. His secret listening device, \"The Thing\", hung for seven years in plain view in the United States ambassador's Moscow office and enabled Soviet agents to secretly eavesdrop on conversations.\nEarly life.\nLeon Theremin was born in Saint Petersburg, Russian Empire in 1896. His father was Sergei Emilievich Theremin, of French Huguenot descent. His mother was Yevgenia Antonova Orzhinskaya and of German ancestry. He had a sister named Helena.\nIn the seventh grade of his high school, in front of an audience of students and parents, he demonstrated various optical effects using electricity.\nBy the age of 17 he was in his last year of high school, had his own laboratory at home for experimenting with high-frequency circuits, optics and magnetic fields. His cousin, Kirill Fedorovich Nesturkh, then a young physicist, invited him to attend the defense of the dissertation of Abram Fedorovich Ioffe. Physics lecturer Vladimir Konstantinovich Lebedinskiy had explained to Theremin the dispute over Ioffe's work on the electron. On 9 May 1913 Theremin and his cousin attended Ioffe's dissertation defense. Ioffe's subject was on the elementary photoelectric effect, the magnetic field of cathode rays and related investigations. In 1917 Theremin wrote that Ioffe talked of electrons, the photoelectric effect and magnetic fields as parts of an objective reality that surrounds us every day, unlike others that talked more of somewhat abstract formulae and symbols. Theremin wrote that he found this explanation revelatory and that it fit a scientific \u2013 not abstract \u2013 view of the world, different scales of magnitude, and matter. From then on Theremin endeavoured to study the microcosm, in the same way he had studied the macrocosm with his hand-built telescope. Later, Kyrill introduced Theremin to Ioffe as a young experimenter and physicist, and future student of the university.\nTheremin recalled that while still in his last year of school, he had built a million-volt Tesla coil and noticed a strong glow associated with his attempts to ionize the air. He then wished to further investigate the effects using university resources. A chance meeting with Abram Fedorovich Ioffe led to a recommendation to see Karl Karlovich Baumgart, who was in charge of the physics laboratory equipment. Karl then reserved a room and equipment for Theremin's experiments. Abram Fedorovich suggested Theremin also look at methods of creating gas fluorescence under different conditions and of examining the resulting light's spectrum. However, during these investigations Theremin was called up for World War I military service.\nWorld War I and Russian Civil War.\nAlthough only in his second academic year, the deanery of the Faculty of Physics and Astronomy recommended that Theremin go to the Nikolayevska Military Engineering School in Petrograd (previously Saint Petersburg), which usually only accepted students in their fourth year. Theremin recalled that Ioffe reassured him that the war would not last long and that military experience would be useful for scientific applications.\nBeginning his military service in 1916, Theremin finished the Military Engineering School in six months, progressed through the Graduate Electronic School for Officers, and attained the military radio-engineer diploma in the same year. In the course of the next three and a half years he oversaw the construction of a radio station in Saratov to connect the Volga area with Moscow, graduated from Petrograd University, became deputy leader of the new Military Radiotechnical Laboratory in Moscow, and finished as the broadcast supervisor of the radio transmitter at \"Tsarskoye Selo\" near Petrograd (then renamed \"Detskoye Selo\").\nDuring the Russian Civil War, in October 1919 White Army commander Nikolai Nikolayevich Yudenich advanced on Petrograd from the side of \"Detskoye Selo\", apparently intending to capture the radio station to announce a victory over the Bolsheviks. Theremin and others evacuated the station, sending equipment east on rail cars. Theremin then detonated explosives to destroy the 120-meter-high antenna mast before traveling to Petrograd to set up an international listening station. There he also trained radio specialists but reported difficulties obtaining food and working with foreign experts whom he described as narrow-minded pessimists.\nTheremin recalled that on an evening when his hopes of overcoming these obstructing experts reached a low ebb, Abram Fedorovich Ioffe telephoned him. Ioffe asked Theremin to come to his newly founded Physical Technical Institute in Petrograd, and the next day he invited him to start work at developing measuring methods for high-frequency electrical oscillations.\nUnder Ioffe.\nThe day after Ioffe's invitation, Theremin started at the institute. He worked in diverse fields: applying the Laue effect to the new field of X-ray analysis of crystals, using hypnosis to improve measurement-reading accuracy, working with Ivan Pavlov's laboratory, and using gas-filled lamps as measuring devices. He built a high-frequency oscillator to measure the dielectric constant of gases with high precision; Ioffe then urged him to look for other applications using this method, and shortly made the first motion detector for use as a \"radio watchman\".\nWhile adapting the dielectric device by adding circuitry to generate an audio tone, Theremin noticed that the pitch changed when his hand moved around. In October 1920 he first demonstrated this to Ioffe who called in other professors and students to hear. Theremin recalled trying to find the notes for tunes he remembered from when he played the cello, such as The Swan, by Saint-Sa\u00ebns. By November 1920, Theremin had given his first public concert with the instrument, now modified with a horizontal volume antenna replacing the earlier foot-operated volume control. He named it the \"etherphone\", but it was known in the Soviet Union as the or , in Germany as the and later, in the USA, as the \"theremin.\"\nOn 24 May 1924 Theremin married 20-year-old Katia () Konstantinova, and they lived together in his parents' apartment on Marat street. In 1925 Theremin went to Germany to sell both the radio watchman and Termenvox patents to the German firm Goldberg and Sons. According to Glinsky, this was the Soviet's \"decoy for capitalists\" to obtain both Western profits from sales and technical knowledge.\nDuring that time Theremin was also working on a wireless television with 16 scan lines in 1925, improving to 32 scan lines and then 64 using interlacing in 1926, and he demonstrated moving, if blurry, images on 7 June 1927. His device was the first functioning television apparatus in Russia.\nUnited States.\nAfter being sent on a lengthy tour of Europe starting 1927\u2013including London, Paris, and towns in Germany \u2013 during which he demonstrated his invention to full audiences, Theremin went to the United States arriving on 30 December 1927 with his first wife Katia. He performed the theremin with the New York Philharmonic in 1928. He patented his invention in the United States in 1928 and then granted commercial production rights to RCA.\nTheremin set up a laboratory in New York in the 1930s, where he further refined the theremin and experimented with other inventions and new electronic musical instruments. These included the Rhythmicon commissioned by the composer Henry Cowell.\nIn 1930, ten thereminists performed on stage at Carnegie Hall. Two years later, Theremin conducted the first-ever electronic orchestra, featuring the theremin and other electronic instruments including a \"fingerboard\" theremin which resembled a cello in use (Theremin was a cellist). In 1931, he worked with composer Henry Cowell to build an instrument called the rhythmicon. They were lucky to have gotten it to market as quickly as they did as brothers Otto and Benjamin Miessner had almost completed a similar instrument with the same name.\nTheremin's mentors during this time were some of society's foremost scientists, composers, and musical theorists including composer Joseph Schillinger and physicist (and amateur violinist) Albert Einstein. At the time, Theremin worked closely with fellow Soviet \u00e9migr\u00e9 and theremin virtuoso Clara Rockmore (n\u00e9e Reisenberg). Theremin had several times \nproposed to her, but she chose to marry attorney Robert Rockmore, and thereafter used his name professionally.\nThe U.S. Federal Bureau of Prisons hired Theremin to build a metal detector for Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary. He was interested in a role for the theremin in dance music. He developed performance locations that could automatically react to dancers' movements with varied patterns of sound and light.\nThe Soviet consulate had apparently demanded he divorce Katia. Afterwards, while working with the American Negro Ballet Company, the inventor married a young African-American prima ballerina Lavinia Williams. Their marriage caused shock and disapproval in his social circles, but the ostracized couple remained together.\nReturn to the Soviet Union.\nTheremin abruptly returned to the Soviet Union in 1938. At the time, the reasons for his return were unclear; some claimed that he was homesick, while others believed that he had been kidnapped by Soviet officials. Beryl Campbell, one of Theremin's dancers, said his wife Lavinia \"called to say that he had been kidnapped from his studio\" and that \"some Russians had come in\" and that she felt that he was going to be spirited out of the country.\nMany years later, it was revealed that Theremin had returned to his native land due to tax and financial difficulties in the United States. However, Theremin himself once told Bulat Galeyev that he decided to leave himself because he was anxious about the approaching war. Shortly after he returned he was imprisoned in the Butyrka prison and later sent to work in the Kolyma gold mines. Although rumors of his execution were widely circulated and published, Theremin was put to work in a \"sharashka\" (a secret laboratory in the Gulag camp system), together with Andrei Tupolev, Sergei Korolev and other well-known scientists and engineers. The Soviet Union said he was rehabilitated, closing its case against him in 1956.\nEspionage.\nDuring his work at the \"sharashka\", where he was put in charge of other workers, Theremin created the Buran eavesdropping system. A precursor to the modern laser microphone, it worked by using a low-power infrared beam from a distance to detect sound vibrations in glass windows. Lavrentiy Beria, the head of the secret police organization NKVD (the predecessor of the KGB), used the Buran device to spy on the British, French and US embassies in Moscow. According to Galeyev, Beria also spied on Stalin; Theremin kept some of the tapes in his flat. In 1947, Theremin was awarded the Stalin prize for inventing this advance in Soviet espionage technology.\nTheremin invented another listening device called The Thing, hidden in a replica of the Great Seal of the United States carved in wood. In 1945, Soviet school children presented the concealed bug to the U.S. Ambassador as a \"gesture of friendship\" to the USSR's World War II ally. It hung in the ambassador\u2019s residential office in Moscow and intercepted confidential conversations there during the first seven years of the Cold War, until it was accidentally discovered in 1952.\nLater life.\nAfter his release from the \"sharashka\" in 1947, Theremin volunteered to remain working with the KGB until 1966. By 1947 he had remarried, to Maria Guschina, his third wife, and they had two children: Lena and Natalia.\nTheremin worked at the Moscow Conservatory of Music for 10 years where he taught, and built theremins, electronic cellos and some terpsitones (another invention of Theremin). There he was discovered by Harold Schonberg, the chief music critic of \"The New York Times\", who was visiting the Conservatory. But when an article by Schonberg appeared mentioning Theremin, the Conservatory's Managing Director declared that \"electricity is not good for music; electricity is to be used for electrocution\" and had his instruments removed from the Conservatory. Further electronic music projects were banned, and Theremin was summarily dismissed.\nIn the 1970s, Leon Theremin was a Professor of Physics at Moscow State University (Department of Acoustics) developing his inventions and supervising graduate students.\nAfter 51 years in the Soviet Union, Theremin started traveling, first visiting France in June 1989 and then the United States in 1991, each time accompanied by his daughter Natalia. Theremin was brought to New York by filmmaker Steven M. Martin where he was reunited with Clara Rockmore. He also made a demonstration concert at the Royal Conservatory of The Hague in early 1993 before dying in Moscow on Wednesday 3 November 1993 at the age of 97.\nMedia.\nThe feature-length documentary film ' was released in 1993. Theremin's life story and his Great Seal bug invention were featured in a of the '.\nIn 2000, University of Illinois Press published \"Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage\" by Albert Glinsky, with a foreword by Robert Moog. In 2014, Canadian writer Sean Michaels published the novel \"Us Conductors\", which was inspired by the relationship between Leon Theremin and Clara Rockmore. The novel won the 2014 Scotiabank Giller Prize. In 2022, French writer Emmanuel Villin published the novel La Fugue Th\u00e9r\u00e9mine (\u00e9ditions Asphalte), which looks back on the life of Leon Theremin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18572", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18572", "title": "Linear prediction", "text": "Mathematical operation that predicts future values of a discrete-time signal\nLinear prediction is a mathematical operation where future values of a discrete-time signal are estimated as a linear function of previous samples.\nIn digital signal processing, linear prediction is often called linear predictive coding (LPC) and can thus be viewed as a subset of filter theory. In system analysis, a subfield of mathematics, linear prediction can be viewed as a part of mathematical modelling or optimization.\nThe prediction model.\nThe most common representation is\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the predicted signal value, formula_3 the previous observed values, with formula_4, and formula_5 the predictor coefficients. The error generated by this estimate is\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the true signal value.\nThese equations are valid for all types of (one-dimensional) linear prediction. The differences are found in the way the predictor coefficients formula_5 are chosen.\nFor multi-dimensional signals the error metric is often defined as\nformula_9\nwhere formula_10 is a suitable chosen vector norm. Predictions such as formula_2 are routinely used within Kalman filters and smoothers to estimate current and past signal values, respectively, from noisy measurements.\nEstimating the parameters.\nThe most common choice in optimization of parameters formula_5 is the root mean square criterion which is also called the autocorrelation criterion. In this method we minimize the expected value of the squared error formula_13, which yields the equation\nformula_14\nfor 1 \u2264 \"j\" \u2264 \"p\", where \"R\" is the autocorrelation of signal \"x\"\"n\", defined as\nformula_15,\nand \"E\" is the expected value. In the multi-dimensional case this corresponds to minimizing the L2 norm.\nThe above equations are called the normal equations or Yule-Walker equations. In matrix form the equations can be equivalently written as\nformula_16\nwhere the autocorrelation matrix formula_17 is a symmetric, formula_18 Toeplitz matrix with elements formula_19 is the autocorrelation vector formula_20, and formula_21, the parameter vector.\nAnother, more general, approach is to minimize the sum of squares of the errors defined in the form\nformula_22\nwhere the optimisation problem searching over all formula_5 must now be constrained with formula_24.\nOn the other hand, if the mean square prediction error is constrained to be unity and the prediction error equation is included on top of the normal equations, the augmented set of equations is obtained as\nformula_25\nwhere the index formula_26 ranges from 0 to formula_27, and formula_17 is a formula_29 matrix.\nSpecification of the parameters of the linear predictor is a wide topic and a large number of other approaches have been proposed. In fact, the autocorrelation method is the most common and it is used, for example, for speech coding in the GSM standard.\nSolution of the matrix equation formula_16 is computationally a relatively expensive process. The Gaussian elimination for matrix inversion is probably the oldest solution but this approach does not efficiently use the symmetry of formula_17. A faster algorithm is the Levinson recursion proposed by Norman Levinson in 1947, which recursively calculates the solution. In particular, the autocorrelation equations above may be more efficiently solved by the Durbin algorithm.\nIn 1986, Philippe Delsarte and Y.V. Genin proposed an improvement to this algorithm called the split Levinson recursion, which requires about half the number of multiplications and divisions. It uses a special symmetrical property of parameter vectors on subsequent recursion levels. That is, calculations for the optimal predictor containing formula_27 terms make use of similar calculations for the optimal predictor containing formula_33 terms.\nAnother way of identifying model parameters is to iteratively calculate state estimates using Kalman filters and obtaining maximum likelihood estimates within expectation\u2013maximization algorithms.\nFor equally-spaced values, a polynomial interpolation is a linear combination of the known values. If the discrete time signal is estimated to obey a polynomial of degree formula_34 then the predictor coefficients formula_5 are given by the corresponding row of the triangle of binomial transform coefficients. This estimate might be suitable for a slowly varying signal with low noise. The predictions for the first few values of formula_27 are\n formula_37\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18574", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18574", "title": "Leto", "text": "Greek goddess and mother of Apollo and Artemis\nIn ancient Greek mythology and religion, Leto (; ) is a childhood goddess, the daughter of the Titans Coeus and Phoebe, the sister of Asteria, and the mother of Apollo and Artemis.\nIn the Olympian scheme, the king of gods Zeus is the father of her twins, Apollo and Artemis, whom Leto conceived after her hidden beauty accidentally caught the eye of Zeus. During her pregnancy, Leto sought for a place where she could give birth to Apollo and Artemis, since Hera, the wife of Zeus, in her jealousy, ordered all lands to shun her and deny her shelter. Hera is also the one to have sent the monstrous serpent Python and the giant Tityos against Leto to pursue and harm her. Leto eventually found an island, Delos, that was not joined to the mainland or attached to the ocean floor, therefore it was not considered land or island and she could give birth. In some stories, Hera further tormented Leto by delaying her labour, leaving Leto in agony for days before she could deliver the twins, who proceed to slay her assailants.\nBesides the myth of the birth of Apollo and Artemis, Leto appears in other notable myths, usually where she punishes mortals for their hubris against her. After some Lycian peasants prevented her and her infants from drinking from a fountain, Leto transformed them all into frogs inhabiting the fountain. When Niobe boasts of being a better mother than Leto due to having given birth to a greater number of children than the goddess and mocks the appearance of her twins, Leto then asks her children to avenge her, and they respond by shooting all of Niobe's sons and daughters dead as punishment.\nUsually, Leto is found at Olympus among the other gods, having gained her seat next to Zeus, or accompanying and helping her children in their various endeavors. She was usually worshipped in conjunction with her children, particularly in the sacred island of Delos, as a \"kourotrophic\" deity, the goddess of motherhood; in Lycia she was a mother goddess.\nIn Roman mythology, Leto's Roman equivalent is Latona, a Latinization of her name, influenced by the Etruscan \"Letun\".\nEtymology.\n'Leto' is Attic Greek; in the Doric Greek dialect, spoken in Sparta and the surrounding areas her name was spelled Lato with an alpha instead (; ).\nThere are several explanations for the origin of the goddess and the meaning of her name. Older sources speculated that the name is related to the Greek \u03bb\u03ae\u03b8\u03b7 \"l\u1e17th\u0113\" (lethe, oblivion) and \u03bb\u03c9\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 \"lotus\" (the fruit that brings oblivion to those who eat it). It would thus mean \"the hidden one\".\nIn 20th\u00a0century sources \"Leto\" is traditionally derived from Lycian \"lada\", \"wife\", as her earliest cult was centered in Lycia. Lycian \"lada\" may also be the origin of the Greek name \u039b\u03ae\u03b4\u03b1 \"Leda\". Other scholars (Kretschmer, Bethe, Chantraine, and Beekes) have suggested a pre-Greek origin.\nIn Mycenaean Greek her name has been attested through the form \"Latios\", meaning \"son of Leto\" or \"related to Leto\" (Linear B: , \"ra-ti-jo\"), and \"Lato\" (Linear B: , \"ra-to\").\nOrigins.\nLeto was identified from the fourth century onwards as the principal local mother goddess of Anatolian Lycia, as the region became Hellenized. In Greek inscriptions, the children of Leto are referred to as the \"national gods\" of the country. Her sanctuary, the Letoon near Xanthos, predated Hellenic influence in the region, however, united the Lycian confederacy of city-states. The Hellenes of Kos also claimed Leto as their own. Another sanctuary, more recently identified, was at Oenoanda in the north of Lycia. There was a further Letoon at Delos.\nLeto is exceptional among Zeus's divine lovers for being the only one who was tormented by Hera, who otherwise only directs her anger toward mortal women and nymphs, but not goddesses, thus being treated more in line with mortal women than divine beings in mythology. Zeus had various affairs with goddesses like Metis, Demeter, Dione, Maia, Persephone, Themis, Mnemosyne, Selene, Nemesis and more, which were never harmed by Hera; the sole exception (besides Leto) is found in the \"Suda\", a late Byzantine lexicon which recounts the story of Hera cursing a pregnant Aphrodite's belly, leading to the birth of Priapus.\nMoreover, Leto's troubled childbirth bears resemblance to Alcmene's, as both suffered painful extended labours due to Hera not allowing Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to help them, and both stories overall are also thematically linked to the myth of Semele and her son Dionysus, another story of a mortal woman who bore an important son for Zeus and was punished by Hera for that. Yet at the same time Hesiodic tradition makes her the daughter of two Titans, elder gods, and one of Zeus's first seven wives. Leto's peculiar mythology and ontology has led to suggestions that she might be a composite of two figures, an immortal goddess who bore Artemis, and a mortal woman who gave birth to Apollo.\nFamily and attributes.\nLeto is the daughter of the Titans Phoebe and Coeus. Leto is also sometimes called the daughter of Coeus with no mother specified. The island of Kos, in the southeast Aegean Sea, is claimed to be her birthplace. However, Diodorus Siculus states clearly that Leto was born in Hyperborea and not in Kos.\nHer sister is Asteria, who is, by the Titan Perses, the mother of Hecate. Both sisters captured Zeus's heart; first Leto, and then Asteria, who caught his attention after Leto had already been impregnated with his twins. Unlike Leto, Asteria did not reciprocate his love and escaped his advances by transforming herself into a bird and then a wandering island, later renamed Delos.\nIn Homeric texts, Leto is shown standing next to Zeus in the absence of Hera almost in the manner of a married wife, and not just one mistress among the many.\nHesiod describes Leto as \"always mild, kind to men and to the deathless gods, mild from the beginning,\" the gentlest goddess in all Olympus. Plato also makes references to Leto's softness when trying to link etymologically her name to the word \"\u1f10\u03b8\u03b5\u03bb\u03ae\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd\u03b1\" (\"willing\", i.e. to assist those asking for her help), as well as \"\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd\" (\"mild\"). Next to Demeter, Leto was the most celebrated mother of the ancient world.\nHesiod describes Leto as \"dark-gowned\" and the \"Orphic Hymn\" 35 \"to Leto\" describes her as \"dark-veiled\" and \"goddess who gave birth to twins\" (\"\u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2 \u03b4\u03b9\u03b4\u03c5\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2\"). In the \"Homeric Hymn to Apollo\", she is described as golden-haired.\nMythology.\nBirth of Artemis and Apollo.\nEarlier accounts.\nHesiod makes her the sixth out of the seven wives of Zeus, who bore his children before his marriage to Hera, however this element is absent in later accounts, all of which speak of a liaison between the two, that ended up in Leto falling pregnant. When Hera, the goddess of marriage and family, queen of the gods and the wife of Zeus, figured it out, she pursued her relentlessly.\nThe \"Homeric Hymn 3 to Apollo\" is the oldest extant account of Leto's wandering and birth of her children, but it is only concerned with the birth of Apollo, and treats Artemis as an afterthought; in fact the hymn does not even state that Leto's children are twins, and they are given different birthplaces (he in Delos, she in Ortygia). The first to speak of Leto's children being twins is a slightly later poet, Pindar. The two earliest poets, Homer and Hesiod, confirm Artemis and Apollo's status as full siblings born to Leto by Zeus, but neither explicitly makes them twins.\nAccording to the \"Homeric Hymn\" 3 \"to Delian Apollo\", Leto travelled far and wide to find a place to give birth, but none of them dared be the birthplace of Apollo. After having arrived at Delos, she labored for nine nights and nine days, in the presence of Dione, Rhea, Ichnaea, Themis and Amphitrite. Only Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, was not present; she, unaware of the situation, was with jealous Hera on Olympus.\nHer absence, which was preventing Leto from giving birth, kept her in labor for nine days. According to the Homeric hymn, the goddesses who assembled to witness the birth of Apollo were responding to a public occasion in the rites of a dynasty, where the authenticity of the child must be established beyond doubt from the first moment.\nThe dynastic rite of the witnessed birth must have been familiar to the hymn's hearers. The dynasty that is so concerned about being authenticated in this myth is the new dynasty of Zeus and the Olympian Pantheon, and the goddesses at Delos who bear witness to the rightness of the birth are the great goddesses of the old order.\nDemeter was not present and Aphrodite was not either, but Rhea attended. The goddess Dione (her name simply means \"divine\" or \"she-Zeus\") is sometimes taken by later mythographers as a mere feminine form of Zeus (see entry Dodona). If that was the case, she would not have assembled there. Then, on the ninth day, Eileithyia was sent for by the messenger goddess Iris, who persuaded her with a necklace and brought her to Delos.\nAs soon as Eileithyia arrived, Apollo was finally allowed to be born, and was given ambrosia and nectar by Themis, rather than breastmilk. Preceding the myth of Apollo's birth, the preface of the hymn begins with the status quo that was then established, namely that Leto is now by the side of Zeus in Olympus, both proudly watching Apollo exercise his archery skills, and she is ever glad for having borne the king of gods such a splendid son and archer.\nLater accounts.\nAccording to the \"Bibliotheca\", \"But Latona for her intrigue with Zeus was hunted by Hera over the whole earth, till she came to Delos and brought forth first Artemis, by the help of whose midwifery she afterwards gave birth to Apollo.\"\nAntoninus Liberalis hints that Leto came down from Hyperborea in the guise of a she-wolf, or that she sought out the \"wolf-country\" of Lycia, formerly called Tremilis, which she renamed to honour wolves that had befriended her. Another late source, Aelian, also links Leto with wolves and Hyperboreans:\nWolves are not easily delivered of their young, only after twelve days and twelve nights, for the people of Delos maintain that this was the length of time that it took Leto to travel from the Hyperboreoi to Delos.\nLeto found the barren floating island of Delos, still bearing its archaic name of Asterios, which was neither mainland nor a real island and gave birth there, promising the island wealth from the worshippers who would flock to the obscure birthplace of the splendid god who was to come. As a gesture of gratitude, Delos was secured with four pillars and later became sacred to Apollo.\nCallimachus states that not only did every place on earth refuse to give sanctuary to Leto out of fear of Hera, but the queen of gods had also deployed Ares and Iris to drive Leto away from anywhere she tried to settle in, so she would not give birth to her twins. Leto considered the island of Kos for a birthplace, but Apollo, still in the womb, advised his mother against giving birth to him there, saying Kos was fated to be the birthplace of someone else. He later urged his mother to go to Delos, who used to Leto's sister Asteria. Delos was the only place on earth willing to receive Leto when she went into labour, defying Hera's orders. Callimachus wrote that it is remarkable that Leto brought forth Artemis, the elder twin, without travail despite her exhausting journey. Although Hera was enraged that Asteria had defied her and allowed Leto to give birth to the products of Zeus's liaison, she did no harm to Asteria, out of respect for her for not sleeping with Zeus when he chased her, thus not further defiling Hera's marriage.\nLibanius wrote that neither land nor visible islands would receive Leto, but by the will of Zeus Delos then became visible, and thus received Leto and the children.\nAccording to Hyginus, when Hera discovered that Leto was pregnant by Zeus, she banned Leto from giving birth on \"terra firma\", the mainland, any island at sea, or any place under the sun. But Zeus then sent Boreas, the god of the north wind, to Leto, who brought her to Poseidon. Poseidon then raised high waves above Ortygia, shielding it from the light of the sun with a water dome; it was later called the island of Delos. There Leto, clinging to an olive tree, bore Apollo and Artemis after four days.\nAccording to the Homeric Hymn and the \"Orphic Hymn\" 35 \"to Leto\", Artemis was born on the island of Ortygia before Apollo was on Delos. Stephanus of Byzantium also states that Artemis was born before Apollo, however he claims that she was born at Coressus.\nAccording to a local tradition, Apollo was not born on Delos at all, but in Tegyra, a town in Boeotia, where he was worshipped as Apollo Tegyraeus.\nServius, a grammarian who lived during the late 300s AD and early 400s AD, wrote that Artemis was born first because first came the night, whose instrument is the moon, which Artemis represents, and then the day, whose instrument is the sun, which Apollo represents. Pindar however writes that both twins shone like the sun when they came into the bright light.\nChthonic assailants.\nLeto was threatened and assailed in her wanderings by ancient earth creatures that had to be overcome, chthonic monsters of the ancient earth and old ways, and these became the enemies of Apollo and Artemis for attempting to cause harm to their mother.\nOne of the monsters that came across Leto was the dragon Python, which lived in a cleft of the mother-rock beneath Delphi and beside the Castalian Spring. Once Python knew that Leto was pregnant to Zeus, he hunted her down with the intention to harm her, and once he could not find her, he returned to Parnassus.\nAn epigram from 159 BC seems to imply that Python in particular wanted to rape Leto. According to some, Python was sent by Hera herself to attack Leto, out of jealousy for having been preferred by Zeus and he knew of a prophecy that he would find death at the hands of Leto's unborn son.According to Clearchus of Soli, while Python was pursuing them, Leto stepped on a stone and, holding her son in her hands, cried (\"h\u00ede pa\u00ee\", meaning \"shoot, child\") to Apollo, who was holding a bow and arrows. Apollo slew it but had to do penance and be cleansed afterward, since though Python was a child of Gaia, it was necessary that the ancient Delphic Oracle passed to the protection of the new god.\nAnother one was the giant Tityos, a phallic being who grew so vast that he split his mother's womb and had to be carried to term by Gaia (the Earth) herself. He attempted to rape Leto near Delphi under the orders of Hera, like Python was, for having slept with Zeus, or alternatively he was simply overwhelmed with lust when he saw her.\nTityos took hold of Leto and attempted to force himself on her, but she called out for her children, and Tityos was laid low by the arrows of Apollo and/or Artemis, as Pindar recalled in a Pythian ode. As he laid dying, his mother Gaia moaned over her slain son; Leto only laughed. For the crime of having tried to rape Leto, one of Zeus's mistresses, he was punished by having his liver being constantly eaten by two vultures in the Underworld.\nInvolvement in wars.\nLeto fought alongside the other gods during the Gigantomachy, as evidenced from her depiction on the east frieze of the Pergamon Altar, fighting a Giant between her children Artemis and Apollo; None of the other Gigantomachy depictions includes Leto, although her presence is conjectured in one of the missing sections of the Siphnian frieze from Delphi, another relief depiction of the battle of the gods against the Giants.\nWhen the gigantic Typhon attacked Olympus, all the gods transformed into animals and fled to Egypt terrified, or alternatively Typhon attacked them once they had assembled in Egypt in great numbers. Leto turned into a shrew mouse. Leto was equated with the Egyptian goddess Wadjet, a cobra goddess, however other Egyptian gods and goddesses were also connected to shrew mice. Additionally, the Egyptians would embalm small animals like ichneumons and shrew mice and put their mummies in bronze containers.\nLeto also took part in the Trojan War, on the Trojans' side, along with her children Apollo and Artemis. When Apollo saved Aeneas from the battlefield, he brought him to one of his own temples in nearby Pergamus, where he was healed by Artemis and Leto. Later, when the gods battle each other, Leto supports the Trojans, standing opposite of Hermes, who supports the Achaeans.\nAfter witnessing Hera defeat Artemis and beating her with her own bow, and Artemis fleeing in tears, Hermes refuses to challenge Leto, encouraging her to simply tell everyone she beat him fair and square. Leto picks up Artemis's discarded bow and arrows and runs after her crying daughter. According to a scholium on the \"Iliad\" that claims to report Theagenes's interpretation of the gods' battle, Hermes here represents reason and rationality (', \"logos\") as opposed to Leto, who stands in for forgetfulness (', \"lethe\", perhaps a wordplay on Leto's name).\nFavour myths.\nAfter Orion's sight was restored, he met with Artemis and Leto and joined them in hunting, where he bragged about being such a great hunter he could kill every animal on earth, angering Gaia who sent a giant scorpion to kill him. In one version, Orion dies after pushing Leto out of the scorpion's way. Afterwards, Leto (and Artemis) placed Orion among the stars (the constellation Orion).\nClinis was a rich Babylonian man who deeply respected Apollo. Having witnessed the Hyperboreans sacrifice donkeys to Apollo, he attempted to do the same, only to be prohibited by the god himself under pain of death. Clinis obeyed and sent the donkeys away, but two of his sons proceeded with the sacrifice anyway. Apollo, enraged, drove the donkeys mad which then began to devour the entire family. Leto and Artemis felt sorry for Clinis, his third son and his daughter, who had done nothing to deserve such fate. Apollo allowed his mother and sister to save those three, and the goddesses changed them into birds before they could be killed by the donkeys.\nIn one version, Leto, along with her daughter Artemis, stood before Zeus with tearful eyes while her son Apollo pleaded with him to release Prometheus (the god who had stolen fire from the gods, give them to humans, and was subsequently chained in the Caucasus with an eagle feasting on his liver each day for punishment) from his eternal torment. Zeus, moved by Artemis and Leto's tears and Apollo's words, agreed instantly and commanded Heracles to free Prometheus.\nPraxilla wrote that Carneus was a son of Zeus and Europa, and that he was brought up by Apollo and Leto.\nWhen Apollo killed the Cyclopes in revenge for Zeus slaying his son Asclepius, a gifted healer who could bring the dead back to life, with a thunderbolt, Zeus was about to punish Apollo by throwing him into Tartarus, but Leto interceded for him, and Apollo became bondman to a mortal king named Admetus instead. Apollo happily served Admetus, and enthusiastically undertook several domestic chores during his servitude with him. Leto is said to have despaired at the sight of his unkempt and disheveled locks, which had been admired by even Hera.\nIn Crete lived a poor couple, Galatea and Lamprus. When Galatea fell pregnant, Lamprus warned her that if the child turned out to be female, he would expose it. Galatea gave birth while Lamprus was away, and the infant proved indeed to be a girl. Galatea, fearing her husband, lied to him and told him it was a boy instead whom she named Leucippus (\"white horse\"). But as the years passed, Leucippus grew to be an exceptionally beautiful girl, and her true sex could no longer be concealed. Galatea fled to the temple of Leto, and prayed to the goddess to change Leucippus into an actual boy. Leto took pity in mother and child, and fulfilled Galatea's wish, changing Leucippus's sex into that of a boy's. To celebrate this, the people at Phaistos sacrificed to Leto Phytia during the Ecdysia (\"stripping naked\") festival in her honour.\nWrath myths.\nLeto's introduction into Lycia was met with resistance. There, according to Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", when Leto was wandering the earth after giving birth to Apollo and Artemis, she attempted to drink water from a pond in Lycia. The peasants there refused to allow her to do so by stirring the mud at the bottom of the pond. Leto turned them into frogs for their inhospitality, forever doomed to swim in the murky waters of ponds and rivers.\nNiobe was a queen of Thebes and wife of Amphion of whom Sappho wrote that \"Lato and Niobe were most dear friends\", although she is most famous for boasting of her superiority to Leto because she had fourteen children (Niobids), seven sons and seven daughters, while Leto had only two. She also mocked Apollo's effeminate appearance and Artemis's manly appearance. For her hubris, Leto asks her children to take revenge. Apollo killed her sons as they practiced athletics, and Artemis killed her daughters. Apollo and Artemis used poisoned arrows to kill them, though according to some versions a number of the Niobids were spared. Other sources say that Artemis spared one of the girls (usually Chloris, sometimes alongside her brother Amyclas, because the two prayed to Leto). Amphion, at the sight of his dead sons, either killed himself or was killed by Zeus after swearing revenge. A devastated Niobe fled to Mount Sipylus in Asia Minor and either turned to stone as she wept or killed herself. Her tears formed the river Achelous. Zeus had turned all the people of Thebes to stone so no one buried the Niobids until the ninth day after their death when the gods themselves entombed them.\nThe Niobe narrative appears in Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" where Leto has demanded the women of Thebes to go to her temple and burn incense. Niobe, queen of Thebes, enters in the midst of the worship and insults the goddess, claiming that having beauty, better parentage and more children than Leto, she is more fit to be worshipped than the goddess. To punish this insolence, Leto begs Apollo and Artemis to avenge her against Niobe and to uphold her honor. Obedient to their mother, the twins slay Niobe's seven sons and seven daughters, leaving her childless, and her husband Amphion kills himself. Niobe is unable to move from grief and seemingly turns to marble, though she continues to weep, and her body is transported to a high mountain peak in her native land.\nA rarer version of the myth gives Leto an active role in bringing Niobe down rather than relying on Artemis and Apollo after the queen claimed her children to be more beautiful than Leto's; the goddess caused Niobe's husband Philottus to die accidentally during hunting, and her father Assaon to fall in love with her. After Niobe rejected him many times, Assaon invited the Niobids at a banquet, and there he killed them all by setting them on fire.\nThe narrative of Leto destroying Niobe's children parallels another myth about Niobe, in which her sister-in-law A\u00ebdon, jealous of how fecund Niobe had turned out while she only had one or two children (Itylus and Neis), attempted to kill Niobe's eldest child Amaleus only to end up killing her own son instead. A\u00ebdon acts as a foil to Leto; both are mothers of a son and a daughter who feel threatened by Niobe's children, and both attempt to hurt Niobe by harming the Niobids. Unlike Leto however, A\u00ebdon is a mortal woman and not a goddess, so she lacks the power to ruin Niobe and her plans fail.\nOther works.\nAelian writes that the rooster is Leto's sacred animal as he was by her side when she gave birth to her twins; this is why ancient women would have a rooster at hand while delivering their children, believing the bird to promote an easy childbirth. He also wrote that the ichneumon (mongoose) is also sacred to her.\nSatirical author Lucian of Samosata featured Leto in one of his \"Dialogues of the Gods\". There, Hera mocks Leto over the children she gave Zeus, downplaying Artemis and Apollo's importance while bringing up their flaws (such as the flaying of Marsyas, or the killing of the Niobids). Leto sarcastically says that not all goddesses can be blessed to be the mother of gods like Hephaestus, and calmly tells Hera that she might feel confident belittling everyone due to her status as queen of the gods as the wife of Zeus, but she will cry and sob all the same the next time he shall abandon her for the love of some mortal woman.\nIn one of his \"Idylls\", poet Theocritus asks Leto to bless the newlyweds Menelaus and Helen with children.\nIn Orphism, there were several \"theogonies\" which, similar to Hesiod's \"Theogony\", told myths explaining and describing the origin of the world and the gods. These texts, though now no longer extant in their entirety, survive in fragments. One of these works, the \"Rhapsodic Theogony\", or Rhapsodies, (first century BC/AD) apparently called Leto the mother of Hecate.\nA fragment of Aeschylus possibly has Leto as the mother of the moon goddess Selene, as does a scholium on Euripides's tragedy \"The Phoenician Women\" which adds Zeus as the father. In Virgil's epic the \"Aeneid\", when Nisus addresses the Moon/Luna, he calls her \"daughter of Latona.\"\nWorship.\nLycian Letoon and wider Asia Minor.\nLeto was intensely worshipped in Lycia, Asia Minor, where worship was particularly strong and widespread. In Delos and Athens she was worshipped primarily as an adjunct to her children. Herodotus reported a temple to her in Egypt supposedly attached to a floating island called \"Khemmis\" in Buto, which also included a temple to an Egyptian god Greeks identified by \"interpretatio graeca\" as Apollo. There, Herodotus was given to understand, the goddess whom Greeks recognised as Leto was worshipped in the form of Wadjet, the cobra-headed goddess of Lower Egypt.\nThe ancient Greek colony of Physcus on the western coast of Asia Minor also contained a magnificent harbour and a grove sacred to Leto.\nMainland Greece.\nLeto also had a temple in Attica as well as an altar, along with her children Apollo and Artemis in the village Zoster. Pausanias also described statues of Leto and her twins in Megara. Leto was worshipped in Boeotia in her children's temples. In Phocis, she was revered in Delphi, sacred to her son Apollo. She also had a temple in Cirrha. In Argolis, Leto had a sanctuary with statues made by Praxiteles in Argos, and images of her were also found on the sanctuary of Artemis Orthia, near Argos. Leto had a sanctuary near Lete, Macedonia. According to Stephanus of Byzantium, Theagenes in his \"Macedonica\" stated that the town had been named after the goddess. Leto was also revered in Sparta and the rest of Laconia. Leto also had a sanctuary in Mantineia, Arcadia.\nAegean Islands.\nLeto was usually not worshipped on her own account, but in conjunction with her children, especially in the island Delos, her chief center of worship and birthplace of her son Apollo as well as his sacred island, where she was represented in temple by a shapeless wooden image, in a Letoum situated in a plain. Sacrifices to Artemis and Apollo were also made in Leto's name as well. Poseidon agreed with Leto that she would have Delos, while he got to keep the island of Kelauria. Leto was also worshipped in the island of Rhodes. She might have had a cult center in Lesbos as well. Leto was also worshipped in Crete, whether one of \"certain Cretan goddesses, or Greek goddesses in their Cretan form, influenced by the Minoan goddess\". Veneration of a local Leto is attested at Phaistos (where it is purported that she gave birth to Apollo and Artemis at the islands known today as the Paximadia (also known as Letoai in ancient Crete) and at Lato, which bore her name. As \"Leto Phytia\" she was a mother-deity.\nEpithets.\nPindar calls the goddess \"Leto Chryselakatos\", an epithet that was attached to her daughter Artemis as early as Homer. \"The conception of a goddess enthroned like a queen and equipped with a spindle seems to have originated in Asiatic worship of the Great Mother\", O. Brendel notes, but a lucky survival of an inscribed inventory of her temple on Delos, where she was the central figures of the Delian trinity, records her cult image as sitting on a wooden throne, clothed in a linen \"chiton\" and a linen \"himation\".\nArt.\nIn ancient Greek and Roman art, Leto was a common subject in vase painting, but she was hard to distinguish due to her not having any special or unique attributes. Her capture by Tityus and subsequent rescue by Artemis and Apollo was also a very popular subject. Ancient representations of Leto holding her infant children however are rare. A lost vase, now known only through a drawing of Wilhelm Tischbein in his \"Collection of Engravings\" (published in 1795, volume III), shows Leto running away from the enormous Python in terror while holding her two young children in her arms; this is the only known classical representation of Leto escaping Python.\nThe myth of Leto transforming the mortals into frogs of the pond became very popular in post-antiquity art. This scene, usually called Latona and the Lycian Peasants or Latona and the Frogs, was popular in Northern Mannerist art, allowing a combination of mythology with landscape painting and peasant scenes, thus combining history painting and genre painting. It is represented in the central fountain, the \"Bassin de Latone\", in the garden terrace of the Palace of Versailles. In later art, this scene with the Lycian frogs is exclusively the one Leto appeared in.\nIn Crete, at the city of Dreros, Spyridon Marinatos uncovered an eighth-century post-Minoan hearth house temple in which there were found three unique figures of Apollo, Artemis and Leto made of brass sheeting hammered over a shaped core (\"sphyrelata\"). Walter Burkert notes that in Phaistos she appears in connection with an initiation cult.\nLegacy.\nThe asteroid 68 Leto and the minor planet 639 Latona were both named after this Greek goddess.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary Sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary Sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18575", "revid": "84942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18575", "title": "Li Po", "text": ""}
{"id": "18576", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18576", "title": "La Malinche", "text": "Nahua aide to Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s\nMarina () or Malintzin (; c. 1500 \u2013 c. 1529), more popularly known as La Malinche (), was a Nahua woman from the Mexican Gulf Coast, who became known for contributing to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire (1519\u20131521), by acting as an interpreter, advisor, and intermediary for the Spanish conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s. She was one of 20 enslaved women given to the Spaniards in 1519 by the natives of Tabasco. Cort\u00e9s chose her as a consort, and she later gave birth to their first son, Mart\u00edn \u2013 one of the first \"Mestizos\" (people of mixed European and Indigenous American ancestry) in New Spain. \nLa Malinche's reputation has shifted over the centuries, as various peoples evaluate her role against their own societies' changing social and political perspectives. Especially after the Mexican War of Independence, which led to Mexico's independence from Spain in 1821, dramas, novels, and paintings portrayed her as an evil or scheming temptress. In Mexico today, La Malinche remains a powerful icon \u2013 understood in various and often conflicting aspects as the embodiment of treachery, the quintessential victim, or the symbolic mother of the new Mexican people. The term \"malinchista\" refers to a disloyal compatriot, especially in Mexico.\nName.\nMalinche is known by many names, though her birth name is unknown. Malinche was baptized in the Roman Catholic Church and given the Christian name \"Marina\", often preceded by the honorific . The Nahua called her Malintzin, derived from \"Malina\", a Nahuatl rendering of her Spanish name, and the honorific suffix . According to historian Camilla Townsend, the vocative suffix is sometimes added at the end of the name, giving the form \"Malintzine\", which would be shortened to \"Malintze\", and heard by the Spaniards as \"Malinche\". Another possibility is that the Spaniards simply did not hear the \u201cwhispered\u201d of the name \"Malintzin\".\nThe title Tenepal was often assumed to be part of her name. In the annotation made by Nahua historian Chimalpahin on his copy of G\u00f3mara's biography of Cort\u00e9s, \"Malintzin Tenepal\" is used repeatedly about Malinche. According to linguist and historian Frances Karttunen, \"Tenepal\" is probably derived from the Nahuatl root \"\", which means \"lip-possessor, one who speaks vigorously\", or \"one who has a facility with words\", and postposition , which means \"through\". Historian James Lockhart, however, suggests that \"Tenepal\" might be derived from , \"somebody\u2019s tongue\". In any case, \"Malintzin Tenepal\" appears to have been a literal translation of Spanish , with , \"the interpreter\", literally meaning \"the tongue\", being her Spanish sobriquet.\nSince at least the 19th century, she was believed to have originally been named Malinalli, (Nahuatl for \"grass\"), after the day sign on which she was supposedly born. \nIf so, Marina would have been chosen as her baptismal name because of its phonetic similarity. Modern historians have rejected such mythic suggestions, noting that the Nahua associate the day sign \"Malinalli\" with bad or \"evil\" connotations, and they are known to avoid using such day signs as personal names. Moreover, there would be little reason for the Spaniards to ask the natives what their names were before they were christened with new names after Catholic saints.\nLife.\nBackground.\nMalinche's birthdate is unknown, but it is estimated to be around 1500, and likely no later than 1505. She was born in an that was either a part of or a tributary of a Mesoamerican state whose center was located on the bank of the Coatzacoalcos River to the east of the Aztec Empire. Records disagree about the exact name of the where she was born. In three unrelated legal proceedings that occurred not long after her death, various witnesses who claimed to have known her personally, including her daughter, said that she was born in Olutla. The of her grandson also mentioned Olutla as her birthplace. Her daughter added that the of Olutla was related to Tetiquipaque, although the nature of this relationship is unclear. In the \"Florentine Codex\", Malinche's homeland is mentioned as \"Teticpac\", which is most likely the singular form of Tetiquipaque. G\u00f3mara writes that she came from \"Uiluta\" (presumably a variant of \"Olutla\"). He departs from other sources by writing that it was in the region of Jalisco. D\u00edaz, on the other hand, gives \"Painalla\" as her birthplace.\nHer family is reported to have been of noble background; G\u00f3mara writes that her father was related to a local ruler, while D\u00edaz recounts that her parents were rulers. Townsend notes that while Olutla at the time probably had a Popoluca-speaking majority, the ruling elite, which Malinche supposedly belonged to, would have been Nahuatl-speaking. Another hint that supports her noble origin is her apparent ability to understand the courtly language of (\"lordly speech\"), a Nahuatl register that is significantly different from the commoner's speech and has to be learned. The fact that she was often referred to as a , at the time a term in Spain not commonly used when referring to someone outside of the aristocracy, indicates that she was viewed as a noblewoman. But she may have been given this honorific by the Spanish because of recognition of her important role in the conquest.\nMalinche was probably between the ages of 8 and 12 when she was either sold or kidnapped into slavery. D\u00edaz wrote that after her father's death, she was given away to merchants by her mother and stepfather so that their son (Malinche's halfbrother) would have the rights of an heir. Scholars, historians, and literary critics alike have cast doubt upon D\u00edaz's account of her origin, in large part due to his strong emphasis on Catholicism throughout his narration of the events. \nIn particular, historian Sonia Rose de Fuggle analyzes D\u00edaz's over-reliance on polysyndeton (which mimics the sentence structure of many Biblical stories) as well as his overarching portrayal of Malinche as an ideal Christian woman. But Townsend believes that it was likely that some of her people were complicit in trafficking her, regardless of the reason. Malinche was taken to Xicalango, a major port city in the region. She was later purchased by a group of Chontal Maya who brought her to the town of Potonch\u00e1n. It was here that Malinche started to learn the Chontal Maya language, and perhaps also Yucatec Maya. Her acquisition of the language later enabled her to communicate with Jer\u00f3nimo de Aguilar, another interpreter for Cortes who also spoke Yucatec Maya, as well as his native Spanish.\nThe conquest of Mexico.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMotecu\u00e7oma was told how the Spaniards were bringing along with them a Mexica [Nahuatl-speaking] Indian woman called Marina, a citizen of the settlement of Teticpac, on the shore of the North Sea [Caribbean], who served as interpreter and said in the Mexican language everything that Captain don Hernando Cort\u00e9s told her to.\n \u2014 Report from the emissaries to Moctezuma. \"Florentine Codex\", Book XII, Chapter IX\nEarly in his expedition to Mexico, Cort\u00e9s was confronted by the Maya at Potonch\u00e1n. In the ensuing battle, the Mayas suffered significant loss of lives and asked for peace. In the following days, they presented the Spaniards with gifts of food and gold, as well as twenty enslaved women, including Malinche. The women were baptized and distributed among Cort\u00e9s's men, who expected to use them as servants and sexual objects. Malinche was given to Alonso Hern\u00e1ndez Puertocarrero, one of Cort\u00e9s' captains. He was a first cousin to the count of Cort\u00e9s's hometown, Medell\u00edn.\nMalinche's language skills were discovered when the Spaniards encountered the Nahuatl-speaking people at San Juan de Ul\u00faa. Moctezuma's emissaries had come to inspect the peoples, but Aguilar could not understand them. Historian G\u00f3mara wrote that, when Cort\u00e9s realized that Malinche could talk with the emissaries, he promised her \"more than liberty\" if she would help him find and communicate with Moctezuma. Cort\u00e9s took Malinche from Puertocarrero. He was later given another Indigenous woman before he returned to Spain. \nAided by Aguilar and Malinche, Cort\u00e9s talked with Moctezuma's emissaries. The emissaries also brought artists to make paintings of Malinche, Cort\u00e9s, and the rest of the group, as well as their ships and weapons, to be sent as records for Moctezuma. D\u00edaz later said that the Nahua addressed Cort\u00e9s as \"Malinche\"; they took her as a point of reference for the group.\nFrom then on, Malinche worked with Aguilar to bridge communication between the Spaniards and the Nahua; Cort\u00e9s would speak Spanish with Aguilar, who translated into Yucatec Maya for Malinche, who in turn translated into Nahuatl, before reversing the process. The translation chain grew even longer when, after the emissaries left, the Spaniards met the Totonac, whose language was not understood by either Malinche or Aguilar. There, Malinche asked for Nahuatl interpreters. Karttunen remarks that \"it is a wonder any communication was accomplished at all\", for Cort\u00e9s' Spanish words had to be translated into Maya, Nahuatl, and Totonac before reaching the locals, whose answers went back through the same chain. Meeting with the Totonac was how the Spaniards first learned of opponents to Moctezuma. \nAfter founding the town of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz to be freed from the legal restriction of what was supposed to be an exploratory mission, the Spaniards stayed for two months in a nearby Totonac settlement. They secured a formal alliance with the Totonac and prepared for a march toward Tenochtitlan.\nThe first major polity that they encountered on the way to Tenochtitlan was Tlaxcala. Although the Tlaxcaltec were initially hostile to the Spaniards and their allies, they later permitted the Spaniards to enter the city. The Tlaxcalans negotiated an alliance with the Spaniards through Malinche and Aguilar. Later Tlaxcalan visual records of this meeting feature Malinche as a prominent figure. She appears to bridge communication between the two sides, as the Tlaxcalan presented the Spaniards with gifts of food and noblewomen to cement the alliance. After several days in Tlaxcala, Cort\u00e9s continued the journey to Tenochtitlan by the way of Cholula. By then he was accompanied by a large number of Tlaxcalan soldiers.\nThe Spaniards were received at Cholula and housed for several days. The explorers claimed that the Cholulans stopped giving them food, dug secret pits, built a barricade around the city, and hid a large Aztec army in the outskirts to prepare for an attack against the Spaniards. Somehow, the Europeans learned of this and, in a preemptive strike, assembled and massacred the Cholulans. Later accounts claimed that Malinche had uncovered the plot. According to D\u00edaz, she was approached by a Cholulan noblewoman who promised her a marriage to the woman's son if she were to switch sides. Pretending to go along with the suggestion, Malinche was told about the plot and later reported all the details to Cort\u00e9s. \nIn later centuries, this story has often been cited as an example of Malinche's \"betrayal\" of her people. But modern historians such as Hassig and Townsend have suggested that Malinche's \"heroic\" discovery of the purported plot was likely already a fabricated story intended to provide Cort\u00e9s with political justification for his actions, to distant Spanish authorities. In particular, Hassig suggests that Cort\u00e9s, seeking stronger native alliances leading to the invasion of Tenochtitlan, worked with the Tlaxcalans to coordinate the massacre. Cholula had supported Tlaxcala before joining the Aztec Empire one or two years prior, and losing them as an ally had been a severe blow to the Tlaxcalans. Their state was now completely encircled by the Aztecs. Hassig and other historians assert that Tlaxcalans considered the attack on the Cholulans as a \"litmus test\" of the Spanish commitment to them. \nThe combined forces reached Tenochtitlan in early November 1519, where they were met by Moctezuma on a causeway leading to the city. Malinche was in the middle of this event, translating the conversation between Cort\u00e9s and Moctezuma. Gomara writes that Moctezuma was \"speaking through Malinche and Aguilar\", although other records indicate that Malinche was already translating directly, as she had quickly learned some Spanish herself. Moctezuma's flowery speech, delivered through Malinche at the meeting, has been claimed by the Spaniards to represent a submission, but this interpretation is not followed by modern historians. The deferential nature of the speech can be explained by Moctezuma's usage of , a Nahuatl register known for its indirection and complex set of reverential affixes. Despite Malinche's apparent ability to understand , it is possible that some nuances were lost in translation. The Spaniards, deliberately or not, may have misinterpreted Moctezuma's words.\nTenochtitl\u00e1n fell in late 1521 and Marina's son by Cortes, Mart\u00edn Cort\u00e9s was born in 1522. During this time Malinche or Marina stayed in a house Cort\u00e9s built for her in the town of Coyoac\u00e1n, eight miles south of Tenochtitl\u00e1n. The Aztec capital city was being redeveloped to serve as Spanish-controlled Mexico City. Cort\u00e9s took Marina to help quell a rebellion in Honduras in 1524\u20131526 when she again served as interpreter (she may have known Mayan languages beyond Chontal and Yucatec). While in the mountain town of Orizaba in central Mexico, she married Juan Jaramillo, a Spanish hidalgo. Some contemporary scholars have estimated that she died less than a decade after the conquest of Mexico-Tenochtitlan, at some point before February 1529. She was survived by her son Don Mart\u00edn, who would be raised primarily by his father's family, and a daughter Do\u00f1a Mar\u00eda, who would be raised by Jaramillo and his second wife Do\u00f1a Beatriz de Andrada. \nAlthough Mart\u00edn was Cort\u00e9s's first-born son and eventual heir, his relation to Marina was poorly documented by prominent Spanish historians such as Francisco L\u00f3pez de G\u00f3mara. He never referred to Marina by name, even in her work as Cort\u00e9s's translator. Even during Marina's lifetime, she spent little time with Mart\u00edn. But many scholars and historians have marked her multiracial child with Cort\u00e9s as the symbolic beginning of the large mestizo population that developed in Mesoamerica.\nDebates about influence and importance in the conquest of Mexico.\nFor the conquistadores, having a reliable interpreter was important enough, but there is evidence that Marina's role and influence were larger still. Bernal D\u00edaz del Castillo, a soldier who, as an old man, produced the most comprehensive of the eye-witness accounts, the \"Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva Espa\u00f1a\" (\"True Story of the Conquest of New Spain\"), speaks repeatedly and reverentially of the \"great lady\" Do\u00f1a Marina (always using the honorific title Do\u00f1a). \"Without the help of Do\u00f1a Marina\", he writes, \"we would not have understood the language of New Spain and Mexico.\" Rodr\u00edguez de Oca\u00f1a, another conquistador, relates Cort\u00e9s' assertion that after God, Marina was the main reason for his success.\nThe evidence from Indigenous sources is even more interesting, both in the commentaries about her role, and in her prominence in the codex drawings made of conquest events. Although to some Marina may be known as a traitor, she was not viewed as such by all the Tlaxcalan. In some depictions they portrayed her as \"larger than life,\" sometimes larger than Cort\u00e9s, in rich clothing, and an alliance is shown between her and the Tlaxcalan instead of them and the Spaniards. They respected and trusted her and portrayed her in this light generations after the Spanish conquest.\nIn the \"Lienzo de Tlaxcala (History of Tlaxcala)\", for example, not only is Cort\u00e9s rarely portrayed without Marina poised by his side, but she is shown at times on her own, seemingly directing events as an independent authority. If she had been trained for court life, as in D\u00edaz's account, her relationship with Cort\u00e9s may have followed the familiar pattern of marriage among native elite classes. The role of the Nahua wife acquired through an alliance would have been to assist her husband achieve his military and diplomatic objectives.\nToday's historians give great credit to Marina's diplomatic skills, with some \"almost tempted to think of her as the real conqueror of Mexico.\" Old conquistadors on various occasions recalled that one of her greatest skills had been her ability to convince other natives of what she could perceive, that it was useless in the long run to stand against Spanish metal (arms) and Spanish ships. In contrast to earlier parts of D\u00edaz del Castillo's account, after Marina began assisting Cort\u00e9s, the Spanish were forced into combat on one more occasion.\nHad La Malinche not been part of the Conquest of Mexico for her language skills, communication between the Spanish and the Indigenous peoples would have been much harder. La Malinche knew how to speak in different registers and tones among certain Indigenous tribes and classes of people. For the Nahua audiences, she spoke rhetorically, formally, and high-handedly. This shift into formality gave the Nahua the impression that she was a noblewoman who knew what she was talking about.\nImage in contemporary Mexico.\nMalinche's image has become a mythical archetype that artists have represented in various forms of art. Her figure permeates historical, cultural, and social dimensions of Mexican cultures. In modern times and several genres, she is compared with La Llorona (folklore story of the woman weeping for lost children), and the Mexican soldaderas (women who fought beside men during the Mexican Revolution) for their brave actions.\nLa Malinche's legacy is one of myth mixed with legend and the opposing opinions of the Mexican people about the legendary woman. Some see her as a founding figure of the Mexican nation, while others continue to see her as a traitor\u2014as may be assumed from a legend that she had a twin sister who went North, and from the pejorative nickname \"La Chingada\" associated with her twin.\nFeminist interventions into the figure of Malinche began in the 1960s. The work of Rosario Castellanos was particularly significant; Chicanas began to refer to her as a \"mother\" as they adopted her as symbolism for duality and complex identity. Castellanos's subsequent poem \"La Mallinche\" recast her not as a traitor but as a victim. Mexican feminists defended Malinche as a woman caught between cultures, forced to make complex decisions, who ultimately served as a mother of a new race.\nToday in Mexican Spanish, the term \"malinchismo\" and its adjetive \"malinchista\" are used to denounce Mexicans who are perceived as denying their cultural heritage by preferring foreign cultural expressions.\nSome historians believe that La Malinche saved her people from the Aztecs, who held a hegemony throughout the territory and demanded tribute from its inhabitants. Some Mexicans also credit her with having brought Christianity to the New World from Europe, and for having influenced Cort\u00e9s to be more humane than he would otherwise have been. It is argued, however, that without her help, Cort\u00e9s would not have been successful in conquering the Aztecs as quickly, giving the Aztec people enough time to adapt to new technology and methods of warfare. From that viewpoint, she is seen as one who betrayed the Indigenous people by siding with the Spaniards. Recently, several feminists have decried such categorization as scapegoating.\nPresident Jos\u00e9 L\u00f3pez Portillo commissioned a sculpture of Cort\u00e9s, Do\u00f1a Marina, and their son Mart\u00edn, which was placed in front of Cort\u00e9s' house in the Coyoac\u00e1n section of Mexico City. Once L\u00f3pez Portillo left office, the sculpture was removed to an obscure park in the capital.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18577", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18577", "title": "Lusitania", "text": "Roman province in Hispania (27 BC \u2013 c. 410 AD)\nLusitania (; ) was an ancient Iberian Roman province encompassing most of modern-day Portugal (south of the Douro River) and a large portion of western Spain (the present Extremadura and Province of Salamanca). Romans named the region after the Lusitanians, an Indo-European tribe inhabiting the lands.\nThe capital Emerita Augusta was initially part of the Roman Republic province of Hispania Ulterior before becoming a province of its own during the Roman Empire. \nAfter Romans arrived in the territory during the 2nd century BC, a war with Lusitanian tribes ensued between 155 and 139 BC, with the Roman province eventually established in 27 BC.\nIn modern parlance, \"Lusitania\" is often synonymous with Portugal, despite the Roman province's capital being located in modern M\u00e9rida, Spain.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the name of the Lusitani (who gave the Roman province its name) remains unclear. Popular etymology connected the name to a supposed Roman demigod Lusus, whereas some early-modern scholars suggested that \"Lus\" was a form of the Celtic Lugus followed by another (unattested) root \"*tan-\", supposed to mean \"tribe\", while others derived the name from \"Lucis\", an ancient people mentioned in Avienius' \"Ora Maritima\" (4th century AD) and from \"tan\" (-stan in Iranian), or from \"tain\", meaning \"a region\" or implying \"a country of waters\", a root word that formerly meant a prince or sovereign governor of a region.\nAncient Romans, such as Pliny the Elder (\"Natural History\", https://) and Varro (116 \u2013 27 BC, cited by Pliny), speculated that the name \"Lusitania\" had Roman origins, as when Pliny says \"lusum enim Liberi Patris aut lyssam cum eo bacchantium nomen dedisse Lusitaniae et Pana praefectum eius universae\" [Lusitania takes its name from the \"Lusus\" associated with Bacchus and the \"Lyssa\" of his Bacchantes, and Pan is its governor].\n\"Lusus\" is usually translated as \"game\" or \"play\", while \"lyssa\" is a borrowing from the Greek \u03bb\u03c5\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1, \"frenzy\" or \"rage\", and sometimes Rage personified; for later poets, Lusus and Lyssa become flesh-and-blood companions (even children) of Bacchus. Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es' epic \"Os Lus\u00edadas\" (1572), which portrays Lusus as the founder of Lusitania, extends these ideas, which have no connection with modern etymology.\nIn his work, \"Geography\", the classical geographer Strabo (died ca. 24 AD) suggests a change had occurred in the use of the name \"Lusitanian\". He mentions a group who had once been called \"Lusitanians\" living north of the Douro river but were called in his day \"Callacans\".\nLusitanians.\nThe Lusitani established themselves in the region in the 6th century BC, but historians and archeologists are still undecided about their ethnogenesis. Some modern authors consider them to be an indigenous people who were Celticized culturally and possibly also through intermarriage.\nThe archeologist Scarlat Lambrino defended the position that the Lusitanians were a tribal group of Celtic origin related to the Lusones (a tribe that inhabited the east of Iberia). Some have claimed that both tribes came from the Swiss mountains. Others argue that the evidence points to the Lusitanians being a native Iberian tribe, resulting from intermarriage between different local tribes. \nThe first area colonized by the Lusitani was probably the Douro valley and the region of Beira Alta (present day Portugal); in Beira, they stayed until they defeated the Celtici and other tribes, then they expanded to cover a territory that reached Estremadura before the arrival of the Romans.\nWar against Rome.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And yet the country north of the Tagus, Lusitania, is the greatest of the Iberian nations, and is the nation against which the Romans waged war for the longest times\u2014\u200a\nThe Lusitani are mentioned for the first time in Livy who describes them as fighting for the Carthaginians in 218 BCE; they are reported as fighting against Rome in 194 BC, sometimes allied with Celtiberian tribes.\nIn 179 BC, the \"praetor\" Lucius Postumius Albinus celebrated a triumph over the Lusitani, but in 155 BC, on the command of Punicus (\u03a0\u03bf\u03c5\u03bd\u03af\u03ba\u03bf\u03c5, perhaps a Carthaginian) first and Caesarus (\u039a\u03b1\u03af\u03c3\u03b1\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2) after, the Lusitani reached Gibraltar. Here they were defeated by the \"praetor\" Lucius Mummius.\nFrom 152 BC onwards, the Roman Republic had difficulties in recruiting soldiers for the wars in Hispania, deemed particularly brutal. In 150 BC, Servius Sulpicius Galba organised a false armistice. While the Lusitani celebrated this new alliance, he massacred them, selling the survivors as slaves; this caused a new rebellion led by Viriathus, who was after many attempts killed by traitors paid by the Romans in 139 BC, after having led a successful guerrilla campaign against Rome and their local allies. Two years after, in 137 BC Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus led a successful campaign against the Lusitani, reaching as far north as the Minho river.\nRomans scored other victories with \"proconsul\" Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus and Gaius Marius (elected in 113 BC), but still the Lusitani resisted with a long guerilla war; they later joined Sertorius' (a renegade Roman General) troops (around 80 BC) and Julius Caesar conducted a successful campaign against them in 61-60 BC, but they were not finally defeated until the reign of Augustus (around 28\u201324 BC).\nRoman province.\nTerritory.\nUnder Augustus.\nWith Lusitania (and Asturia and Gallaecia), Rome had completed the conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, which was then divided by Augustus (25\u201320 BC or 16\u201313 BC) into the eastern and northern \"Hispania Tarraconensis,\" the southwestern \"Hispania Baetica\" and the western \"Provincia Lusitana\". Originally, Lusitania included the territories of Asturia and Gallaecia, but these were later ceded to the jurisdiction of the new \"Provincia Tarraconensis\" and the former remained as \"Provincia Lusitania et Vettones\". Its northern border was along the Douro River, while on its eastern side its border passed through \"Salmantica\" (Salamanca) and \"Caesarobriga\" (Talavera de la Reina) to the \"Anas\" (Guadiana) river.\nBetween 28 and 24 BC Augustus' military campaigns pacified all Iberia under Roman rule, with the foundation of Roman cities like \"Asturica Augusta\" (Astorga) and \"Bracara Augusta\" (Braga) to the north, and to the south \"Emerita Augusta\" (M\u00e9rida) (settled with the emeriti of the Legio V Alaudae and Legio X Gemina legions).\n\"Conventus Iuridicus\".\nBetween the time of Augustus and Claudius, the province was divided into three conventus iuridicus, territorial units presided by capital cities with a court of justice and joint Roman/indigenous people assemblies (conventus), that counseled the Governor:\nThe \"conventus\" ruled of a total of forty-six populis. Five were Roman colonies: \"Emerita Augusta\" (M\u00e9rida, Spain), \"Pax Iulia\" (Beja), \"Scalabis\" (Santar\u00e9m), \"Norba Caesarina\" (C\u00e1ceres) and \"Metellinum\" (Medell\u00edn). \"Felicitas Iulia Olisipo\" (Lisbon, which was a Roman law municipality) and three other towns had the old Latin status: \"Ebora\" (\u00c9vora), \"Myrtilis Iulia\" (M\u00e9rtola) and \"Salacia\" (Alc\u00e1cer do Sal). The other thirty-seven were of \"stipendiarii\" class, among which \"Aeminium\" (Coimbra), \"Balsa\" (Tavira), or \"Mirobriga\" (Santiago do Cac\u00e9m). Other cities include \"Ossonoba\" (Faro), \"Cetobriga\" (Set\u00fabal), \"Collippo\" (Leiria) or \"Arabriga\" (Alenquer).\nUnder Diocletian.\nUnder Diocletian, Lusitania kept its borders and was ruled by a \"praeses\", later by a \"consularis.\"\nRoman diocese.\nFinally, in 298 AD, Lusitania was united with the other provinces to form the \"Diocesis Hispaniarum\" (\"Diocese of the Hispanias\").\nLegacy of the name.\nAs with the Roman names of many European countries, \"Lusitania\" was and is often used as an alternative name for Portugal, especially in formal or literary and poetic contexts. The 16th-century colony that would eventually become Brazil was initially founded as \"New Lusitania\". In common use are such terms as Lusophone, meaning Portuguese-speaking, and Lusitanic, referring to the Community of Portuguese Language Countries\u2014once Portugal's colonies and presently independent countries still sharing some common heritage. Prior to his invasion in 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte proposed the establishment of a French-backed puppet Kingdom of Northern Lusitania as one of the successor states to Portugal under the assumption that such a campaign would result in an easy French victory.\nThe province was also the namesake of the North Atlantic Ocean liner RMS \"Lusitania\" infamous for being torpedoed by a German U-boat in 1915. Cunard, the ship's owner, commonly named its vessels after Roman provinces with the \"Lusitania\" so being called after the Roman Iberian province to the north of the Strait of Gibraltar while her sister ship RMS \"Mauretania\" was named after the Roman North African province on the south side of the strait.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18578", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18578", "title": "Limited-stop", "text": "Public transport trip pattern\nIn public transit, particularly bus, tram, or train transportation, a limited-stop (or sometimes referred to as semi-fast) service is a trip pattern that stops less frequently than a local service. Many limited-stop or semi-fast services are a combination of commuter rail and express train.\nThe term is normally used on routes with a mixture of fast and slow services, and can differ in meaning, depending on how it is used by different transit agencies. The main benefits of limited-stop or semi-fast services is the ability to utilise skip-stop calling pattern to maximise capacity along the line, as opposed to a commuter service stopping at every station which slows trailing express trains down.\nRailways.\nOn railways, the layout of the tracks and number and length of platforms at stations normally limit the extent to which a blend of fast/semi-fast/slow services can be operated.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, particularly in Brisbane and Sydney, limited stop services are formed by commuter trains that run as limited stops or express services from the city centre to the edge of the suburban area and then as all stops in the interurban area (an example of such an express pattern can be seen on the Gold Coast line and the East Hills line).\nFinland.\nIn Helsinki, Finland, VR commuter rail services are formed by trains that run as limited stops or express from the city centre and then stop all stations in the interurban area. The Y train is one such example.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the limited stops train is known as a semi-express train ( \"Junky\u016b\"). An example is applied to Nankai Railway's Koya Line.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, some railway stations have tracks for which there are no platforms, allowing a larger number of fast trains to pass them without stopping. They may go down the middle of the station or down the side such as at Forest Hill, Raynes Park, Kentish Town and Totnes (the middle track at Totnes is used only in the summer by Great Western Railway services between London Paddington and Newquay).\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, some railway stations have tracks for which there are no platforms. For instance, various commuter rail services run along the same tracks as Amtrak's Acela Express and Northeast Corridor routes with four rails, two in the middle for Amtrak, and two on either side for the commuter rail. There are also Express services within those, as at many smaller stations, the Northeast Corridor trains will split off onto the commuter rail tracks to make a stop, and the Acela trains will continue.\nSubways.\nThe United States also uniquely has subways that use this method. In New York City, services are designated as separate lines, which are often part-express, part-local, while others are only express at certain times of day, for example the J and Z services. In Philadelphia, they are considered the same line, but with a few different types of services. The B has the local (B1), which makes all stops; the express (B2), which has an early Southern terminus in the city center; the spur (B3), which makes a few more stops than the express but less than the local, and then branches out to service two other stations), and the special, which is run only during sporting events, and runs as the express but then continues nonstop down to the southern terminus of the local, sharing tracks with the local.\nBuses.\nTraditionally, limited-stop bus services usually operate on an identical or similar route to one or more local bus routes, only serving primary stops, and skipping the others served by local routes. Typically, the stops that are served by limited stop routes are chosen so that stops are evenly spaced or are transfer points, major intersections, or popular destinations. Within downtowns, limited-stop services may stop more frequently. Depending on the transit agency, this can sometimes be referred to as express service. For example, Chicago Transit Authority refers to both this type and non-stop services as express.\nLimited-stop bus service is a core component of bus rapid transit (BRT), but differs by not sharing most of the common features of bus rapid transit such as unique route branding, off-vehicle fare collection, signal preemption, frequent all-day service, and dedicated right-of-way. For example, the RapidRide lines in Seattle, Washington are existing local King County Metro routes but with fewer stops and some BRT features being adopted at some stations. In other cities, such as Hong Kong, limited stop bus service currently uses the same branding and has the same features (except stopping less frequently) as regular bus routes.\nOther forms of limited-stop bus service other than the traditional type characterized by serving only some of the stops. Some bus routes with portions of the route are non-stop are referred to as limited stop by the transit agency that operates the route.\nOne form is a route that operates partially on a highway. It is more similar to an express bus route than the traditional limited stop route. However, the non-stop portion of the route is typically shorter than that of an express route, and the fare structure of the transit agency cause a limited stop route to have a lower fare than an express route.\nOne example of this type of route would be Metro Transit Route 114 in Minneapolis, MN. The route originates at the University of Minnesota campus in Minneapolis, then it travels several miles on Interstates 35W and 94, before it begins to operate as local service through the Uptown area of Minneapolis.\nAnother form of limited stop bus service includes local routes that may operate certain trips with limited or non-stop sections. For example, to aid commute times for downtown workers, Metro Transit Route 12 in Minneapolis operates during peak hours as non-stop for approximately eight blocks between Franklin Avenue and Uptown Transit Station, but the route serves all stops along that section at other times.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18579", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18579", "title": "Laeken European Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "18581", "revid": "18915484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18581", "title": "Limburg", "text": "Limburg or Limbourg may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18582", "revid": "1319124094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18582", "title": "Limburg (Netherlands)", "text": "Province of the Netherlands\nLimburg (; ), also known as Dutch Limburg, is the southernmost of the twelve provinces of the Netherlands. It is bordered by Gelderland to the north and by North Brabant to the west. Its long eastern boundary forms the border with the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia. To the west is the border with the Belgian province of Limburg, part of which is delineated by the river Meuse. To the south, Limburg is bordered by the Belgian province of Li\u00e8ge. The Vaalserberg is the extreme southeastern point, the tripoint of the Netherlands, Germany, and Belgium.\nLimburg had a population of about 1,128,000 in January 2023. Its main municipalities are the provincial capital Maastricht (population 120,837 as of January 2022), Venlo (population 102,176) in the northeast, as well as Sittard-Geleen (population 91,760, bordering both Belgium and Germany) and Heerlen (population 86,874) in the south. More than half of the population, approximately 650,000 people, live in the south of Limburg, which corresponds to roughly one-third of the province's area proper. In South Limburg, most people live in the urban agglomerations of Maastricht, Parkstad and Sittard-Geleen.\nEtymology.\nLimburg's name derives from the Belgian fortified town of the same name, Limbourg-sur-Vesdre, now in the nearby Li\u00e8ge Province, immediately south of Limburg. The name of Limbourg-sur-Vesdre was important to the region because it had been the seat of the medieval Duchy of Limburg. \nThere are several proposals concerning the etymology of Limbourg. The second part, \"bourg\" or \"burg\" is common in placenames, and refers to a fortified town. The first part is often suggested to refer to lime or linden trees (species of \"Tilia\"). The historian Jean-Louis Kupper has proposed that its founder Frederick, Duke of Lower Lorraine named it after Limburg Abbey in Germany. He favours a derivation from a Germanic word \"lint\" meaning \"dragon\".\nThe area under the direct lordship of the old Duchy did not overlap the modern Belgian and Dutch provinces named after it, though the medieval Duchy was a high status title in the region. On the other hand, while the Duchy's effective power was limited, the Duchy and what is now South Limburg (referred to as the (Lands of Overmaas) did have a long history of connection under the lordship of the Dukes of Brabant. During this long period, from the Middle Ages until the French Revolution, they were sometimes referred to collectively under one name (Overmaas or Limburg).\nAfter 1794, it was the French First Republic which unified the region, along with Belgian Limburg, and removed all ties to the old feudal society (the \"ancien regime\"). The new name, as with all the names of the \"d\u00e9partements\", was based on natural features such as rivers, in this case Meuse-Inf\u00e9rieure or Neder-Maas (\"Lower Meuse\"). \nAfter the defeat of Napoleon, the newly created United Kingdom of the Netherlands desired a new name for this province. It was decided that the historic connection to the duchy of Limburg was to be restored, albeit only in name.\nHistory.\nThe current province Limburg of the Netherlands only came into existence in 1839, after the finalization of the separation of Belgium from the Netherlands which had begun in 1830. The two Limburgs had been brought together under French revolutionary administration some decades earlier, but they and the surrounding region shared much of their history. For long periods of history however, the region was not united under the same rule.\nFor centuries, the strategic location of the current province, stretching along the Maas river route, made it a much-coveted region among Europe's major powers. Romans, Carolingians, Habsburg Spaniards, Prussians, Habsburg Austrians and France have all ruled parts of Limburg. \nThe first inhabitants of whom traces have been found were Neanderthals who camped in South Limburg. In Neolithic times, flint was mined in underground mines.\nRoman era.\nJulius Caesar conquered the area in 53 BC, and wrote that he had extinguished the name of the Eburones, the inhabitants of most of the area of current Limburg, as a punishment for their revolt under Ambiorix.\nThe north\u2013south route along the Maas was crossed by the Via Belgica, a road crossing South Limburg and connecting the two local capitals of Tongeren and Cologne. \"Mosa Trajectum\" (Maastricht) and \"Coriovallum\" (Heerlen) were founded by the Romans upon this route. The area became strongly Romanized. Bishop Servatius introduced Christianity in Roman Maastricht, where he died in 384. Maastricht appears to have taken over from Tongeren for some time as regional capital for the Romanized and Christian population, before the bishopric was re-established in Li\u00e8ge, south of Maastricht.\nMedieval era.\nAs Roman authority in the area weakened, Franks took over from the Romans, but the area came to flourish under their rule, with Cologne continuing to be the most important local capital. The Maas valley, especially the middle and southern part of the current province, formed an important part of the heartland of Merovingian Austrasia.\nWith the rise of the Carolingian dynasty, who were themselves from this region, the Maas valley became more culturally and politically one of the most important regions in Europe. In 714 Susteren Abbey was founded, as far as is known the first proprietary abbey in the current Netherlands. The main benefactor was Plectrude, the consort of Pepin of Herstal. Charles Martel was born in nearby Herstal. Charlemagne made Aachen, today a German city which has suburban sprawl stretching into South Limburg, the capital of the Frankish empire. \nAfter the death of Charlemagne, the Frankish dominions were again split between kings. While the Austrasian lands remained a separate \"Middle Kingdom\", sometimes now referred to as Lotharingia, in the treaties of Verdun (843), and Pr\u00fcm (855), in the 870 Treaty of Meerssen, signed in South Limburg itself, Lotharingia was divided. The river Meuse became the border between the Western- and Eastern Frankish kingdoms, placing most of the current Dutch province of Limburg on the western boundary of the Eastern Frankish kingdom, with Belgian Limburg in the Western Kingdom. In the Treaty of Ribemont of 888, the Eastern Kingdom was granted control of the whole of Lotharingia, including all of the modern Netherlands and Luxembourg, and most of modern Belgium.\nThe region of Thorn, Netherlands was drained and about 975 a swamp nearby the Roman road between Maastricht and Nijmegen. Bishop Ansfried of Utrecht founded a Benedictine nunnery. This developed from the 12th century into a secular or convent. The principal of the was the abbess. She was assisted by a chapter of at most twenty ladies of the highest nobility. \nDuring the period of West Frankish control under the Treaty of Meerssen, effective Frankish power in the area of the current Netherlands more or less collapsed. For two or more years a large Viking army, operating from a place on or near the Meuse called Ascloa (or Hasloa or Haslon), wrought havoc in the neighbourhood. The damage was such that the emperor, Charles the Fat was forced to assemble a large multinational army, that in 882 unsuccessfully besieged this island.\nIn the 10th century, the Eastern kingdom consolidated its control of Lotharingia and became the Holy Roman Empire. In the first decades of this empire the founding imperial family had close ties to areas in what is today northern Limburg. The emperor Otto III for instance was born in 980 in Kessel, practically on the current border between Limburg and North Rhine-Westphalia, just east from Gennep. In 1080 in Genneperhuis, just north of Gennep, Norbert of Gennep was born as a son of the count of Gennep. He was the founder of the order of the Premonstratensians.\nSouth Limburg in the early Middle Ages was mainly made up of the lordships of Valkenburg, Dalhem, and Herzogenrath. All of these lands were, however, united with the Duchy of Limburg, under the rule of the Duchy of Brabant, when they were known collectively as the Lands of Overmaas.\nThe Duchy of Limburg and its dependencies first came under Brabantian control in 1288, as a result of the Battle of Worringen, then in the 15th century under the Duchy of Burgundy. By 1473, the Lands of Overmaas and the Duchy of Limburg formed one unified delegation to the States General of the Burgundian Netherlands. Both the terms Overmaas and Limburg came to be used loosely to refer to this sparsely populated province of the so-called Seventeen Provinces. Maastricht was never part of this polity: as a condominium, sovereignty over this city was held jointly by the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge and the Duchy of Brabant. Also, the central and northern part of present-day Limburg belonged to different political entities, notably the Duchy of J\u00fclich and the Duchy of Guelders.\nBy the late Middle Ages most of the present day territory of Limburg had been partitioned to the Duchy of Brabant, the Duchy of Gelderland, the Duchy of J\u00fclich, the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge or the Electorate of Cologne. These dukes, prince-bishops and prince-electors were nominal subordinates of the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, but in practice acted as independent sovereigns who were often at war with each other. These conflicts were often fought in and over Limburg, contributing to its fragmentation and a loss of economic importance.\nLimburg was the scene of many bloody battles during the Eighty Years' War (1568\u20131648), in which the Dutch Republic threw off Habsburg Spanish rule. At the Battle of Mookerheyde (14 April 1574), two brothers of Prince William of Orange-Nassau and thousands of \"Dutch\" mercenaries died. Most Limburgians fought on the Spanish side, being Catholics and being opposed to the Calvinist Hollanders.\nEarly modern era.\nIn the early modern era, Limburg was largely divided between the Spanish Netherlands (the Austrian Netherlands after 1714), Prussia, the Republic of the Seven United Netherlands, the Prince-Bishopric of Li\u00e8ge and many small independent fiefs. In 1673, King Louis XIV personally commanded the siege of Maastricht by French troops. During the siege, one of his brigadiers, Charles de Batz-Castelmore d'Artagnan, perished.\n19th century.\nThe modern boundaries of Dutch Limburg, along with its neighbour, Belgian Limburg, were basically set during the period after the French Revolution, which erased much of the \" of Europe, with all its old boundaries and titles. These two provinces were part of a new French , named (like many ) after the river running through it, \", meaning simply \"lower Maas\".\nFollowing the Napoleonic Era, the great powers (the United Kingdom, Prussia, the Austrian Empire, the Russian Empire and France) left the region to the new United Kingdom of the Netherlands in the Congress of Vienna in 1815. A new province was formed which was to receive the name \"Maastricht\" after its capital. The first king, William I, who did not want the medieval name to be lost, insisted that it be changed to \"Province of Limburg\". As such, the name of the new province was derived from the old Duchy of Limburg that had existed until 1795 on the east bank of the Meuse river.\nWhen the Catholic and French-speaking Belgians split away from the mainly Calvinist northern Netherlands in the Belgian Revolution of 1830, the Province of Limburg was at first almost entirely under Belgian rule. However, by the 1839 Treaty of London, the province was divided in two, with the eastern part going to the Netherlands and the western part to Belgium, a division that remains today.\nWith the Treaty of London, what is now the Belgian Province of Luxembourg was handed over to Belgium and removed from the German Confederation. To appease Prussia, which had also lost access to the Meuse after the Congress of Vienna, the Dutch province of Limburg (excluding the cities of Maastricht and Venlo because without them Limburg's population equalled that of the Province of Luxembourg, 150,000), was joined to the German Confederation between 5 September 1839 and 23 August 1866 as the Duchy of Limburg. On 11 May 1867, the Duchy, which from 1839 on had been \"de jure\" a separate polity in personal union with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, was reincorporated into the latter with the 1867 Treaty of London, though the term \"Duchy of Limburg\" remained in some official use until February 1907. Another idiosyncrasy survives today: the head of the province, referred to as the \"King's Commissioner\" in other provinces, is addressed as \"Governor\" in Limburg.\n20th century.\nThe Second World War cost the lives of many civilians in Limburg, and a large number of towns and villages were destroyed by bombings and artillery battles. Various cemeteries, too, bear witness to this dark chapter in Limburg's history. Almost 8,500 American soldiers, who perished during the liberation of the Netherlands, lie buried at the Netherlands American Cemetery and Memorial in Margraten. Other big war cemeteries are to be found at Overloon (British soldiers) and the Ysselsteyn German war cemetery was constructed in the Municipality of Venray for the 31,000 German soldiers who died.\nAccording to the research of Herman van Rens, the residents of Limburg were especially active in hiding local and refugee Jews during the Holocaust, to the extent that the Jewish population even increased during the war. Jews in hiding were three times as likely to survive in Limburg as in Amsterdam.\nIn December 1991, the European Community (now European Union) held a summit in Maastricht. At that summit, the \"Treaty on European Union\" or so-called Maastricht Treaty was signed by the European Community member states. With that treaty, the European Union came into existence.\nAnthem.\n\"Limburg mijn Vaderland\" (Limburg my Fatherland) is the official anthem of both Belgian and Dutch Limburg.\nLanguage.\nAlthough standard Dutch is the official language and the one most used, Limburgish is currently considered a regional language as described in the a page of the Dutch Government. It has been an official regional language since 1997 and it receives moderate protection under Chapter 2 of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. The German and Belgian governments do not recognise it as an official language. Before the 20th century, most newspapers were in French or in German, and schools in Maastricht taught French, as the city has historic ties with the Belgian city of Li\u00e8ge. Other parts of the province taught German.\nLimburgish is spoken by an estimated 1.6 million people in Dutch Limburg, Belgian Limburg, and Germany. There are many different dialects of Limburgish; almost every town and village has its own. A lot of isoglosses cross through Limburg. No single dialect can fully represent Limburgish as a whole. Dialects in the north, nearby Venray and Gennep, are classified as Kleverlandish and are closely connected to the dialects in the northeast of Brabant (Land van Cuijk) and the region of Nijmegen. Dialects in the southeast (near Aachen) are closer to Ripuarian and are sometimes classified as Southeast Limburgish. Dialects in the western part of Limburg, surrounding Weert, are influenced by the neighbouring dialects of southeast Brabant, which means that the tone is more Brabantic than in the rest of Limburg.\nPolitics.\nThe provincial council (States-Provincial - \"Provinciale Staten\") has 47 seats, and is headed by a King's Commissioner (\"Commissaris van de Koning\") who unofficially is called the Governor. While the provincial council is elected by the inhabitants, the King's Commissioner is appointed by the King and the cabinet of the Netherlands. Since December 2021 Emile Roemer (SP) has been holding the office of governor.\nSince the 2011 elections the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) was the largest party in the council, although the Party for Freedom (PVV) won the most votes during the election. However, two members of the PVV left the party, taking their seats with them, which lost the PVV their number one status.\nSince the 2015 elections the CDA (11 seats) has again been the largest party, followed by the PVV (9 seats) and the Socialist Party (SP) (8 seats).\nThe province's daily affairs are taken care of by the Provincial-Executive (\"Gedeputeerde Staten\"), which are also headed by the King's Commissioner; its members (\"gedeputeerden\") can be compared with ministers.\nStates-Provincial.\nResults of the elections for the States-Provincial:\nProvincial-Executive.\nThe Provincial-Executive 2023\u20132027 consists of the following parties: BBB, CDA, VVD, PvdA and SP.\nGeography.\nLimburg is a salient of the Netherlands into Belgium.\nCompared to the rest of the Netherlands the southern part of Limburg is less flat, slightly undulated. The highest point in the continental Netherlands is the Vaalserberg (meaning 'mountain' of Vaals) with a height of 322.4 metres (1,058\u00a0ft) above NAP, rising approximately 110 metres above the village Vaals, where three countries (Netherlands, Belgium and Germany) border each other at the so-called \"Three-country-point\".\nLimburg's main river is the Meuse, which passes through the province's entire length from south to north.\nLimburg's surface is largely formed by deposits from the Meuse, consisting of river clay, fertile loessial soil and large deposits of pebblestone, currently being quarried for the construction industry. In the north of the province, further away from the riverbed, the soil primarily consists of sand and peat.\nLimburg makes up one region of the International Organization for Standardization world region code system, having the code -LI.\nMunicipalities.\nThe province of Limburg has 31 municipalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCities.\nFrom North to South: Gennep, Venray, Venlo, Weert, Roermond, Thorn, Sittard, Geleen, Heerlen, Valkenburg, Kerkrade, Maastricht, Vaals. \nEconomy.\nThe Gross domestic product (GDP) of the province was \u20ac44.5 billion in 2018, accounting for 5.7% of the Netherlands economic output. GDP per capita adjusted for purchasing power was \u20ac34,700 or 115% of the EU27 average in the same year.\nIn the past peat and coal were mined in Limburg. In 1965\u201375 the coal mines were finally closed. As a result, 60,000 people lost their jobs in the two coal mining areas, Heerlen-Kerkrade-Brunssum and Sittard-Geleen. A difficult period of economic readjustment started. The Dutch government partly eased the pain by moving several government offices (including Stichting Pensioenfonds ABP and CBS Statistics Netherlands) to Heerlen.\nThe state-owned corporation that once mined in Limburg, DSM, is now a major chemical company, still operating in Limburg. In 2002 DSM sold its petrochemical division (naphtha crackers and polyolefin plants) to SABIC of Saudi Arabia. In 2010, the agro and melamine business groups were sold to OCI Nitrogen. SABIC is located on the Chemelot campus in Sittard-Geleen, which is bounded by the Chemelot Industrial Park, one of Western Europe's biggest industrial sites. At this moment 8000 people work at Chemelot, of which 1000 are active at the Campus. The innovation and licensing division Stamicarbon of DSM was sold in 2009 to Maire Tecnimont, the parent company of an engineering, main contracting and licensing group that operates worldwide in the oil, gas &amp; petrochemicals, power, infrastructure and civil engineering sectors. Stamicarbon is based in Sittard-Geleen.\nVDL Nedcar in Born (Sittard-Geleen) is the only large-scale car manufacturer in the Netherlands, currently manufacturing MINIs and BMW X1s. Other industries include rockwool in Roermond, Oc\u00e9 copiers and printers manufacturers in Venlo and a paper factory in Maastricht. There are four large beer breweries in Limburg.\nSouthern Limburg has long been one of the country's two main fruit-growing areas, but over the last four decades, many fruit-growing areas have been replaced by water as a result of gravel quarrying near the Meuse.\nLimburg is one of the most important provinces when it comes to Dutch wine production. South Limburg has the highest concentration of vineyards in the Netherlands. Limburg's wine regions have 3 Appellations: Maasvallei, Mergelland and Vijlen. Voerendaalse bergen is expected to be recognized somewhere in 2021. \nTourism is an essential sector of the economy, especially in the hilly southern part of the province. The town of Valkenburg is the main centre.\nIn 2005, the two provincial newspapers, \"De Limburger\" and \"Limburgs Dagblad\", merged.\nCulture.\nEssential elements in Limburgian culture are\nMusic.\nChoral singing is popular in Limburg. One of its best-known choruses is the Mastreechter Staar (Maastricht Star), which performs nationally and internationally.\nWind music (\"bloasmuzeek\", blown music) is also widespread, most villages and cities have one or more amateur fanfare or wind orchestras (\"harmonie\").\nEvery four years the World Music Contest, a competition for professional, amateur and military band sometimes called the Olympic Games of brass band music is held in Kerkrade.\nIn 2013 and 2009 the winner in the World Concert Division was the Koninklijke Harmonie Sainte C\u00e9cile, from Eijsden (Limburg).\nAlso held in Kerkrade (situated on the German border) is the Schlagerfestival, a nationally broadcast event presenting singers of German-language pop music called Schlagers.\nSince 1969 yearly on the Pentecost weekend an international pop music festival called Pinkpop Festival takes place in the southern part of Limburg; initially at Geleen, since 1988 at Schaesberg.\nMore nationally or internationally known musicians from this province are mentioned hereunder in section \"Famous Limburgians\".\nThe Limburg Symphony Orchestra, that resided and rehearsed in Maastricht, and was the oldest symphony orchestra of the Netherlands (founded in 1883) following elimination of government grants merged with \"Het Brabants Orkest\" to form a single ensemble with the new name of the \"philharmonie zuidnederland\", as of April 2013.\nFolklore.\nMany places in both Netherlands' and Belgian Limburg still have their own (by now folkloristic) schutterij. An annual festival is held in which all 160 of them compete for the highest honours to be gained, in the \"OLS\" (Oud Limburgs Schuttersfeest), which is held somewhere in either Belgian or Netherlands' Limburg.\nSports.\nFootball.\nIn Limburg there are currently four professional Football clubs; Roda JC Kerkrade, VVV-Venlo, MVV Maastricht and Fortuna Sittard. Fortuna Sittard competes in the highest Dutch division, the Eredivisie. The others compete in the second highest division.\nCycling.\nThe annual bike classic Amstel Gold Race is run in the southern part of Limburg. The area has also staged the UCI Road World Championships six times, once hosted by Heerlen and five times by Valkenburg.\nHandball.\nTeam handball is the third-most popular sport in Limburg. The women's team, HV Swift Roermond, has won the national championship in the highest division 19 times. The male teams, Sittardia (Sittard), Vlug en Lenig (Geleen) and BFC (Beek), which in 2008 merged as the \"Limburg Lions\", have in total won the national championship 25 times.\nReligion.\nLimburg is one of two Dutch provinces (North Brabant being the other) that has historically been dominated by the Roman Catholic faith. \nIn 2015, 64.5% of the population of Limburg identified as Catholic, while 3.3% identified as Muslim, 2.2% with the Protestant Church in the Netherlands, and 2.1% with other churches or faiths. Over a quarter (27.9%) of the population reported being non-religious. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn contrast, the Diocese of Roermond, which covers the entire province of Limburg, reports that out of a population of 1,115,895, roughly 1,071,000 or 96% of them were Catholics in 2022.\nFamous Limburgians.\nPolitics, science, religion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEntertainment, arts\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNature.\nIn 2012, from April 5 to October 7, the ten-yearly world horticulture expo \"Floriade\" was held in Venlo.\nNationally and internationally known are nature films and nature television series produced by film director Maurice Nijsten and nature protector Jo Erkens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18585", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18585", "title": "Leon", "text": "Leon, L\u00e9on (French) or Le\u00f3n (Spanish) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18587", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18587", "title": "Linguistically", "text": ""}
{"id": "18589", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18589", "title": "Ligand", "text": "Ion or molecule bound to a metal atom\nIn coordination chemistry, a ligand is an ion or molecule with a functional group that binds to a central metal atom to form a coordination complex. The bonding with the metal generally involves formal donation of one or more of the ligand's electron pairs, often through Lewis bases. The nature of metal\u2013ligand bonding can range from covalent to ionic. Furthermore, the metal\u2013ligand bond order can range from one to three. Ligands are viewed as Lewis bases, although rare cases are known to involve Lewis acidic \"ligands\".\nMetals and metalloids are bound to ligands in almost all circumstances, although gaseous \"naked\" metal ions can be generated in a high vacuum. Ligands in a complex dictate the reactivity of the central atom, including ligand substitution rates, the reactivity of the ligands themselves, and redox. Ligand selection requires critical consideration in many practical areas, including bioinorganic and medicinal chemistry, homogeneous catalysis, and environmental chemistry.\nLigands are classified in many ways, including: charge, size (bulk), the identity of the coordinating atom(s), and the number of electrons donated to the metal (denticity or hapticity). The size of a ligand is indicated by its cone angle.\nHistory.\nThe composition of coordination complexes have been known since the early 1800s, such as Prussian blue and copper vitriol. The key breakthrough occurred when Alfred Werner reconciled formulas and isomers. He showed, among other things, that the formulas of many cobalt(III) and chromium(III) compounds can be understood if the metal has six ligands in an octahedral geometry. The first to use the term \"ligand\" were Alfred Werner and Carl Somiesky, in relation to silicon chemistry. The theory allows one to understand the difference between coordinated and ionic chloride in the cobalt ammine chlorides and to explain many of the previously inexplicable isomers. He resolved the first coordination complex called hexol into optical isomers, overthrowing the theory that chirality was necessarily associated with carbon compounds.\nStrong field and weak field ligands.\nIn general, ligands are viewed as electron donors and the metals as electron acceptors, i.e., respectively, Lewis bases and Lewis acids. This description has been semi-quantified in many ways, e.g. ECW model. Bonding is often described using the formalisms of molecular orbital theory.\nLigands and metal ions can be ordered in many ways; one ranking system focuses on ligand 'hardness' (see also hard/soft acid/base theory). Metal ions preferentially bind certain ligands. In general, 'hard' metal ions prefer weak field ligands, whereas 'soft' metal ions prefer strong field ligands. According to the molecular orbital theory, the HOMO (Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital) of the ligand should have an energy that overlaps with the LUMO (Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital) of the metal preferential. Metal ions bound to strong-field ligands follow the Aufbau principle, whereas complexes bound to weak-field ligands follow Hund's rule.\nBinding of the metal with the ligands results in a set of molecular orbitals, where the metal can be identified with a new HOMO and LUMO (the orbitals defining the properties and reactivity of the resulting complex) and a certain ordering of the 5 d-orbitals (which may be filled, or partially filled with electrons). In an octahedral environment, the 5 otherwise degenerate d-orbitals split in sets of 3 and 2 orbitals (for a more in-depth explanation, see crystal field theory):\nThe energy difference between these 2 sets of d-orbitals is called the splitting parameter, \u0394o. The magnitude of \u0394o is determined by the field-strength of the ligand: strong field ligands, by definition, increase \u0394o more than weak field ligands. Ligands can now be sorted according to the magnitude of \u0394o (see the table below). This ordering of ligands is almost invariable for all metal ions and is called spectrochemical series.\nFor complexes with a tetrahedral surrounding, the d-orbitals again split into two sets, but this time in reverse order:\nThe energy difference between these 2 sets of d-orbitals is now called \u0394t. The magnitude of \u0394t is smaller than for \u0394o, because in a tetrahedral complex only 4 ligands influence the d-orbitals, whereas in an octahedral complex the d-orbitals are influenced by 6 ligands. When the coordination number is neither octahedral nor tetrahedral, the splitting becomes correspondingly more complex. For the purposes of ranking ligands, however, the properties of the octahedral complexes and the resulting \u0394o has been of primary interest.\nThe arrangement of the d-orbitals on the central atom (as determined by the 'strength' of the ligand), has a strong effect on virtually all the properties of the resulting complexes. E.g., the energy differences in the d-orbitals has a strong effect in the optical absorption spectra of metal complexes. It turns out that valence electrons occupying orbitals with significant 3 d-orbital character absorb in the 400\u2013800\u00a0nm region of the spectrum (UV\u2013visible range). The absorption of light (what we perceive as the color) by these electrons (that is, excitation of electrons from one orbital to another orbital under influence of light) can be correlated to the ground state of the metal complex, which reflects the bonding properties of the ligands. The relative change in (relative) energy of the d-orbitals as a function of the field-strength of the ligands is described in Tanabe\u2013Sugano diagrams.\nIn cases where the ligand has low energy LUMO, such orbitals also participate in the bonding. The metal\u2013ligand bond can be further stabilised by a formal donation of electron density back to the ligand in a process known as \"back-bonding.\" In this case a filled, central-atom-based orbital donates density into the LUMO of the (coordinated) ligand. Carbon monoxide is the preeminent example a ligand that engages metals via back-donation. Complementarily, ligands with low-energy filled orbitals of pi-symmetry can serve as pi-donor.\nClassification of ligands as L and X.\nLigands are classified according to the number of electrons that they \"donate\" to the metal. L ligands are Lewis bases. L ligands are represented by amines, phosphines, CO, N2, and alkenes. Examples of L ligands extend to include dihydrogen and hydrocarbons that interact by agostic interactions. X ligands are halides and pseudohalides. X ligands typically are derived from anionic precursors such as chloride but includes ligands where salts of anion do not really exist such as hydride and alkyl.\nEspecially in the area of organometallic chemistry, ligands are classified according to the \"CBC Method\" for Covalent Bond Classification, as popularized by M. L. H. Green and \"is based on the notion that there are three basic types [of ligands]... represented by the symbols L, X, and Z, which correspond respectively to 2-electron, 1-electron and 0-electron neutral ligands.\"\nPolydentate and polyhapto ligand motifs and nomenclature.\nDenticity.\nMany ligands are capable of binding metal ions through multiple sites, usually because the ligands have lone pairs on more than one atom. Such ligands are polydentate. Ligands that bind via more than one atom are often termed \"chelating\". A ligand that binds through two sites is classified as \"bidentate\", and three sites as \"tridentate\". The \"bite angle\" refers to the angle between the two bonds of a bidentate chelate. Chelating ligands are commonly formed by linking donor groups via organic linkers. A classic bidentate ligand is ethylenediamine, which is derived by the linking of two ammonia groups with an ethylene (\u2212CH2CH2\u2212) linker. A classic example of a polydentate ligand is the hexadentate chelating agent EDTA, which is able to bond through six sites, completely surrounding some metals. The number of times a polydentate ligand binds to a metal centre is symbolized by \"\u03ban\", where \"n\" indicates the number of sites by which a ligand attaches to a metal. EDTA4\u2212, when it is hexidentate, binds as a \"\u03ba\"6-ligand, the amines and the carboxylate oxygen atoms are not contiguous. In practice, the n value of a ligand is not indicated explicitly but rather assumed. The binding affinity of a chelating system depends on the chelating angle or bite angle.\nDenticity (represented by \"\u03ba\") is nomenclature that described to the number of noncontiguous atoms of a ligand bonded to a metal. This descriptor is often omitted because the denticity of a ligand is often obvious. The complex tris(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III) could be described as [Co(\u03ba2-en)3]3+.\nComplexes of polydentate ligands are called \"chelate\" complexes. They tend to be more stable than complexes derived from monodentate ligands. This enhanced stability, called the \"chelate effect\", is usually attributed to effects of entropy, which favors the displacement of many ligands by one polydentate ligand.\nRelated to the chelate effect is the macrocyclic effect. A macrocyclic ligand is any large ligand that at least partially surrounds the central atom and bonds to it, leaving the central atom at the centre of a large ring. The more rigid and the higher its denticity, the more inert will be the macrocyclic complex. Heme is an example, in which the iron atom is at the centre of a porphyrin macrocycle, bound to four nitrogen atoms of the tetrapyrrole macrocycle. The very stable dimethylglyoximate complex of nickel is a synthetic macrocycle derived from dimethylglyoxime.\nHapticity.\nHapticity (represented by Greek letter \"\u03b7\") refers to the number of \"contiguous\" atoms that comprise a donor site and attach to a metal center. The \"\u03b7-notation\" applies when multiple atoms are coordinated. For example, \"\u03b7\"2 is a ligand that coordinates through two contiguous atoms. Butadiene forms both \"\u03b7\"2 and \"\u03b7\"4 complexes depending on the number of carbon atoms that are bonded to the metal.\nLigand motifs.\nTrans-spanning ligands.\nIn coordination chemistry, a trans-spanning ligand is a bidentate ligand that can span coordination positions on opposite sides of a coordination complex. This means that the two attachment points of the ligand are located on opposite sides of the metal center, forming a linear or near-linear arrangement. The trans-spanning ligand bridges the two coordination positions, providing stability to the complex.\nAmbidentate ligand.\nIn contrast to polydentate ligands, ambidentate ligands can attach to the central atom in either one of two (or more) places, but not both. An example is thiocyanate, SCN\u2212, which can attach at either the sulfur atom or the nitrogen atom. Such compounds give rise to linkage isomerism.\nPolydentate and ambidentate are therefore two different types of polyfunctional ligands (ligands with more than one functional group) which can bond to a metal center through different ligand atoms to form various isomers. Polydentate ligands can bond through one atom AND another (or several others) at the same time, whereas ambidentate ligands bond through one atom OR another. Proteins are complex examples of polyfunctional ligands, usually polydentate.\nBridging ligand.\nA bridging ligand links two or more metal centers. Virtually all inorganic solids with simple formulas are coordination polymers, consisting of metal ion centres linked by bridging ligands. This group of materials includes all anhydrous binary metal ion halides and pseudohalides. Bridging ligands can also persist in solution. Polyatomic ligands such as carbonate are ambidentate and thus are found to often bind to two or three metals simultaneously. Atoms that bridge metals are sometimes indicated with the prefix \"\u03bc\". Most inorganic solids are polymers by virtue of the presence of multiple bridging ligands. Bridging ligands, capable of coordinating multiple metal ions, have been attracting considerable interest because of their potential use as building blocks for the fabrication of functional multimetallic assemblies. Ligands such as halides which may not be bridging in solution can become bridging in the solid state due to the energetic favorability of filling the metal's first coordination sphere in the solid state. While in solution, open coordination sites in the coordination sphere of a metal complex are often filled by molecules of coordinating solvents such as water, acetonitrile, or tetrahydrofuran. \nBinucleating ligand.\nBinucleating ligands bind two metal ions. Usually binucleating ligands feature bridging ligands, such as phenoxide, pyrazolate, or pyrazine, as well as other donor groups that bind to only one of the two metal ions.\nMetal\u2013ligand multiple bond.\nSome ligands can bond to a metal center through the same atom but with a different number of lone pairs. The bond order of the metal ligand bond can be in part distinguished through the metal ligand bond angle (M\u2212X\u2212R). This bond angle is often referred to as being linear or bent with further discussion concerning the degree to which the angle is bent. For example, an imido ligand in the ionic form has three lone pairs. One lone pair is used as a sigma X donor, the other two lone pairs are available as L-type pi donors. If both lone pairs are used in pi bonds then the M\u2212N\u2212R geometry is linear. However, if one or both these lone pairs is nonbonding then the M\u2212N\u2212R bond is bent and the extent of the bend speaks to how much pi bonding there may be. \"\u03b7\"1-Nitric oxide can coordinate to a metal center in linear or bent manner.\nSpectator ligand.\nA spectator ligand is a tightly coordinating polydentate ligand that does not participate in chemical reactions but removes active sites on a metal. Spectator ligands influence the reactivity of the metal center to which they are bound.\nBulky ligands.\nBulky ligands are used to control the steric properties of a metal center. They are used for many reasons, both practical and academic. On the practical side, they influence the selectivity of metal catalysts, e.g., in hydroformylation. Of academic interest, bulky ligands stabilize unusual coordination sites, e.g., reactive coligands or low coordination numbers. Often bulky ligands are employed to simulate the steric protection afforded by proteins to metal-containing active sites. Of course excessive steric bulk can prevent the coordination of certain ligands.\nChiral ligands.\nChiral ligands are useful for inducing asymmetry within the coordination sphere. Often the ligand is employed as an optically pure group. In some cases, such as secondary amines, the asymmetry arises upon coordination. Chiral ligands are used in homogeneous catalysis, such as asymmetric hydrogenation.\nHemilabile ligands.\nHemilabile ligands contain at least two electronically different coordinating groups and form complexes where one of these is easily displaced from the metal center while the other remains firmly bound, a behaviour which has been found to increase the reactivity of catalysts when compared to the use of more traditional ligands.\nNon-innocent ligand.\nNon-innocent ligands bond with metals in such a manner that the distribution of electron density between the metal center and ligand is unclear. Describing the bonding of non-innocent ligands often involves writing multiple resonance forms that have partial contributions to the overall state.\nCommon ligands.\nVirtually every molecule and every ion can serve as a ligand for (or \"coordinate to\") metals. Monodentate ligands include virtually all anions and all simple Lewis bases. Thus, the halides and pseudohalides are important anionic ligands whereas ammonia, carbon monoxide, and water are particularly common charge-neutral ligands. Simple organic species are also very common, be they anionic (RO\u2212 and RCO2\u2212) or neutral (R2O, R2S, R3\u2212\"x\"NH\"x\", and R3P). The steric properties of some ligands are evaluated in terms of their cone angles.\nBeyond the classical Lewis bases and anions, all unsaturated molecules are also ligands, utilizing their pi electrons in forming the coordinate bond. Also, metals can bind to the \u03c3 bonds in for example silanes, hydrocarbons, and dihydrogen (see also: Agostic interaction).\nIn complexes of non-innocent ligands, the ligand is bonded to metals via conventional bonds, but the ligand is also redox-active.\nExamples of common ligands (by field strength).\nIn the following table the ligands are sorted by field strength (weak field ligands first):\nThe entries in the table are sorted by field strength, binding through the stated atom (i.e. as a terminal ligand). The 'strength' of the ligand changes when the ligand binds in an alternative binding mode (e.g., when it bridges between metals) or when the conformation of the ligand gets distorted (e.g., a linear ligand that is forced through steric interactions to bind in a nonlinear fashion).\nOther generally encountered ligands (alphabetical).\nIn this table other common ligands are listed in alphabetical order.\nLigand exchange.\nA ligand exchange (also called ligand substitution) is a chemical reaction in which a ligand in a compound is replaced by another. Two general mechanisms are recognized: associative substitution or by dissociative substitution.\nAssociative substitution closely resembles the SN2 mechanism in organic chemistry. A typically smaller ligand can attach to an unsaturated complex followed by loss of another ligand. Typically, the rate of the substitution is first order in entering ligand L and the unsaturated complex.\nDissociative substitution is common for octahedral complexes. This pathway closely resembles the SN1 mechanism in organic chemistry. The identity of the entering ligand does not affect the rate.\nLigand\u2013protein binding database.\nBioLiP is a comprehensive ligand\u2013protein interaction database, with the 3D structure of the ligand\u2013protein interactions taken from the Protein Data Bank. MANORAA is a webserver for analyzing conserved and differential molecular interaction of the ligand in complex with protein structure homologs from the Protein Data Bank. It provides the linkage to protein targets such as its location in the biochemical pathways, SNPs and protein/RNA baseline expression in target organ.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18591", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18591", "title": "Lincos language", "text": "Constructed language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLincos (an abbreviation of the Latin phrase \"lingua cosmica\") is a constructed language first described in 1960 by Dr. Hans Freudenthal in his book \"Lincos: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse, Part 1\". It is a language designed to be understandable by any possible intelligent extraterrestrial life form, for use in interstellar radio transmissions. Freudenthal considered that such a language should be easily understood by beings not acquainted with any Earthling syntax or language. Lincos was designed to be capable of encapsulating \"the whole bulk of our knowledge\".\nConcepts and range.\nThe Lincos \"dictionary\" is intended to be transmitted first before any additional messages. It teaches natural numbers by a series of repeated pulses, separated by pauses. It then teaches &gt;, &lt;, =, +, -, by examples such as . . . . . &gt; . . . (an extended pause is shown around &gt; in this example so as to suggest to an alien that &gt; is a new separate symbol; otherwise, an alien might think that the whole pattern is a new symbol of unknown meaning). In introducing =, unary notation is shown for numbers: . = 1, . . = 2, and so on. This progresses to multiplication, division, variables, and constants, then propositional logic, set theory, and first-order logic. The dictionary tries to introduce questions by leaving mathematical expressions unsolved (e.g., ? x x + 101 = 11).\nThe next section of the Lincos dictionary introduces a word for second, \"Sec\", by playing pulses of various lengths, followed by Sec, and the number of seconds, \"until the receiver may be expected to remark that the numbers... are proportional to the durations\", thus teaching both that Sec is a unit of time, and exactly how long it is. It then introduces means for measuring durations, referring to moments in time, and talking about past and future events.\nFreudenthal's third section is perhaps the most complex, and attempts to convey the concepts and language necessary to describe behavior and conversation between individuals. It uses examples to introduce actors speaking to each other, asking questions, disapproving, quoting other people, knowing and wanting things, promising, and playing. The first steps (having already introduced sets of numbers and questions) are to introduce some new symbols (distinctive patterns of pulses), say that they are NOT numbers, and transmit sequences showing two of these new symbols separated by the word \"Inq\" (inquiry), followed by a question about an equation, then the symbols reversed, followed by the answer (example below). It is thus expected that, after many repetitions, the recipient will determine that these new symbols are entities asking and answering the questions, rather than some other context for the questions.\nFinally, the fourth section describes the concepts and language relating to mass, space, and motion. This last section goes so far as to describe physical features of human beings and of the Solar System.\nA second book by Freudenthal, planned but never written, would have added four more sections to the dictionary: \"Matter\", \"Earth\", \"Life\", and \"Behavior 2\". Other researchers have since extended the language somewhat on their own. One example is CosmicOS. Another is a second-generation \"Lingua Cosmica\" developed by the Dutch-Swedish astronomer and mathematician Alexander Ollongren of Leiden University, using constructive logic.\nFreudenthal's book on Lincos discusses it with many technical words from linguistic and logical theory, usually without defining them, which may have reduced its general interest, though the main chapters can be understood without these technical terms: appellatives, binding, formalization, function, lexicology, logistical, ostensive, quasi-general, semantics, syntax, variables, etc.\nUse.\nFor decades, no actual transmissions were made using Lincos; it remained largely a theoretical exercise, until Canadian astrophysicists Yvan Dutil and St\u00e9phane Dumas, working at the Canadian Defense Research Establishment, created a noise-resistant coding system for messages aimed at communicating with extraterrestrial civilizations. In 1999, the astrophysicists encoded a message in Lincos and used the Yevpatoria RT-70 radio telescope in Ukraine to beam it towards close stars. This is known as Cosmic Call. The experiment was repeated (using other close stars as target) in 2003. The message was a series of pages describing some basic mathematics, physics and astronomy. The Dutil\u2013Dumas experiment was promoted by an organization called \"Encounter 2001\".\nSome researchers have explored the similar issues in communicating with intelligent animals such as cetaceans. Lincos messages (even if sent by pulses of sound rather than radio) are complex and need to reach the most patient, logically oriented members of the target species. A far simpler approach aimed at average members of a species can cover numbers, &gt;, &lt;, =, +, -, and time.\nExamples.\nAn example of Lincos from section 3 of Freudenthal's book, showing one individual asking another individual questions:\nNote the difference between \"good\" and \"bad\" as compared to \"true\" and \"false\"; 10/4 is a true answer to the question, so \"Ver\" (\"true\") would be a valid response, but since it wasn't reduced to lowest terms, it wasn't what Ha wanted and so he responded \"Mal\" (\"bad\") instead. The book separately teaches Ver and Fal for true and false.\nAnother example, showing meta-conversation:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18594", "revid": "1653549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18594", "title": "Lascaux", "text": "Caves in France containing Paleolithic paintings\nLascaux ( , ; , \"Lascaux Cave\") is a network of caves near the village of Montignac, in the department of Dordogne in southwestern France. Over 600 parietal wall paintings cover the interior walls and ceilings of the cave. The paintings represent primarily large animals, typical local contemporary fauna that correspond with the fossil record of the Upper Paleolithic in the area. They are the combined effort of many generations. With continued debate, the age of the paintings is now usually estimated at 17,000 to 22,000 years (early Magdalenian). Because of the outstanding prehistoric art in the cave, Lascaux was inducted into the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1979, as an element of the \"Prehistoric Sites and Decorated Caves of the V\u00e9z\u00e8re Valley\".\nThe original caves have been closed to the public since 1963, as their condition was quickly deteriorating, but there are now a number of replicas.\nHistory since rediscovery.\nOn 12 September 1940, the entrance to the Lascaux Cave was discovered on the La Rochefoucauld-Montbel lands by 18-year-old Marcel Ravidat when his dog investigated a hole left by an uprooted tree (Ravidat would embellish the story in later retellings, saying the dog had fallen into the cave). Ravidat returned to the scene with three friends, Jacques Marsal, Georges Agnel, and Simon Coencas. They entered the cave through a shaft that they believed might be a legendary secret passage to the nearby Lascaux Manor. The teenagers discovered that the cave walls were covered with depictions of animals. Galleries that suggest continuity, context or simply represent a cavern were given names. Those include the \"Hall of the Bulls\", the \"Passageway\", the \"Shaft\", the \"Nave\", the \"Apse\", and the \"Chamber of Felines\". They returned along with the Abb\u00e9 Henri Breuil on 21 September 1940; Breuil would make many sketches of the cave, some of which are used as study material today due to the extreme degradation of many of the paintings. Breuil was accompanied by Denis Peyrony, curator of the National Museum of Prehistory at Les Eyzies, Jean Bouyssonie and Dr Cheynier.\nThe cave complex was opened to the public on 14 July 1948, and initial archaeological investigations began a year later, focusing on the Shaft. By 1955, carbon dioxide, heat, humidity, and other contaminants produced by 1,200 visitors per day had visibly damaged the paintings. As air condition deteriorated, fungi and lichen increasingly infested the walls. Consequently, the cave was closed to the public in 1963, the paintings were restored to their original state, and a monitoring system on a daily basis was introduced.\nReplicas.\nConservation problems in the original cave have made the creation of replicas more important.\nLascaux II.\n\"Lascaux II\", an exact copy of the \"Great Hall of the Bulls\" and the \"Painted Gallery\" was displayed at the Grand Palais in Paris, before being displayed from 1983 in the cave's vicinity (about away from the original cave), a compromise and attempt to present an impression of the paintings' scale and composition for the public without harming the originals. A full range of Lascaux's parietal art is presented a few kilometres from the site at the \"Centre of Prehistoric Art\", Le Parc du Thot, where there are also live animals representing ice-age fauna.\nThe paintings for this site were duplicated with the same type of materials (such as iron oxide, charcoal, and ochre) which were believed to be used 19,000 years ago. Other facsimiles of Lascaux have also been produced over the years.\nLascaux III.\n\"Lascaux III\" is a series of five exact reproductions of the cave art (the Nave and Shaft) that, since 2012, have been exhibited in various countries, allowing knowledge of Lascaux to be shared widely, far away from the original.\nLascaux IV.\n\"Lascaux IV\" is the latest replica, in real scale, of the integrality of the cave of Lascaux. Situated on the same hill overlooking Montignac, and from the original site, it is part of the International Centre for Parietal Art (Centre International de l'Art Pari\u00e9tal) that was inaugurated in December 2016. The museum, built by Sn\u00f8hetta, integrates digital technology, workshops and films into adjacent display rooms.\nGeographic setting.\nIn its sedimentary composition, the V\u00e9z\u00e8re drainage basin covers one fourth of the \"d\u00e9partement\" of the Dordogne, the northernmost region of the Black P\u00e9rigord. Before joining the Dordogne River near Limeuil, the V\u00e9z\u00e8re flows in a south-westerly direction. At its centre point, the river's course is marked by a series of meanders flanked by high limestone cliffs that determine the landscape. Upstream from this steep-sloped relief, near Montignac and in the vicinity of Lascaux, the contours of the land soften considerably; the valley floor widens, and the banks of the river lose their steepness.\nThe Lascaux valley is located some distance from the major concentrations of decorated caves and inhabited sites, most of which were discovered further downstream. In the environs of the village of Eyzies-de-Tayac Sireuil, there are no fewer than 37 decorated caves and shelters, as well as an even greater number of habitation sites from the Upper Paleolithic, located in the open, beneath a sheltering overhang, or at the entrance to one of the area's karst cavities. This is the highest concentration in Europe.\nImages.\nThe cave contains nearly 6,000 figures, which can be grouped into three main categories: animals, human figures, and abstract signs. The paintings contain no images of the surrounding landscape or the vegetation of the time. Most of the major images have been painted onto the walls using red, yellow, and black colours from a complex multiplicity of mineral pigments including iron compounds such as iron oxide (ochre), hematite, and goethite, as well as manganese-containing pigments. Charcoal may also have been used but seemingly to a sparing extent. On some of the cave walls, the colour may have been applied as a suspension of pigment in either animal fat or calcium-rich cave groundwater or clay, making paint, that was swabbed or blotted on, rather than applied by brush. In other areas, the colour was applied by spraying the pigments by blowing the mixture through a tube. Where the rock surface is softer, some designs have been incised into the stone. Many images are too faint to discern, and others have deteriorated entirely.\nOver 900 can be identified as animals, and 605 of these have been precisely identified. Out of these images, there are 364 paintings of equines as well as 90 paintings of stags. Also represented are cattle and bison, each representing 4 to 5% of the images. A smattering of other images includes seven felines, a bird, a bear, a rhinoceros. In the deepest reaches of the cave, at the bottom of a 9m-deep well, the only human figure of the cave was depicted, in a strikingly different style. There are no images of reindeer, even though that was the principal source of food for the artists, and no image of fish either. Geometric images have also been found on the walls.\nThe most famous section of the cave is The Hall of the Bulls where bulls, equines, aurochs, stags, and the only bear in the cave are depicted. The four black bulls, or aurochs, are the dominant figures among the 36 animals represented here. One of the bulls is long, the largest animal discovered so far in cave art. Additionally, the bulls appear to be in motion.\nA painting referred to as \"The Crossed Bison\", found in the chamber called the Nave, demonstrates some of the earliest use of occlusion and transparency in human art. Two bison are depicted tail to tail. One in the foreground and one in the background. The back legs of one bison overlaps with the other to create the illusion of depth. Their rear quarters also overlap and express some transparency due to a curve outlining the rear of the background bison. Occlusion and transparency can be found in other works in Lascaux, but also in earlier works, 30 kya, in Chauvet Cave, and occlusion was fully realized by at least Egyptian era works. The developing artistic skills seen in the caves, along with the use of shadow in classical art, eventually led to the development of perspective during the Renaissance. In the mid-20th century, Pablo Picasso visited Lascaux Caves and famously said upon exiting that \"we have learned nothing in twelve thousand years\".\nParietal representation.\nThe Hall of the Bulls presents the most spectacular composition of Lascaux. Its calcite walls are not suitable for engraving, so it is only decorated with paintings, often of impressive dimensions: some are up to long.\nTwo rows of aurochs face each other, two on one side and three on the other. The two aurochs on the north side are accompanied by about ten horses and a large enigmatic animal, with two straight lines on its forehead that earned it the nickname \"unicorn\". On the south side, three large aurochs are next to three smaller ones, painted red, as well as six small deer and the only bear in the cave, superimposed on the belly of an aurochs and difficult to read.\nThe Axial Diverticulum is also decorated with cattle and horses accompanied by deer and ibex. A drawing of a fleeing horse was brushed with manganese pencil above the ground. Some animals are painted on the ceiling and seem to roll from one wall to the other. These representations, which required the use of scaffolding, are intertwined with many signs (sticks, dots, and rectangular signs).\nThe Passage has a highly degraded decoration, notably through air circulation.\nThe Nave has four groups of figures: the Empreinte panel, the Black Cow panel, the Deer swimming panel, and the Crossed Buffalo panel. These works are accompanied by many enigmatic geometric signs, including coloured checkers that H. Breuil called \"coats of arms\".\nThe Feline Diverticulum owes its name to a group of felines, one of which seems to urinate to mark its territory. Very difficult to access, one can see there engravings of wild animals of a rather naive style. There are also other animals associated with signs, including a representation of a horse seen from the front, exceptional in Paleolithic art where animals are generally represented in profiles or from a \"twisted perspective\".\nThe Apse contains more than a thousand engravings, some of which are superimposed on paintings, corresponding to animals and signs. There is the only reindeer represented in Lascaux.\nThe Well presents the most enigmatic scene of Lascaux: an ithyphallic man with a bird's head seems to lie on the ground, perhaps knocked down by a buffalo gutted by a spear; at his side is represented an elongated object surmounted by a bird, on the left a rhinoceros moves away. Various interpretations of what is represented have been offered. A horse is also present on the opposite wall. Two groups of signs are to be noted in this composition:\nInterpretation.\nThe interpretation of Palaeolithic Art is problematic, as it can be influenced by our own prejudices and beliefs. Some anthropologists and art historians theorize the paintings could be an account of past hunting success, or could represent a mystical ritual in order to improve future hunting endeavors. The latter theory is supported by the overlapping images of one group of animals in the same cave location as another group of animals, suggesting that one area of the cave was more successful for predicting a plentiful hunting excursion.\nApplying the iconographic method of analysis to the Lascaux paintings (studying position, direction and size of the figures; organization of the composition; painting technique; distribution of the color planes; research of the image center), Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Guiot-Houdart attempted to comprehend the symbolic function of the animals, to identify the theme of each image and finally to reconstitute the canvas of the myth illustrated on the rock walls.\nJulien d'Huy and Jean-Lo\u00efc Le Quellec showed that certain angular or barbed signs of Lascaux may be analysed as \"weapon\" or \"wounds\". These signs affect dangerous animals\u00a0\u2013 big cats, aurochs, and bison\u00a0\u2013 more than others and may be explained by a fear of the animation of the image. Another finding supports the hypothesis of half-alive images. At Lascaux, bison, aurochs, and ibex are not represented side by side. Conversely, one can note a bison-horses-lions system and an aurochs-horses-deer-bears system, these animals being frequently associated. Such a distribution may show the relationship between the species pictured and their environmental conditions. Aurochs and bison fight one against the other, and horses and deer are very social with other animals. Bison and lions live in open plains areas; aurochs, deer and bears are associated with forests and marshes; ibex habitat is rocky areas, and horses are highly adaptive for all these areas. The Lascaux paintings' disposition may be explained by a belief in the real life of the pictured species, wherein the artists tried to respect their real environmental conditions.\nLess known is the image area called the \"Abside\" (Apse), a roundish, semi-spherical chamber similar to an apse in a Romanesque basilica. It is approximately and covered on every wall surface (including the ceiling) with thousands of entangled, overlapping, engraved drawings. The ceiling of the Apse, which ranges from as measured from the original floor height, is so completely decorated with such engravings that it indicates that the prehistoric people who executed them first constructed a scaffold to do so.\nAccording to David Lewis-Williams and Jean Clottes who both studied presumably similar art of the San people of Southern Africa, this type of art is spiritual in nature relating to visions experienced during ritualistic trance-dancing. These trance visions are a function of the human imagination and so are independent of geographical location. Nigel Spivey, a professor of classical art and archeology at the University of Cambridge, has further postulated in his series, \"How Art Made the World\", that dot and lattice patterns overlapping the representational images of animals are very similar to hallucinations provoked by sensory-deprivation. He further postulates that the connections between culturally important animals and these hallucinations led to the invention of image-making, or the art of drawing.\nAndr\u00e9 Leroi-Gourhan studied the cave from the 1960s; his observation of the associations of animals and the distribution of species within the cave led him to develop a Structuralist theory that posited the existence of a genuine organization of the graphic space in Palaeolithic sanctuaries. This model is based on a masculine/feminine duality \u2013 which can be particularly observed in the bison/horse and aurochs/horse pairs \u2013 identifiable in both the signs and the animal representations. He also defined an ongoing evolution through four consecutive styles, from the Aurignacian to the Late Magdalenian. Leroi-Gourhan did not publish a detailed analysis of the cave's figures. In his work Pr\u00e9histoire de l'art occidental, published in 1965, he nonetheless put forward an analysis of certain signs and applied his explanatory model to the understanding of other decorated caves.\nThreats.\nThe opening of Lascaux Cave after World War II changed the cave environment. The exhalations of 1,200 visitors per day, presence of light, and changes in air circulation have created a number of problems. Lichens and crystals began to appear on the walls in the late 1950s, leading to closure of the caves in 1963. This led to restriction of access to the real caves to a few visitors every week, and the creation of a replica cave for visitors to Lascaux. In 2001, the authorities in charge of Lascaux changed the air conditioning system which resulted in regulation of the temperature and humidity. When the system had been established, an infestation of \"Fusarium solani\", a white mold, began spreading rapidly across the cave ceiling and walls. The mold is considered to have been present in the cave soil and exposed by the work of tradesmen, leading to the spread of the fungus which was treated with quicklime. In 2007, a new fungus, which has created grey and black blemishes, began spreading in the real cave.\nAs of 2008, the cave contained black mold. In January 2008, authorities closed the cave for three months, even to scientists and preservationists. A single individual was allowed to enter the cave for twenty minutes once a week to monitor climatic conditions. Now only a few scientific experts are allowed to work inside the cave and just for a few days a month, but the efforts to remove the mold have taken a toll, leaving dark patches and damaging the pigments on the walls. In 2009 the mold problem was pronounced stable. In 2011 the fungus seemed to be in retreat after the introduction of an additional, even stricter conservation program. Two research programs have been instigated at the CIAP concerning how to best treat the problem, and the cave also now possesses a climatisation system designed to reduce the introduction of bacteria.\nOrganized through the initiative of the French Ministry of Culture, an international symposium titled \"Lascaux and Preservation Issues in Subterranean Environments\" was held in Paris on 26 and 27 February 2009, under the chairmanship of Jean Clottes. It brought together nearly three hundred participants from seventeen countries with the goal of confronting research and interventions conducted in Lascaux Cave since 2001 with the experiences gained in other countries in the domain of preservation in subterranean environments. The proceedings of this symposium were published in 2011. Seventy-four specialists in fields as varied as biology, biochemistry, botany, hydrology, climatology, geology, fluid mechanics, archaeology, anthropology, restoration and conservation, from numerous countries (France, United States, Portugal, Spain, Japan, and others) contributed to this publication.\nIn May 2018 \"Ochroconis lascauxensis\", a species of fungus of the Ascomycota phylum, was officially described and named after the place of its first emergence and isolation, the Lascaux cave. This followed on from the discovery of another closely related species \"Ochroconis anomala\", first observed inside the cave in 2000. The following year black spots began to appear among the cave paintings. No official announcement on the effect or progress of attempted treatments has ever been made.\nThe problem is ongoing, as are efforts to control the microbial and fungal growths in the cave. The fungal infection crises have led to the establishment of an International Scientific Committee for Lascaux and to rethinking how, and how much, human access should be permitted in caves containing prehistoric art.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18595", "revid": "45364314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18595", "title": "Lex Luthor", "text": "DC Comics supervillain\nAlexander Joseph \"Lex\" Luthor () is a supervillain appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics. Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster, the character first appeared in \"Action Comics\" #23 (April 1940). He has since endured as the archenemy of Superman. While Superman embodies hope and selflessness, Luthor symbolizes unrestrained ambition and humanity\u2019s belief in the superiority of intellect over superhuman power.\nUnlike many supervillains, Luthor is an ordinary human with no superpowers or secret identity. His true strength lies in his unparalleled intelligence, vast wealth, and influence over politics, science, and technology. A genius with an extraordinary aptitude for business and manipulation, he is also proud, calculating, pragmatic, and vengeful\u2014driven by an insatiable thirst for control and devoid of ethical principles. Luthor does not envy superheroes for their abilities but rather for the adoration they receive. He believes that the admiration society bestows upon them is recognition that rightfully belongs to him. Convinced that he alone possesses the intellect and capability to lead humanity, he justifies his ambition with the belief that only he is fit to guide the world. Luthor sees Superman as a threat, seeking to eliminate him not only out of personal rivalry but also because he believes the existence of an all-powerful being fosters dependence, preventing humanity from achieving its full potential.\nThough his main obsession is Superman, given his high-profile status as a supervillain, Luthor has also come into conflict with Batman and other heroes in the DC Universe. He frequently leads teams of villains, such as the Legion of Doom. While he prefers intelligence and strategy as his primary weapons, he occasionally dons his mechanized \"warsuit\", an advanced armored exoskeleton that grants him enhanced strength, flight capabilities, high-tech weaponry, and other tactical advantages in direct combat.\nThroughout different comic eras, Luthor has embodied various forms of villainy. In his early appearances, he was depicted as a narcissistic and selfish mad scientist. Since the mid-1980s, however, he has more commonly been portrayed as a ruthless corporate tycoon, obsessed with power and controlling LexCorp (or LuthorCorp).\nIn 2009, \"IGN\" ranked him #4 on its list of the \"100 Greatest Comic Book Villains of All Time\", surpassed only by the Joker, Magneto, and Doctor Doom. \"Wizard\" magazine also placed him at #8 in its ranking of the \"100 Greatest Villains of All Time\". The character has been adapted into various other forms of media, including television, film, animation, and video games. In film, Luthor has been played by Lyle Talbot in \"Atom Man vs. Superman\" (1950), Gene Hackman in the 1978\u20131987 \"Superman\" film series, Kevin Spacey in \"Superman Returns\" (2006), Jesse Eisenberg in the DC Extended Universe (2016\u20132017), and Nicholas Hoult in the DC Universe (2025\u2013present).\nPublication history.\nCreation and development.\nFor the first two decades of his existence, starting with his first story appearance in \"Action Comics\" #23 (April 1940), Luthor is depicted as a diabolical genius and referred to only as \"Luthor\", with no clear indications to whether this is his given name, his surname, or a codename. He resides in a flying city suspended by a dirigible and plots to provoke a war between two European nations. Lois Lane and Clark Kent investigate, which results in Lois being kidnapped. Luthor battles Superman with a green ray but he is ultimately defeated, and Lois is rescued. Superman destroys Luthor's dirigible with him still on it, and concludes that Luthor is dead. Stories ending with Luthor's apparent death become common in his earliest appearances, with him turning up alive later on. This contrasted with Superman's previous arch-nemesis, the Ultra-Humanite, who makes a clean getaway at the end of most of his stories.\nLuthor returns in \"Superman\" #4 and steals a weapon from the U.S. Army capable of causing earthquakes. Superman battles and defeats Luthor, then destroys the earthquake device. The scientist who made the device commits suicide to prevent its reinvention. In a story in the same issue, Luthor creates a city on the sunken lost continent of Pacifo and populates it with recreated prehistoric monsters he plans to unleash upon the world. Superman thwarts his plans and Luthor is seemingly killed by the dinosaurs he created. Luthor returns in \"Superman\" #5 to place hypnotic incense in the offices of leading financiers so he can profit from a nationwide economic depression. The story ends with Superman smashing Luthor's plane in mid-flight, killing him.\nIn these early stories, Luthor's schemes are centered around financial gain or megalomaniacal ambitions; unlike most later incarnations, he demonstrates no strong animosity toward Superman beyond inevitable resentment of the hero's constant interference with his plans. Luthor's obsessive hatred of Superman came later in the character's development.\nIn Luthor's earliest appearances, he is a middle-aged man with a full head of red hair. Less than a year later however, an artistic mistake resulted in Luthor being depicted as completely bald, first in a newspaper strip, then in \"Superman\" #10 (May 1941), in which he is also depicted as significantly heavier, with visible jowls. The original error is attributed to Leo Nowak, a studio artist who illustrated for the \"Superman\" dailies during this period. Comics historians have noticed that this new rendition of Luthor closely resembles a stockier, bald henchman of Luthor who appears in \"Superman\" #4 (Spring 1940). Because of this, one hypothesis is that Nowak mistook Luthor for this henchman. The character's abrupt hair loss has been made reference to several times over the course of his history. In 1962, writer Jerry Siegel altered Luthor's backstory to both allow adventures in which he and Superman battled each other when they were teenagers (whereas \"Action Comics\" #23 depicts them meeting for the first time as adults) and incorporate his hair loss into his origin.\nDuring World War II, the War Department asked for dailies of the \"Superman\" comic strip to be pulled. The strips in question were created in April 1945 and depicted Luthor bombarding Superman with radiation from a cyclotron. This violated wartime voluntary censorship guidelines meant to help conceal the Manhattan Project.\nSilver Age Lex Luthor.\nIn 1956, DC Comics reimagined the Flash with a new secret identity, costume and origin. This led to the new Silver Age of Comics and the first DC Comics reboot, with characters across the board being reimagined or having their histories and nature redefined. The earlier Golden Age stories of Superman and Batman were later said to have taken place on Earth-Two, a parallel universe that was part of the larger DC Multiverse.\nThe Silver Age version of Luthor was introduced in \"Adventure Comics\" #271 (April 1960), now given the first name \"Lex\" (later said to be short for Alexis, eventually retconned as Alexander) and an origin story. Originally hero-worshiping Superboy, teenage Lex Luthor of Smallville is determined to prove he is Earth's greatest scientist by creating artificial life. His recklessness and inexperience causes a fire in his lab and he calls on Superboy to save him. The Boy of Steel puts out the fire but, in the process, accidentally destroys the artificial life form and the years of research notes that led to its creation, while fumes from the chemical fire cause Luthor's hair to fall out. Unwilling to hold himself responsible for the lab fire and the destruction of his own life's work, Luthor decides that Superboy was jealous of his intellect and caused the fire himself. Believing he was betrayed by his hero and friend, Lex swears revenge. His first attempts at that are grandiose scientific and engineering projects around Smallville to steal Superboy's thunder. When these attempts, for which, unknown to Luthor, Superboy is supportive as consolation that Lex is at least being constructive in his vendetta, each go disastrously awry and force Superboy to intervene while earning the citizenry's scorn, Lex's hate for Superboy only grows in rationalization of his failures.\nThis revised origin makes Luthor's fight with Superman a personal one and suggests that if events had unfolded differently, Luthor might have grown to be a more noble person. Luthor's ego preventing him from personal growth and the tragedy that he and Clark could have been a force for good together are played up in various stories throughout the 1970s and 1980s, particularly in Elliot S. Maggin's novels \"\" and \"Miracle Monday\".\nThe Golden Age version of Luthor appears again as a villain still alive and well on Earth-Two. To distinguish him from the modern-day Lex Luthor, the original incarnation is shown as having kept his red hair and is retroactively given the first name Alexei. In \"DC Comics Presents\" Annual #1 (1982), Alexei Luthor of Earth-Two and Lex Luthor of Earth-One team up. It is shown that Alexei is arguably colder and more villainous, perfectly willing to destroy all of Earth in order to prove his superiority, whereas Lex hesitates to do so because he had no desire to rule a lifeless world and does not want his sister to die.\nYears later, Lex Luthor and the villain Brainiac recruit an army of super-villains during \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", including Alexei Luthor from Earth-Two. When Alexei argues that the army does not need two Luthors, Brainiac agrees and executes him.\nPost-\"Crisis\" reboot.\nFollowing \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" (1985\u20131986), DC rebooted its universe yet again, creating the \"Post-\"Crisis\"\" reality. For the 1986 limited series \"The Man of Steel\", Marv Wolfman and John Byrne redesigned Lex Luthor from scratch, intending to make him a villain that the 1980s would recognize: an evil corporate executive. Wolfman, a writer on \"Action Comics\", came up with the idea of Luthor being a wealthy businessman rather than a brilliant scientist. He recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I never believed the original Luthor. Every story would begin with him breaking out of prison, finding some giant robot in an old lab he hid somewhere, and then he'd be defeated. My view was if he could afford all those labs and giant robots he wouldn't need to rob banks. I also thought later that Luthor should not have super powers. Every other villain had super powers. Luthor's power was his mind. He needed to be smarter than Superman. Superman's powers had to be useless against him because they couldn't physically fight each other and Superman was simply not as smart as Luthor.\nByrne based this new depiction of Luthor on the businessmen Donald Trump, Ted Turner, and Howard Hughes. Initially brutish and overweight, the character later evolved into a sleeker, more athletic version of his old self. Luthor is no longer recounted as having lost his hair in a chemical fire; rather, his hairline is receding naturally over time.\nAs originally presented in the post-\"Crisis\" version of the DC Comics Universe, Lex Luthor is a product of child abuse and early poverty. Born in the Suicide Slum district of Metropolis, he is instilled with a desire to become a self-made man of great power and influence. As a teenager, he takes out a large life insurance policy on his parents without their knowledge, then sabotages their car's brakes, causing their deaths. Upon graduating from MIT, Luthor founds his own business, LexCorp, which grows to dominate much of Metropolis.\nLuthor does not fully appear in \"The Man of Steel\" mini-series until the fourth issue, which takes place over a year after Superman's arrival in Metropolis. Terrorists seize Luthor's yacht, forcing Superman to intervene. Satisfied at the hero's performance, Luthor attempts to hire him, admitting he knew about the incoming attack and allowed it to occur so he could see how Superman responded (assuming that he would arrive in time). Enraged, the Mayor deputizes Superman to arrest Luthor for reckless endangerment. Although Luthor is released from jail quickly and has the charges dropped, the humiliation of being publicly arrested and processed, coupled with indignation that Superman refused to work for him, results in the villain pledging to destroy Superman simply to prove his power.\nDespite general acceptance of Byrne's characterization, which led to its influence in media adaptations, DC Comics writers began bringing back his quality of being a scientific genius in the 1990s in stories such as \"The Final Night\". By 2000, it was said that Luthor's genuine accomplishments in several scientific fields is what helped create LexCorp and make it so successful so quickly (in early post-\"Crisis\" stories, Byrne suggested that Luthor was recognized as a brilliant inventor and great scientific mind, but had largely withdrawn from his laboratory in favor of the boardroom). Regarding the character being a corrupt billionaire rather than a mad scientist, author Neil Gaiman commented: \"It's a pity Lex Luthor has become a multinationalist; I liked him better as a bald scientist. He was in prison, but they couldn't put his mind in prison. Now he's just a skinny Kingpin.\"\nLuthor's romantic aspirations toward Lois Lane, established early on in the series, become a focal point of the stories immediately following it. He makes repeated attempts to court her during \"The Man of Steel\", though Lois plainly does not return his feelings.\nIn the \"Superman Adventures\" comic line based on the TV series of the same name, Luthor's backstory is identical to that of the post-\"Crisis\" origin with slight changes. Luthor originates in Suicide Slum, his intelligence outshining other children, fueling his ambition to have all of Metropolis look up to him one day. Luthor's baldness is never explained, save for a brief depiction of him with blond hair in childhood; it is assumed the hair loss was natural. Luthor's parents die during his teenage years. However, their deaths are accidental. Lex uses the insurance to pay for his tuition to MIT and then founds LexCorp. His hatred of Superman is explained as the citizens of Metropolis have admired Superman more than him.\nModern depictions.\n', a limited series written by Mark Waid in 2004, offers an alternate look at Luthor's history, including his youth in Smallville, and his first encounter with Superman. The story has similarities to the 2001 television series \"Smallville\", which follows Clark Kent's life as a teenager and into early adulthood. One plot element shared by the comic and the show is the problematic relationship between Lex and his father Lionel. Along with this, \"Birthright\" restores the Silver Age concept of Luthor befriending Clark Kent as a young man. The two find a kinship in both feeling like outsiders and sharing a wish to explore outer space and discover alien life, despite one resenting humanity and the other hoping to understand and be accepted by it. Lex discovers kryptonite samples in Smallville and uses them as a power source for a machine he hopes will pierce space and time so he can communicate with Krypton. When Clark falls ill approaching the machine, Lex mistakes his reaction as doubt in the young scientist's ability and sanity. Feeling betrayed, Lex continues the experiment but an explosion erupts, the radiation blast causing his hair to fall out. Luthor leaves Metropolis and years later his scientific work, largely based on his ideas about alien life, results in a fortune he uses to create LexCorp. When Superman appears, Lex is angry that the powerful alien, the kind of companion he'd often hoped for, looks on him with disapproval and openly disrespects him in front of the media. For this and his interference with Luthor's criminal operations, the scientist businessman decides to humiliate and destroy the alien.\nWaid's original intention was to jettison the notion of Lex Luthor being an evil businessman, restoring his status as a mad scientist. He ultimately conceded, however, that the CEO Luthor would be easier for readers to recognize. In \"Birthright\", Luthor remains a wealthy corporate magnate; in contrast to Byrne's characterization, however, LexCorp is founded upon Luthor's study of extraterrestrial life, thereby providing a link between him and Superman. In the retrospective section of the \"Superman: Birthright\" trade paperback, Waid explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Despite my own personal prejudices, I say we leave Lex the criminal businessman he's been for the past 17 years. The \"\" producers liked it, the guys liked it ... so clearly, it works on some level. My concern is that, at least in my eyes, the fact that Luthor's allowed to operate uncontested for \"years\" makes Superman look ineffectual.\n\"Birthright\" was initially intended to establish a new origin for Superman and Luthor. Immediately, the Superman comics and the series Superman/Batman made references to the canonicity of the new origin series. But after \"Infinite Crisis\" ended in 2006, new stories discredited parts of it and it was officially replaced by the 2009\u20132010 series '.\"' \"Superman: Secret Origin\" revised Lex's backstory so that he now again had a sister Lena. While he knew Clark as a teenager in Smallville, he rejected the other boy's attempts to form a friendship. Resentful toward his alcoholic and abusive father, Lex arranges his parents to die in a car accident and uses the insurance money to leave Smallville and start a better life. After studying under the villains Ra's al Ghul and Darkseid, he founds LexCorp and uses his PR, resources, and media control to set himself up as a near-savior in Metropolis. The \"Daily Planet\" opposes Luthor and he retaliates in ways that leave the newspaper almost bankrupt. Superman's arrival challenges Luthor's image and brings renewed interest to the \"Planet\" when he does exclusive interviews with their staff. Clark Kent, Jimmy Olsen, and Lois Lane work together to oppose Luthor's power and Superman tells the public they should strive to achieve great things themselves and not wait for others to be their saviors. Angry at Superman's interference and blaming him for losing the love of the public, Luthor swears vengeance.\nFollowing changes to continuity in 2016's \"DC Rebirth\", the history from \"Superman: Secret Origin\" is still largely intact, though it has also been revealed that for a time Lionel Luthor worked as a scientist for Vandal Savage and that this led to a brief friendship between Lex and J'onn J'onzz, the Martian Manhunter, when both were children.\nFictional character biography.\nWhether he is a mad scientist, corrupt businessman, or both, Luthor's ego is a defining trait in all his incarnations; he believes he is entitled to both popularity and power. While each incarnation initially wants the adoration of others and control over either Smallville or Metropolis, the goal eventually rises to control over Earth and possibly universal domination. Luthor's other defining trait is his obsession to destroy Superman and humiliate the alien hero, either by displaying his own superiority by achieving victory without the benefit of superpowers or to prove Superman is motivated by selfish desire rather than altruism. Many times, Luthor has claimed he could create a better way of life for the entire human race if not for Superman's interference with his work; he has even argued that the Man of Tomorrow's presence not only invites danger, it actually \"encourages\" human society not to strive for greatness because a powerful alien is around to protect them and solve problems. During the \"Blackest Night\" crossover, Wonder Woman restrains Luthor with her magic lasso and under its spell of truth he confesses he secretly wants to be Superman, revealing that beneath all his blustering, Luthor covets Superman's powers for himself. When Superman was out of sight for a year, Luthor used the time to create the \"Everyman\" project intending to create new superheroes to replace the Kryptonian, then later attacks Metropolis with a long-buried Kryptonian warship. Returning to action, Superman points out that Luthor had a year to prove his old argument that he could help others and improve Earth if Superman didn't interfere with his life, but instead of curing disease or making technological breakthroughs, all he did was focus on increasing his power and finding \"a big destructive machine so [he] could break things.\" In the storyline \"The Black Ring\", Luthor is endowed with cosmic powers that could enable him to bring peace and bliss to the entire universe and therefore achieve his dream of being more respected than Superman, but he ultimately chooses to renounce his new powers when he realizes that his greatest enemy would never suffer again if he used them.\nAt times, Lex has been shown evidence that Clark Kent is Superman and almost always he denies this possibility, unable to imagine a man of such power spending half his time pretending to be average since in his mind, such a possibility would be too humiliating to bear. In stories appearing in \"JLA\" and \"52\" by Grant Morrison, Luthor cannot bring himself to believe Superman is truly altruistic and deeply cares about a planet that is not his native world, concluding the hero's good deeds are often actually passive-aggressive ways of flaunting his power and popularity to Lex. When the hero joins forces with others to form a new, powerful version of the Justice League of America, Lex decides this is Superman's direct challenge to his own power, and establishes an \"Injustice League\" composed of various supervillains to rival them.\nSilver Age.\nWhile the Golden Age Luthor (later named Alexei Luthor) is simply an amoral and brilliant man driven by a simple desire for power, the Silver Age incarnation was given a more developed personality and backstory. Overall, The Silver Age incarnation was more detailed. Teenage Lex Luthor is an aspiring scientist who resides in Smallville and greatly admires its local hero Superboy. After Lex saves him from kryptonite, Superboy builds him a private laboratory in gratitude. After thousands of experiments, Luthor creates an artificial living protoplasm. Overjoyed, he accidentally causes a chemical fire in the lab. Superboy puts out the fire, inadvertently spilling other chemicals, destroying his research. The chemical fumes also cause Lex's hair to completely fall out. Enraged he has lost years of research but unwilling to accept responsibility for the fire, Luthor concludes Superboy intentionally sabotaged his work and swears revenge.\nLuthor creates grandiose engineering projects to prove his superiority over the superhero, but each one fails and causes problems that Superboy then solves. Luthor then makes his first attempt to murder Superman and fails. Instead of bringing him to the authorities, Superboy declares they are even now and expresses hope Lex will \"straighten out\" and use his intelligence to help humanity rather than try to prove his superiority or waste time seeking power and vengeance.\n\"Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane\" #23 (1961) reveals the Silver Age Lex Luthor parents are Jules and Arlene and that he has a younger sister Lena. When Lex becomes a criminal, the family moves away from Smallville and changes its name to Thorul (an anagram) to start a new life free of him. Lena Thorul is a toddler at the time and grows up not remembering her real last name, while her parents say her older brother died in a mountain climbing accident. Lex later watches over the adult Lena, making sure she does not discover her connection to one of Earth's greatest villains.\nAs an adult, Lex Luthor's driving ambitions are to kill Superman and rule Earth, a stepping stone to dominating the universe, believing a man of his intellect deserves such power. On several occasions he joins forces with Superman's enemy Brainiac (though the two often betray each other as well). Lex is repeatedly imprisoned, but his genius allows him to routinely escape. He also makes it a point to be out of prison on the birthday of Albert Einstein, regarding it as a holiday. A non-canonical \"imaginary story\" from 1961 entitled \"The Death of Superman\" has Luthor finally succeed in killing Superman after pretending to reform and befriend him.\nOn a distant arid planet orbiting a red star, Luthor challenges Superman to a fight since Kryptonians lose power when exposed to red sun radiation. Befriending the planet's inhabitants, Luthor aids them in rediscovering lost technology that restores the water supply and helps the society rebuild. As a result, Luthor becomes a hero in the eyes of the planet, whereas his enemy Superman is detested as a villain. The people rename the planet Lexor and it becomes a regular home base and retreat for Luthor in-between his efforts to fight Superman and take over Earth. He later meets a local woman named Ardora (first called \"Tharla\" but renamed \"Ardora\" in later stories as well as the reprint of her first appearance). The two eventually fall in love and marry.\nBronze Age.\nDeciding to retire permanently, Luthor returns to Lexor and learns he has fathered a son by Ardora, Lex Luthor Jr. He spends the next several weeks with his new family before discovering Lexor suffers from the same planetary instability that destroyed Krypton. While creating a \"Neutrarod\" tower to stabilize the planetary core, Luthor's pathological hatred for Superman resurfaces and he reflects on feeling unsatisfied in life without their conflict. The villain then unearths an ancient underground laboratory of great technology, a relic from Lexor's lost age. After one of Luthor's still-active satellites threatens the people of Earth, he concludes Superman will soon come to Lexor to take him back to Earth authorities. With the underground lab's resources, he spends weeks creating a \"warsuit\" \u2014 highly destructive, flight-capable power armor \u2014 to finally match the Kryptonian in physical combat and counter his powers. To test the suit, Luthor performs several acts of destruction on Lexor, feigning ignorance when he hears about the \"mystery marauder\" and telling Ardora he has no knowledge of the armored man.\nWhen Superman arrives, Luthor dons his warsuit and attacks, now obsessed with the need to best the hero in combat and prove his superiority. The people of Lexor are shocked to realize he is the mystery marauder and does not care about the harm he has caused them. During the battle, Luthor releases an energy salvo that accidentally overloads the Neutrarod, resulting in the complete destruction of the planet Lexor and all its inhabitants, including Ardora and Lex Jr.. Similar to how he reacted after the destruction of his lab in Smallville, Lex is unable to process his grief and accept his responsibility for Lexor's destruction. He psychologically blocks part of his own memory to convince himself Superman is at fault, renewing his need for vengeance. In his subsequent stories, he regularly uses the Lexorian warsuit. The warsuit was designed by George P\u00e9rez as part of the Super Powers toyline in the early 1980s before being introduced into the comics in 1983. The suit vanished in 1986 after \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" rebooted DC Comics continuity, but was reintroduced in 2004, now said to be built with a combination of Earth and alien technology (including tech from the other-dimensional world Apokolips) and armed with different forms of kryptonite in the gauntlet.\nLex Luthor of Earth-One teams up with Alexei Luthor of Earth-Two. It is shown that Alexei is arguably colder and more villainous, perfectly willing to destroy all of Earth in order to prove his superiority, whereas Lex hesitates to do so because he had no desire to rule a lifeless world and does not want his sister to die. They even extend their alliance to Ultraman when Earth-Three's Lex Luthor is a good guy. All three villains were defeated by Superman of Earth-One, Superman of Earth-Two, and Lex Luthor of Earth-Three.\nDuring the 12-issue limited series \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\", Luthor allies himself with fellow Superman foe Brainiac to recruit an army of supervillains spanning the DC Multiverse. Alexei Luthor is present and complains this army does not need two Luthors; Brainiac kills Alexei in response. At the conclusion of the series, reality is altered so that each of the different universes converge into one. Luthor is subsequently returned to prison with all his memories of the Crisis forgotten.\nThis incarnation of Lex Luthor met his end in the non-canonical two-part story \"Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?\" that closed out the pre-\"Crisis\" Superman continuity of the Silver and Bronze Age. Luthor finds Brainiac's head, hoping to revive the villain for a new team-up. Instead, Brainiac takes control of Luthor's body, forcing him to be a host as he attempts to destroy Superman. Luthor later begs a superpowered Lana Lang to kill him, who does so. Brainiac retains control of the body for a short period of time before rigor mortis sets in, then abandons it, running out of power shortly afterward.\nPost-\"Crisis\".\nAs part of the continuity changes which followed \"The Man of Steel\" and \"Superman: Secret Origin\", Alexander \"Lex\" Joseph Luthor is a corrupt businessman profiting from many hidden criminal operations. This Luthor grew up a poor child alongside Perry White, later causing his parents' death via a car accident so he can inherit their life insurance and create a better life for himself, creating LexCorp. He marries and divorces several times and desires a romance with Lois Lane. When Superman appears, Luthor takes advantage of a terrorist attack to see the hero in action and then attempts to make him an employee. Superman, acting as a special deputy of Metropolis, arrests him for endangering people by not warning authorities of the impending terrorist attack. Humiliated, Luthor swears revenge, repeatedly letting Superman know about his criminal schemes but never leaving him enough evidence to bring the man to justice again. Luthor becomes obsessed with Superman and gathers all information on him and his associates, leading a computer analysis to conclude Clark Kent and Superman are the same person. Unable to believe someone as powerful as Superman regularly hides his powers and pretends to be average, as that is something he would never do himself, Luthor dismisses the computer's findings and concludes both the machine and its programmer are at fault.\nAs a nod to the previous continuity, Luthor has his lab create high-tech armor that resembles the Lexorian warsuit. Rather than act directly, he has an employee don the armor and attack Superman for him. The man is defeated and cannot testify against Luthor because the armor's neural control unit destroys his mind. Along with this, Luthor participates in the creation of two \"Superman\" villains, Parasite (indirectly) and Bizarro (a failed attempt by Luthor's scientists to clone Superman).\nWhen Superman fights the cyborg Metallo, Luthor intervenes. In \"Superman\" (vol. 2) #2, discovering Metallo is powered by a 'heart' of kryptonite that can hurt and potentially kill Superman, Luthor steals it and a creates a kryptonite ring for himself. He wears the radioactive ore around his finger as a symbol that he is untouchable, causing the Man of Tomorrow pain and weakness whenever he approaches. Not realizing humans can be affected by severe or long-term meteoric radiation exposure, Luthor eventually suffers from Kryptonite poisoning. He had his right hand amputated to prevent the cancer's spread, and not long afterwards, said kryptonite ring (which he kept in cold storage prior to the surgery) would be stolen. Eventually coming into the possession of Superman, who in turn entrusts it to Batman, tasking the Dark Knight to use it if Superman ever becomes corrupt or falls under the control of another. But removing the tainted limb was a mere half measure, as his affliction had already metastasized rendering Lex's condition terminal.\nLuthor fakes his death in a plane crash in the Andes and secretly has his brain transferred to a cloned body, one younger, taller, with full hair, and more physically fit. With aid from trusted assistants, the now physically 21-year-old Luthor presents himself to the world as his own hitherto unknown, illegitimate son and heir from Australia, Lex Luthor II, who only wishes to do good and cannot be judged by the actions of his father. He quickly manipulates and recruits the new Supergirl (a protoplasmic being), who falls in love with him due to his resemblance to her lost love and creator, the Luthor of a parallel Earth. When Superman is seemingly killed by the living weapon Doomsday, the genetic research facility Project Cadmus creates a seeming clone of the hero called Superboy. As Earth science cannot perfectly replicate Kryptonian DNA, Superboy is a purely human clone with genetic modifications that mimic Superman's powers.\nLuthor's clone body eventually begins to deteriorate, causing him to lose his hair and age at an accelerated rate, a side-effect of a disease affecting all clones. Lois Lane discovers proof of Luthor's clone harvesting and false identity and exposes him with help from Superman. Desperate to evade arrest, Luthor activates technology left on Earth by Brainiac, destroying large sections of Metropolis in the process. In the end, Luthor becomes a prisoner in his own body, unable to move or even blink, internally swearing vengeance on Superman. During the crossover \"Underworld Unleashed\", the demon-lord Neron offers Luthor full health and vitality in exchange for services and his soul. Not believing in the existence of souls, Lex agrees and is restored, regaining the physical fitness of his Lex II body but again lacking head and facial hair, and is physically approximately in his true age. His soul is later restored after Neron is defeated by Captain Marvel and the Trickster. Returning to Metropolis, Luthor submits to a trial. He claims all his crimes were committed by a violent clone created by renegade scientists from Project Cadmus who secretly held the true Luthor hostage. Luthor is acquitted of all charges. He later arranges to reacquire his old kryptonite ring.\nWhen Superman and others form a new, powerful version of the Justice League of America, Lex decides this is Superman's direct challenge to his own power, so he creates a new Injustice Gang in response. Along with his new teammates, Lex acquires a powerful artifact known as the Worlogog, which can warp space and time. The Injustice Gang kills several people while attacking the League then lures the heroes into a trap, but then is defeated. The Joker gains control of the Worlogog, but is then telepathically attacked, becoming temporarily sane and remorseful. Before the killer's mind reverts, Luthor has Joker use the Worlogog to revise history so that those killed no longer died. With the deaths removed and little physical evidence linking him to any wrongdoing, Luthor is free to go. While Batman concludes Luthor simply used Joker to avoid murder charges, Superman believes it is a sign Luthor does not truly desire the deaths of innocents and still has the potential to be a good man.\nLuthor marries Contessa Erica Alexanda Del Portenza, a near-immortal and formidable woman with her own agenda. After the birth of their daughter Lena, Luthor attempts to raise the girl without her interference. After several clashes, Luthor has Contessa seemingly killed by a missile barrage. Later on, the time-traveling villain Brainiac 13 infuses Metropolis with technology from the future while his ancestor Brainiac, in need of a new physical vessel, mentally inhabits young Lena's body. Brainiac 13 offers Luthor control of the technology if Luthor turns over Brainiac and hands over his daughter. He later tells Superman that he has a \"kingdom\" now as a result of his deal, adding \"As for my princess... I can always make another.\"\nPresident of the United States.\nDeciding to turn to politics, Luthor becomes President of the United States, winning the election on a platform of promoting technological progress. His first action as president is to take a proposed moratorium on fossil-based fuels to U.S. Congress. On the night of the election, Batman threatens that Luthor can keep the kryptonite ring or the White House but not both. Later on, Superman, Batman and Lois Lane seemingly try to steal the ring only to be thwarted. In actuality, they manipulated Luthor into retrieving a fake while Batman keeps the actual ring. Superman, upon learning that Lex Luthor was about to be elected president, flew off in a fit of rage and split one of Saturn's small moons in half with one fly through.\nBefore he takes office in the White House, Luthor cuts ties with his company LexCorp, turning over leadership to Talia al Ghul. Luthor's popularity is assisted by the unpopularity of the previous administration's mishandling of the Gotham City earthquake crisis during the ' storyline, and his own seemingly heroic efforts to rebuild Gotham before it rejoins the United States. Batman learns Luthor attempted to take control of Gotham by forging deeds for its lands in his own name. This results in Bruce Wayne severing all commercial ties between the U.S. government and his company, Wayne Enterprises. In response to Wayne Enterprises severing ties with his government, Luthor arranges the murder of Wayne's lover, Vesper Fairchild, and frames Wayne for the murder (as seen in '), the plan being more successful than Luthor anticipated when his chosen assassin of David Cain realizes Wayne's identity as Batman and sets up a complex frame.\nSoon after Luthor discovers evidence that leads him to conclude Clark Kent is Superman, Imperiex destroys Topeka, Kansas. Luthor is warned of the impending attack beforehand but alerts no one so Earth can enter a great war and he can prove his leadership to the world. Luthor coordinates the U.S. Army, Earth's superheroes, and a number of untrustworthy alien forces to battle the main villain of the story arc. Although Lex Luthor is able to devise a plan to destroy Imperiex's body, the plan is hijacked by Brainiac 13, requiring Superman to propose a new plan where Darkseid and Luthor coordinate their efforts to defeat Imperiex by sending him back in time. Following the battle, Superman retrieves Lena and returns her to Lex, advising Luthor to stop trying to be a god and just be a man. Soon afterward, Superman confronts Manchester Black. Realizing Superman is a true hero and therefore true heroism is possible, Black repents for his actions against Superman by removing Luthor's knowledge of Superman's secret identity.\nRevised backstory and removal from office.\nFollowing the publication of \"\" in 2003\u20132004, Luthor's history is altered (and the new canon is quickly referenced in both Superman comics and the series \"Superman/Batman\" that begins in 2004). In the new history, Luthor is only a few years older than Clark Kent and his family moves to Smallville when he is a teenager. Possibly abused by his father Lionel, and alienated from others by his intelligence and his ignorance of certain social cues and behaviors (he does not understand why gifts are given on birthdays without a promise of payment of some kind), Lex only finds friendship with Clark, impressed by the young man's knowledge though also finding him naive. Luthor discovers kryptonite meteors in Smallville and uses the radioactive mineral as a power source for his experiments. When Clark sees the machine and feels ill from proximity to kryptonite, Luthor mistakes his reaction to mean the young man does not believe in the experiment, that he also thinks Lex is lying or \"crazy\" as others do. The machine then explodes and Luthor survives but loses his hair as a result of radiation. Years later, his scientific research, largely based on his ideas about alien life, results in a small fortune that he uses to create LexCorp. When Superman appears in Metropolis, Lex is angered the man won't bow to his control and takes it personally that a powerful alien, the kind of companion Luthor had often hoped for and believed would see him as a peer, instead looks on him with disapproval and moral judgment. This, along with Superman interfering with his criminal agenda and openly disrespecting Luthor in front of the media, motivates Lex to humiliate and destroy the alien hero.\nThe initial story arc of the \"Superman/Batman\" ongoing series depicts the fall of Luthor's reign as U.S. president before he finishes his first term of office. In \"The World's Finest\" (more commonly referred to as \"Public Enemies\"), a kryptonite asteroid threatens Earth. Luthor has been secretly injecting himself with a new version of the \"super-steroid\" Venom (a chemical associated with the Batman villain Bane) mixed with liquified synthetic kryptonite. While increasing his physical strength and speed, it starts making him irrational and more prone to aggression. Seeing an opportunity with the appearance of the asteroid, Luthor decides to finally end Superman and tells the media that he has evidence Superman is drawing the meteorite towards Earth. He offers a billion-dollar reward for Superman's capture. As these efforts fail and the meteorite is destroyed, an enraged Luthor decides to fight Superman directly, injecting himself with more Venom and donning a high-tech warsuit.\nMaddened by the Venom, Luthor admits during the battle that he has no real proof Superman is the cause of the deadly asteroid heading to Earth and reveals he traded Doomsday to Darkseid in return for technology. After Superman damages his warsuit, Luthor retreats to LexCorp HQ only to discover that Talia has sold the entire company to the Wayne Foundation. Without resources and realizing his confession to criminal acts and conspiring with a hostile power was recorded and broadcast, Luthor flees, now a wanted fugitive. Vice President Pete Ross briefly assumes his place as president. While on the run, Luthor takes a renewed interest in Superboy, who since learned that he is a hybrid clone created from the DNA of Luthor and Superman; Luthor intends to corrupt Superboy into being his soldier.\nIn 2009, the \"Public Enemies\" story arc was adapted as a direct-to-video animated film entitled \"\".\n\"Infinite Crisis\".\nAlexander Luthor Jr. (the son of Earth-Three's version of Luthor) returns to the DC Universe along with other survivors from \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" as part of a scheme to replace it with a perfect Earth. He masquerades as the mainstream Lex Luthor and creates a new Secret Society of Super Villains. In response, the real Luthor takes on the identity of Mockingbird and forms the third incarnation of the Secret Six to counter the Society. The two have a confrontation during the main \"Infinite Crisis\" story and the mainstream Lex Luthor helps Earth's heroes locate young Alexander Jr. After \"Infinite Crisis\" ends, Luthor oversees Alexander's execution at the hands of the Joker in Crime Alley.\n\"52\".\nIn the 2006 \u2013 2007 series \"52\", Lex takes advantage of the presence of Alexander Jr.'s body. He convinces the public that it was not him who committed crimes and fled the White House but rather this man, a Luthor from a parallel Earth who masqueraded as him. While some in the public don't believe this, it is enough to provide reasonable doubt and clear Lex of all charges again. With Superman now missing (due to losing his powers at the end of \"Infinite Crisis\"), Luthor pursues a new agenda. He creates the Luthoran Church and becomes spokesman for the Everyman Project, which offers superpowers to ordinary citizens through artificial metagene treatment. With several Everyman volunteers (including Natasha Irons, niece of John Henry Irons), Luthor forms his own team of superheroes, the new Infinity Inc. When the team battles the villain Blockbuster (whom Luthor empowered as well), Lex demonstrates he can 'shut off' the powers of any of his Everyman agents; this results in the death of his speedster, Trajectory.\nAt the stroke of midnight on New Year's Eve, Luthor sets in motion a calculated plot to discredit Supernova, a new hero defending Metropolis in Superman's absence. Luthor triggers a mass-shutdown of the powers of everyone who has undertaken the Everyman program, except for the members of Infinity Inc, causing widespread death, injury, and millions of dollars' worth of damage. Luthor's plot ultimately fails when Supernova is able to minimize the disaster with a spectacular rescue.\nWhile investigating Luthor, Natasha Irons discovers he has experimented on himself with artificial metagene treatment. After developing nearly all of Superman's powers himself, Luthor considers conquering Earth and renaming it Lexor. However, Natasha triggers an electromagnetic pulse which shuts down the synthetic metagene and her uncle Steel knocks Lex out. Publicly disgraced, Lex faces indictment for over 120 criminal counts relating to what is now called \"the New Year's Eve massacre\", ranging from malfeasance to first-degree murder. The full nature of his crimes are brought to public attention through various articles written by Clark Kent.\n\"One Year Later\" and \"Countdown\".\nOne year after the events of \"Infinite Crisis\", weeks after the New Year's Eve Massacre, Luthor is cleared of all criminal charges in the \"One Year Later\" storyline. Despite this, his public image is ruined and, thanks to the machinations of the villain Doctor Sivana, he has lost most of his wealth and had no control over the newly reformed LexCorp, now being run by Lana Lang. He blames Clark Kent for swaying public opinion and pledges vengeance on Metropolis after an angry mob jeers him. Amassing large quantities of kryptonite and kidnapping the super-villains Metallo and Kryptonite Man, Lex uses them to power a Kryptonian warship controlled through a \"sunstone\" crystal. Having recently regained his powers, Superman destroys the kryptonite-powered ship and confronts Lex with the fact that, despite his claims that Superman is what prevents him from helping humanity, the only thing he accomplished during Superman's absence was to cause pain and acquire a machine that could cause more destruction. Enraged, Lex manages to escape custody yet again.\nLex Luthor continues his open campaigns against Superman and Earth's heroes, working with Bizarro, a new Revenge Squad, and the Kryptonian General Zod. Alongside Joker and Cheetah III, Luthor (once again wearing his warsuit) organizes a new Injustice League to help destroy the reformed Justice League. During this period, he creates the third Shaggy Man and the third Blockbuster.\nLuthor plays a large role in the \"Countdown to Final Crisis\" tie-in series \"Salvation Run\". Exiled to a distant planet along with many of Earth's villains, Lex quickly assumes command and convinces many to follow him as he finds a way home. He is opposed by those who join forces with Joker and Gorilla Grodd. Eventually, the villains are attacked by Parademons. Luthor manages to get the villains off the planet with a makeshift teleporter, using the villains Neutron, Heatmonger, Plasmus, Warp, and Thunder and Lightning as unwilling power sources. When called a \"monster\" by Thunder, Luthor claims the ones who exiled them are the real monsters and he is the hero. He sets the teleporter to self-destruct after he uses it, killing the Parademons as well as his living batteries.\n\"Final Crisis\".\nIn the \"Final Crisis\" crossover, Luthor joins the Inner Circle of Libra's Secret Society of Super Villains. After learning Libra is a prophet of Darkseid, Lex Luthor opposes him, unwilling to be a mindless slave while Earth is largely destroyed. Working with Doctor Sivana, Luthor seemingly destroys Libra and overrides the Anti-Life Equation being broadcast into the helmets of the Justifiers, humans forced to obey Darkseid. Luthor subsequently assists Superman in leading the assault against Darkseid's forces, noting that Superman can consider this a legendary first team-up between \"good\" and \"bad.\" Luthor joins those assisting Superman and his remaining allies in constructing the Miracle Machine, which is later used to reset the universe without Darkseid's presence.\n\"New Krypton\".\nLuthor is finally found guilty for his crimes. Rather than spend life in prison, he is recruited by General Sam Lane to serve out his sentence by working for the secretive Project 7734, accessing the knowledge stored within the captured Brainiac. Luthor successfully accesses Brainiac's brain, using it to activate the villain's ship and robotic drones. Luthor is then tasked with studying the genetic potential of the seemingly dead body of Doomsday.\nLuthor later manages to use Brainiac's ship to kill the soldiers assigned to watch him. Brainiac frees himself from Luthor's control and the two make their escape. Forming an alliance, Brainiac promises Luthor can have Earth when he is done with it. Lex returns to Smallville, where it is revealed his sister Lena is alive, physically and mentally handicapped, and living with her daughter Lori. In an effort to prove his abilities to Superboy, Lex manages to counter Lena's disabilities, allowing her to walk and regain greater mental awareness, then quickly reverses the process, leaving her completely catatonic. Luthor then informs Superboy that so long as Superman is alive, he will never reveal how he helped Lena. Seeing Superboy now as a failed experiment due to having 50% \"wrong alien DNA\", Luthor and Brainiac create another binary clone with their own genetics.\n\"Last Stand of New Krypton\" and \"War of the Supermen\".\nAs part of his participation in Project 7734, Luthor sends a robot double of himself with Brainiac on a mission to attack New Krypton. While there, the Luthor robot tampers with the body chemistry of the previously captured villain Reactron. Reactron then kills himself, initiating a chain reaction which destroys New Krypton and all but a handful of its 100,000 Kryptonian inhabitants. Supergirl's mother Alura is among the casualties. Since Earth is at war with New Krypton at the time, Luthor is praised for this action and receives a presidential pardon for all his past crimes.\n\"Blackest Night\".\nDuring the \"Blackest Night\" storyline, when the public learned that everyone who has died are rising as undead Black Lanterns, Luthor isolates himself in his safehouse in fear that all the people he has murdered over the years will reanimate and seek revenge. Several victims, including his deceased father, arrive but he escapes after receiving a power ring fueled by the orange light of avarice, becoming an Orange Lantern deputy. Luthor arrives at Coast City and joins the battle against the Black Lantern Corps, fighting Black Lantern versions of Superman and Superboy. Luthor is quickly overwhelmed by his greed and sets out to steal the rings of his fellow inducted Lanterns, taking Scarecrow's yellow fear-powered ring before being held back. Wonder Woman restrains Luthor with her magic lasso and under its spell of truth he confesses he secretly wants to be Superman. When Nekron is defeated, Larfleeze takes Luthor's ring, as there can only be one avarice-powered ring.\nStill craving the power of the orange light, Luthor recovers and operates on the remains of Black Lanterns. He is visited by Larfleeze, who demands to know what is important to the people of Earth. Luthor responds with \"power\" (which Larfleeze already possesses) and \"land\" (which intrigues the alien).\n\"Superman: Secret Origin\" Revision.\nThe 2009-2010 mini-series \"\" alters Lex's history again. He now grows up in Smallville with his younger sister Lena and abusive, alcoholic father. He meets Clark Kent on a few occasions but is defensive and insulted when he realizes Clark desires a friendship. While in high school, Lex arranges for his parents to die in a car accident, after which he uses the money to travel the world. \"Action Comics\" Annual #13 in 2011 reveals that after leaving Smallville, Lex spent some time studying under Ra's al Ghul and later spent time working as a weapons maker for Darkseid, learning the technology of Apokolips.\nLex's scientific work and other factors lead him to create a fortune and found LexCorp. Luthor's public relations paints him as a savior to Metropolis, which suffers greatly from crime, and he makes a display of regularly granting good fortune to a random citizen. When Superman appears, Luthor's secret criminal operations are threatened and Luthor is no longer considered a great savior or power in the city, particularly after the hero tells the public that they should look to themselves to be heroes and not look to others to be their saviors. Luthor begins a quest for vengeance, aiding (indirectly and directly) in the origins of Parasite and Metallo.\n\"The Black Ring\".\nAfter the conclusion of the \"New Krypton\" event, Luthor became the lead character in \"Action Comics\" until issue No. 900. Written by Paul Cornell, the first storyline \"The Black Ring\" explores Luthor's new desire to locate the energy of the Black Lantern Corps. Aiding him in this quest is a robot duplicate of Lois Lane. To distract Superman and his closest allies from interrupting him, Luthor releases several Doomsday duplicates.\nLuthor's quest involves a conversation with Death herself and finally leads him to face a powerful and deadly entity released from the Phantom Zone. Luthor infuses himself with Kryptonian technology and grapples with the creature. The two fuse and Luthor learns it evolved in the Phantom Zone and now seeks to escape, driven mad by sensing the grief and anger of the Zone prisoners. With the creature's power at his command, Luthor draws out Superman to him and attempts to drive the hero mad by forcing him to experience real human emotions, believing that Superman only fakes humanity to be trusted. The ploy fails and Luthor's new abilities reveal that Superman is really Clark Kent, a well-meaning man raised by Earth people who loved him and who still mourns the loss of Jonathan Kent. Luthor is enraged by how this upbringing and emotional nature clashes with his own motivations, unhappy childhood and anger towards his own father.\nIt becomes clear that the Phantom Zone entity has the power to create a feeling of peace and bliss throughout the entire universe, at the cost of never allowing him to cause any harm to another being. Superman appeals to Luthor to make this a reality, thus giving the universe a gift and achieving something beyond Superman's abilities. Unwilling to create a universe of bliss when it would mean Superman would also be rewarded instead of suffering, Luthor loses his connection to the entity and its power, as well as his memory of everything he learned merged with it. The entity departs for another reality and Lex falls into a Phantom Zone portal. Shortly afterward, the \"Flashpoint\" timeline is created and the DC Universe rebooted.\n\"The New 52\".\nIn 2011, DC Comics implemented \"The New 52\", a relaunch of its titles and a reboot of its fictional continuity. In the new reality, Lex Luthor has no childhood association with Smallville or Clark Kent. As an adult in Metropolis with the resources of LexCorp, he sets up himself as a scientific troubleshooter for the military, working with government scientist John Henry Irons to create high-tech armor called \"Metal-Zero\" (which is later used to create the villain Metallo). When Superman appears in Metropolis and clashes with local authorities, Luthor works with the military to bring in the superhuman being, arguing that alien vigilante is an inherent threat since history has shown that introducing new life forms into other environments often causes the local environment to destabilize and suffer. Luthor tortures Superman to test his power, justifying his actions by looking at the hero as an alien rather than a human being whose well being should be considered. Superman laughs at Lex, infuriating the scientist, then escapes. Insulted by Superman's mocking laughter and his failure to contain the alien, and determined to learn more secrets from the Kryptonian's biology and technology, Luthor becomes determined to best Superman.\nUnknown to the U.S. military, Lex Luthor has been in contact with the \"Collector of Worlds\" (a version of Brainiac) and makes a deal with the alien, who wishes to collect specimens from Earth for his collection of inhabitants and artifacts from different planets. Luthor intends to increases his power in Metropolis and to aid this he also supplies social justice blogger and journalist Clark Kent with information regarding the corrupt activities of powerful media mogul Glen Glennmorgan of Galaxy Inc. Clark is unaware his informant is Luthor, knowing him only as \"Icarus\".\nAfter the Collector attacks Metropolis and Luthor's deal with the villain is exposed, Luthor is fired as a consultant to the U.S. military by General Sam Lane himself. He is later instrumental in the creation of the \"New 52\" version of the Kryptonite Man, known in this world primarily as K-Man. A few years later, Luthor's schemes against Superman and some of his crimes are exposed. He is arrested and imprisoned in a special U.S. government prison.\nIn the \"Forever Evil\" storyline, Luthor plays a major role in opposing the Crime Syndicate, an evil version of the Justice League from a parallel Earth. He founds the New 52 incarnation of the Injustice League, helping Batman to free their world from the Syndicate's control and saving Superman's life from a kryptonite attack by Syndicate member Atomica. Public opinion of Lex Luthor becomes favorable. After learning an entity destroyed the Crime Syndicate's Earth, Luthor wants to prepare for the possibility that his Earth could be threatened next. To aid him in this and continue his new role as a hero, he requests Justice League membership. The Justice League are not sure about his altruism but decides his membership would make it easier to monitor him. While a Leaguer, Luthor helps against several threats, wearing a high-tech warsuit created by reverse-engineering Kryptonian technology, and builds a new Watchtower for the team.\nWhen the New God Darkseid is seemingly killed, his \"Omega Effect\" is contained in Lex Luthor, temporarily turning him into a God of Apokolips.\nThe \"New 52\" Superman's identity is revealed to the world and the hero subsequently loses most of his powers. Superman consults Luthor for help, but the villain cannot believe that someone as powerful as Superman would pretend to be someone as ordinary as Clark Kent. He decides that Superman's loss of power is a convenient lie to hide the fact that Clark Kent is not really Superman, that he is only dressing like him and has found a way to acquire limited powers of his own. Luthor asks Clark to tell him the truth of why he and Superman are lying to the world, but Superman has no answers for him.\n\"DC Rebirth\".\nFollowing the death of the \"New 52\" Superman, Luthor creates a new warsuit decorated by Superman's S-shield, deciding he is the new protector of Metropolis. He is confronted by the pre-\"Flashpoint\" version of Superman, who refuses to believe Luthor's intentions are noble. In DC's 2016 line-wide relaunch \"DC Rebirth\", large parts of the New 52 canon are removed (later said to have occurred in a different timeline) while large parts of post-\"Crisis\" canon are restored to the DC Universe. Eventually, this affects the Superman comics as well, in the wake of the 2017 storyline \"Superman Reborn\" Luthor's backstory from \"Superman: Secret Origin\" and large parts of his post-\"Crisis\" continuity are restored, while the \"New 52\" events are largely removed. The canon says that Luthor still served in the Justice League for a time.\nIn \"Doomsday Clock\", Luthor is approached by Adrian Veidt, who attempts to enlist his aid in finding Doctor Manhattan. He is then attacked by a seemingly-revived Comedian. After recovering from surgery, he reveals he has been investigating claims that many heroes and villains gained their powers from government experiments rather than accidents. He later provides Lois Lane with footage of the Justice Society of America, who in the new canon were not the publicly known superheroes of World War II, but were clandestine heroes whose existence was largely denied. \"Doomsday Clock\" ends with Luthor considering utilizing and improving Veidt's methods for his own personal use. It is also revealed the New 52 Luthor and history still exist in a parallel universe.\n\"Year of the Villain\".\nLex Luthor's childhood is fleshed out further in the pages of \"Justice League\". Before he ever met Clark Kent, it is said his father Lionel Luthor was a scientist working with the Legionnaires Club, an organization created by the immortal villain Vandal Savage to unlock the secrets of the universe. At one point, Lionel is able to reach through space and time to bring a Martian child named J'onn J'onzz to Earth. Lex and J'onn form a brief friendship. When the Blackhawks attacks the operations of the Legionnaires' Club, Lex sends J'onn back home to Mars to protect him. Many years later, he will meet J'onn again when the alien operates on Earth as the Martian Manhunter. To protect his secrets, Vandal Savage has Lionel's memories altered. As a result of this psychological trauma, Lionel becomes a \"broken man\" and an alcoholic. Lex comes to hate his father and only feels family love for his sister Lena, who is increasingly ill and whom he wishes to help.\nAfter the universal barrier known as the Source Wall is broken during the events of \"No Justice,\" Luthor forms a new Legion of Doom to track down the secrets that were once pursued by the Legionnaires' Club, discovering they are connected to the god-like Perpetua, Mother of Forgers. In the \"Year of the Villain\" special, Luthor commits suicide to gain favor with Perpetua, who resurrects him as her acolyte/child, becoming a powerful Martian/human hybrid called Apex Lex. He then offers power to many DC Universe villains. Apex Lex is eventually betrayed by Perpetua and Batman Who Laughs, who depowers him and sends him back to Earth with Mercy. \nDC Infinite Frontier.\nLex Luthor makes guest appearances in Joshua Williamson's Batman run, trying to convince Bruce Wayne to work with him in dealing with an enemy name Abyss. Black Adam recruits Lex and the Legion of Doom during Dark Crisis event after Pariah uses his Dark Army to seemingly kill the Justice League. Deathstroke manages to corrupt Lex Luthor, and Lex fights against the heroes in the climatic battle, before escaping after the Deathstroke is defeated. \nDawn of DC.\nAfter Superman returns to Earth, Lex blackmails Metallo into working with him by kidnapping his sister, and is thrown in Stryker's prison. Lex Luthor kills Manchester Black to make the world forget about Superman's identity because he hated how the world viewed Superman as equal and human to them, while revealing that if civilians were to discover Superman's identity, it woudl give them a heart attack. Superman defeats Lex and sends him back to prison. Lex Luthor decides to give his company to Superman, and renames it Supercorp to help make Metropolis a better place and helps Superman deal with Parasite. In House of Brainiac, Brainiac captures Lex Luthor by mistake to help him with his dying body. Lex reunites with his daughter Lena Luthor, and helps Superman take down Brainiac, but at the cost of losing his memory. \nRelationships and family.\nPre-\"Crisis\" continuity.\nIn pre-\"Crisis\" continuity, Luthor is shown as having few personal attachments. Shamed by his crimes, his parents Jules and Arlene disown him, move away, cut off all ties to Smallville, and change their name to the anagram \"Thorul\". Jules and Arlene take their younger child Lena with them, who is only a toddler at the time and later does not remember her real last name. Lena Thorul is told her older brother died in a mountain climbing accident. Not long after their departure from Smallville, Jules and Arlene die in a car accident, leaving Lena to grow up alone. Like her brother, she attends Regis High School and then later becomes a librarian. Lena meets Lois Lane, who plans to mention the young woman in a story but is then warned not to by Lex Luthor. Superman and Lois discover the truth but agree to Lex's request that Lena not learn about their connection. Later on, Lena moves to Midvale and befriends Superman's cousin Supergirl, who also winds up helping to make sure Lena does not learn the truth about her brother.\nExposure to one of Luthor's inventions later grants Lena ESP, making her an empath. Lena Thorul marries FBI agent Jeff Colby (who had once arrested Lex) and they have a son, Val Colby. Jeff Colby dies some time later. After Lena has brain surgery, the decision is made to reveal the truth about Luthor to her. Luthor then discovers he was an unwitting party to a conspiracy against Lena masterminded by his own cellmate \"Sam\", who wanted revenge against Colby. Deeply remorseful about this, he apologizes to Lena and the two attempt to make amends with each other.\nThe pre-\"Crisis\" Luthor also has a niece named Nasthalthia Luthor, the child of an older unnamed sister of Lex's who had run away and eloped in Europe when she was a teenager. Nasthalthia is an occasional thorn in Supergirl's side, at one point forming a gang called Nasty's Nasties. Nasthalthia is removed from canon following the reboot of \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\".\nLex Luthor himself later marries Ardora of the planet Lexor and, in \"Action Comics\" #544 (June 1983), learns he has an infant son by Ardora, Lex Luthor Jr.. Almost two months later, Luthor accidentally causes the destruction of Lexor, and Ardora and Lex Jr. die as a direct result.\nPost-\"Crisis\" continuity.\nIn post-\"Crisis\" continuity, Lena is the name of Lex's adopted sister when he was living in a foster home. She is accidentally killed by their foster father when she refuses to try to trick Lex out of his inheritance. Lex later names his baby daughter after her.\nFollowing the events of \"Infinite Crisis\", Luthor's history was again altered, re-introducing Lena as his blood sister. Unlike the pre-\"Crisis\" version, Lena is well aware of her history with Lex, having grown up alongside him, with only an abusive father. Lex and Lena's mother is named Letitia and is presumed deceased. She has no empathic abilities, and is a paraplegic with a teenaged daughter, Lori, both of whom still live in Smallville. Unlike his pre-\"Crisis\" version, Lex has little love for his sister, having abandoned her with an unnamed aunt after their father dies of a heart attack. Lex even goes so far as to cure Lena's illness, and then immediately undoes the process, leaving her completely catatonic, solely to make a mocking point to Superboy and Superman. Lena is currently under the care of the best doctors from Wayne Enterprises, hired by Red Robin.\nIn post-\"The Man of Steel\" continuity, Luthor is childhood friends with Perry White and it is revealed Luthor is the biological father of Perry's son Jerry White, conceived during a period when Perry was believed dead. Luthor, Perry and Alice only learned the truth shortly before Jerry was killed by a gang war that Luthor had triggered. Post-\"Crisis\" Lex Luthor has been married eight times, though the first seven marriages occurred off-panel in Luthor's past. His eighth marriage to Contessa Erica Alexandra Del Portenza (a.k.a. the \"Contessa\") is based on mutual greed; Contessa buys controlling interest in LexCorp after Luthor is indicted, compelling him to marry her in order to regain control of his company. Contessa becomes pregnant and starts using the unborn child to dominate Lex into doing her bidding. Luthor's response is to imprison her while she is drugged during childbirth, keeping her in a permanently unconscious state. Contessa later escapes to an island mansion, but upon being elected president, Luthor targets her home with a barrage of missiles and destroys it. Luthor's daughter, Lena, was the avatar of The Tech, the remnant cyberware of Metropolis after Brainiac 13's advancement of the city to a futuristic state was undone.\nDan Jurgens's run on \"Superman\" further expands on Lex's origins. The story details how Luthor was sent to live with a foster family following the sabotage of his parents' car. His foster parents, Casey and Emily Griggs, who prove to be as volatile and hateful as Jules and Arlene Luthor, conspire to embezzle his insurance and coerce their adopted daughter, Lena, into seducing Lex to learn the location of the money. Due to her genuine romantic feelings toward Lex, Lena refuses and is beaten to death by her father. Lex is absent from the home at the time of the murder, having been talked into going to a football game by his schoolmate Perry White. Once he has established his preeminence in Metropolis, Luthor takes vengeance on Griggs, secretly hiring him to assassinate Frank Berkowitz, the city's popular four-term mayor, who refuses to knuckle under to Luthor's dominance, then personally killing him once the deed is done.\nAs an adult, Perry's unwitting 'role' in Lena's death motivates Luthor to have an affair with Perry's wife, Alice, during a period when Perry is missing and assumed dead. Alice becomes pregnant shortly afterward, although the timing of the conception means there is an equal possibility that either Luthor or White could be the father. The child, Jerry White, later learns his true parentage during his late teens, shortly before being killed by a local street gang he is associated with. The loss of a potential heir weighs heavily on Luthor's mind, particularly when he is dying of cancer; while mulling over his fate, Luthor visits Jerry's gravesite.\nLuthor has shown an unusual level of compassion for Conner Kent, a hybrid clone created from the DNA of Superman and Luthor himself. After Conner's death in \"Infinite Crisis\", Luthor is shown visiting a memorial statue of Conner in Metropolis and placing flowers there. More than once Luthor addresses Conner as his son. Following Conner's resurrection, Luthor is shocked and decides to locate him. When Brainiac accuses him of showing paternal feelings for Conner though, Luthor denies it, saying that he only wants his property back, and has no fatherly feelings towards Superboy. After Superboy and Luthor visit Lena, Luthor makes it clear he now sees Conner as an inherently \"failed experiment\" due to having 50% \"wrong alien DNA.\" Luthor then works with Brainiac to create a binary clone with their own genetics, a possible threat to Superboy.\nLena Luthor was revealed to have mothered a daughter named Lori Luthor, making her Lex Luthor's niece.\nIn the alternate future timeline of \"Titans Tomorrow\", Conner becomes an uncompromising and dictatorial successor to Superman, while Luthor acts as a caring, father figure to him.\nIn \"Blackest Night\", Lex Luthor's father Lionel Luthor is revealed to have died of an allergic reaction to his medicine during Clark Kent's days as Superboy. He is temporarily reanimated as a member of the Black Lantern Corps and attacks Lex. Following \"Blackest Night'\", Luthor creates a gynoid version of Lois Lane using Brainiac technology. His primary purpose for creating her was to have a companion who would voice honest opinions and provide an extra voice of reason to counsel him on his obsessive quest for the Black Lantern energy. Luthor also had a pseudo-romantic relationship with the \"Loisbot\".\nAlternate versions.\nEarth-Three.\nA heroic alternate universe variant of Alexander Luthor from Earth-Three appears in \"DC Comics Presents\" Annual. This version is a scientist who possesses a high-tech \"supersuit\" and opposes the Crime Syndicate. He and his Earth's Lois Lane would later have a child named Alexander Luthor Jr., who appears in \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" and \"Infinite Crisis\".\nEarth-3 (New 52).\nA separate depiction of an Earth-3 variant of Alexander Luthor appears in \"Forever Evil\" (2014). This version operates as the superhero Mazahs, takes the powers of those he kills, and fathered a child with Superwoman. He is later killed by \"The New 52\" incarnation of Lex Luthor.\nDue to changes made to the multiverse during the events of \"\", Alexander Luthor became a human African American man who wears a suit of high-tech armor and opposes Ultraman. Well intentioned and compassionate yet largely ineffectual, Luthor goes on to form the Legion of Justice, only to be defeated and imprisoned by Ultraman.\nAnti-Matter Earth.\nAn alternate universe variant of Alexander Luthor from the anti-matter universe appears in \"\".\n\"Batman: The Dark Knight Strikes Again\".\nA possible future variant of Lex Luthor appears in \"\". This version became obese, developed a hunchback, and joined forces with Brainiac to control the U.S. government and blackmail Superman, Wonder Woman, and Captain Marvel into doing their bidding by taking their loved ones hostage. After being attacked by Batman and Catgirl, Luthor retaliates by manipulating Superman and Wonder Woman into killing Brainiac in the hopes the former will die trying and launching satellites to destroy most of the world's population. However, both plans fail and Luthor is eventually killed by Hawkman and Hawkgirl's son Hawkboy.\nBizarro Luthor.\nA Bizarro World incarnation of Lex Luthor appears in multiple versions of DC Comics canon.\nEarth-29.\nA separate Bizarro Luthor from Earth-29 appears in \"Superman\" (vol. 7).\nEarth-47.\nAn alternate universe variant of Lex Luthor from Earth-47 appears in \"Year of the Villain: Lex Luthor\" #1 (2019). This version studies and uses the Black Mercy. Through repeated use of its illusionary effects, he experiences multiple scenarios wherein he acquires great power, but is never satisfied. Realizing his ambitions are based on his ego, he spends the rest of his life creating new ways for people to heal and live better lives.\nAmalgam Comics.\nAn alternate universe variant of Lex Luthor, with elements of Marvel Comics character the Red Skull, appears in Amalgam Comics. This version is a war profiteer who injected himself with a chemical agent derived from a green radioactive meteorite. While it extends his lifespan, it also gives him green skin and a skull-like head. Taking the name the \"Green Skull\", he goes on to oppose Super-Soldier (a combination of Superman and Captain America).\nEarth C Minus.\nA funny animal-inspired variant of Lex Luthor resembling a lemur from Earth C Minus appears in \"Captain Carrot and His Amazing Zoo Crew!\".\nPocket Universe.\nA young Lex Luthor from a pocket universe created by the Time Trapper appears in \"Superman\" (vol. 2). This version never lost his hair and admires Superboy's exploits. Following Superboy's death, Luthor explores the former's lab and accidentally frees villains from the Phantom Zone, who kill him.\nSuperman: Earth One.\nDr. Alexander Luthor and his wife Dr. Alexandra Luthor appear in \"\". They are scientists who refer to themselves as Lex2 Incorporated. While working with the military, Alexandra researches ways to kill Superman as a thought exercise amidst the compassionate Alexander's apprehension over harming someone who has not given cause to be feared. Alexander would later sacrifice himself to help Superman battle Zod, for which a grief-stricken Alexandra blames Superman and vows to destroy him.\nSuperman/Batman.\nAn alternate timeline variant of Lex Luthor, amalgamated with the Joker, appears in \"Superman/Batman\".\nElseworlds.\nMultiple variants of Lex Luthor appear in \"Elseworlds\".\nPowers and abilities.\nLex Luthor has no superpowers, but is one of the brightest minds in the DC Universe, standing out not only for his prodigious intellect but also for his extraordinary analytical ability and deep knowledge across multiple scientific and technological disciplines. His genius is not limited to theory alone but extends to the practical application of his knowledge, allowing him to develop cutting-edge technology, devise extremely complex strategies, and accurately anticipate the actions of his enemies.\nSince his inception as a character, Luthor has been described as the most intelligent human in the DC Universe and one of the brightest beings in any world. His eidetic memory enables him to recall any information with absolute precision, reinforcing his mastery of virtually all branches of science, including aerospace engineering, biochemistry, robotics, artificial intelligence, computing, nanotechnology, genetics, nuclear energy, synthetic polymers, telecommunications, quantum physics, and time travel. His expertise in these fields has allowed him to develop everything from highly sophisticated weaponry to teleportation mechanisms and advanced augmented reality devices. Unlike most scientists and technologists in the DC Universe, Luthor does not limit himself to scientific innovation but has also demonstrated unparalleled skill in business and politics. He is the founder and CEO of LuthorCorp, one of the most powerful corporations in the world, with interests spanning multiple industries, from energy to biotechnology. Thanks to his cunning, charisma, and determination, he has become one of the richest and most influential people on the planet. His strategic genius has even led him to hold the presidency of the United States, showcasing his ability to manipulate public opinion, gain powerful allies, and eliminate political threats.\nIn combat, although he is not a natural fighter like Batman or Deathstroke, Luthor has received martial arts training, specifically in Karate, which allows him to defend himself in emergency situations. In some versions, he has also received training from the Amazons of Themyscira, further enhancing his hand-to-hand combat skills. However, his true strength lies in his ability to anticipate any confrontation and prepare advanced strategies and technology that enable him to emerge victorious without relying on physical force.\nDespite his immense intellect, Luthor rarely acknowledges others as his equals. With the exception of the extraterrestrial entity known as Brainiac and, on occasion, Batman, Luthor believes that no other being in the universe matches his intellectual level. This arrogance, combined with his unwavering determination to surpass Superman, constantly drives him to seek new ways to expand his power and influence.\nWeaponry.\nLex Luthor's weaponry is varied and reflects his scientific genius, limitless wealth, and obsession with surpassing Superman.\nCombat Suit (Warsuit).\nOne of the most iconic elements of Lex Luthor's arsenal is his combat suit, a high-tech armour known as the \"LexCorp Warsuit\". This exoskeleton, typically powered by advanced energy sources and reinforced with ultra-durable alloys, grants him superhuman strength, resistance, and the ability to directly confront Superman. Its key features include:\nKryptonite-based weapons.\nKryptonite is Luthor's weapon of choice against Superman, and his ingenuity has allowed him to develop it in multiple forms:\nRobotic technology and clones.\nLuthor frequently employs robots and clones as extensions of his will:\nStrategic devices.\nLuthor's weaponry is not limited to brute force; his tactical mind leads him to create more subtle tools:\nWeapons of mass destruction.\nWhen his ambitions escalate, Luthor does not hesitate to resort to catastrophic measures:\nRelationship with Superman.\nSuperman (Clark Kent/Kal-El) and Lex Luthor often start on opposite ends of the spectrum. Superman represents hope, altruism, and power used for the common good, while Lex embodies ambition, selfishness, and human intellect taken to the extreme. In many versions, Lex sees Superman as a threat to human supremacy or a personal obstacle to his absolute control, while Superman perceives Lex as a wasted genius who could benefit the world if he abandoned his destructive obsession and unbridled thirst for power and absolute control.\nIn classic comics, their rivalry is rooted in Metropolis, where Lex, a billionaire magnate and brilliant scientist, clashes with Superman, the hero who protects the city. However, in more modern adaptations, such as \"Smallville\", their relationship takes an emotional turn: it begins as a friendship that deteriorates, adding layers of tragedy to their conflict.\nThe central themes of their relationship include:\nOver the decades, Superman and Lex Luthor have evolved from simply being hero and villain to symbols of a philosophical struggle. Lex sees Superman as an intruder who weakens humanity by making it dependent on him, while Superman sees in Lex a reminder of what happens when genius is corrupted by ego and hubris. Their relationship is an endless cycle of challenge and resistance, where neither can completely destroy the other, reflecting their narrative interdependence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18596", "revid": "26618737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18596", "title": "Lute", "text": "Plucked string musical instrument\nA lute ( or ) is any plucked string instrument with a neck and a deep round back enclosing a hollow cavity, usually with a sound hole or opening in the body. It may be either fretted or unfretted.\nMore specifically, the term \"lute\" commonly refers to an instrument from the family of European lutes, which were themselves influenced by short-necked lutes in Gandhara (modern-day Pakistan) which became the predecessor of the Islamic, the Sino-Japanese and the European lute families. The term also refers generally to any necked string instrument having the strings running in a plane parallel to the sound table (in the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs system).\nThe strings are attached to pegs or posts at the end of the neck, which have some type of turning mechanism to enable the player to tighten the tension on the string or loosen the tension before playing (which respectively raise or lower the pitch of a string), so that each string is tuned to a specific pitch (or note). The lute is plucked or strummed with one hand while the other hand \"frets\" (presses down) the strings on the neck's fingerboard. By pressing the strings on different places of the fingerboard, the player can shorten or lengthen the part of the string that is vibrating, thus producing higher or lower pitches (notes).\nThe European lute and the modern Near-Eastern \"oud\" descend from a common ancestor via diverging evolutionary paths. The lute is used in a great variety of instrumental music from the Medieval to the late Baroque eras and was the most important instrument for secular music in the Renaissance. During the Baroque music era, the lute was used as one of the instruments that played the \"basso continuo\" accompaniment parts. It is also an accompanying instrument in vocal works. The lute player either improvises (\"realizes\") a chordal accompaniment based on the figured bass part, or plays a written-out accompaniment (both music notation and tablature (\"tab\") are used for lute). As a small instrument, the lute produces a relatively quiet sound. The player of a lute is called a \"lutenist\", \"lutanist\" or \"lutist\", and a maker of lutes (or any similar string instrument, or violin family instruments) is referred to as a \"luthier\".\nHistory and evolution of the lute.\nFirst lutes.\nCurt Sachs defined \"lute\" in the terminology section of \"The History of Musical Instruments\" as \"composed of a body, and of a neck which serves both as a handle and as a means of stretching the strings beyond the body\". His definition focused on body and neck characteristics and not on the way the strings were sounded, so the fiddle counted as a \"bowed lute\". Sachs also distinguished between the \"long-necked lute\" and the short-necked variety. The short-necked variety contained most of our modern instruments, \"lutes, guitars, hurdy-gurdies and the entire family of viols and violins\".\nThe long lutes were the more ancient lutes; the \"Arabic tanb\u016br\u00a0... faithfully preserved the outer appearance of the ancient lutes of Babylonia and Egypt\". He further categorized long lutes with a \"pierced lute\" and \"long neck lute\". The \"pierced lute\" had a neck made from a stick that pierced the body (as in the ancient Egyptian long-neck lutes, and the modern African gunbr\u012b).\nThe \"long lute\" had an attached neck, and included the sitar, tanbur and tar: the dut\u0101r had two strings, set\u0101r three strings, \u010d\u0101rt\u0101r four strings, pan\u010dt\u0101r five strings.\nSachs's book is from 1941, and the archaeological evidence available to him placed the early lutes at about 2000 BC. Discoveries since then have pushed the existence of the lute back to c.\u20093100 BC.\nMusicologist Richard Dumbrill today uses the word lute more categorically to discuss instruments that existed millennia before the term \"lute\" was coined. Dumbrill documented more than 3,000 years of iconographic evidence of the lutes in Mesopotamia, in his book \"The Archaeomusicology of the Ancient Near East\". According to Dumbrill, the lute family included instruments in Mesopotamia before 3000\u00a0BC. He points to a cylinder seal as evidence; dating from about 3100\u00a0BC or earlier and now in the possession of the British Museum, the seal depicts on one side what is thought to be a woman playing a stick \"lute\". Like Sachs, Dumbrill saw length as distinguishing lutes, dividing the Mesopotamian lutes into a long variety and a short. His book does not cover the shorter instruments that became the European lute, beyond showing examples of shorter lutes in the ancient world. He focuses on the longer lutes of Mesopotamia, various types of necked chordophones that developed throughout the ancient world: Indian (Gandhara and others), Greek, Egyptian (in the Middle Kingdom), Iranian (Elamite and others), Jewish/Israelite, Hittite, Roman, Bulgar, Turkic, Chinese, Armenian/Cilician cultures. He names among the long lutes, the pandura and the tanbur\nThe line of short-necked lutes was further developed to the east of Mesopotamia, in Bactria and Gandhara, into a short, almond-shaped lute. Curt Sachs talked about the depictions of Gandharan lutes in art, where they are presented in a mix of \"Northwest Indian art\" under \"strong Greek influences\". The short-necked lutes in these Gandhara artworks were \"the venerable ancestor of the Islamic, the Sino-Japanese and the European lute families\". He described the Gandhara lutes as having a \"pear-shaped body tapering towards the short neck, a frontal stringholder, lateral pegs, and either four or five strings\".\nPersian barbat.\nBactria and Gandhara became part of the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651). Under the Sasanians, a short almond-shaped lute from Bactria came to be called the barbat or barbud, which was developed into the later Islamic world's \"oud\" or \"ud\". When the Moors conquered Andalusia in 711, they brought their ud or quitra along, into a country that had already known a lute tradition under the Romans, the pandura.\nDuring the 8th and 9th centuries, many musicians and artists from across the Islamic world flocked to Iberia. Among them was Abu l-Hasan 'Ali Ibn Nafi' (789\u2013857), a prominent musician, who had trained under Ishaq al-Mawsili (d. 850) in Baghdad and was exiled to Andalusia before 833. He taught and has been credited with adding a fifth string to his oud and with establishing one of the first schools of music in C\u00f3rdoba.\nBy the 11th century, Muslim Iberia had become a center for the manufacture of instruments. These goods spread gradually to Provence, influencing French troubadours and trouv\u00e8res and eventually reaching the rest of Europe. While Europe developed the lute, the \"oud\" remained a central part of Arab music, and broader Ottoman music, undergoing a range of transformations.\nBeside the introduction of the lute to Spain (Andalusia) by the Moors, another important point of transfer of the lute from Arabian to European culture was Sicily, where it was brought either by Byzantine or later by Muslim musicians. There were singer-lutenists at the court in Palermo after the Norman conquest of the island from the Muslims, and the lute is depicted extensively in the ceiling paintings in the Palermo's royal Cappella Palatina, dedicated by the Norman King Roger II of Sicily in 1140. His Hohenstaufen grandson Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor (1194\u20131250) continued integrating Muslims into his court, including Moorish musicians. Frederick II made visits to the Lech valley and Bavaria between 1218 and 1237 with a \"Moorish Sicilian retinue\". By the 14th century, lutes had spread throughout Italy and, probably because of the cultural influence of the Hohenstaufen kings and emperor, based in Palermo, the lute had also made significant inroads into the German-speaking lands. By 1500, the valley and F\u00fcssen had several lute-making families, and in the next two centuries the area hosted \"famous names of 16th and 17th century lutemaking\".\nAlthough the major entry of the short lute was in Western Europe, leading to a variety of lute styles, the short lute entered Europe in the East as well; as early as the sixth century, the Bulgars brought the short-necked variety of the instrument called komuz to the Balkans.\nFrom Middle Ages to Baroque.\nMedieval lutes were four- and five-course instruments, plucked with a quill as a plectrum. There were several sizes and, by the end of the Renaissance, seven sizes (up to the great octave bass) are documented. Song accompaniment was probably the lute's primary function in the Middle Ages, but very little music securely attributable to the lute survives from before 1500. Medieval and early-Renaissance song accompaniments were probably mostly improvised, hence the lack of written records.\nIn the last few decades of the fifteenth century, to play Renaissance polyphony on a single instrument, lutenists gradually abandoned the quill in favor of plucking the instrument with the fingers. The number of courses grew to six and beyond. The lute was the premier solo instrument of the sixteenth century, but continued to accompany singers as well.\nAbout 1500, many Iberian lutenists adopted vihuela de mano, a viol-shaped instrument tuned like the lute; both instruments continued in coexistence. This instrument also found its way to parts of Italy that were under Spanish domination (especially Sicily and the papal states under the Borgia pope Alexander VI who brought many Catalan musicians to Italy), where it was known as the viola da mano.\nBy the end of the Renaissance, the number of courses had grown to ten, and during the Baroque era the number continued to grow until it reached 14 (and occasionally as many as 19). These instruments, with up to 35 strings, required innovations in the structure of the lute. At the end of the lute's evolution the archlute, theorbo and torban had long extensions attached to the main tuning head to provide a greater resonating length for the bass strings, and since human fingers are not long enough to stop strings across a neck wide enough to hold 14 courses, the bass strings were placed outside the fretboard, and were played \"open\", i.e., without pressing them against the fingerboard with the left hand. \"The lute is a very fragile instrument and so, although there are many surviving old lutes, very few with their original soundboards are in playable condition,\" which makes the Rauwolf Lute so notable.\nOver the course of the Baroque era, the lute was increasingly relegated to the continuo accompaniment, and was eventually superseded in that role by keyboard instruments. The lute almost fell out of use after 1800. Some sorts of lute were still used for some time in Germany, Sweden, and Ukraine.\nEtymology.\nThe words \"lute\" and \"oud\" possibly derive from Arabic \"al-\u02bfoud\" (- literally means \"the wood\"). It may refer to the wooden plectrum traditionally used for playing the oud, to the thin strips of wood used for the back, or to the wooden soundboard that distinguished it from similar instruments with skin-faced bodies.\nMany theories have been proposed for the origin of the Arabic name. Music scholar Eckhard Neubauer suggested that \"oud\" may be an Arabic borrowing from the Persian word \"r\u014dd\" or \"r\u016bd\", which meant string. Another researcher, archaeomusicologist Richard J. Dumbrill, suggests that \"rud\" came from the Sanskrit \"rudr\u012b\" (\u0930\u0941\u0926\u094d\u0930\u0940, meaning \"string instrument\") and transferred to Arabic and European languages by way of a Semitic language. However another theory, according to Semitic language scholars, is that the Arabic \"\u02bfoud\" is derived from Syriac \"\u02bfoud-a\", meaning \"wooden stick\" and \"burning wood\"\u2014cognate to Biblical Hebrew \"'\u016b\u1e0f\", referring to a stick used to stir logs in a fire. Henry George Farmer notes the similarity between \" \"and \"al-\u02bfawda\" (\"the return\" \u2013 of bliss).\nConstruction.\nSoundboard.\nLutes are made almost entirely of wood. The soundboard is a teardrop-shaped thin flat plate of resonant wood (typically spruce). In all lutes the soundboard has a single (sometimes triple) decorated sound hole under the strings called the \"rose\". The sound hole is not open, but rather covered with a grille in the form of an intertwining vine or a decorative knot, carved directly out of the wood of the soundboard.\nThe geometry of the lute soundboard is relatively complex, involving a system of barring that places braces perpendicular to the strings at specific lengths along the overall length of the belly, the ends of which are angled to abut the ribs on either side for structural reasons. Robert Lundberg, in his book \"Historical Lute Construction\", suggests ancient builders placed bars according to whole-number ratios of the scale length and belly length. He further suggests the inward bend of the soundboard (the \"belly scoop\") is a deliberate adaptation by ancient builders to afford the lutenist's right hand more space between the strings and soundboard.\nSoundboard thickness varies, but generally hovers between . Some luthiers tune the belly as they build, removing mass and adapting bracing to produce desirable sonic results. The lute belly is almost never finished, but in some cases the luthier may size the top with a very thin coat of shellac or glair to help keep it clean. The belly joins directly to the rib, without a lining glued to the sides, and a cap and counter cap are glued to the inside and outside of the bottom end of the bowl to provide rigidity and increased gluing surface.\nAfter joining the top to the sides, a half-binding is usually installed around the edge of the soundboard. The half-binding is approximately half the thickness of the soundboard and is usually made of a contrasting color wood. The rebate for the half-binding must be extremely precise to avoid compromising structural integrity.\nBack.\nThe \"back\" or the shell is assembled from thin strips of hardwood (maple, cherry, ebony, rosewood, gran, wood and/or other tonewoods) called \"ribs\", joined (with glue) edge to edge to form a deep rounded body for the instrument. There are braces inside on the soundboard to give it strength.\nNeck.\nThe \"neck\" is made of light wood, with a veneer of hardwood (usually ebony) to provide durability for the \"fretboard\" beneath the strings. Unlike most modern stringed instruments, the lute's fretboard is mounted flush with the top. The \"pegbox\" for lutes before the Baroque era was angled back from the neck at almost 90\u00b0 (see image), presumably to help hold the low-tension strings firmly against the \"nut\" which, traditionally, is not glued in place but is held in place by string pressure only. The \"tuning pegs\" are simple pegs of hardwood, somewhat tapered, that are held in place by friction in holes drilled through the pegbox.\nAs with other instruments that use friction pegs, the wood for the pegs is crucial. As the wood suffers dimensional changes through age and loss of humidity, it must retain a reasonably circular cross-section to function properly\u2014as there are no gears or other mechanical aids for tuning the instrument. Often pegs were made from suitable fruitwoods such as European pearwood, or equally dimensionally stable analogues. Matheson, c. 1720, said, \"If a lute-player has lived eighty years, he has surely spent sixty years tuning.\"\nBridge.\nThe bridge, sometimes made of a fruitwood, is attached to the soundboard typically between a fifth and a seventh of the belly length. It does not have a separate saddle but has holes bored into it to which the strings attach directly. The bridge is made so that it tapers in height and length, with the small end holding the trebles and the higher and wider end carrying the basses. Bridges are often colored black with carbon black in a binder, often shellac and often have inscribed decoration. The scrolls or other decoration on the ends of lute bridges are integral to the bridge, and are not added afterwards as on some Renaissance guitars (cf Joachim Tielke's guitars).\nFrets.\nThe frets are made of loops of gut tied around the neck. They fray with use, and must be replaced from time to time. A few additional partial frets of wood are usually glued to the body of the instrument, to allow stopping the highest-pitched courses up to a full octave higher than the open string, though these are considered anachronistic by some (though John Dowland and Thomas Robinson describe the practice of gluing wooden frets onto the soundboard). Given the choice between nylon and gut, many luthiers prefer to use gut, as it conforms more readily to the sharp angle at the edge of the fingerboard.\nStrings.\nStrings were historically made of animal gut, usually from the small intestine of sheep (sometimes in combination with metal) and are still made of gut or a synthetic substitute, with metal windings on the lower-pitched strings. Modern manufacturers make both gut and nylon strings, and both are in common use. Gut is more authentic for playing period pieces, though unfortunately it is also more susceptible to irregularity and pitch instability owing to changes in humidity. Nylon offers greater tuning stability, but is seen as anachronistic by purists, as its timbre differs from the sound of earlier gut strings. Such concerns are moot when more recent compositions for the lute are performed.\nOf note are the \"catlines\" used as basses on historical instruments. Catlines are several gut strings wound together and soaked in heavy metal solutions to increase the string mass. Catlines can be quite large in diameter compared to wound nylon strings of the same pitch. They produce a bass that differs somewhat in timbre from nylon basses.\nThe lute's strings are arranged in \"courses\", of two strings each, though the highest-pitched course usually consists of only a single string, called the \"chanterelle\". In later Baroque lutes, two upper courses are single. The courses are numbered sequentially, counting from the highest pitched, so that the \"chanterelle\" is the \"first course\", the next pair of strings is the \"second course\", etc. Thus an 8-course Renaissance lute usually has 15 strings, and a 13-course Baroque lute has 24.\nThe courses are tuned in unison for high and intermediate pitches, but for lower pitches one of the two strings is tuned an octave higher (the course where this split starts changed over the history of the lute). The two strings of a course are virtually always stopped and plucked together, as if a single string\u2014but in rare cases, a piece requires that the two strings of a course be stopped or plucked separately. The tuning of a lute is a complicated issue, described in a section of its own below. The lute's design makes it extremely light for its size.\nLute in the modern world.\nThe lute enjoyed a revival with the awakening of interest in historical music around 1900 and throughout the century. That revival was further boosted by the early music movement in the twentieth century. Important pioneers in lute revival were Julian Bream, Hans Neemann, Walter Gerwig, Suzanne Bloch and Diana Poulton. Lute performances are now not uncommon; there are many professional lutenists, especially in Europe where the most employment is found, and new compositions for the instrument are being produced by composers.\nDuring the early days of the early music movement, many lutes were constructed by available luthiers, whose specialty was often classical guitars. Such lutes were heavily built with construction similar to that of classical guitars, with fan bracing, heavy tops, fixed frets, and lined sides, all of which are anachronistic to historical lutes. As lutherie scholarship increased, makers began constructing instruments based on historical models, which have proven lighter and more responsive instruments.\nLutes built at present are invariably replicas or near copies of those surviving historical instruments that are in museums or private collections. Many are custom-built, but there is a growing number of luthiers who build lutes for general sale, and there is a fairly strong, if small, second-hand market. Because of this fairly limited market, lutes are generally more expensive than mass-produced modern instruments. Factory-made guitars and violins, for example, can be purchased more cheaply than low-end lutes, while at the highest level of modern instruments, guitars and violins tend to command the higher prices.\nUnlike in the past, there are many types of lutes encountered today: 5-course medieval lutes, renaissance lutes of 6 to 10 courses in many pitches for solo and ensemble performance of Renaissance works, the archlute of Baroque works, 11-course lutes in d-minor tuning for 17th-century French, German and Czech music, 13/14-course d-minor tuned German Baroque Lutes for later High Baroque and Classical music, theorbo for basso continuo parts in Baroque ensembles, gallichons/mandoras, bandoras, orpharions and others.\nLutenistic practice has reached considerable heights in recent years, thanks to a growing number of world-class lutenists: Rolf Lislevand, Hopkinson Smith, Paul O'Dette, Christopher Wilke, Andreas Martin, Robert Barto, Eduardo Eg\u00fcez, Edin Karamazov, Nigel North, Christopher Wilson, Luca Pianca, Yasunori Imamura, Anthony Bailes, Peter Croton, Xavier Diaz-Latorre, Evangelina Mascardi and Jakob Lindberg. Singer-songwriter Sting has also played lute and archlute, in and out of his collaborations with Edin Karamazov, and Jan Akkerman released two albums of lute music in the 1970s while he was a guitarist in the Dutch rock band Focus. Lutenist/Composer Jozef van Wissem composed the soundtrack to the Jim Jarmusch film \"Only Lovers Left Alive\".\nRepertoire.\nLutes were in widespread use in Europe at least since the 13th century, and documents mention numerous early performers and composers. However, the earliest surviving lute music dates from the late 15th century. Lute music flourished during the 16th and 17th centuries: numerous composers published collections of their music, and modern scholars have uncovered a vast number of manuscripts from the era\u2014however, much of the music is still lost. In the second half of the 17th century lutes, vihuelas and similar instruments started losing popularity, and little music was written for the instrument after 1750. The interest in lute music was revived only in the second half of the 20th century.\nImprovisation (making up music on the spot) was, apparently, an important aspect of lute performance, so much of the repertoire was probably never written down. Furthermore, it was only around 1500 that lute players began to transition from plectrum to plucking. That change facilitated complex polyphony, which required that they develop notation. In the next hundred years, three schools of tablature notation gradually developed: Italian (also used in Spain), German, and French. Only the last survived into the late 17th century. The earliest known tablatures are for a six-stringed instrument, though evidence of earlier four- and five-stringed lutes exists. Tablature notation depends on the actual instrument the music is written for. To read it, a musician must know the instrument's tuning, number of strings, etc.\nRenaissance and Baroque forms of lute music are similar to keyboard music of the periods. Intabulations of vocal works were very common, as well as various dances, some of which disappeared during the 17th century, such as the piva and the saltarello. The advent of polyphony brought about \"fantasias\": complex, intricate pieces with much use of imitative counterpoint. The improvisatory element, present to some degree in most lute pieces, is particularly evident in the early ricercares (not imitative as their later namesakes, but completely free), as well as in numerous preludial forms: preludes, tastar de corde (\"testing the strings\"), etc. During the 17th century keyboard and lute music went hand in hand, and by 1700 lutenists were writing suites of dances quite akin to those of keyboard composers. The lute was also used throughout its history as an ensemble instrument\u2014most frequently in songs for voice and lute, which were particularly popular in Italy (see frottola) and England.\nThe earliest surviving lute music is Italian, from a late 15th-century manuscript. The early 16th century saw Petrucci's publications of lute music by Francesco Spinacino (fl. 1507) and Joan Ambrosio Dalza (fl. 1508); together with the so-called Capirola Lutebook, these represent the earliest stage of written lute music in Italy. The leader of the next generation of Italian lutenists, Francesco Canova da Milano (1497\u20131543), is now acknowledged as one of the most famous lute composers in history. The bigger part of his output consists of pieces called fantasias or ricercares, in which he makes extensive use of imitation and sequence, expanding the scope of lute polyphony. In the early 17th century Johannes Hieronymus Kapsberger (c. 1580\u20131651) and Alessandro Piccinini (1566\u20131638) revolutionized the instrument's technique and Kapsberger, possibly, influenced the keyboard music of Girolamo Frescobaldi.\nFrench written lute music began, as far as we know, with Pierre Attaingnant's (c. 1494 \u2013 c. 1551) prints, which comprised preludes, dances and intabulations. Particularly important was the Italian composer Albert de Rippe (1500\u20131551), who worked in France and composed polyphonic fantasias of considerable complexity. His work was published posthumously by his pupil, Guillaume de Morlaye (born c. 1510), who, however, did not pick up the complex polyphony of de Rippe. French lute music declined during the second part of the 16th century; however, various changes to the instrument (the increase of diapason strings, new tunings, etc.) prompted an important change in style that led, during the early Baroque, to the celebrated style bris\u00e9: broken, arpeggiated textures that influenced Johann Jakob Froberger's suites. The French Baroque school is exemplified by composers such as Ennemond Gaultier (1575\u20131651), Denis Gaultier (1597/1603\u20131672), Fran\u00e7ois Dufaut (before 1604 \u2013 before 1672) and many others. The last stage of French lute music is exemplified by Robert de Vis\u00e9e (c. 1655\u20131732/3), whose suites exploit the instrument's possibilities to the fullest.\nThe history of German written lute music started with Arnolt Schlick (c. 1460\u2013after 1521), who, in 1513, published a collection of pieces that included 14 voice and lute songs, and three solo lute pieces, alongside organ works. He was not the first important German lutenist, because contemporaries credited Conrad Paumann (c. 1410\u20131473) with the invention of German lute tablature, though this claim remains unproven, and no lute works by Paumann survive. After Schlick, a string of composers developed German lute music: Hans Judenk\u00fcnig (c. 1445/50 \u2013 1526), the Neusidler family (particularly Hans Neusidler (c. 1508/09 \u2013 1563)) and others. During the second half of the 16th century, German tablature and German repertoire were gradually replaced by Italian and French tablature and international repertoire, respectively, and the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) effectively stopped publications for half a century. German lute music was revived much later by composers such as Esaias Reusner (fl. 1670), however, a distinctly German style came only after 1700 in the works of Silvius Leopold Weiss (1686\u20131750), one of the greatest lute composers, some of whose works were transcribed for keyboard by none other than Johann Sebastian Bach (1685\u20131750), who composed a few pieces for the lute himself (though it is generally agreed that they were really composed on the lautenwerk, as many of them are not idiomatic to the lute).\nOf other European countries, particularly important are England and Spain. English-written lute music began only around 1540; however, the country produced numerous lutenists, of which John Dowland (1563\u20131626) is perhaps the most famous. His influence spread very far: variations on his themes were written by keyboard composers in Germany decades after his death. Dowland's predecessors and colleagues, such as Anthony Holborne (c. 1545\u20131602) and Daniel Bacheler (1572\u20131619), were less known. Spanish composers wrote mostly for the vihuela; their main genres were polyphonic fantasias and (variations). Luys Milan (c. 1500 \u2013 after 1560) and Luys de Narv\u00e1ez (fl. 1526\u20131549) were particularly important for their contributions to the development of lute polyphony in Spain.\nFinally, perhaps the most influential European lute composer was the Hungarian B\u00e1lint Bakfark (c. 1526/30\u20131576), whose contrapuntal fantasias were much more difficult and tighter than those of his Western European contemporaries.\nOttorino Respighi's famous orchestral suites called \"Ancient Airs and Dances\" are drawn from various books and articles on 16th- and 17th-century lute music transcribed by the musicologist Oscar Chilesotti, including eight pieces from a German manuscript \"Da un Codice Lauten-Buch\", now in a private library in northern Italy.\n20th century revival and composers.\nThe revival of lute-playing in the 20th century has its roots in the pioneering work of Arnold Dolmetsch (1858\u20131940); whose research into early music and instruments started the movement for authenticity. The revival of the lute gave composers an opportunity to create new works for it.\nOne of the first such composers was Johann Nepomuk David in Germany. Composer Vladimir Vavilov was a pioneer of the lute revival in the USSR, he was also the author of numerous musical hoaxes. Sandor Kallos and Toyohiko Satoh applied modernist idiom to the lute, Elena Kats-Chernin, Jozef van Wissem and Alexandre Danilevsky minimalist and post-minimalist idiom, Roman Turovsky-Savchuk, Paulo Galv\u00e3o, Robert MacKillop historicist idiom, and Ronn McFarlane New Age. This active movement by early music specialists has inspired composers in different fields; for example, in 1980, Akira Ifukube, a classical and film composer best known for the Godzilla's theme, wrote the Fantasia for Baroque Lute with the historical tablature notation, rather than the modern staff one.\nTuning conventions.\nLutes were made in a large variety of sizes, with varying numbers of strings/courses, and with no permanent standard for tuning. However, the following seems to have been \"generally\" true of the Renaissance lute.\nA 6-course Renaissance tenor lute would be tuned to the same intervals as a tenor viol, with intervals of a \"perfect fourth\" between all the courses except the third and fourth, which differed only by a \"major third\". The tenor lute was usually tuned nominally \"in G\" (there was no pitch standard before the 20th century), named after the pitch of the highest course, yielding the pattern (G'G) (Cc) (FF) (AA) (dd) (g) from the lowest course to the highest. (Much renaissance lute music can be played on a guitar by tuning the guitar's third string down by a half tone.)\nFor lutes with more than six courses, the extra courses would be added on the low end. Because of the large number of strings, lutes have very wide necks, and it is difficult to stop strings beyond the sixth course, so additional courses were usually tuned to pitches useful as bass notes rather than continuing the regular pattern of fourths, and these lower courses are most often played without stopping. Thus an 8-course tenor Renaissance lute would be tuned to (D'D) (F'F) (G'G) (Cc) (FF) (AA) (dd) (g), and a 10-course to (C'C) (D'D) (E\u266d'E\u266d) (F'F) (G'G) (Cc) (FF) (AA) (dd) (g).\nHowever, none of these patterns were \"de rigueur\", and a modern lutenist occasionally retunes one or more courses between pieces. Manuscripts bear instructions for the player, e.g., \"7e ch\u0153ur en fa\" = \"seventh course in \"fa\"\" (= F in the standard C scale).\nThe early 17th century was a period of considerable development for the lute, particularly with new tuning schemes developed in France. At this time French lutenists began to explore the expressive capabilities of the lute through experimentation in tuning schemes on the instrument. Today these tunings are often labeled as transitional tunings or Accords nouveaux (French: \u201cnew tunings\u201d). Transitional tunings document the transition from the established Renaissance lute tuning, to the later established Baroque d-minor tuning scheme. \nThis development in tuning is credited to French lutenists of the early 17th century, who began increasing the number of major or minor thirds on the adjacent open strings of the 10-course lute. As a result the French lutenist found a more sonorous sound and increased sympathetic vibration on the instrument. This led to new compositional styles and playing techniques on the instrument, most notably the Style bris\u00e9 (French: \"broken style\"). Manuscript sources from the first half of the 17th century provide evidence that French transitional tunings gained popularity and were adopted across much of continental Europe. \nThe most used transitional tunings during this time were known as the \"sharp\" and \"flat\" tunings. Read from the tenth to the first course on a 10-course lute, the sharp tuning reads: C, D, E, F, G, C, F, A, C, E. The flat tuning reads, C, Db, Eb, F, G, C, F, Ab, C, Eb.\nHowever, by around 1670 the scheme known today as the \"Baroque\" or \"D minor\" tuning became the norm, at least in France and in northern and central Europe. In this case, the first six courses outline a d-minor triad, and an additional five to seven courses are tuned generally scalewise below them. Thus the 13-course lute played by composer Sylvius Leopold Weiss would have been tuned (A\u2033A') (B\u2033B') (C'C) (D'D) (E'E) (F'F) (G'G) (A'A') (DD) (FF) (AA) (d) (f), or with sharps or flats on the lower 7 courses appropriate to the key of the piece.\nModern lutenists tune to a variety of pitch standards, ranging from A = 392 to 470\u00a0Hz, depending on the type of instrument they are playing, the repertory, the pitch of other instruments in an ensemble and other performing expediencies. No attempt at a universal pitch standard existed during the period of the lute's historical popularity. The standards varied over time and from place to place.\nVarieties.\nSpecific instruments in the lute family include:\nEuropean Lutes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAfrican Lutes:\nAsian Lutes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouth American Lutes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlayers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMakers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSocieties\nOnline music and other useful resources\nPhotos of historic instruments\nhttp://\u00a0\u2013 search-phrase: Mot-cl\u00e9(s) : \"luth\"\nhttp://\u00a0\u2013 search-phrase: Instrument fabriqu\u00e9 : \"luth\"\nhttp://\u00a0\u2013 search-phrase: Instrument de musique, ville ou pays : \"luth\"\nArticles and resources\nOriginal: https://; Luthinerie / Geluit http:// and http://"}
{"id": "18597", "revid": "50975258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18597", "title": "Little Boy", "text": "Atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima\nLittle Boy was a type of atomic bomb created by the Manhattan Project during World War II. The name is also often used to describe the specific bomb (L-11) used in the bombing of the Japanese city of Hiroshima by the Boeing B-29 Superfortress \"Enola Gay\" on 6 August 1945, making it the first nuclear weapon used in warfare, and the second nuclear explosion in history, after the Trinity nuclear test. It exploded with an energy of approximately and had an explosion radius of approximately which caused widespread death across the city. It was a gun-type fission weapon which used uranium that had been enriched in the isotope uranium-235 to power its explosive reaction. \nLittle Boy was developed by Lieutenant Commander Francis Birch's group at the Los Alamos Laboratory. It was the successor to a plutonium-fueled gun-type fission design, Thin Man, which was abandoned in 1944 after technical difficulties were discovered. Little Boy used a charge of cordite to fire a hollow cylinder (the \"bullet\") of highly enriched uranium through an artillery gun barrel into a solid cylinder (the \"target\") of the same material. The design was highly inefficient: the weapon used on Hiroshima contained of uranium, but less than a kilogram underwent nuclear fission. Unlike the implosion design developed for the Trinity test and the Fat Man bomb design that was used against Nagasaki, which required sophisticated coordination of shaped explosive charges, the simpler but inefficient gun-type design was considered almost certain to work, and was never tested prior to its use at Hiroshima.\nAfter the war, numerous components for additional Little Boy bombs were built. By 1950, at least five weapons were completed; all were retired by November 1950.\nNaming the bomb.\nThere are two primary accounts of how the first atomic bombs got their names. Los Alamos Laboratory and Project Alberta physicist Robert Serber stated, many decades after the fact, that he had named the first two atomic bomb designs during World War II based on their shapes: Thin Man and Fat Man. The \"Thin Man\" was a long, thin device, and its name came from the Dashiell Hammett detective novel and series of movies about \"The Thin Man\". The \"Fat Man\" was round and fat so it was named after Kasper Gutman, a rotund character in Hammett's 1930 novel \"The Maltese Falcon\", played by Sydney Greenstreet in the 1941 film version. Little Boy was named by others as an allusion to Thin Man since it was based on its design. It was also sometimes referred to as the \"Mark I\" nuclear bomb design, with \"Mark II\" referring to the abandoned Thin Man, and \"Mark III\" to the \"Fat Man.\"\nIn September 1945, another Project Alberta physicist, Norman F. Ramsey, stated in his brief \"History of Project A,\" that the early bomb ballistic test shapes designs were referred to as \"Thin Man\" and \"Fat Man\" by (unspecified) \"Air Force representatives\" for \"security reasons,\" so that their communications over telephones sounded \"as if they were modifying a plane to carry Roosevelt (the Thin Man) and Churchill (the Fat Man),\" as opposed to modifying the B-29s to carry the two atomic bomb shapes as part of Project Silverplate in late 1943.\nAnother explanation of the names, from a classified United States Air Force history of Project Silverplate from the 1950s, implies a possible reconciliation of the two versions: that the terms \"Thin Man\" and \"Fat Man\" were first developed by someone at or from Los Alamos (i.e., Serber), but were consciously adopted by the officers in Silverplate when they were adopting their own codenames for their own project (including \"Silverplate\"). As Silverplate involved modifying B-29s for a secret purpose, deliberately using codenames that would align with modifying vehicles for Roosevelt and Churchill would serve their needs well.\nDevelopment.\nEarly gun-type design work.\nBecause of its perceived simplicity, the gun-type nuclear weapon design was the first approach pursued by the scientists working on bomb design during the Manhattan Project. In 1942, it was not yet known which of the two fissile materials pathways being simultaneously pursued\u2014uranium-235 or plutonium-239\u2014would be successful, or if there were significant differences between the two fuels that would impact the design work. Coordination with British scientists in May 1942 convinced the American scientists, led by J. Robert Oppenheimer, that the atomic bomb would not be difficult to design and that the difficulty would lie only in the production of fuel. Calculations in mid-1942 by theoretical physicists working on the project reinforced the idea that an ordinary artillery gun barrel would be able to impart sufficient velocity to the fissile material projectile.\nSeveral different weapon designs, including autocatalytic assembly, a nascent version of implosion, and alternative gun designs (e.g., using high explosives as a propellent, or creating a \"double gun\" with two projectiles) were pursued in the early years of the project, while the facilities to manufacture fissile material were being constructed. The belief that the gun design would be an easy engineering task once fuel was available led to a sense of optimism at Los Alamos, although Oppenheimer established a small research group to study implosion as a fallback in early 1943. A full ordnance program for gun-design development was established by March 1943, with expertise provided by E.L. Rose, an experienced gun designer and engineer. Work was begun to study the properties of barrels, internal and external ballistics, and tampers of gun weapons. Oppenheimer led aspects of the effort, telling Rose that \"at the present time [May 1945] our estimates are so ill founded that I think it better for me to take responsibility for putting them forward.\" He soon delegated the work to Naval Captain William Sterling Parsons, who, along with Ed McMillan, Charles Critchfield, and Joseph Hirschfelder would be responsible for rendering the theory into practice.\nConcern that impurities in reactor-bred plutonium would make predetonation more likely meant that much of the gun-design work was focused on the plutonium gun. To achieve high projectile velocities, the plutonium gun was long with a narrow diameter (suggesting its codename as the Thin Man) which created considerable difficulty in its ballistics dropping from aircraft and fitting it into the bomb bay of a B-29.\nIn early 1944, Emilio G. Segr\u00e8 and his P-5 Group at Los Alamos received the first samples of plutonium produced from a nuclear reactor, the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee. Analyzing it, they discovered that the presence of the isotope plutonium-240 (Pu-240) raised the rate of spontaneous fission of the plutonium to an unacceptable amount. Previous analyses of plutonium had been made from samples created by cyclotrons and did not have as much of the contaminating isotope. If reactor-bred plutonium was used in a gun-type design, they concluded, it would predetonate, causing the weapon to destroy itself before achieving the conditions for a large-scale explosion.\nFrom Thin Man to Little Boy.\nAs a consequence of the discovery of the Pu-240 contamination problem, in July 1944 almost all research at Los Alamos was redirected to the implosion-type plutonium weapon, and the laboratory was entirely reorganized around the implosion problem. Work on the gun-type weapon continued under Parsons's Ordnance (O) Division, for use exclusively with highly enriched uranium as a fuel. All the design, development, and technical work at Los Alamos was consolidated under Lieutenant Commander Francis Birch's group.\nIn contrast to the plutonium implosion-type nuclear weapon and the plutonium gun-type fission weapon, the uranium gun-type weapon was much simpler to design. As a high-velocity gun was no longer required, the overall length of the gun barrel could be dramatically decreased, and this allowed the weapon to fit into a B-29 bomb bay without difficulty. Though not an optimal use of fissile material compared to the implosion design, it was seen as a nearly guaranteed weapon.\nThe design specifications were completed in February 1945, and contracts were let to build the components. Three different plants were used so that no one would have a copy of the complete design. The gun and breech were made by the Naval Gun Factory in Washington, D.C.; the target case and some other components by the Naval Ordnance Plant in Center Line, Michigan; and the tail fairing and mounting brackets by the Expert Tool and Die Company in Detroit, Michigan. The bomb, except for the uranium payload, was ready at the beginning of May 1945. Manhattan District Engineer Kenneth Nichols expected on 1 May 1945 to have enriched uranium \"for one weapon before August 1 and a second one sometime in December\", assuming the second weapon would be a gun type; designing an implosion bomb for enriched uranium was considered, and this would increase the production rate. The enriched uranium projectile was completed on 15 June, and the target was completed on 24 July. The target and bomb pre-assemblies (partly assembled bombs without the fissile components) left Hunters Point Naval Shipyard, California, on 16 July aboard the heavy cruiser , arriving on 26 July. The target inserts followed by air on 30 July.\nAlthough all of its components had been individually tested, no full test of a gun-type nuclear weapon occurred before the Little Boy was dropped over Hiroshima. The only test explosion of a nuclear weapon concept had been of an implosion-type device employing plutonium as its fissile material, which took place on 16 July 1945 at the Trinity nuclear test. There were several reasons for not testing a Little Boy type of device. Primarily, there was the issue of fissile material availability. K-25 at Clinton Engineer Works was designed to produce around 30 kilograms of enriched uranium per month, and the Little Boy design used over 60 kilograms per bomb. So testing the weapon would incur a considerable delay in use of the weapon. (By comparison, B Reactor at the Hanford Site was designed to produce around 20 kilograms of plutonium per month, and each Fat Man bomb used around 6 kilograms of material.) Because of the simplicity of the gun-type design, laboratory testing could establish that its parts worked correctly on their own: for example, dummy projectiles could be shot down the gun barrel to make sure they were \"seated\" correctly onto a dummy target. Absence of a full-scale test in the implosion-type design made it much more difficult to establish whether the necessary simultaneity of compression had been achieved. While there was at least one prominent scientist (Ernest O. Lawrence) who advocated for a full-scale test, by early 1945 Little Boy was regarded as nearly a sure thing and was expected to have a higher yield than the first-generation implosion bombs.\nThough Little Boy incorporated various safety mechanisms, an accidental detonation of a fully-assembled weapon was very possible. Should the bomber carrying the device crash, the hollow \"bullet\" could be driven onto the \"target\" cylinder, possibly detonating the bomb from gravity alone (though tests suggested this was unlikely), but easily creating a critical mass that would release dangerous amounts of radiation. A crash of the B-29 and subsequent fire could trigger the explosives, causing the weapon to detonate. If immersed in water, the uranium components were subject to a neutron moderator effect, which would not cause an explosion but would release radioactive contamination. For this reason, pilots were advised to crash on land rather than at sea. Ultimately, Parsons opted to keep the explosives out of the Little Boy bomb until after the B-29 had taken off, to avoid the risk of a crash that could destroy or damage the military base from which the weapon was launched.\nDesign.\nThe Little Boy was in length, in diameter and weighed approximately . The design used the gun method to explosively force a hollow sub-critical mass of enriched uranium and a solid target cylinder together into a super-critical mass, initiating a nuclear chain reaction. This was accomplished by shooting one piece of the uranium onto the other by means of four cylindrical silk bags of cordite powder. This was a widely used smokeless propellant consisting of a mixture of 65 percent nitrocellulose, 30 percent nitroglycerine, 3 percent petroleum jelly, and 2 percent carbamite that was extruded into tubular granules. This gave it a high surface area and a rapid burning time, and could attain pressures of up to . Cordite for the wartime Little Boy was sourced from Canada; propellant for post-war Little Boys was obtained from the Picatinny Arsenal. The bomb contained of enriched uranium. Most was enriched to 89% but some was only 50% uranium-235, for an average enrichment of 80%. Less than a kilogram of uranium underwent nuclear fission, and of this mass only represents the mass-energy equivalence of the 15 kiloton yield. This was transformed into several forms of energy, mostly kinetic energy, but also heat and radiation.\nAssembly details.\nInside the weapon, the uranium-235 material was divided into two parts, following the gun principle: the \"projectile\" and the \"target\". The projectile was a hollow cylinder with 60% of the total mass (). It consisted of a stack of nine uranium rings, each in diameter with a bore in the center, and a total length of , pressed together into the front end of a thin-walled projectile long. Filling in the remainder of the space behind these rings in the projectile was a tungsten carbide disc with a steel back. At ignition, the projectile slug was pushed along the , smooth-bore gun barrel. The slug \"insert\" was a 4-inch cylinder, 7 inches in length with a axial hole. The slug comprised 40% of the total fissile mass (). The insert was a stack of six washer-like uranium discs, somewhat thicker than the projectile rings, that were slid over a 1-inch rod. This rod then extended forward through the tungsten carbide plug, impact-absorbing anvil, and nose plug backstop, eventually protruding out of the front of the bomb casing. This entire target assembly was secured at both ends with locknuts.\nWhen the hollow-front projectile reached the target and slid over the target insert, the assembled super-critical mass of uranium would be completely surrounded by a tamper and neutron reflector of tungsten carbide and steel, both materials having a combined mass of . Neutron initiators inside the assembly were activated by the impact of the projectile into the target.\nCounter-intuitive design.\nThe material was split almost in half, with at one end a group of rings of highly enriched uranium with 40% of the supercritical mass, and at the other end another group of slightly larger rings with 60% of the supercritical mass, which was fired onto the smaller group, with four polonium-beryllium neutron initiators to make the supercritical mass explode.\nA hole in the center of the larger piece dispersed the mass and increased the surface area, allowing more fission neutrons to escape, thus preventing a premature chain reaction. But, for this larger, hollow piece to have minimal contact with the tungsten carbide tamper, it must be the projectile, since only the projectile's back end was in contact with the tamper prior to detonation. The rest of the tungsten carbide tamper surrounded the sub-critical mass target cylinder (called the \"insert\" by the designers) with air space between it and the insert. This arrangement packs the maximum amount of fissile material into a gun-assembly design.\nFor the first fifty years after 1945, every published description and drawing of the Little Boy mechanism assumed that a small, solid projectile was fired into the center of a larger, stationary target. However, critical mass considerations dictated that in Little Boy the more extensive, hollow piece would be the projectile. Hollow cylinders have higher critical masses than solid pieces of fissile material, because any neutrons encountered by or generated by the material are more likely to get scattered in the air than to continue a chain reaction. The larger piece would also avoid the effects of neutron reflection from the tungsten carbide tamper until it was fully joined with the rest of the fuel. Once joined and with its neutrons reflected, the assembled fissile core would comprise more than two critical masses of uranium-235. In 2004, John Coster-Mullen, a truck driver and model maker from Illinois who had studied every photograph and document on the Hiroshima bomb to make an accurate model, corrected earlier published accounts.\nFuze system.\nThe fuzing system was designed to trigger at the most destructive altitude, which calculations suggested was . It employed a three-stage interlock system:\nRehearsals.\nThe Little Boy pre-assemblies were designated L-1, L-2, L-3, L-4, L-5, L-6, L-7, and L-11. Of these, L-1, L-2, L-5, and L-6 were expended in test drops. The first drop test was conducted with L-1 on 23 July 1945. It was dropped over the sea near Tinian in order to test the radar altimeter by the B-29 later known as \"Big Stink\", piloted by Colonel Paul W. Tibbets, the commander of the 509th Composite Group. Two more drop tests over the sea were made on 24 and 25 July, using the L-2 and L-5 units in order to test all components. Tibbets was the pilot for both missions, but this time the bomber used was the one subsequently known as \"Jabit\". L-6 was used as a dress rehearsal on 29 July. The B-29 \"Next Objective\", piloted by Major Charles W. Sweeney, flew to Iwo Jima, where emergency procedures for loading the bomb onto a standby aircraft were practiced. This rehearsal was repeated on 31 July, but this time L-6 was reloaded onto a different B-29, \"Enola Gay\", piloted by Tibbets, and the bomb was test dropped near Tinian. L-11 was the assembly used for the Hiroshima bomb, and was fully assembled with its nuclear fuel by 31 July.\nBombing of Hiroshima.\nParsons, the \"Enola Gay\"'s weaponeer, was concerned about the possibility of an accidental detonation if the plane crashed on takeoff, so he decided not to load the four cordite powder bags into the gun breech until the aircraft was in flight. After takeoff, Parsons and his assistant, Second Lieutenant Morris R. Jeppson, made their way into the bomb bay along the narrow catwalk on the port side. Jeppson held a flashlight while Parsons disconnected the primer wires, removed the breech plug, inserted the powder bags, replaced the breech plug, and reconnected the wires. Before climbing to altitude on approach to the target, Jeppson switched the three safety plugs between the electrical connectors of the internal battery and the firing mechanism from green to red. The bomb was then fully armed. Jeppson monitored the bomb's circuits.\nThe bomb was dropped at approximately 08:15 (JST) on 6 August 1945. After falling for 44.4 seconds, the time and barometric triggers started the firing mechanism. The detonation happened at an altitude of . It was less powerful than the Fat Man, which was dropped on Nagasaki, but the damage and the number of victims at Hiroshima were much higher, as Hiroshima was on flat terrain, while the hypocenter of Nagasaki lay in a small valley. According to figures published in 1945, 66,000 people were killed as a direct result of the Hiroshima blast, and 69,000 were injured to varying degrees. Later estimates put the deaths as high as 140,000 people. The United States Strategic Bombing Survey estimated that out of 24,158 Imperial Japanese Army soldiers in Hiroshima at the time of the bombing, 6,789 were killed or missing as a result of the bombing.\nThe exact measurement of the explosive yield of the bomb was problematic since the weapon had never been tested. President Harry S. Truman officially announced that the yield was . This was based on Parsons's visual assessment that the blast was greater than what he had seen at the Trinity nuclear test. Since that had been estimated at , speech writers rounded up to 20 kilotons. Further discussion was then suppressed, for fear of lessening the impact of the bomb on the Japanese. Data had been collected by Luis Alvarez, Harold Agnew, and Lawrence H. Johnston on the instrument plane, \"The Great Artiste\", but this was not used to calculate the yield at the time. More rigorous estimates of the bomb yield and conventional bomb equivalent were made when more data was acquired following the end of the war. A 1985 study estimated the bomb's yield was around . \nPhysical effects.\nAfter being selected in April 1945, Hiroshima was spared conventional bombing to serve as a pristine target, where the effects of a nuclear bomb on an undamaged city could be observed. While damage could be studied later, the energy yield of the untested Little Boy design could be determined only at the moment of detonation, using instruments dropped by parachute from a plane flying in formation with the one that dropped the bomb. Radio-transmitted data from these instruments indicated a yield of about 15 kilotons.\nComparing this yield to the observed damage produced a rule of thumb called the lethal area rule. Approximately all the people inside the area where the shock wave carried such an overpressure or greater would be killed. At Hiroshima, that area was in diameter.\nThe damage came from three main effects: blast, fire, and radiation.\nBlast.\nThe blast from a nuclear bomb is the result of X-ray-heated air (the fireball) sending a shock wave or pressure wave in all directions, initially at a velocity greater than the speed of sound, analogous to thunder generated by lightning. Knowledge about urban blast destruction is based largely on studies of Little Boy at Hiroshima. Nagasaki buildings suffered similar damage at similar distances, but the Nagasaki bomb detonated from the city center over hilly terrain that was partially bare of buildings.\nIn Hiroshima, almost everything within of the point directly under the explosion was completely destroyed, except for about 50 heavily reinforced, earthquake-resistant concrete buildings, only the shells of which remained standing. Most were completely gutted, with their windows, doors, sashes, and frames ripped out. The perimeter of severe blast damage approximately followed the contour at .\nLater test explosions of nuclear weapons with houses and other test structures nearby confirmed the 5\u00a0psi overpressure threshold. Ordinary urban buildings experiencing it were crushed, toppled, or gutted by the force of air pressure. The picture at right shows the effects of a nuclear bomb-generated 5\u00a0psi pressure wave on a test structure in Nevada in 1953.\nA major effect of this kind of structural damage was that it created fuel for fires that were started simultaneously throughout the severe destruction region.\nFire.\nThe first effect of the explosion was blinding light, accompanied by radiant heat from the fireball. The Hiroshima fireball was in diameter, with a surface temperature of , about the same temperature as at the surface of the sun. Near ground zero, everything flammable burst into flame. One famous, anonymous Hiroshima victim, sitting on stone steps from the hypocenter, left a permanent shadow, having absorbed the fireball heat that permanently bleached the surrounding stone. Simultaneous fires were started throughout the blast-damaged area by fireball heat and by overturned stoves and furnaces, electrical shorts, etc. Twenty minutes after the detonation, these fires had merged into a firestorm, pulling in surface air from all directions to feed an inferno which consumed everything flammable.\nThe Hiroshima firestorm was roughly in diameter, corresponding closely to the severe blast-damage zone. (See the USSBS map, right.) Blast-damaged buildings provided fuel for the fire. Structural lumber and furniture were splintered and scattered about. Debris-choked roads obstructed firefighters. Broken gas pipes fueled the fire, and broken water pipes rendered hydrants useless. At Nagasaki, the fires failed to merge into a single firestorm, and the fire-damaged area was only one-quarter as great as at Hiroshima, due in part to a southwest wind that pushed the fires away from the city.\nAs the map shows, the Hiroshima firestorm jumped natural firebreaks (river channels), as well as prepared firebreaks. The spread of fire stopped only when it reached the edge of the blast-damaged area, encountering less available fuel. The Manhattan Project report on Hiroshima estimated that 60% of immediate deaths were caused by fire, but with the caveat that \"many persons near the center of explosion suffered fatal injuries from more than one of the bomb effects.\"\nRadiation.\nLocal fallout is dust and ash from a bomb crater, contaminated with radioactive fission products. It falls to earth downwind of the crater and can produce, with radiation alone, a lethal area much larger than that from blast and fire. With an air burst, the fission products rise into the stratosphere, where they dissipate and become part of the global environment. Because Little Boy was an air burst above the ground, there was no bomb crater and no local radioactive fallout.\nHowever, a burst of intense neutron and gamma radiation came directly from the fission of the uranium. Its lethal radius was approximately , covering about half of the firestorm area. An estimated 30% of immediate fatalities were people who received lethal doses of this direct radiation, but died in the firestorm before their radiation injuries would have become apparent. Over 6,000 people survived the blast and fire, but died of radiation injuries. Among injured survivors, 30% had radiation injuries from which they recovered, but with a lifelong increase in cancer risk. To date, no radiation-related evidence of heritable diseases has been observed among the survivors' children.\nAfter the surrender of Japan was finalized, Manhattan Project scientists began to immediately survey the city of Hiroshima to better understand the damage, and to communicate with Japanese physicians about radiation effects in particular. The collaboration became the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission in 1946, a joint U.S.\u2013Japanese project to track radiation injuries among survivors. In 1975 its work was superseded by the Radiation Effects Research Foundation.\nIn 1962, scientists at Los Alamos created a mockup of Little Boy known as \"Project Ichiban\" in order to answer some of the unanswered questions about the exact radiation output of the bomb, which would be useful for setting benchmarks for interpreting the relationship between radiation exposure and later health outcomes. But it failed to clear up all the issues. In 1982, Los Alamos created a replica Little Boy from the original drawings and specifications. This was then tested with enriched uranium but in a safe configuration that would not cause a nuclear explosion. A hydraulic lift was used to move the projectile, and experiments were run to assess neutron emission.\nConventional weapon equivalent.\nAfter hostilities ended, a survey team from the Manhattan Project that included William Penney, Robert Serber, and George T. Reynolds was sent to Hiroshima to evaluate the effects of the blast. From evaluating the effects on objects and structures, Penney concluded that the yield was 12 \u00b1 1 kilotons. Later calculations based on charring pointed to a yield of 13 to 14 kilotons. In 1953, Frederick Reines calculated the yield as . Based on the Project Ichiban data, and the pressure-wave data from \"The Great Artiste\", the yield was estimated in the 1960s at 16.6 \u00b1 0.3 kilotons. A review conducted by a scientist at Los Alamos in 1985 concluded, on the basis of existing blast, thermal, and radiological data, and then-current models of weapons effects, that the best estimate of the yield was with an uncertainty of 20% (\u00b13 kt). By comparison, the best value for the Nagasaki bomb was evaluated as with an uncertainty of 10% (\u00b12 kt), the difference in uncertainty owing to having better data on the latter.\nTo put these numerical differences into context, it is necessary to know that the acute effects of nuclear detonations, especially the blast and thermal effects, do not scale linearly, but generally as a cubic root. Specifically, the distance of these effects scale as a function of the yield raised to an exponential power of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443. So the range of the overpressure damage expected from a detonated 12 kiloton weapon with a height of burst at would be expected to be , whereas a 20 kiloton weapon would have the same range extend to , a difference of only . The areas affected for each would be and , respectively. As such, the practical differences in effects at these yield ranges are smaller than may at first appear, if one assumes that there is a linear relationship between yield and damage.\nAlthough Little Boy exploded with the energy equivalent of around 15 kilotons of TNT, in 1946 the Strategic Bombing Survey estimated that the same blast and fire effect could have been caused by 2.1 kilotons of conventional bombs distributed evenly over the same target area: \"220 B-29s carrying 1.2 kilotons of incendiary bombs, 400 tons of high-explosive bombs, and 500 tons of anti-personnel fragmentation bombs.\" Since the target was spread across a two-dimensional plane, the vertical component of a single spherical nuclear explosion was largely wasted. A cluster bomb pattern of smaller explosions would have been a more energy-efficient match to the target.\nPost-WWII.\nWhen the war ended, it was not expected that the inefficient Little Boy design would ever again be required, and many plans and diagrams were destroyed. However, by mid-1946 the Hanford Site reactors were suffering badly from the Wigner effect. Faced with the prospect of no more plutonium for new cores and no more polonium for the initiators for the cores that had already been produced, the Director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, ordered that some Little Boys be prepared as an interim measure until a solution could be found. No Little Boy assemblies were available, and no comprehensive set of diagrams of the Little Boy could be found, although there were drawings of the various components, and stocks of spare parts.\nAt Sandia Base, three Army officers, Captains Albert Bethel, Richard Meyer, and Bobbie Griffin attempted to re-create the Little Boy. They were supervised by Harlow W. Russ, an expert on Little Boy who served with Project Alberta on Tinian, and was now leader of the Z-11 Group of the Los Alamos Laboratory's Z Division at Sandia. Gradually, they managed to locate the correct drawings and parts, and figured out how they went together. Eventually, they built six Little Boy assemblies. Although the casings, barrels, and components were tested, no enriched uranium was supplied for the bombs. By early 1947, the problem caused by the Wigner effect was on its way to solution, and the three officers were reassigned.\nThe Navy Bureau of Ordnance began in 1947 to produce 25 \"revised\" Little Boy mechanical assemblies for use by the nuclear-capable Lockheed P2V Neptune aircraft carrier aircraft (which could be launched from, but not land on, the \"Midway\"-class aircraft carriers). Components were produced by the Naval Ordnance Plants in Pocatello, Idaho, and Louisville, Kentucky. Enough fissionable material was available by 1948 to build ten projectiles and targets, although there were only enough initiators for six. However, no actual fissionable components were produced by the end of 1948, and only two outer casings were available. By the end of 1950, only five complete Little Boy assemblies had been built. All were retired by November 1950.\nThe Smithsonian Institution displayed a Little Boy (complete, except for enriched uranium), until 1986. The Department of Energy took the weapon from the museum to remove its inner components, so the bomb could not be stolen and detonated with fissile material. The government returned the emptied casing to the Smithsonian in 1993. Three other disarmed bombs are on display in the United States; another is at the Imperial War Museum in London.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18598", "revid": "31711350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18598", "title": "Litha", "text": ""}
{"id": "18599", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18599", "title": "Lebanon War", "text": "The term Lebanon War can refer to any of the following wars, fought in Lebanon:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18602", "revid": "17521759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18602", "title": "Lester Bangs", "text": "American music critic (1948\u20131982)\nLeslie Conway \"Lester\" Bangs (December 14, 1948 \u2013 April 30, 1982) was an American music journalist and critic. He wrote for \"Creem\" and \"Rolling Stone\" magazines and was also a performing musician. The music critic Jim DeRogatis called him \"America's greatest rock critic\".\nEarly life.\nBangs was born in Escondido, California. He was the son of Norma Belle (\"n\u00e9e\" Clifton) and Conway Leslie Bangs, a truck driver. Both of his parents were from Texas: his father from Enloe and his mother from Pecos County. Norma Belle was a devout Jehovah's Witness. Conway died in a fire when his son was young. When Bangs was 11, he moved with his mother to El Cajon, also in San Diego County.\nHis early interests and influences ranged from the Beat Generation (particularly William S. Burroughs) and jazz musicians John Coltrane and Miles Davis, to comic books and science fiction. He met Cameron Crowe while they were both contributing music pieces to \"The San Diego Door\", an underground newspaper of the late 1960s.\nCareer.\n\"Rolling Stone\" magazine.\nBangs became a freelance writer in 1969, after reading an ad in \"Rolling Stone\" soliciting readers' reviews. His first accepted piece was a negative review of the MC5 album \"Kick Out the Jams\", which he sent to \"Rolling Stone\" with a note requesting, if the magazine were to decline to publish the review, that he be given a reason for the decision; no reply was forthcoming, as the magazine did indeed publish the review.\nHis 1970 review of Black Sabbath's first album in \"Rolling Stone\" was scathing, rating them as imitators of the band Cream:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cream clich\u00e9s that sound like the musicians learned them out of a book, grinding on and on with dogged persistence. Vocals are sparse, most of the album being filled with plodding bass lines over which the lead guitar dribbles wooden Claptonisms from the master's tiredest Cream days. They even have discordant jams with bass and guitar reeling like velocitized speedfreaks all over each other's musical perimeters yet never quite finding synch\u2014just like Cream! But worse.\nBangs wrote about the death of Janis Joplin in 1970 from a drug overdose: \"It's not just that this kind of early death has become a fact of life that has become disturbing, but that it's been accepted as a given so quickly.\"\nIn 1973, Jann Wenner fired Bangs from \"Rolling Stone\" for \"disrespecting musicians\" after a particularly harsh review of the group Canned Heat.\n\"Creem\" magazine.\nBangs began freelancing for Detroit-based \"Creem\" in 1970. In 1971, he wrote a feature for \"Creem\" on Alice Cooper, and soon afterward he moved to Detroit. Named \"Creem\"'s editor in 1971, Bangs fell in love with Detroit, calling it \"rock's only hope\", and remained there for five years.\nDuring the early 1970s, Bangs and some other writers at \"Creem\" began using the term \"punk rock\" to designate the genre of 1960s garage bands and more contemporary acts, such as MC5 and Iggy and the Stooges. Their writings provided some of the conceptual framework for the later punk and new wave movements that emerged in New York, London, and elsewhere later in the decade. They were quick to pick up on these new movements and provide extensive coverage of the phenomenon. Bangs was enamored of the noise music of Lou Reed, and \"Creem\" gave exposure to artists such as Reed, David Bowie, Roxy Music, Captain Beefheart, Blondie, Brian Eno, and the New York Dolls years earlier than the mainstream press. Bangs wrote the essay/interview \"Let Us Now Praise Famous Death Dwarves\" about Reed in 1975. \"Creem\" was also among the earliest publications to give sizable coverage to hard rock and metal artists such as Mot\u00f6rhead, Kiss, Judas Priest, and Van Halen.\nSubsequent career.\nAfter leaving \"Creem\" in 1976, he wrote for \"The Village Voice\", \"Penthouse\", \"Playboy\", \"New Musical Express\", and many other publications. He won a posthumous Grammy Award in 1984 for his liner notes on \"The Fugs Greatest Hits, Volume 1\".\nDeath.\nBangs died in New York City on April 30, 1982, at the age of 33; he was self-medicating a bad case of the flu and accidentally overdosed on dextropropoxyphene (an opioid analgesic), diazepam (a benzodiazepine), and NyQuil.\nBangs appeared to be listening to music when he died. Earlier that day, he had bought a copy of \"Dare\" by English synth-pop band the Human League. Later that night, a friend found him lying on a couch in his apartment, unresponsive. \"\"Dare\" was spinning on the turntable, and the needle was stuck on the end groove,\" Jim DeRogatis wrote in \"Let It Blurt\", his biography of Bangs.\nWriting style and cultural commentary.\nBangs's criticism was filled with cultural references, not only to rock music but also to literature and philosophy. His radical and confrontational style influenced others in the punk rock and related social and political movements. In a 1982 interview, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Well, basically, I just started out to lead [an interview] with the most insulting question I could think of. Because it seemed to me that the whole thing of interviewing as far as rock stars and that was just such a suck-up. It was groveling obeisance to people who weren't that special, really. It's just a guy, just another person, so what?\nIn 1979, writing for \"The Village Voice\", Bangs wrote a piece about racism in the punk music scene, called \"The White Noise Supremacists\", wherein he re-examined his own actions and words, and those of his peers, in light of some bands using Nazi symbolism, and other racist speech and imagery, \"for shock value\". He came to the conclusion that generating outrage for attention was not worth the harm it was causing fellow members of the community, and expressed his personal shame and embarrassment about having engaged in these racist behaviors himself. He praised the efforts of activist groups like Rock Against Racism and Rock Against Sexism as \"an attempt at simple decency by a lot of people whom one would think too young and naive to begin to appreciate the contradictions.\"\nMusic.\nBangs was also a musician. In 1976, he and Peter Laughner recorded an acoustic improvisation in the \"Creem\" office. The recording included covers/parodies of songs like \"Sister Ray\" and \"Pale Blue Eyes\", both by the Velvet Underground.\nIn 1977, Bangs recorded, as a solo artist, a 7\" vinyl single named \"Let It Blurt/Live\", mixed by John Cale and released in 1979.\nIn 1977, at the New York City nightclub CBGB, Bangs and guitarist Mickey Leigh, Joey Ramone's brother, decided to form a band named \"Birdland\". Although they both had their roots in jazz, the two wanted to create an old-school rock-and-roll group. Leigh brought in his post-punk band, The Rattlers (David Merrill on bass; Matty Quick on drums). On April Fool's Day 1979, the band snuck into Electric Lady Studios for an impromptu late-night recording session; the studio was under renovation but Merrill was helping and had the key. Birdland broke up within two months of the recording. The cassette tape from the session became the master, mixed by Ed Stasium and released by Leigh in 1986 as \"\"Birdland\" with Lester Bangs\". In a review of the album, Robert Christgau gave it a B-plus and said, \"musically he always had the instincts, and words were no problem.\"\nHe also appeared on stage with others at times. On one occasion, while the J. Geils Band were playing in concert, Bangs climbed onto the stage, typewriter in hand, and proceeded to type a supposed review of the event, in full view of the audience, banging the keys in rhythm with the music.\nIn 1980, Bangs traveled to Austin, Texas, where he met a surf/punk rock group, The Delinquents. In early December of the same year, they recorded an album as \"Lester Bangs and the Delinquents\", titled \"Jook Savages on the Brazos\", released the following year.\nIn 1990, the Mekons released the EP \"F.U.N. 90\" with Bangs's declamation in the song \"One Horse Town\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18603", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18603", "title": "Lydia Kavina", "text": "Russian musician\nLydia Evgenevna Kavina (; born 8 September 1967) is a British-Russian theremin player, based in Oxfordshire, UK. \nThe granddaughter of L\u00e9on Theremin's first cousin, Soviet anthropologist and primatologist Mikhail Nesturkh, Kavina was born in Moscow and began studying the instrument under the direction of L\u00e9on Theremin when she was nine years old. Five years later, she gave her first theremin concert, which marked the beginning of a musical career that has led to numerous concert, theatre, radio and television performances around the world.\nKavina has appeared as a solo performer at such prestigious venues as the \"Royal Albert Hall\" in London, \"Elbphilharmonie\" in Hamburg, \"Royal Concertgebouw\" in Amsterdam, \"Bolshoi Zal\" (Great Hall) of the Moscow Conservatory, Moscow International Art Centre with National Philharmonic of Russia under Vladimir Spivakov and Bellevue Palace in Berlin, the residence of the German President. She has also performed at leading festivals, including Caramoor with the Orchestra St. Luke's, New York's Lincoln Center Festival, Holland Music Festival, Martinu Festival, Electronic Music Festival in Burge and Moscow \u201cAvantgarde\u201d.\nKavina performs most of the classical theremin repertoire, including popular works for theremin by Bohuslav Martin\u016f, Joseph Schillinger, and \"Spellbound\" by Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa, as well as \"Equatorial\" by Edgard Var\u00e8se and the lesser known \"Testament\" by Nicolas Obouchov.\nIn addition to giving concerts, Kavina is a composer of music for theremin and teaches the instrument in Western Europe, Russia and the United States. Carolina Eyck was one of her students. Together with the London Philharmonic Orchestra, she played theremin for Howard Shore's soundtrack of the Oscar-winning film \"Ed Wood\", as well as for \"eXistenZ\" (also by Shore), \"The Machinist\" and \"The Electrical Life of Louis Wain\". She played the role of theremin performer in the film \"Me and Kaminski\" (2015) Additionally, Kavina has recorded several compact discs and is the subject of an instructional video from the theremin manufacturer Moog Music. She was also featured in stage productions such as \"Alice\" and \"The Black Rider\" (both conceived and directed by Robert Wilson, with music by Tom Waits) at the Thalia Theater in Hamburg, and in collaboration with the Russian experimental surf band Messer Chups.\nLydia Kavina is an active promoter of new experimental music for the theremin. Her recent project \"Nicht zu fassen\" for theremin and accordion, together with Roman Yusipey, includes works by S.Gubaidulina, J.Cage, V.Poleva, as well as Kavina's compositions, it was performed in Germany and Ukraine. In collaboration with Barbara Buchholz and Kamerensemble Neue Musik Berlin, Kavina performed a number of concerts of contemporary works for theremin in Germany in 2005\u20132007 as part of the \"Touch! Don't Touch! \u2013 Music for Theremin\" project.\nThe most notable project of her recent career is her theremin solo in 4th Symphony by Ch. Ives, under Kent Nagano (Hamburg and Zurich, 2018\u20132019), \"B\u00e4hlamms Fest\", an opera by Olga Neuwirth (Vienna, Hamburg, Luzern, Bochum, 1999\u20132021) \"The Little Mermaid\", a ballet by Lera Auerbach, choreographed by John Neumeier in Copenhagen New Opera Haus (2005), Hamburg State Opera (2007\u20132015) and The National Ballet of China in Beijing (2012). Kavina also played the solo in Danny Elfman's UK concert tour with BBC concert orchestra and London Concert orchestra (2013\u20132014).\nKavina has completed a number of her own compositions for theremin including a Concerto for Theremin and Symphony Orchestra, first performed by the Boston Modern Orchestra under the direction of Gil Rose.\nKavina holds a degree in composition from The Moscow Conservatory, where she also completed a postgraduate assistantship program.\nCDs.\nCollaborations\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18605", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18605", "title": "Liver opal", "text": ""}
{"id": "18606", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18606", "title": "Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam", "text": "Tamil militant organisation in Sri Lanka (1976\u20132009)\nThe Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE; , ; also known as the Tamil Tigers) was a Tamil militant organization, that was based in northern and eastern Sri Lanka. The LTTE fought to create an independent Tamil state called Tamil Eelam in the northeast of the island in response to violent persecution and discriminatory policies against Sri Lankan Tamils by the Sinhalese-dominated Sri Lankan government.\nThe leader of the LTTE, Velupillai Prabhakaran, cited the 1958 anti-Tamil pogrom as one of the factors that led him to militancy. In 1975, he assassinated the Mayor of Jaffna, Alfred Duraiappah, in revenge for the 1974 Tamil conference incident. The LTTE was subsequently founded in 1976 as a reaction to the Sri Lankan Constitution of 1972 which prescribed Buddhism as the primary religion of the country, and Sinhala as its national language. The LTTE was involved in attacks on government targets, policemen and local politicians and moved on to armed clashes against the armed forces. Oppression against Sri Lankan Tamils continued by Sinhalese mobs, notably during the 1977 anti-Tamil pogrom and the 1981 burning of the Jaffna Public Library. Following the watershed Black July anti-Tamil pogrom in 1983 orchestrated by members of the government, there was a dramatic growth of Tamil militant groups and a full-scale insurgency began, marking the start of the Sri Lankan civil war. By 1986, the LTTE had emerged as the dominant Tamil militant group in Sri Lanka. It would go on to be widely regarded as among the most effective and disciplined insurgent groups in the world.\nInitially starting out as a guerrilla force, the LTTE increasingly came to resemble conventional armed forces with a well-developed military wing that included a navy, an airborne unit, an intelligence wing, and a specialised suicide attack unit. The LTTE perfected suicide bombing as a tactic. It engaged in a hybrid warfare encompassing both military and civilian targets. The LTTE was also notable for using women and children in combat, and carrying out a number of high-profile assassinations, including former Indian prime minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991. The LTTE was designated as a terrorist organisation by 33 countries, including the European Union, Canada, the United States and India.\nOver the course of the conflict, the LTTE frequently exchanged control of territory in the north-east with the Sri Lankan military, with the two sides engaging in intense military confrontations. It was involved in four unsuccessful rounds of peace talks with the Sri Lankan government and at its peak in 2000, the LTTE was in control of 76% of the landmass in the Northern and Eastern provinces of Sri Lanka. Prabhakaran headed the organisation from its inception until his death in 2009. Between 1983 and 2009, at least 100,000 were killed in the civil war, of which many were Sri Lankan Tamils. Many Sri Lankan Tamils also left Sri Lanka for various destinations, mainly Western countries and India, forming the pivotal Tamil diaspora estimated at one million.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nEmergence of Tamil militancy has its roots in the political developments and ethnic tensions in post-independent Sri Lanka. Sinhalese-led governments attempted to reduce the increased presence of the Tamil minority in government jobs, which led to ethnic discrimination, seeded hatred and divisive policies including the \"Sinhala Only Act\" and anti-Tamil riots, which gave rise to separatist ideologies among many Tamil leaders. By the late 1970s, initial non-violent political struggle for an independent Tamil state was used as justification for a secessionist insurgency led by the LTTE.\nIn the early 1970s, the United Front government of Sirimavo Bandaranaike introduced the policy of standardisation to curtail the number of Tamil students selected for certain faculties in the universities. In 1972, the government added a district quota as a parameter within each language. A student named Satiyaseelan formed \"Tamil Manavar Peravai\" (Tamil Students League) to counter this. This group comprised Tamil youth who advocated the rights of students to have fair enrolment. Inspired by the failed 1971 insurrection of Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, it was the first Tamil militant group of its kind. It consisted of around 40 Tamil youth, including Ponnuthurai Sivakumaran (later, the leader of the Sivakumaran group), K. Pathmanaba (one of the founder members of EROS) and Velupillai Prabhakaran, an 18-year-old youth from Valvettithurai (VVT).\nIn 1972, Prabhakaran teamed up with Chetti Thanabalasingam in Jaffna to form the Tamil New Tigers (TNT), with Thanabalasingham as its leader. After he was killed, Prabhakaran took over. At the same time, Nadarajah Thangathurai and Selvarajah Yogachandran (better known by his \"nom de guerre\" Kuttimani) were also involved in discussions about an insurgency. They would later (in 1979) create a separate organisation named Tamil Eelam Liberation Organisation (TELO) to campaign for the establishment of an independent Tamil Eelam. These groups, along with another prominent figure of the armed struggle, Ponnuthurai Sivakumaran, were involved in several hit-and-run operations against pro-government Tamil politicians, Sri Lanka Police and civil administration during the early 1970s. These attacks included throwing bombs at the residence and the car of SLFP Jaffna Mayor, Alfred Duraiyappah, placing a bomb at a carnival held in the stadium of Jaffna city (now \"Duraiyappah stadium\") and Neervely bank robbery. The 1974 Tamil conference incident during which intervention by Sri Lankan police resulted in 11 dead also sparked the anger of these militant groups. Both Sivakumaran and Prabhakaran attempted to assassinate Duraiyappah in revenge for the incident. Sivakumaran committed suicide on 5 June 1974, to evade capture by Police. On 27 July 1975, Prabhakaran assassinated Duraiyappah, who was branded as a \"traitor\" by TULF and the insurgents alike. Prabhakaran shot and killed the Mayor when he was visiting the Krishnan temple at Ponnalai.\nFounding and rise to power.\nThe LTTE was founded on 5 May 1976 as the successor to the Tamil New Tigers. Uma Maheswaran became its leader, and Prabhakaran its military commander. A five-member committee was also appointed. It has been stated that Prabhakaran sought to \"refashion the old TNT/new LTTE into an elite, ruthlessly efficient, and highly professional fighting force\", by the terrorism expert Rohan Gunaratna. Prabhakaran kept the numbers of the group small and maintained a high standard of training. The LTTE carried out low-key attacks against various government targets, including policemen and local politicians.\nTULF support.\nTamil United Liberation Front leader Appapillai Amirthalingam, who was in 1977 elected as the Opposition leader of Sri Lanka Parliament, clandestinely supported the LTTE. Amirthalingam believed that if he could exercise control over the Tamil insurgent groups, it would enhance his political position and pressure the government to agree to grant political autonomy to the Tamils. Thus, he provided letters of reference to the LTTE and to other Tamil insurgent groups to raise funds. Both Uma Maheswaran (a former surveyor) and Urmila Kandiah, the first female member of the LTTE, were prominent members of the TULF youth wing. Maheswaran was the secretary of TULF Tamil Youth Forum, Colombo branch. Amirthalingam introduced Prabhakaran to N. S. Krishnan, who later became the first international representative of LTTE. It was Krishnan who introduced Prabhakaran to Anton Balasingham, who later became the chief political strategist and chief negotiator of LTTE, which split for the first time in 1979. Uma Maheswaran was found to be having a love affair with Urmila Kandiah, which was against the code of conduct of LTTE. Prabhakaran expelled him and Maheswaran formed People's Liberation Organisation of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) in 1980.\nIn 1980, Junius Richard Jayewardene's government agreed to devolve power by the means of District Development Councils upon the request of TULF. By this time, LTTE and other insurgent groups wanted a separate state. They had no faith in any sort of political solution. Thus the TULF and other Tamil political parties were steadily marginalized and insurgent groups emerged as the major force in the north. During this period of time, several other insurgent groups came into the arena, such as Eelam Revolutionary Organisation of Students (1975), Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization (1979), PLOTE (1980), Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (1980) and Tamil Eelam Liberation Army (1982). LTTE ordered civilians to boycott the local government elections of 1983 which TULF contested. Voter turnout became as low as 10%. Thereafter, Tamil political parties were largely unable to represent the Tamil people as insurgent groups took over their position.\nThirunelveli attack, 1983.\nFollowing a Sri Lankan Army ambush in Meesalai in which two LTTE members were killed including its military commander Seelan, the LTTE sought revenge by launching its first attack on the Army. On 23 July 1983, the LTTE ambushed the Army patrol Four Four Bravo in Thirunelveli, Jaffna, and killed thirteen soldiers. The ambush provided the pretext for the pre-planned Black July pogrom to be unleashed against the Tamil community in which 3,500-4,000 Tamils were killed. Before the pogrom the LTTE had only 30 full-time members. Subsequently, thousands of outraged Tamil youths joined Tamil militant groups to fight the Sri Lankan government, in what is considered a major catalyst to the insurgency in Sri Lanka. Among the notable members to join the LTTE following the pogrom included its eastern commander Karuna Amman, its police chief Balasingham Nadesan and its first suicide attacker Captain Miller.\nIndian support.\nIn reaction to various geopolitical and economic factors, from August 1983 to May 1987, India, through its intelligence agency the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), provided arms, training and monetary support to six Sri Lankan Tamil insurgent groups including the LTTE. During that period, 32 camps were set up in India to train these 495 LTTE insurgents, including 90 women who were trained in 10 batches. The first batch of Tigers were trained in Establishment 22 based in Chakrata, Uttarakhand. The second batch, including LTTE intelligence chief Pottu Amman, trained in Himachal Pradesh. Prabakaran visited the first and the second batch of Tamil Tigers to see them training. Eight other batches of LTTE were trained in Tamil Nadu. Thenmozhi Rajaratnam \"alias\" Dhanu, who carried out the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi and Sivarasan, the key conspirator, were among the militants trained by RAW in Nainital, India.\nIn April 1984, the LTTE formally joined a common militant front, the Eelam National Liberation Front (ENLF), a union between LTTE, TELO, EROS, PLOTE and EPRLF.\nClashes with other insurgent groups.\nTELO usually held the Indian view of problems and pushed for India's view during peace talks with Sri Lanka and other groups. LTTE denounced the TELO view and claimed that India was only acting on its own interest. As a result, the LTTE broke from the ENLF in 1986. Soon fighting broke out between the TELO and the LTTE and clashes occurred over the next few months. As a result, almost the entire TELO leadership and at least 400 TELO militants were killed by the LTTE. The LTTE attacked training camps of the EPRLF a few months later, forcing it to withdraw from the Jaffna peninsula. Notices were issued to the effect that all remaining Tamil insurgents join the LTTE in Jaffna and in Madras, where the Tamil groups were headquartered. With the major groups including the TELO and EPRLF eliminated, the remaining 20 or so Tamil insurgent groups were then absorbed into the LTTE, making Jaffna an LTTE-dominated city.\nAnother practice that increased support by Tamil people was LTTE's members taking an oath of loyalty which stated LTTE's goal of establishing a state for the Sri Lankan Tamils. LTTE members were prohibited from smoking cigarettes and consuming alcohol in any form. LTTE members were required to avoid their family members and avoid communication with them. Initially, LTTE members were prohibited from having love affairs or sexual relationships as it could deter their prime motive, but this policy changed after Prabhakaran married Mathivathani Erambu in October 1984.\nIPKF period.\nIn July 1987, faced with growing anger among its own Tamils and a flood of refugees, India intervened directly in the conflict for the first time by initially airdropping food parcels into Jaffna. After negotiations, India and Sri Lanka entered into the Indo-Sri Lanka Accord. Though the conflict was between the Tamil and Sinhalese people, India and Sri Lanka signed the peace accord instead of India influencing both parties to sign a peace accord among themselves. The peace accord assigned a certain degree of regional autonomy in the Tamil areas, with Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front (EPRLF) controlling the regional council and called for the Tamil militant groups to surrender. India was to send a peacekeeping force, named the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF), part of the Indian Army, to Sri Lanka to enforce the disarmament and to watch over the regional council.\nWar against IPKF.\nAlthough the Tamil militant organizations did not have a role in the Indo-Lanka agreement, most groups, including EPRLF, TELO, EROS, and PLOTE, accepted it. LTTE rejected the accord because they opposed EPRLF's Varadaraja Perumal as the chief ministerial candidate for the merged North Eastern Province. The LTTE named three alternate candidates for the position, which India rejected. The LTTE subsequently refused to hand over their weapons to the IPKF. The LTTE's political leader for Jaffna peninsula Thileepan died during a hunger strike directed at the Indian government after it had failed to meet his demands; and on 5 October 12 LTTE cadres detained by the Sri Lankan Navy committed suicide when the Sri Lankan Army attempted to take them to Colombo for interrogation after the IPKF refused to intervene and secure their release under the accord. Major General Harkirat Singh J.N.Dixit and Depinder Singh were against handing over the LTTE cadres to the Sri Lankan Army but due to orders from New Delhi they agreed. The LTTE walked out of the accord after the mass suicide. Harkirat Singh blamed the diplomats and the Army headquarters for the turn of events leading to the conflict.\nThus LTTE engaged in military conflict with the Indian Army, and launched its first attack on an Indian army rations truck on 8 October, killing five Indian para-commandos who were on board by strapping burning tires around their necks. The government of India stated that the IPKF should disarm the LTTE by force. The Indian Army launched assaults on the LTTE, including a month-long campaign, \"Operation Pawan\" to win control of the Jaffna Peninsula. The ruthlessness of this campaign, and the Indian army's subsequent anti-LTTE operations, which included civilian massacres and rapes made it extremely unpopular among many Tamils in Sri Lanka.\nPremadasa government support.\nThe Indian intervention was also unpopular among the Sinhalese majority. Prime Minister Ranasinghe Premadasa pledged to withdraw IPKF as soon as he was elected president during his presidential election campaign in 1988. After being elected, in April 1989, he started negotiations with LTTE. President Premadasa ordered the Sri Lanka Army to clandestinely hand over arms consignments to the LTTE to fight the IPKF and its proxy, the Tamil National Army (TNA). These consignments included RPGs, mortars, self-loading rifles, Type 81 assault rifle, T56 automatic rifles, pistols, hand grenades, ammunition, and communications sets. Moreover, millions of dollars were also passed on to the LTTE.\nAfter IPKF.\nThe last members of the IPKF, which was estimated to have had a strength of well over 100,000 at its peak, left the country in March 1990 upon the request of President Premadasa. Unstable peace initially held between the government and the LTTE, and peace talks progressed towards providing devolution for Tamils in the north and east of the country. A ceasefire held between LTTE and the government from June 1989 to June 1990, but broke down as LTTE massacred 600 police officers in the Eastern Province.\nFighting continued throughout the 1990s, and was marked by two key assassinations carried out by the LTTE: those of former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1991, and Sri Lankan President Ranasinghe Premadasa in 1993, using suicide bombers on both occasions. The fighting briefly halted in 1994 following the election of Chandrika Kumaratunga as President of Sri Lanka and the onset of peace talks, but fighting resumed after LTTE sacked two SLN gunboats on 19 April 1995. In a series of military operations that followed, the Sri Lanka Armed Forces recaptured the Jaffna Peninsula. Further offensives followed over the next three years, and the military captured large areas in the north of the country from the LTTE, including areas in the Vanni region, the town of Kilinochchi, and many smaller towns. From 1998 onward, the LTTE regained control of these areas, which culminated in the capture in April 2000 of the strategically important Elephant Pass base complex, located at the entrance of the Jaffna Peninsula, after prolonged fighting against the Sri Lanka Army.\nMahattaya, a one-time deputy leader of LTTE, was accused of treason by the LTTE and killed in 1994. He is said to have collaborated with the Indian Research and Analysis Wing to remove Prabhakaran from the LTTE leadership.\n2002 ceasefire.\nIn 2002, the LTTE dropped its demand for a separate state, instead demanding a form of regional autonomy. Following the landslide election defeat of Kumaratunga and Ranil Wickramasinghe coming to power in December 2001, the LTTE declared a unilateral ceasefire. The Sri Lankan Government agreed to the ceasefire, and in March 2002 the Ceasefire Agreement (CFA) was signed. As part of the agreement, Norway and other Nordic countries agreed to jointly monitor the ceasefire through the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission.\nSix rounds of peace talks between the Government of Sri Lanka and LTTE were held, but they were temporarily suspended after the LTTE pulled out of the talks in 2003 claiming \"certain critical issues relating to the ongoing peace process\". In 2003 the LTTE proposed an Interim Self-Governing Authority (ISGA). This move was approved of by the international community but rejected by the Sri Lankan President. The LTTE boycotted the presidential election in December 2005. While LTTE claimed that the people under its control were free to vote, it is alleged that they used threats to prevent the population from voting. The United States condemned this.\nThe new government of Sri Lanka came into power in 2006 and demanded to abrogate the ceasefire agreement, stating that the ethnic conflict could only have a military solution, and that the only way to achieve this was by eliminating the LTTE. Further peace talks were scheduled in Oslo, Norway, on 8 and 9 June 2006, but cancelled when the LTTE refused to meet directly with the government delegation, stating its fighters were not being allowed safe passage to travel to the talks. Norwegian mediator Erik Solheim told journalists that the LTTE should take direct responsibility for the collapse of the talks. Rifts grew between the government and LTTE, and resulted in a number of ceasefire agreement violations by both sides during 2006. Suicide attacks, military skirmishes, and air raids took place during the latter part of 2006. Between February 2002 to May 2007, the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission documented 3,830 ceasefire violations by the LTTE, with respect to 351 by the security forces. Military confrontation continued into 2007 and 2008. In January 2008 the government officially pulled out of the Cease Fire Agreement.\nDissension.\nIn the most significant show of dissent from within the organisation, a senior LTTE commander named Colonel Karuna (\"nom de guerre\" of Vinayagamoorthi Muralitharan) broke away from the LTTE in March 2004 and formed the TamilEela Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal (later Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal), amid allegations that the northern commanders were overlooking the needs of the eastern Tamils. The LTTE leadership accused him of mishandling funds and questioned him about his recent personal behaviour. He tried to take control of the eastern province from the LTTE, which caused clashes between the LTTE and TMVP. The LTTE suggested that TMVP was backed by the government, and the Nordic SLMM monitors corroborated this. It was later revealed that UNP Member of Parliament Seyed Ali Zahir Moulana had played an important role in the defection of Colonel Karuna from the LTTE to the Government.\nMilitary defeat.\nMahinda Rajapaksa was elected as the president of Sri Lanka in 2005. After a brief period of negotiations, LTTE pulled out of peace talks indefinitely. Sporadic violence had continued and on 25 April 2006, LTTE tried to assassinate Sri Lankan Army Commander Lieutenant General Sarath Fonseka. Following the attack, the European Union proscribed the LTTE as a terrorist organisation. A new crisis leading to the first large-scale fighting since signing of the ceasefire occurred when the LTTE closed the sluice gates of the Mavil Oya (Mavil Aru) reservoir on 21 July 2006, and cut the water supply to 15,000 villages in government controlled areas. This dispute developed into a full-scale war by August 2006.\nAfter the breakdown of the peace process in 2006, the Sri Lankan military launched a major offensive against the Tigers, defeating the LTTE militarily and bringing the entire country under its control. Human rights groups criticised the nature of the victory which included the internment of Tamil civilians in concentration camps with little or no access to outside agencies. Victory over the Tigers was declared by Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa on 16 May 2009, and the LTTE admitted defeat on 17 May 2009. Prabhakaran was killed by government forces on 19 May 2009. Selvarasa Pathmanathan succeeded Prabhakaran as leader of the LTTE, but he was later arrested in Malaysia and handed over to the Sri Lankan government in August 2009.\nDefeat in the East.\nEelam War IV had commenced in the East. Mavil Aru came under the control of the Sri Lanka Army by 15 August 2006. Systematically, Sampoor, Vakarai, Kanjikudichchi Aru and Batticaloa also came under military control. The military then captured Thoppigala, the Tiger stronghold in Eastern Province on 11 July 2007. IPKF had failed to capture it from LTTE during its offensive in 1988.\nDefeat in the North.\nSporadic fighting had been happening in the North for months, but the intensity of the clashes increased after September 2007. Gradually, the defence lines of the LTTE began to fall. The advancing military confined the LTTE into rapidly diminishing areas in the North. Earlier, on 2 November 2007, S. P. Thamilselvan, who was the head of the rebels' political wing, was killed during another government air raid. On 2 January 2008, the Sri Lankan government officially abandoned the ceasefire agreement. By 2 August 2008, LTTE lost the Mannar District following the fall of Vellankulam town. Troops captured Pooneryn and Mankulam during the final months of 2008.\nOn 2 January 2009, the President of Sri Lanka, Mahinda Rajapaksa, announced that the Sri Lankan troops had captured Kilinochchi, the city which the LTTE had used for over a decade as its de facto administrative capital. On the same day, President Rajapaksa called upon LTTE to surrender. It was stated that the loss of Kilinochchi had caused substantial damage to the LTTE's public image, and that the LTTE was likely to collapse under military pressure on multiple fronts. As of 8 January 2009, the LTTE abandoned its positions on the Jaffna peninsula to make a last stand in the jungles of Mullaitivu, their last main base.&lt;ref name=\"mod-bbc-01/08/09\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Jaffna Peninsula was captured by the Sri Lankan Army by 14 January. On 25 January 2009, SLA troops \"completely captured\" Mullaitivu town, the last major LTTE stronghold.&lt;ref name=\"mod-bbc-01/25/09\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nPresident Mahinda Rajapaksa declared military victory over the Tamil Tigers on 16 May 2009, after 26 years of conflict. The rebels offered to lay down their weapons in return for a guarantee of safety. On 17 May 2009, LTTE's head of the Department of International Relations, Selvarasa Pathmanathan conceded defeat, saying in an email statement, \"this battle has reached its bitter end\".\nAftermath.\nWith the end of the hostilities, 11,664 LTTE members, including 595 child soldiers surrendered to the Sri Lankan military. Approximately 150 hardcore LTTE cadres and 1,000 mid-level cadres escaped to India. The government detained surrendered cadres for \"rehabilitation\" under a National Action Plan for the Re-integration of Ex-combatants while allegations of torture, rape and murder of detainees were reported by international human rights bodies. They were divided into three categories; hardcore, non-combatants, and those who were forcibly recruited (including child soldiers). Twenty-four rehabilitation centres were set up in Jaffna, Batticaloa, and Vavuniya. Among the apprehended cadres, there had been about 700 hardcore members. Some of these cadres were integrated into the State Intelligence Service to tackle the internal and external networks of LTTE. By August 2011, the government had released more than 8,000 cadres, and 2,879 remained.\nContinued operations.\nAfter the death of LTTE leader Prabhakaran and the most powerful members of the organisation, Selvarasa Pathmanathan (alias \"KP\") was its sole first generation leader left alive. He assumed duty as the new leader of LTTE on 21 July 2009. A statement was issued, allegedly from the executive committee of the LTTE, stating that Pathmanathan had been appointed leader of the LTTE. 15 days after the announcement, on 5 August 2009, a Sri Lankan military intelligence unit, with the collaboration of local authorities, captured Pathmanathan in the Tune Hotel, in downtown Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Sri Lanka Ministry of Defence alleges that Perinpanayagam Sivaparan \"alias\" Nediyavan of the Tamil Eelam People's Alliance (TEPA) in Norway, Suren Surendiran of British Tamils Forum (BTF), Father S. J. Emmanuel of Global Tamil Forum (GTF), Visvanathan Rudrakumaran of Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and Sekarapillai Vinayagamoorthy \"alias\" Kathirgamathamby Arivazhagan \"alias\" Vinayagam, a former senior intelligence leader are trying to revive the organisation among the Tamil diaspora. Subsequently, in May 2011, Nediyavan, who advocates an armed struggle against the Sri Lankan state, was arrested and released on bail in Norway, pending further investigation.\nDivisions.\nThe LTTE was viewed as a disciplined and militarised group with a leader of a significant military and organisational skills. Three major divisions of the LTTE were the military, intelligence, and political wings.\nThe military wing consisted of at least 11 separate divisions including the conventional fighting forces, Charles Anthony Regiment and Jeyanthan Regiment; the suicide wing called the Black Tigers; naval wing Sea Tigers, air-wing Air Tigers, LTTE leader Prabhakaran's personal security divisions, Imran Pandian regiment and Ratha regiment; auxiliary military units such as Kittu artillery brigade, Kutti Sri mortar brigade, Ponnamman mining unit and hit-and-run squads like Pistol gang. Charles Anthony brigade was the first conventional fighting formation created by LTTE. The Sea Tiger division was founded in 1984, under the leadership of Thillaiyampalam Sivanesan \"alias\" Soosai. LTTE acquired its first light aircraft in the late 1990s. Vaithilingam Sornalingam \"alias\" Shankar was instrumental in creating the Air Tigers. It carried out nine air attacks since 2007, including a suicide air raid targeting Sri Lanka Air Force headquarters, Colombo in February 2009. LTTE was the only rebel organisation to have an air force. LTTE intelligence wing consisted of Tiger Organisation Security Intelligence Service \"aka\" TOSIS, run by Pottu Amman, and a separate military intelligence division. The LTTE cadres were required to follow a strict code of conduct which included prohibition on smoking and consumption of alcohol, with sexual relationships also being regulated. Each member carried a cyanide capsule to commit suicide in case of capture.\nThe LTTE operated a systematic and powerful political wing, which functioned like a separate state in the LTTE controlled area. In 1989, it established a political party named People's Front of Liberation Tigers, under Gopalaswamy Mahendraraja \"alias\" Mahattaya. It was abandoned soon after. Later, S. P. Thamilselvan was appointed the head of the political wing. He was also a member of the LTTE delegation for Norwegian brokered peace talks. After the death of Thamilselvan in November 2007, Balasingham Nadesan was appointed as its leader. Major sections within the political wing include International peace secretariat, led by Pulidevan, LTTE Police, LTTE court, Bank of Tamil Eelam, Sports division and the \"Voice of Tigers\" radio broadcasting station of LTTE.\nLTTE used female cadres for military engagements. Its women's wing consisted of Malathi and Sothiya Brigades.\nGovernance.\nDuring its active years, the LTTE had established and administered a de facto state under its control, named Tamil Eelam with Kilinochchi as its administrative capital, and had managed a government in its territory, providing state functions such as courts, a police force, a human rights organisation, and a humanitarian assistance board, a health board, and an education board. However, the court system, composed of young judges with little or no legal training had operated without codified or defined legal authority, and essentially operated as agents of the LTTE rather than as an independent judiciary. It ran a bank (Bank of Tamil Eelam), a radio station (Voice of Tigers) and a television station (National Television of Tamil Eelam). In the LTTE-controlled areas, women reported lower levels of domestic violence because \"the Tigers had a de facto justice system to deal with domestic violence.\" The United States Department of State described LTTE's governance as an \"authoritarian military rule\" that violated civil liberties and discriminated against minorities.\nIn 2003, the LTTE issued a proposal to establish an Interim Self-Governing Authority in the eight districts of the North and East which it controlled. The ISGA was to be entrusted with powers such as the right to impose law, collect taxes and oversee the rehabilitation process until a favourable solution was reached after which elections would be held. The ISGA would consist of members representing the LTTE, GoSL and the Muslim community. According to the proposal, this LTTE administration intended to be a secular one with principal emphasis on prohibition of discrimination and protection of all communities.\nLocal perception and support.\nDue to its military victories, policies, call for national self-determination and constructive Tamil nationalist platform, the LTTE was supported by major sections of the Tamil community. Based on the survey of the Jaffna population by the BBC and Reuters journalists, a U.S. diplomatic cable from 1994 stated that support for the LTTE was fairly strong among the Jaffna population who admired the discipline of the LTTE's administrative service, and that majority of Jaffna residents would choose the LTTE over the Sri Lankan Army given the choice. According to the assessments by independent observers, the LTTE administration of justice gained \"significant social acceptance\", and its courts were broadly seen as \"more efficient, less expensive, and less vulnerable to corruption than their Sri Lankan counterparts.\" The LTTE police force also had \"a high degree of legitimacy\" among Tamil civilians who viewed it as \"an uncorrupt and important stabilizing factor in the region.\" A survey carried out by the Centre for Policy Alternatives in 2002 from a sample of 89 Sri Lankan Tamils found that 89% regarded the LTTE as their sole representatives. \nHowever, University Teachers for Human Rights (Jaffna), a local human rights NGO that has been accused of anti-LTTE bias by some critics, claimed that \"by combination of internal terror and narrow nationalist ideology the LTTE succeeded in atomising the community. It took away not only the right to oppose but even the right to evaluate, as a community, the course they were taking. This gives a semblance of illusion that the whole society is behind the LTTE.\" After meeting with the Tamil civil society in Jaffna in 2001, Jehan Perera, the executive director of the National Peace Council of Sri Lanka, observed that fear was not the only factor that impelled civic groups in Jaffna to speak in favour of the LTTE but that the Jaffna people had recognized the LTTE's military strength and pragmatically accepted it as the main player in achieving a negotiated settlement.\nIdeology.\nThe LTTE was a self-styled national liberation organisation with the primary goal of establishing an independent Tamil state. Tamil nationalism was the primary basis of its ideology. LTTE claimed to strive for a democratic, secular state that is based on socialism. Its leader Velupillai Prabhakaran was influenced by Indian freedom fighters such as Subhas Chandra Bose. The organisation denied being a separatist movement and saw itself as fighting for self-determination and restoration of sovereignty in what it recognised as Tamil homeland. Although most Tigers were Hindus, the LTTE was an avowedly secular organisation; religion did not play any significant part in its ideology. Prabhakaran criticised what he saw as the oppressive features of traditional Hindu Tamil society, such as the caste system and gender inequality. The LTTE presented itself as a revolutionary movement seeking widespread change within Tamil society, not just independence from the Sri Lankan state. Therefore, its ideology called for the removal of caste discrimination and support for women's liberation. Prabhakaran described his political philosophy as \"revolutionary socialism\", with the goal of creating an \"egalitarian society\". However, by 2002 with the shift in geopolitical climate, Prabhakaran endorsed \"open market economy\", but he pointed out that the question about the proper economic system can be considered only after the ethnic problem had been solved.\nGlobal network.\nLTTE had developed a large international network since the days of N. S. Krishnan, who served as its first international representative. In the late 1970s, TULF parliamentarian and opposition leader A. Amirthalingam provided letters of reference for fundraising, and V. N. Navaratnam, who was an executive committee member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), introduced many influential and wealthy Tamils living overseas to Tamil insurgent leaders. Navaratnam also introduced LTTE members to the members of Polisario Front, a national liberation movement in Morocco, at a meeting held in Oslo, Norway. In 1978, during the world tour of Amirthalingam (with London-based Eelam activist S. K. Vaikundavasan), he formed the World Tamil Coordinating Committee (WTCC), which was later found to be an LTTE front organisation. The global contacts of LTTE grew steadily since then. At the height of its power, LTTE had 42 offices worldwide. The international network of LTTE engages in propaganda, fundraising, arms procurement, and shipping.\nThere were three types of organisations that engage in propaganda and fund raising\u2014Front, Cover, and Sympathetic. Prior to the ethnic riots of 1983, attempts to raise funds for a sustaining military campaign were not realised. It was the mass exodus of Tamil civilians to India and western countries following the Black July ethnic riots, which made this possible. As the armed conflict evolved and voluntary donations lessened, LTTE used force and threats to collect money. LTTE was worth US$200\u2013300 million at its peak. The group's global network owned numerous business ventures in various countries. These include investment in real estate, shipping, grocery stores, gold and jewellery stores, gas stations, restaurants, production of films, mass media organisations (TV, radio, print), and industries. It was also in control of numerous charitable organisations, which included, according to the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Tamils Rehabilitation Organisation.\nArms Procurement and shipping activities of LTTE were largely clandestine. Prior to 1983, it procured weapons mainly from Afghanistan via the Indo-Pakistani border. Explosives were purchased from commercial markets in India. From 1983 to 1987, LTTE acquired a substantial amount of weapons from RAW and from Lebanon, Cyprus, Singapore, and Malaysia-based arms dealers. LTTE received its first consignment of arms from Singapore in 1984 on board the MV \"Cholan\", the first ship owned by the organisation. Funds were received and cargo cleared at Chennai Port with the assistance of M. G. Ramachandran, the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu. In November 1994, the LTTE was able to purchase 60 tonnes of explosives (50 tonnes of TNT and 10 tonnes of RDX) from Rubezone Chemical plant in Ukraine, providing a forged Bangladeshi Ministry of Defence end-user certificate. Payments for the explosives were made from a Citibank account in Singapore held by Selvarasa Pathmanathan. Consignment was transported on board MV Sewne. The same explosives were used for the Central Bank bombing in 1996. Myanmar, Thailand, Malaysia, Cambodia and Indonesia remained the most trusted outposts of LTTE, after India alienated it following the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.\nAccording to Rohan Gunaratna, since late 1997, North Korea became the principal country to provide arms, ammunition, and explosives to the LTTE. The deal with North Korean government was carried out by Ponniah Anandaraja \"alias\" Aiyannah, a member of World Tamil Coordinating Committee of the United States and later, the accountant of LTTE. According to the Sri Lankan government, he worked at the North Korean embassy in Bangkok since late 1997. LTTE had nearly 20-second-hand ships, which were purchased in Japan, and registered in Panama and other Latin American countries. These ships mostly transported general cargo, including paddy, sugar, timber, glass, and fertilizer. But when an arms deal was finalized, they travelled to North Korea, loaded the cargo and brought it to the equator, where the ships were based. Then on board merchant tankers, weapons were transferred to the sea of Alampil, just outside the territorial waters in Sri Lanka's exclusive economic zone. After that, small teams of Sea Tigers brought the cargo ashore. The Sri Lanka Navy, during 2005\u201308 destroyed at least 11 of these cargo ships belonged to LTTE in the international waters.\nLTTE's last shipment of weapons was in March 2009, towards the end of the war. The merchant vessel \"Princess Iswari\" went from Indonesia to North Korea under captain Kamalraj Kandasamy \"alias\" Vinod, loaded the weapons and came back to international waters beyond Sri Lanka. But due to the heavy naval blockades set up by the Sri Lankan Navy, it could not deliver the arms consignment. Thus it dumped the weapons in the sea. The same ship, after changing its name to MV \"Ocean Lady\", arrived in Vancouver with 76 migrants, in October 2009. In December 2009, The Sri Lankan Navy apprehended a merchant vessel belonging to LTTE, \"Princess Chrisanta\" in Indonesia and brought it back to Sri Lanka.\nThe United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations (USSFRC) and Ethiopian based Jimma Times claimed that the Eritrean government had provided direct military assistance, including light aircraft to LTTE, during the 2002\u201303 period when the LTTE was negotiating with the Sri Lankan government via the Norwegian mediators. It was also alleged that Erik Solheim, the chief Norwegian facilitator, helped LTTE to establish this relationship. These allegations and a suspicion from within the Sri Lankan armed forces, that LTTE had considerable connections and assets in Eritrea and that its leader Prabhakaran might try to flee to Eritrea in the final stages of war, prompted the Sri Lankan government to establish diplomatic relations with Eritrea in 2009.\nIn 2013, Thiruthanikan Thanigasalam and Sahilal Sabaratnam were sentenced to 25 years in prison in Brooklyn in connection of attempting to purchase high-powered weaponry for the LTTE. They were caught in a FBI undercover sting operation while attempting to purchase surface-to-air missiles, missile launchers, and assault rifles.\nProscription as a terrorist group.\nThirty-three countries currently list the LTTE as a terrorist organization. As of October 2019, these include:\nThe framing of \"terrorism\", despite having no universally accepted definition, carries a connotation of moral illegitimacy and, as proscription, is used by states to criminalize their opponents and justify \"extreme\" measures against them. In the Sri Lankan context, proscription is also used to delegitimize the LTTE's political objective of establishing an independent state. There is resistance in the international community to the alteration of state boundaries by force and no state recognized Tamil claim of self-determination. The proscriptions by Western states reflected their opposition to LTTE's political objective than concern about its threat to their own national security. Moreover, despite its human rights abuses, Western states regarded Sri Lanka as a democratic ally in their promotion of a global liberal order and were committed to upholding its sovereignty. Hence, proscription was also used by these states to shape the conduct of the LTTE and Tamil diaspora to align with their foreign policy aims. \nThe first country to ban the LTTE was its brief ally, India, following the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in 1991. The Indian change of policy came gradually, starting with the IPKF-LTTE conflict and culminating with the assassination. India opposes the proposed Tamil Eelam that LTTE wanted to establish, fearing that it would lead to Tamil Nadu's separation from India despite its integration into the national mainstream. In 2012 after the LTTE's defeat, the Indian Government extended the ban on the LTTE on the grounds of its alleged \"strong anti-India posture and threat to the security of Indian nationals\". \nSri Lanka first banned the LTTE in 1998, lifted the ban before signing the ceasefire agreement in 2002 and reintroduced the ban in 2009.\nThe United States proscribed the LTTE as a foreign terrorist organization in October 1997. A U.S. ambassador later explained that the main rationale behind the ban was to prevent LTTE's fundraising and for it to negotiate with the Sri Lankan government. The Pentagon had launched a military programme in March 1996 to train the Sri Lankan military after a series of LTTE attacks which affected U.S. commercial interests on the island but it failed to weaken the LTTE due to its procurement of conventional weapons with funds raised overseas. In 2003, the U.S. Deputy Secretary of State, Richard Armitage, urged the LTTE to renounce its armed struggle for separate state and to accept the Sri Lankan government's sovereignty in order for the proscription to be lifted.\nThe European Union (EU) banned LTTE as a terrorist organization on 17 May 2006. In a statement, the European Parliament said that the LTTE did not represent all Tamils and called on it to \"allow for political pluralism and alternate democratic voices in the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka\". Pressure from the United States, which assisted Sri Lanka's war efforts, played a critical role in getting Canada and the EU to ban the LTTE. The then Sri Lankan Foreign Minister Mangala Samaraweera later recounted that there was a difficulty in adopting the ban as a unanimous decision due to the opposition from seven countries in the 25-member EU and that consensus was finally achieved only after he had met with the US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice several times. Swedish Major General Ulf Henricsson, the head of the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission (SLMM) whom the EU had consulted before the ban, opposed the ban, warning it gave the Sri Lankan government \"carte blanche\" to seek a military solution. He warned the EU in a memo that a ban would lead to an increase in attacks and violence. He later described the ban as a decision made in the \"coffee shops in Brussels\" where EU members had failed to read the memo carefully. He further stated that as part of the global war on terror the EU listened to only the Sri Lankan government's version of events and that the government should have also been listed as it \"used the same methods\". \nIn October 2014, the European Court of Justice (ECJ) annulled the anti-terrorism sanctions and several other restrictions placed on the LTTE in 2006. The court noted that the basis of proscribing the LTTE had been based on \"imputations derived from the press and the Internet\" rather than on direct investigation of the group's actions, as required by law. Later, in March 2015, the EU reimposed the sanctions and restrictions. In July 2017, the LTTE was removed from the terrorism blacklist of the EU's top court, stating that there was no evidence to show of LTTE carrying out attacks after its military defeat in 2009. However, despite the ECJ ruling, the EU stated the LTTE remains listed as a terrorist organization by the EU.\nOn 12 November 2014, the Malaysian government listed the by-then defunct LTTE as a terrorist group amid allegations of its revival attempts in the country. Referring to a letter he purportedly wrote on 12 February 2020 as the Prime Minister to the Ministry of Home Affairs requesting the LTTE's removal from its list of terrorist groups, former Malaysian premier Mahathir Mohamad later explained that the LTTE had not harmed Malaysia and that a group should not be labelled as terrorists simply because other countries do so, since he had met with the leader of the Hamas despite the U.S. having banned it as a terrorist organization. However, responding to the suggestion of the Attorney General (AG) to review the list of gazetted terrorist organizations after the AG dropped charges against 12 alleged LTTE sympathizers, then Minister of Home Affairs Muhyiddin Yassin stated on 22 February 2020 that the LTTE would remain listed as a terrorist organization, claiming its \"ideology\" posed threat to Malaysia's public order and security. Yassin, a Malay nationalist, has been accused of using the ban to mastermind the \"politically motivated\" arrests of Indian Tamil members of the Democratic Action Party over alleged LTTE links.\nThe LTTE leader Prabhakaran contested the terrorist designation of his organization, asserting that the international community had been influenced by the \"false propaganda\" of the Sri Lankan state and said that there was no coherent definition of the concept of terrorism. He also maintained that the LTTE was a national liberation organization fighting against \"state terrorism\" and \"racist oppression\". He urged Western powers engaged in the war on terror to provide \"a clear and comprehensive definition of the concept of terrorism that would distinguish between freedom struggles based on the right to self-determination and blind terrorist acts based on fanaticism.\" He also complained that human rights violators such as Sri Lanka joining the alliance in the war on terror posed threat to \"the legitimate political struggles of the oppressed humanity\".\nSuicide attacks.\nOne of the main divisions of LTTE included the Black Tigers, an elite fighting wing of the movement, whose mission included carrying out suicide attacks against enemy targets. The LTTE conducted its first suicide attack on 5 July 1987 when Captain Miller rammed a truck filled with explosives into a Sri Lankan Army base in Jaffna killing scores of soldiers. Black Tigers as a division would be established years later. Its two strategic purposes were to compensate for the LTTE's lack of heavy weaponry and to serve as a commando unit to access difficult targets. Its members were carefully selected and underwent intense training.\nAccording to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, LTTE was the first insurgent organization to use concealed explosive belts and vests. According to the Sri Lankan Ministry of Defence, the LTTE stated that out of the deceased Black Tigers, 274 were male and 104 were female. Experts estimated that the Black Tigers had carried out most of the suicide attacks recorded around the world by the time the Sri Lankan civil war ended in 2009. The LTTE is credited with popularizing the tactic globally. However, most of the LTTE suicide attacks were carried out against military targets in the north and east of the country; a quarter had been political assassinations and unlike other groups the LTTE primarily used such attacks as part of its insurgency strategy rather than to terrorize civilians. Sometimes civilians were also killed such as in the 1998 attack on Dalada Maligawa killing eight civilians.\nThe Black Tiger wing also carried out attacks on several high-profile political figures. Three notable attacks includes the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India, on 21 May 1991, the assassination of Ranasinghe Premadasa, the President of Sri Lanka, on 1 May 1993, and the failed assassination attempt of Chandrika Kumaratunga, the Sri Lankan President, on 18 December 1999, which resulted in the loss of her right eye.\nBlack Tiger cadres killed in action were highly glorified and their families were given the \"Maaveerar family\" status, just like normal LTTE cadres. Also, these families were honoured with the \"Thamizheezha Maravar pathakkam\" (Warrior medal of Tamil Eelam), one of the higher honours of Tamil Eelam. Black Tiger members were given a chance to have his/her last supper with the LTTE leader Prabhakaran, which was a rare honour, motivating LTTE cadres to join the Black Tiger wing.\nAssassinations.\nThe LTTE has been condemned by various groups for assassinating political and military opponents. The LTTE assassinated several leading Tamil politicians such as Appapillai Amirthalingam, the former Leader of the Opposition; and the Sri Lankan government has accused the LTTE of assassinating Lakshman Kadirgamar, the former Foreign Minister whom the LTTE considered a \"traitor\". The assassination of the Sri Lankan president Ranasinghe Premadasa is attributed to LTTE. The seventh Prime Minister of the Republic of India, Rajiv Gandhi, was assassinated by an LTTE suicide bomber Thenmozhi Rajaratnam on 21 May 1991. On 24 October 1994, LTTE detonated a bomb during a political rally in Thotalanga-Grandpass, which killed most of the prominent politicians of the United National Party, including presidential candidate Gamini Dissanayake MP, Cabinet ministers Weerasinghe Mallimarachchi and G. M. Premachandra, Ossie Abeygunasekara MP and Gamini Wijesekara MP.\nSpecifically in relation to the TELO, the LTTE has said that it had to perform preemptive self-defence because the TELO was in effect functioning as a proxy for India.\nHuman rights violations.\nNumerous countries and international organizations have accused the LTTE of attacking civilians and recruiting children.\nAttacks on civilians.\nThe LTTE carried out several attacks on civilian targets. The first notable attack to take place outside of its claimed territory was the Anuradhapura massacre in 1985 which the LTTE stated was in retaliation to the Valvettiturai massacre of Tamil civilians. Other notable attacks include the Aranthalawa massacre, Kattankudy mosque massacre, the Kebithigollewa massacre, and the Dehiwala train bombing. Civilians have also been killed in attacks on economic targets, such as the Central Bank bombing. According to Udalagama and de Silva, between 3,700 and 4,100 civilians were killed in \"terrorist acts\" attributed to the LTTE, a \"somewhat modest\" proportion of the overall civilian death toll during the war. \nThe LTTE leader Prabhakaran denied allegations of killing innocent Sinhalese civilians, claiming to condemn such acts of violence. In the case of Sinhalese in colonized areas, he claimed that LTTE had instead attacked armed Home Guards who were \"death-squads let loose on Tamil civilians\" and Sinhalese settlers who were \"brought to the Tamil areas to forcibly occupy the land.\" The continuous inflow of Sinhalese settlers into Tamil areas since the 1950s, encouraged by the government to undermine claims of a Tamil homeland, had become a source of inter-ethnic violence and had been one of the major grievances expressed by the LTTE. The LTTE also denied massacring Muslims, stating that they were allies against the Sinhalese state. LTTE sympathizers often claim that Karuna, while he was a commander, was solely responsible for many attacks, especially in the Eastern Province.\nChild soldiers.\nThe LTTE has been accused of recruiting and using child soldiers to fight against Sri Lankan government forces. The LTTE was accused of having up to 5,794 child soldiers in its ranks since 2001. Amid international pressure, the LTTE announced in July 2003 that it would stop conscripting child soldiers, but UNICEF and Human Rights Watch have accused it of reneging on its promises, and of conscripting Tamil children orphaned by the tsunami. N. Malathy, the former secretary of NESOHR, accused the UNICEF of sensationalizing this issue to fundraise and falsely listing disabled and orphaned children in the LTTE orphanages as child soldiers. On 18 June 2007, the LTTE released 135 children under 18 years of age. UNICEF, along with the United States, stated that there had been a significant drop in LTTE recruitment of children, but claimed in 2007 that 506 child recruits remain under the LTTE. A report released by the LTTE's Child Protection Authority (CPA) in 2008 stated that less than 40 soldiers under age 18 remained in its forces. In 2009 a Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations said the Tamil Tigers \"continue to recruit children to fight on the frontlines\", and \"use force to keep many civilians, including children, in harm's way\". During the violent parts of the war, though some children were forcefully recruited, many voluntarily joined the LTTE after witnessing or experiencing abuses by Sri Lankan security forces, seeking to \"protect their families or to avenge real or perceived abuses.\" However, the Sri Lankan government's National Child Protection Authority alleged that since the ceasefire children were more likely to be forcibly recruited. The LTTE argued that instances of child recruitment occurred mostly in the eastern province, under the purview of former LTTE regional commander Colonel Karuna. After leaving the LTTE and forming the TMVP, it is alleged that Karuna continued to forcibly kidnap and induct child soldiers. Soon after Karuna's defection, the LTTE began an intensive campaign to re-recruit Karuna's former cadres, including child soldiers. Many of the former child soldiers were re-recruited by the LTTE, often by force.\nForced displacement.\nFollowing the anti-Tamil violence in Trincomalee District in 1985, where security forces and Sinhalese mobs massacred about 200 Tamils and displaced their entire population from the town, the LTTE carried out a series of attacks on Sinhalese in the area forcing thousands to flee in 1986. In October 1987, the LTTE took advantage of communal violence in the Eastern Province, particularly in the Trincomalee District. LTTE gunmen led Tamil rioters and ordered Sinhalese to leave, threatening their lives. By 4 October, 5,000 Sinhalese were made homeless. Following the suicide of 12 LTTE detainees under the Sri Lankan Army custody, LTTE massacred Sinhalese civilians throughout the Eastern Province. By the end of the week, about 200 Sinhalese were dead and 20,000 had fled the Eastern Province.\nFurther evictions of Muslim residents happened in the north in 1990, and the east in 1992. Yogi, the LTTE's political spokesman, stated that this expulsion was carried out in retaliation for the atrocities committed against Tamils in the Eastern Province by Muslims, who were seen by the LTTE as collaborators with the Sri Lankan Army. Sri Lankan Defence Ministry, Human Rights Watch, among others, have described the forcible removal of Sinhalese and Muslim inhabitants from areas under its control as \"ethnic cleansing\". \nDuring the peace talks in 2002, the LTTE formally apologised to the Muslims for the expulsion and invited them back, stating that the north-east also belonged to them. In 2003, the LTTE formally recognised the rights of the Muslim and Sinhalese communities to be present in the north-east in their ISGA proposals.\nMistreatment of prisoners.\nExecutions.\nThe LTTE executed prisoners of war on a number of occasions despite its declaration in 1988 that it would abide by the Geneva Conventions. One such incident was the mass murder of 600 unarmed Sri Lankan Police officers in 1990, in Eastern Province, after they surrendered to the LTTE on the request of President Ranasinghe Premadasa. In 1993, LTTE killed 200 Sri Lanka Army soldiers, captured in the naval base at Pooneryn, during the Battle of Pooneryn. Few months earlier they had executed an officer and several soldiers captured during the Battle of Janakapura. In 1996, LTTE executed 207 military officers and soldiers who had surrendered to the LTTE during Battle of Mullaitivu (1996). The LTTE has also been accused of executing civilian Tamils accused of dissent. Rajan Hoole of UTHR(J) claims that various dissident sources allege that the number of Tamil dissenters and prisoners from rival armed groups clandestinely killed by the LTTE in detention or otherwise ranges from 8,000 - 20,000, although he later stated that western agencies dismissed his figures as exaggeration.\nTorture.\nThe LTTE tortured suspects based on the victim's refusal to co-operate and for giving information to the Sri Lankan army or IPKF. Torture was also practised on child soldiers who attempted to flee military service such as by being left out in the sun. Sri Lankan soldiers and police officers taken as prisoners were also tortured by the LTTE during interrogations. LTTE prison conditions were often poor and many prisoners died due to infections from their wounds. Among the methods of torture included burning with heated metal, hanging the victim upside down and beating them, slashing with razors and electroshocking.\nWar crimes during the final stages of the Sri Lankan civil war.\nThere are allegations that war crimes were committed by the Sri Lankan military and the LTTE during the last stages of the Sri Lankan civil war. The alleged war crimes include attacks on civilians and civilian buildings by both sides, executions of combatants and prisoners by both sides, keeping civilians as hostages by the LTTE, and recruitment of child soldiers by both the LTTE, and the TMVP, a Sri Lankan Army paramilitary group.\nA panel of experts appointed by UN Secretary-General (UNSG) Ban Ki-moon to advise him on the issue of accountability with regard to any alleged violations of international human rights and humanitarian law during the final stages of the civil war found \"credible allegations\" which, if proven, indicated that war crimes and crimes against humanity were committed by the Sri Lankan military and the LTTE. The panel has called on the UNSG to conduct an independent international inquiry into the alleged violations of international law.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReviews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18607", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18607", "title": "LTTE", "text": ""}
{"id": "18610", "revid": "51065638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18610", "title": "Laplace transform", "text": "Integral transform useful in probability theory, physics, and engineering\nIn mathematics, the Laplace transform, named after Pierre-Simon Laplace (), is an integral transform that converts a function of a real variable (usually formula_1, in the \"time domain\") to a function of a complex variable formula_2 (in the complex-valued frequency domain, also known as s\"-domain or s\"-plane). The functions are often denoted by formula_3 for the time-domain representation and formula_4 for the frequency-domain.\nThe transform is useful for converting differentiation and integration in the time domain into much easier multiplication and division in the Laplace domain (analogous to how logarithms are useful for simplifying multiplication and division into addition and subtraction). This gives the transform many applications in science and engineering, mostly as a tool for solving linear differential equations and dynamical systems by simplifying ordinary differential equations and integral equations into algebraic polynomial equations, and by simplifying convolution into multiplication. \nFor example, through the Laplace transform, the equation of the simple harmonic oscillator (Hooke's law) formula_5 is converted into the algebraic equation formula_6 which incorporates the initial conditions formula_7 and formula_8, and can be solved for the unknown function formula_9 Once solved, the inverse Laplace transform can be used to revert it back to the original domain. This is often aided by referencing tables such as that given below.\nThe Laplace transform is defined (for suitable functions formula_10) by the integral\nformula_11\nwhere \"s\" is a complex number. \nThe Laplace transform is related to many other transforms. It is essentially the same as the Mellin transform and is closely related to the Fourier transform. Unlike the Fourier transform, the Laplace transform is often an analytic function, meaning that it has a convergent power series, the coefficients of which represent the moments of the original function. Moreover, the techniques of complex analysis, especially contour integrals, can be used for simplifying calculations.\nHistory.\nThe Laplace transform is named after mathematician and astronomer Pierre-Simon, Marquis de Laplace, who used a similar transform in his work on probability theory. Laplace wrote extensively about the use of generating functions (1814), and the integral form of the Laplace transform evolved naturally as a result.\nLaplace's use of generating functions was similar to what is now known as the z-transform, and he gave little attention to the continuous variable case which was discussed by Niels Henrik Abel. \nFrom 1744, Leonhard Euler investigated integrals of the form\nformula_12\nas solutions of differential equations, introducing in particular the gamma function. Joseph-Louis Lagrange was an admirer of Euler and, in his work on integrating probability density functions, investigated expressions of the form\nformula_13\nwhich resembles a Laplace transform.\nThese types of integrals seem first to have attracted Laplace's attention in 1782, where he was following in the spirit of Euler in using the integrals themselves as solutions of equations. However, in 1785, Laplace took the critical step forward when, rather than simply looking for a solution in the form of an integral, he started to apply the transforms in the sense that was later to become popular. He used an integral of the form\nformula_14\nakin to a Mellin transform, to transform the whole of a difference equation, in order to look for solutions of the transformed equation. He then went on to apply the Laplace transform in the same way and started to derive some of its properties, beginning to appreciate its potential power.\nLaplace also recognised that Joseph Fourier's method of Fourier series for solving the diffusion equation could only apply to a limited region of space, because those solutions were periodic. In 1809, Laplace applied his transform to find solutions that diffused indefinitely in space. In 1821, Cauchy developed an operational calculus for the Laplace transform that could be used to study linear differential equations in much the same way the transform is now used in basic engineering. This method was popularized, and perhaps rediscovered, by Oliver Heaviside around the turn of the century.\nBernhard Riemann used the Laplace transform in his 1859 paper \"On the number of primes less than a given magnitude\", in which he also developed the inversion theorem. Riemann used the Laplace transform to develop the functional equation of the Riemann zeta function, and his method is still used to relate the modular transformation law of the Jacobi theta function, which is simple to prove via Poisson summation, to the functional equation.\nHjalmar Mellin was among the first to study the Laplace transform, rigorously in the Karl Weierstrass school of analysis, and apply it to the study of differential equations and special functions, at the turn of the 20th century. At around the same time, Heaviside was busy with his operational calculus. Thomas Joannes Stieltjes considered a generalization of the Laplace transform connected to his work on moments. Other contributors in this time period included Mathias Lerch, Oliver Heaviside, and Thomas Bromwich.\nIn 1929, Vannevar Bush and Norbert Wiener published \"Operational Circuit Analysis\" as a text for engineering analysis of electrical circuits, applying both Fourier transforms and operational calculus, and in which they included one of the first predecessors of the modern table of Laplace transforms.\nIn 1934, Raymond Paley and Norbert Wiener published the important work \"Fourier transforms in the complex domain\", about what is now called the Laplace transform (see below). Also during the 30s, the Laplace transform was instrumental in G H Hardy and John Edensor Littlewood's study of tauberian theorems, and this application was later expounded on by , who developed other aspects of the theory such as a new method for inversion. Edward Charles Titchmarsh wrote the influential \"Introduction to the theory of the Fourier integral\" (1937).\nThe current widespread use of the transform (mainly in engineering) came about during and soon after World War II, replacing the earlier Heaviside operational calculus. The advantages of the Laplace transform had been emphasized by Gustav Doetsch, to whom the name Laplace transform is apparently due.\nFormal definition.\nThe Laplace transform of a function \"f\"(\"t\"), defined for all real numbers \"t\" \u2265 0, is the function \"F\"(\"s\"), which is a unilateral transform defined by\nformula_15\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0(Eq. 1)\nwhere \"s\" is a complex frequency-domain parameter\nformula_16\nwith real numbers \u03c3 and \u03c9.\nAn alternate notation for the Laplace transform is formula_17 instead of \"F\". Thus formula_18 in functional notation. This is often written, especially in engineering settings, as formula_19, with the understanding that the dummy variable formula_1 does not appear in the function formula_21.\nThe meaning of the integral depends on types of functions of interest. A necessary condition for existence of the integral is that f must be locally integrable on [0, \u221e). For locally integrable functions that decay at infinity or are of exponential type (formula_22), the integral can be understood to be a (proper) Lebesgue integral. However, for many applications it is necessary to regard it as a conditionally convergent improper integral at \u221e. Still more generally, the integral can be understood in a weak sense, and this is dealt with below.\nOne can define the Laplace transform of a finite Borel measure \u03bc by the Lebesgue integral\nformula_23\nAn important special case is where \u03bc is a probability measure, for example, the Dirac delta function. In operational calculus, the Laplace transform of a measure is often treated as though the measure came from a probability density function f. In that case, to avoid potential confusion, one often writes\nformula_24\nwhere the lower limit of 0\u2212 is shorthand notation for\nformula_25\nThis limit emphasizes that any point mass located at 0 is entirely captured by the Laplace transform. Although with the Lebesgue integral, it is not necessary to take such a limit, it does appear more naturally in connection with the Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform.\nBilateral Laplace transform.\nWhen one says \"the Laplace transform\" without qualification, the unilateral or one-sided transform is usually intended. The Laplace transform can be alternatively defined as the \"bilateral Laplace transform\", or two-sided Laplace transform, by extending the limits of integration to be the entire real axis. If that is done, the common unilateral transform simply becomes a special case of the bilateral transform, where the definition of the function being transformed is multiplied by the Heaviside step function.\nThe bilateral Laplace transform \"F\"(\"s\") is defined as follows:\nformula_26\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0(Eq. 2)\nAn alternate notation for the bilateral Laplace transform is formula_27, instead of F.\nInverse Laplace transform.\nTwo integrable functions have the same Laplace transform only if they differ on a set of Lebesgue measure zero. This means that, on the range of the transform, there is an inverse transform. In fact, besides integrable functions, the Laplace transform is a one-to-one mapping from one function space into another in many other function spaces as well, although there is usually no easy characterization of the range.\nTypical function spaces in which this is true include the spaces of bounded continuous functions, the space \"L\"\u221e(0, \u221e), or more generally tempered distributions on (0, \u221e). The Laplace transform is also defined and injective for suitable spaces of tempered distributions.\nIn these cases, the image of the Laplace transform lives in a space of analytic functions in the region of convergence. The inverse Laplace transform is given by the following complex integral, which is known by various names (the Bromwich integral, the Fourier\u2013Mellin integral, and Mellin's inverse formula):\nformula_28\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0(Eq. 3)\nwhere \u03b3 is a real number so that the contour path of integration is in the region of convergence of \"F\"(\"s\"). In most applications, the contour can be closed, allowing the use of the residue theorem. An alternative formula for the inverse Laplace transform is given by Post's inversion formula. The limit here is interpreted in the weak-* topology.\nIn practice, it is typically more convenient to decompose a Laplace transform into known transforms of functions obtained from a table and construct the inverse by inspection.\nProbability theory.\nIn pure and applied probability, the Laplace transform is defined as an expected value. If X is a random variable with probability density function f, then the Laplace transform of f is given by the expectation\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the expectation of random variable formula_31.\nBy convention, this is referred to as the Laplace transform of the random variable X itself. Here, replacing s by \u2212\"t\" gives the moment generating function of X. The Laplace transform has applications throughout probability theory, including first passage times of stochastic processes such as Markov chains, and renewal theory.\nOf particular use is the ability to recover the cumulative distribution function of a continuous random variable X by means of the Laplace transform as follows:\nformula_32\nAlgebraic construction.\nThe Laplace transform can be alternatively defined in a purely algebraic manner by applying a field of fractions construction to the convolution ring of functions on the positive half-line. The resulting space of abstract operators is exactly equivalent to Laplace space, but in this construction the forward and reverse transforms never need to be explicitly defined (avoiding the related difficulties with proving convergence).\nRegion of convergence.\nIf \"f\" is a locally integrable function (or more generally a Borel measure locally of bounded variation), then the Laplace transform \"F\"(\"s\") of \"f\" converges provided that the limit\nformula_33\nexists.\nThe Laplace transform converges absolutely if the integral\nformula_34\nexists as a proper Lebesgue integral. The Laplace transform is usually understood as conditionally convergent, meaning that it converges in the former but not in the latter sense.\nThe set of values for which \"F\"(\"s\") converges absolutely is either of the form Re(\"s\") &gt; \"a\" or Re(\"s\") \u2265 \"a\", where \"a\" is an extended real constant with \u2212\u221e \u2264 \"a\" \u2264 \u221e (a consequence of the dominated convergence theorem). The constant \"a\" is known as the abscissa of absolute convergence, and depends on the growth behavior of \"f\"(\"t\"). Analogously, the two-sided transform converges absolutely in a strip of the form \"a\" &lt; Re(\"s\") &lt; \"b\", and possibly including the lines Re(\"s\") = \"a\" or Re(\"s\") = \"b\". The subset of values of \"s\" for which the Laplace transform converges absolutely is called the region of absolute convergence, or the domain of absolute convergence. In the two-sided case, it is sometimes called the strip of absolute convergence. The Laplace transform is analytic in the region of absolute convergence: this is a consequence of Fubini's theorem and Morera's theorem.\nSimilarly, the set of values for which \"F\"(\"s\") converges (conditionally or absolutely) is known as the region of conditional convergence, or simply the region of convergence (ROC). If the Laplace transform converges (conditionally) at \"s\" = \"s\"0, then it automatically converges for all \"s\" with Re(\"s\") &gt; Re(\"s\"0). Therefore, the region of convergence is a half-plane of the form Re(\"s\") &gt; \"a\", possibly including some points of the boundary line Re(\"s\") = \"a\".\nIn the region of convergence Re(\"s\") &gt; Re(\"s\"0), the Laplace transform of \"f\" can be expressed by integrating by parts as the integral\nformula_35\nThat is, \"F\"(\"s\") can effectively be expressed, in the region of convergence, as the absolutely convergent Laplace transform of some other function. In particular, it is analytic.\nThere are several Paley\u2013Wiener theorems concerning the relationship between the decay properties of \"f\", and the properties of the Laplace transform within the region of convergence.\nIn engineering applications, a function corresponding to a linear time-invariant (LTI) system is \"stable\" if every bounded input produces a bounded output. This is equivalent to the absolute convergence of the Laplace transform of the impulse response function in the region Re(\"s\") \u2265 0. As a result, LTI systems are stable, provided that the poles of the Laplace transform of the impulse response function have negative real part.\nThis ROC is used in knowing about the causality and stability of a system.\nProperties and theorems.\nThe Laplace transform's key property is that it converts differentiation and integration in the time domain into multiplication and division by \"s\" in the Laplace domain. Thus, the Laplace variable \"s\" is also known as an \"operator variable\" in the Laplace domain: either the \"derivative operator\" or (for \"s\"\u22121) the \"integration operator\".\nGiven the functions \"f\"(\"t\") and \"g\"(\"t\"), and their respective Laplace transforms \"F\"(\"s\") and \"G\"(\"s\"),\nformula_36\nthe following table is a list of properties of unilateral Laplace transform:\nformula_37\nformula_38, if all poles of formula_39 are in the left half-plane.\nThe final value theorem is useful because it gives the long-term behaviour without having to perform partial fraction decompositions (or other difficult algebra). If \"F\"(\"s\") has a pole in the right-hand plane or poles on the imaginary axis (e.g., if formula_40 or formula_41), then the behaviour of this formula is undefined.\nRelation to power series.\nThe Laplace transform can be viewed as a continuous analogue of a power series. If \"a\"(\"n\") is a discrete function of a positive integer \"n\", then the power series associated to \"a\"(\"n\") is the series\nformula_42\nwhere \"x\" is a real variable (see \"Z-transform\"). Replacing summation over \"n\" with integration over \"t\", a continuous version of the power series becomes\nformula_43\nwhere the discrete function \"a\"(\"n\") is replaced by the continuous one \"f\"(\"t\").\nChanging the base of the power from \"x\" to \"e\" gives\nformula_44\nFor this to converge for, say, all bounded functions \"f\", it is necessary to require that ln \"x\" &lt; 0. Making the substitution \u2212\"s\" = ln \"x\" gives just the Laplace transform:\nformula_45\nIn other words, the Laplace transform is a continuous analog of a power series, in which the discrete parameter \"n\" is replaced by the continuous parameter \"t\", and \"x\" is replaced by \"e\"\u2212\"s\".\nAnalogously to a power series, if formula_46, then the power series converges to an analytic function in formula_47, if formula_48, the Laplace transform converges to an analytic function in formula_49\nRelation to moments.\nThe quantities\nformula_50\nare the \"moments\" of the function \"f\". If the first \"n\" moments of \"f\" converge absolutely, then by repeated differentiation under the integral, \nformula_51\nThis is of special significance in probability theory, where the moments of a random variable \"X\" are given by the expectation values formula_52. Then, the relation holds\nformula_53\nTransform of a function's derivative.\nIt is often convenient to use the differentiation property of the Laplace transform to find the transform of a function's derivative. This can be derived from the basic expression for a Laplace transform as follows:\nformula_54\nyielding\nformula_55\nand in the bilateral case,\nformula_56\nThe general result\nformula_57\nwhere formula_58 denotes the \"n\"th derivative of \"f\", can then be established with an inductive argument.\nTransform of a function's integral.\nIt is often convenient to use the integration property of the Laplace transform to find the transform of a function's integral. Integration is equivalent to convolution with the unit step function, and therefore:\nformula_59\nRelation of asymptotic rolloff to a function's continuity.\nConsider the unit step function, formula_60, it has a value discontinuity at formula_61 and a Laplace transform of formula_62. \nNow consider the integral of the unit step function, formula_63, it has value continuity everywhere, but a first derivative discontinuity at formula_61, and has a Laplace transform of formula_65.It can be shown then, that the order of the smallest power of formula_2 in the denominator is related to the order Smoothness of the function.\nSee also the Paley\u2013Wiener theorem\nEvaluating integrals over the positive real axis.\nA useful property of the Laplace transform is the following:\nformula_67\nunder suitable assumptions on the behaviour of formula_68 in a right neighbourhood of formula_69 and on the decay rate of formula_68 in a left neighbourhood of formula_71. The above formula is a variation of integration by parts, with the operators \nformula_72 and formula_73 being replaced by formula_74 and formula_75. Let us prove the equivalent formulation:\nformula_76\nBy plugging in formula_77 the left-hand side turns into:\nformula_78\nbut assuming Fubini's theorem holds, by reversing the order of integration we get the wanted right-hand side.\nThis method can be used to compute integrals that would otherwise be difficult to compute using elementary methods of real calculus. For example,\nformula_79\nRelationship to other transforms.\nLaplace\u2013Stieltjes transform.\nThe (unilateral) Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform of a function \"g\" : \u211d \u2192 \u211d is defined by the Lebesgue\u2013Stieltjes integral\nformula_80\nThe function \"g\" is assumed to be of bounded variation. If \"g\" is the antiderivative of \"f\":\nformula_81\nthen the Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform of g and the Laplace transform of f coincide. In general, the Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform is the Laplace transform of the Stieltjes measure associated to g. So in practice, the only distinction between the two transforms is that the Laplace transform is thought of as operating on the density function of the measure, whereas the Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform is thought of as operating on its cumulative distribution function.\nFourier transform.\nLet formula_10 be a complex-valued Lebesgue integrable function supported on formula_83, and let formula_84 be its Laplace transform. Then, within the region of convergence, we have\nformula_85\nwhich is the Fourier transform of the function formula_86.\nIndeed, the Fourier transform is a special case (under certain conditions) of the bilateral Laplace transform. The main difference is that the Fourier transform of a function is a complex function of a \"real\" variable (frequency formula_87), the Laplace transform of a function is a complex function of a \"complex\" variable (damping factor formula_88 and frequency formula_87). The Laplace transform is usually restricted to transformation of functions of \"t\" with \"t\" \u2265 0. A consequence of this restriction is that the Laplace transform of a function is a holomorphic function of the variable \"s\". Unlike the Fourier transform, the Laplace transform of a distribution is generally a well-behaved function. Techniques of complex variables can also be used to directly study Laplace transforms. As a holomorphic function, the Laplace transform has a power series representation. This power series expresses a function as a linear superposition of moments of the function. This perspective has applications in probability theory.\nFormally, the Fourier transform is equivalent to evaluating the bilateral Laplace transform with imaginary argument \"s\" = \"i\u03c9\" when the condition explained below is fulfilled,\nformula_90\nThis convention of the Fourier transform (formula_91 in ) requires a factor of on the inverse Fourier transform. This relationship between the Laplace and Fourier transforms is often used to determine the frequency spectrum of a signal or dynamical system.\nThe above relation is valid as stated if and only if the region of convergence (ROC) of \"F\"(\"s\") contains the imaginary axis, \"\u03c3\" = 0.\nFor example, the function \"f\"(\"t\") = cos(\"\u03c9\"0\"t\") has a Laplace transform \"F\"(\"s\") = \"s\"/(\"s\"2 + \"\u03c9\"02) whose ROC is Re(\"s\") &gt; 0. As \"s\" = \"i\u03c9\"0 is a pole of \"F\"(\"s\"), substituting \"s\" = \"i\u03c9\" in \"F\"(\"s\") does not yield the Fourier transform of \"f\"(\"t\")\"u\"(\"t\"), which contains terms proportional to the Dirac delta functions \"\u03b4\"(\"\u03c9\" \u00b1 \"\u03c9\"0).\nHowever, a relation of the form\nformula_92\nholds under much weaker conditions. For instance, this holds for the above example provided that the limit is understood as a weak limit of measures (see vague topology). General conditions relating the limit of the Laplace transform of a function on the boundary to the Fourier transform take the form of Paley\u2013Wiener theorems.\nMellin transform.\nThe Mellin transform and its inverse are related to the two-sided Laplace transform by a simple change of variables.\nIf in the Mellin transform\nformula_93\nwe set \"\u03b8\" = \"e\"\u2212\"t\" we get a two-sided Laplace transform.\nZ-transform.\nThe unilateral or one-sided Z-transform is simply the Laplace transform of an ideally sampled signal with the substitution of\nformula_94\nwhere \"T\" = 1/\"fs\" is the sampling interval (in units of time e.g., seconds) and \"fs\" is the sampling rate (in samples per second or hertz).\nLet\nformula_95\nbe a sampling impulse train (also called a Dirac comb) and\nformula_96\nbe the sampled representation of the continuous-time \"x\"(\"t\")\nformula_97\nThe Laplace transform of the sampled signal \"x\"\"q\"(\"t\") is\nformula_98\nThis is the precise definition of the unilateral Z-transform of the discrete function \"x\"[\"n\"]\nformula_99\nwith the substitution of \"z\" \u2192 \"e\"\"sT\".\nComparing the last two equations, we find the relationship between the unilateral Z-transform and the Laplace transform of the sampled signal,\nformula_100\nThe similarity between the Z- and Laplace transforms is expanded upon in the theory of time scale calculus.\nBorel transform.\nThe integral form of the Borel transform\nformula_101\nis a special case of the Laplace transform for \"f\" an entire function of exponential type, meaning that\nformula_102\nfor some constants \"A\" and \"B\". The generalized Borel transform allows a different weighting function to be used, rather than the exponential function, to transform functions not of exponential type. Nachbin's theorem gives necessary and sufficient conditions for the Borel transform to be well defined.\nFundamental relationships.\nSince an ordinary Laplace transform can be written as a special case of a two-sided transform, and since the two-sided transform can be written as the sum of two one-sided transforms, the theory of the Laplace-, Fourier-, Mellin-, and Z-transforms are at bottom the same subject. However, a different point of view and different characteristic problems are associated with each of these four major integral transforms.\nTable of selected Laplace transforms.\nThe following table provides Laplace transforms for many common functions of a single variable. For definitions and explanations, see the \"Explanatory Notes\" at the end of the table.\nBecause the Laplace transform is a linear operator,\nUsing this linearity, and various trigonometric, hyperbolic, and complex number (etc.) properties and/or identities, some Laplace transforms can be obtained from others more quickly than by using the definition directly.\nThe unilateral Laplace transform takes as input a function whose time domain is the non-negative reals, which is why all of the time domain functions in the table below are multiples of the Heaviside step function, \"u\"(\"t\").\nThe entries of the table that involve a time delay \"\u03c4\" are required to be causal (meaning that \"\u03c4\" &gt; 0). A causal system is a system where the impulse response \"h\"(\"t\") is zero for all time t prior to \"t\" = 0. In general, the region of convergence for causal systems is not the same as that of anticausal systems.\n \\ &lt;/math&gt;\n | formula_105\n | formula_106 \n | Frequency shift of&lt;br&gt;unit step\n ! scope=\"row\" | exponential approach \n | formula_107\n | formula_108\n | formula_109 \n | unit step minusexponential decay\n ! scope=\"row\" | sine\n | formula_110\n | formula_111\n | formula_109 \n ! scope=\"row\" | cosine\n | formula_113\n | formula_114\n | formula_109 \n ! scope=\"row\" | hyperbolic sine\n | formula_116\n | formula_117\n | formula_118 \n ! scope=\"row\" | hyperbolic cosine\n | formula_119\n | formula_120\n | formula_118 \n ! scope=\"row\" | exponentially decaying sine wave \n | formula_122\n | formula_123\n | formula_124 \n ! scope=\"row\" | exponentially decaying cosine wave \n | formula_125\n | formula_126\n | formula_124 \n ! scope=\"row\" | natural logarithm\n | formula_128\n | formula_129\n | formula_109 \n ! scope=\"row\" | Bessel function &lt;br&gt; of the first kind, of order \"n\"\n | formula_131\n | formula_132\n | formula_109 (\"n\" &gt; \u22121) \n ! scope=\"row\" | Error function \n | formula_134 \n | formula_135 \n | formula_109\n | colspan=5 style=\"text-align: left;\" |Explanatory notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"s\"-domain equivalent circuits and impedances.\nThe Laplace transform is often used in circuit analysis, and simple conversions to the \"s\"-domain of circuit elements can be made. Circuit elements can be transformed into impedances, very similar to phasor impedances.\nHere is a summary of equivalents:\nNote that the resistor is exactly the same in the time domain and the \"s\"-domain. The sources are put in if there are initial conditions on the circuit elements. For example, if a capacitor has an initial voltage across it, or if the inductor has an initial current through it, the sources inserted in the \"s\"-domain account for that.\nThe equivalents for current and voltage sources are simply derived from the transformations in the table above.\nExamples and applications.\nThe Laplace transform is used frequently in engineering and physics; the output of a linear time-invariant system can be calculated by convolving its unit impulse response with the input signal. Performing this calculation in Laplace space turns the convolution into a multiplication; the latter being easier to solve because of its algebraic form. For more information, see control theory. The Laplace transform is invertible on a large class of functions. Given a simple mathematical or functional description of an input or output to a system, the Laplace transform provides an alternative functional description that often simplifies the process of analyzing the behavior of the system, or in synthesizing a new system based on a set of specifications.\nThe Laplace transform can also be used to solve differential equations and is used extensively in mechanical engineering and electrical engineering. The Laplace transform reduces a linear differential equation to an algebraic equation, which can then be solved by the formal rules of algebra. The original differential equation can then be solved by applying the inverse Laplace transform. English electrical engineer Oliver Heaviside first proposed a similar scheme, although without using the Laplace transform; and the resulting operational calculus is credited as the Heaviside calculus.\nEvaluating improper integrals.\nLet formula_137. Then (see the table above)\nformula_138\nFrom which one gets:\nformula_139\nIn the limit formula_140, one gets\nformula_141\nprovided that the interchange of limits can be justified. This is often possible as a consequence of the final value theorem. Even when the interchange cannot be justified the calculation can be suggestive. For example, with \"a\" \u2260 0 \u2260 \"b\", proceeding formally one has\nformula_142\nComplex impedance of a capacitor.\nIn the theory of electrical circuits, the current flow in a capacitor is proportional to the capacitance and rate of change in the electrical potential (with equations as for the SI unit system). Symbolically, this is expressed by the differential equation\nformula_143\nwhere \"C\" is the capacitance of the capacitor, \"i\" = \"i\"(\"t\") is the electric current through the capacitor as a function of time, and \"v\" = \"v\"(\"t\") is the voltage across the terminals of the capacitor, also as a function of time.\nTaking the Laplace transform of this equation, we obtain\nformula_144\nwhere\nformula_145\nand\nformula_146\nSolving for \"V\"(\"s\") we have\nformula_147\nThe definition of the complex impedance \"Z\" (in ohms) is the ratio of the complex voltage \"V\" divided by the complex current \"I\" while holding the initial state \"V\"0 at zero:\nformula_148\nUsing this definition and the previous equation, we find:\nformula_149\nwhich is the correct expression for the complex impedance of a capacitor. In addition, the Laplace transform has large applications in control theory.\nImpulse response.\nConsider a linear time-invariant system with transfer function\nformula_150\nThe impulse response is simply the inverse Laplace transform of this transfer function:\nformula_151\nTo evaluate this inverse transform, we begin by expanding \"H\"(\"s\") using the method of partial fraction expansion,\nformula_152\nThe unknown constants \"P\" and \"R\" are the residues located at the corresponding poles of the transfer function. Each residue represents the relative contribution of that singularity to the transfer function's overall shape.\nBy the residue theorem, the inverse Laplace transform depends only upon the poles and their residues. To find the residue \"P\", we multiply both sides of the equation by \"s\" + \"\u03b1\" to get\nformula_153\nThen by letting \"s\" = \u2212\"\u03b1\", the contribution from \"R\" vanishes and all that is left is\nformula_154\nSimilarly, the residue \"R\" is given by\nformula_155\nNote that\nformula_156\nand so the substitution of \"R\" and \"P\" into the expanded expression for \"H\"(\"s\") gives\nformula_157\nFinally, using the linearity property and the known transform for exponential decay (see \"Item\" #\"3\" in the \"Table of Laplace Transforms\", above), we can take the inverse Laplace transform of \"H\"(\"s\") to obtain\nformula_158\nwhich is the impulse response of the system.\nThe same result can be achieved using the convolution property as if the system is a series of filters with transfer functions 1/(\"s\" + \"\u03b1\") and 1/(\"s\" + \"\u03b2\"). That is, the inverse of\nformula_159\nis\nformula_160\nPhase delay.\nStarting with the Laplace transform,\nformula_161\nwe find the inverse by first rearranging terms in the fraction:\nformula_162\nWe are now able to take the inverse Laplace transform of our terms:\nformula_163\nThis is just the sine of the sum of the arguments, yielding:\nformula_164\nWe can apply similar logic to find that\nformula_165\nStatistical mechanics.\nIn statistical mechanics, the Laplace transform of the density of states formula_166 defines the partition function. That is, the canonical partition function formula_167 is given by\nformula_168\nand the inverse is given by\nformula_169\nSpatial (not time) structure from astronomical spectrum.\nThe wide and general applicability of the Laplace transform and its inverse is illustrated by an application in astronomy which provides some information on the \"spatial distribution\" of matter of an astronomical source of radiofrequency thermal radiation too distant to resolve as more than a point, given its flux density spectrum, rather than relating the \"time\" domain with the spectrum (frequency domain).\nAssuming certain properties of the object, e.g. spherical shape and constant temperature, calculations based on carrying out an inverse Laplace transformation on the spectrum of the object can produce the only possible model of the distribution of matter in it (density as a function of distance from the center) consistent with the spectrum. When independent information on the structure of an object is available, the inverse Laplace transform method has been found to be in good agreement.\nBirth and death processes.\nConsider a random walk, with steps formula_170 occurring with probabilities formula_171. Suppose also that the time step is a Poisson process, with parameter formula_172. Then the probability of the walk being at the lattice point formula_173 at time formula_1 is\nformula_175\nThis leads to a system of integral equations (or equivalently a system of differential equations). However, because it is a system of convolution equations, the Laplace transform converts it into a system of linear equations for\nformula_176\nnamely:\nformula_177\nwhich may now be solved by standard methods.\nTauberian theory.\nThe Laplace transform of the measure formula_178 on formula_83 is given by\nformula_180\nIt is intuitively clear that, for small formula_181, the exponentially decaying integrand will become more sensitive to the concentration of the measure formula_178 on larger subsets of the domain. To make this more precise, introduce the distribution function:\nformula_183\nFormally, we expect a limit of the following kind:\nformula_184\nTauberian theorems are theorems relating the asymptotics of the Laplace transform, as formula_185, to those of the distribution of formula_178 as formula_187. They are thus of importance in asymptotic formulae of probability and statistics, where often the spectral side has asymptotics that are simpler to infer.\nTwo Tauberian theorems of note are the Hardy\u2013Littlewood Tauberian theorem and Wiener's Tauberian theorem. The Wiener theorem generalizes the Ikehara Tauberian theorem, which is the following statement:\nLet \"A\"(\"x\") be a non-negative, monotonic nondecreasing function of \"x\", defined for 0\u00a0\u2264\u00a0\"x\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\u221e. Suppose that\nformula_188\nconverges for \u211c(\"s\")\u00a0&gt;\u00a01 to the function \"\u0192\"(\"s\") and that, for some non-negative number \"c\",\nformula_189\nhas an extension as a continuous function for \u211c(\"s\")\u00a0\u2265\u00a01.\nThen the limit as \"x\" goes to infinity of \"e\"\u2212\"x\"\u2009\"A\"(\"x\") is equal to\u00a0c.\nThis statement can be applied in particular to the logarithmic derivative of Riemann zeta function, and thus provides an extremely short way to prove the prime number theorem.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18612", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18612", "title": "Liberal arts college", "text": "College with an emphasis on the liberal arts and sciences\nA liberal arts college or liberal arts institution of higher education is a college with an emphasis on undergraduate study in the liberal arts of humanities and science. Such colleges aim to impart a broad general knowledge and develop general intellectual capacities, in contrast to a professional or vocational curriculum. Students in a liberal arts college generally major in a particular discipline while receiving exposure to a wide range of academic subjects. Although it draws on European antecedents, the liberal arts college is strongly associated with American higher education, and most liberal arts colleges around the world draw explicitly on the American model.\nThere is no formal definition of a liberal arts college, but one American authority defines them as schools that \"emphasize undergraduate education and award at least half of their degrees in the liberal arts fields of study\". Other researchers have adopted similar definitions.\nAlthough many liberal arts colleges are exclusively undergraduate, some also offer graduate programs that lead to a master's degree or doctoral degree in subjects such as English, general biology, fine arts, and law. Similarly, the term \"liberal arts college\" most commonly refers to an independent institution with a specialty in non-vocational coursework. It may also sometimes refer to a university college within or affiliated with a larger university. Most liberal arts colleges outside the United States follow this model. In the US, many \"global\" universities have rebranded their liberal arts colleges as \"arts and social sciences\", \"arts and sciences\", and \"humanities\" colleges or created individual and separate schools for traditional liberal arts disciplines.\nDistinguishing characteristics.\nLiberal arts colleges are distinguished from other types of higher education chiefly by their generalist curricula and small size. These attributes have various secondary effects in terms of administration as well as student experience. For example, class size is usually much lower at liberal arts colleges than at universities, and faculty at liberal arts colleges typically focus on teaching more than research.\nFrom a student perspective, a liberal arts college typically differs from other forms of higher education in the following areas: higher overall student satisfaction, a general feeling that professors take a personal interest in the student's education, and perception of encouragement to participate in discussion. Many students select liberal arts colleges with precisely this sense of personal connection in mind.\nFrom an administrative standpoint, the small size of liberal arts colleges contributes to their cohesion and ability to survive through difficult times. Job satisfaction is also typically higher in liberal arts colleges, for both faculty and staff. The smaller size also makes it feasible for liberal arts colleges to adopt relatively experimental or divergent approaches, such as the Great Books curriculum at St. John's or Shimer, or the radically interdisciplinary curriculum of Marlboro.\nIn addition, most liberal arts colleges are primarily residential, which means students live and learn away from home, often for the first time.\nThe distinctiveness of these attributes is somewhat eroded by the tendency of universities to adopt aspects of the liberal arts college, and vice versa. For example, several American universities, including the University of California campuses in Santa Cruz and San Diego, developed a cluster colleges model in which small liberal-arts-college-like units within a larger university form a \"honeycomb of residential colleges\". In addition, some universities have maintained a sub-unit that preserves many aspects of the liberal arts college, such as Columbia College within Columbia University.\nLiberal arts colleges themselves sometimes cluster to offer greater curricular breadth or share other resources (for instance Colgate University and Hamilton College in New York allow cross enrollment). Liberal arts colleges typically require students to take classes from a variety of disciplines and to engage with a range of ideas and ways of thinking about the world. Compared to a liberal arts school, a standard university is typically more direct in its approach to teaching, following a set path for courses. Liberal arts students have a more flexible and well-rounded experience.\nLiberal arts and liberal arts college.\nIn academia, liberal arts generally refer to subjects or skills that aim to provide general knowledge and comprise the arts, humanities, general sciences, and social sciences (rather than professional or technical skills). Most liberal arts colleges, however, also offer courses in subjects that are not traditionally considered part of the liberal arts, such as computer science.\nGlobally.\nLiberal arts colleges are found in all parts of the world. Notwithstanding the European origins of the concept of liberal arts education, today the term is largely associated with the United States, and most self-identified liberal arts colleges worldwide are built on the American model. The Global Liberal Arts Alliance, which incorporates institutions on five continents, refers to itself as \"an international, multilateral partnership of American style liberal arts institutions\".\nIn 2009, liberal arts colleges from around the world formed the Global Liberal Arts Alliance, an international consortium and \"matching service\" to help liberal arts colleges in different countries deal with their shared problems.\nKeep in mind, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" no longer provides rankings for liberal arts colleges at \"global\" universities. These colleges are members of the top 2,000 universities \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranks around the world.\nIn North America.\nThe liberal arts college model took root in the United States in the 19th century, as institutions spread that followed the model of early schools like Harvard, Yale, and Dartmouth, although none of these early American schools are regarded as liberal arts colleges today. These colleges served as a means of spreading a basically European cultural model across the new country. The model proliferated in the 19th century; some 212 small liberal arts colleges were established between 1850 and 1899. As of 1987, there were about 540 liberal arts colleges in the United States.\nThe oldest liberal arts college in America is considered to be Washington College, the first college chartered after American independence. Other prominent examples in the United States include the so-called Little Ivy colleges in New England, the surviving predominantly female Seven Sisters colleges along the northeastern seaboard, the Claremont Colleges in Southern California, and the Ohio Five, but similar institutions are found all over the country.\nThe Maple League in Canada is a consortium of four universities \u2013 Acadia, Bishop's, Mount Allison and St. Francis Xavier \u2013 who together form an alliance of small, rural, undergraduate liberal arts education institutions with Francophone heritage and a commitment to truth and reconciliation with indigenous communities.\nMost liberal arts colleges are private institutions, but a handful of public liberal arts schools exist (such as the University of Mary Washington in Fredericksburg, Virginia).\nAccording to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", the top ten ranked Liberal Arts Colleges in America for 2022 were: Williams College, Amherst College, Swarthmore College, Pomona College, Wellesley College, Bowdoin College, United States Naval Academy, Claremont McKenna College, Carleton College, and Middlebury College, based on institutional stats and proprietary questionnaires .\nLiberal arts colleges in Canada include Acadia University, Bishop's University, Glendon College of York University, Mount Allison University, St. Francis Xavier University, St. Thomas University, Trent University, and the University of King's College.\nIn South America.\nThe leading organization is the National Institute of Educators of Liberal Arts and Artistic Education \"Instituto Nacional Superior del Profesorado en Artes\" located in Buenos Aires, Argentina, initially created in 1923 by Ernesto de la C\u00e1rcova, under the name \"Escuela Nacional Superior de Bellas Artes\", the original school of Liberal Arts building became the Ernesto de la C\u00e1rcova Museum. From 1983 to 2013 the institute was part of the IUNA National University Institute for the Arts, and since 2014, the Ruanova Institute of Performing Arts and Higher Education, named after Maria Ruanova, became part of the UNA Universidad Nacional de las Artes, (UNA) National University of the Arts\nIn Europe.\nWith the exception of pioneering institutions such as Franklin University Switzerland, established as a Europe-based, US-style liberal arts college in 1969, Saint Louis University Madrid Campus, established in 1967, and Richmond, The American International University in London, established in 1972 only recently have efforts been made to import the American liberal arts college model to Europe.\nIn the Netherlands, universities have opened constituent liberal arts colleges under the terminology \"\" since the late 1990s. This trend was spearheaded by Dutch sociologist Hans Adriaansens, who was \"frustrated with the large-scale climate of university education in the Netherlands\". Dutch university colleges of this kind include Leiden University College The Hague, University College Utrecht, University College Maastricht, Amsterdam University College, University College Roosevelt, Erasmus University College, University College Groningen and University College Tilburg.\nOther liberal arts colleges in continental Europe include The American University of Paris, Bratislava International School of Liberal Arts in Slovakia, Jacobs University Bremen, Bard College Berlin, the Leuphana University of L\u00fcneburg with their Bachelor program Studium Individuale and the University College Freiburg in Germany. Bard College Berlin was founded in Berlin in 1999 as the European College of Liberal Arts, and in 2009 it introduced a 4-year Bachelor of Arts program in Value Studies taught in English and leading to an interdisciplinary degree in the humanities. In the Czech Republic, the Faculty of Humanities, Charles University, a part of Charles University started providing liberal arts education in 1994 as the Institute for Liberal Education and gained full academic autonomy in 2000.\nAlthough liberal arts colleges as such remain rare, liberal arts degree programs are beginning to establish themselves in Europe. For example, University College Dublin offers the degree, as does St. Marys University College Belfast, both institutions coincidentally on the island of Ireland. In 2010 the University of Winchester introduced its Modern Liberal Arts undergraduate program, the first of its kind in the UK. In 2012, University College London began its interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences BASc degree (which has kinship with the liberal arts model) with 80 students. King's College London launched the BA Liberal Arts, which has a slant towards arts, humanities and social sciences subjects. The New College of the Humanities also launched a new liberal education programme. The four-year bachelor's degree in Liberal Arts and Sciences at University College Freiburg is the first of its kind in Germany. It started in October 2012 with 78 students. The first Liberal Arts degree program in Sweden was established at Gothenburg University in 2011, followed by a Liberal Arts Bachelor Programme at Uppsala University's Campus Gotland in the autumn of 2013. Liberal arts colleges in Italy include John Cabot University and The American University of Rome in Rome. The University College of North Staffordshire, founded in 1950 in the United Kingdom, was frequently referred to as the \"Keele Experiment\" because of its innovative curriculum and emphasis on a scholarly community resident together on campus. The college became Keele University in 1962 and continues to reflect many features of the liberal arts college model. It has been described as the closest example of a liberal arts college in the UK. This distinctiveness was reinforced with the opening of the new Keele Institute of Liberal Arts and Sciences in 2016.\nIn September 2016 Chavagnes Studium, a Liberal Arts centre in France, began offering a 2-year intensive BA in the Liberal Arts with a Catholic perspective.\nIn Asia.\nLingnan University in Hong Kong was established as a liberal arts college in the early 20th century, although it subsequently became a full-fledged university. Ginling College in Nanjing similarly followed the model of an American liberal arts college from its founding in 1915 until forced to conform with the Nationalist educational system in the 1930s. In Zhuhai City, Hong Kong Baptist University and Beijing Normal University opened United International College, which adopted the liberal arts college education system.\nInternational Christian University in Tokyo, which opened in 1953, defines itself as \"Japan's first liberal arts college\". Other Japanese liberal arts programs include the other four members of the Global Five which includes School of International Liberal Studies at Waseda University, Akita International University, Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University and Sophia University's Faculty of Liberal Arts.\nYale-NUS College was started in 2011 as Singapore's first liberal arts college as a collaboration between Yale University in the United States and the National University of Singapore. It attracted controversy over concerns that Yale was compromising on its liberal values by opening a college in a country where there are strong curbs on freedom of speech and assembly, with Yale faculty members expressing their \"concern regarding the history of lack of respect for civil and political rights in the state of Singapore\". In response, many existing faculty and students have noted that there has been little repression of freedom of expression at the college and that it provides a great opportunity to promote the liberal arts in Asia. In August 2021, NUS announced the closure of Yale-NUS College, with the Class of 2025 being the last cohort to receive an NUS degree. It will be replaced by NUS College, a merger between Yale-NUS College and the NUS University Scholars Programme.\nKalayaan College in the Philippines is one of the best examples of a liberal arts college in the country. Located in the New Manila district of Quezon City, it was founded in 2000 by former educators from the University of the Philippines led by Jos\u00e9 Abueva, President of the University from 1987 to 1993 and current Chairman of the KC Board of Trustees. It offers the same kind of education provided by UP to qualified students who are unable to enter the country's premier state university because of its limited college quotas. The curriculum and grading system is patterned after the academic programs and the grade structure offered by the University of the Philippines and is composed of administrators and faculty members who graduated from UP, and/or are also members of the UP academic community.\nSogang University was founded as South Korea's first liberal arts college. In 1960, Jesuits founded Sogang College. Although, it became Sogang University in 1970, it is still following model of American liberal arts college in many aspects. Seoul National University in South Korea established the College of Liberal Studies in 2007, initially as an educational project. However, after being established as a proper college in the SNU, it has become the only college that allows students to create their own major.\nLiberal arts colleges in India include undergraduate UG or bachelor's degree/diploma and postgraduate PG or master's degree/diploma as well as doctoral PhD and postdoctoral studies and research, in this academic discipline. The highly ranked IIT Guwahati offers a There are also programs such as Ajeenkya DY Patil University in Pune, India, Forman Christian College in Lahore, Pakistan, Aga Khan University and Habib University in Karachi, Pakistan and FLAME University in Pune, Maharashtra, India, referred to as India's 'first college of Liberal Education'. The University is a member of the Global Liberal Arts Alliance has also recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Nuffield College, University of Oxford.\nAlso, Ahmedabad University, a private, non-profit university offers its students a liberal education which is focused on research and interdisciplinary learning\".\"\nBaghdad College has offered a liberal arts curriculum since the early 20th century, but despite its name it has never offered more than a high school education. Effat University in Saudi Arabia, a women's institution, is a member of the Global Liberal Arts Alliance. Israel's first liberal arts college, Shalem College, was established in 2013.\nThe Jindal School of Liberal Arts &amp; Humanities (JSLH) at O.\u202fP.\u202fJindal Global University in Sonipat offers undergraduate programs fostering critical thinking, research skills, and a broad-based liberal arts education. One of its key offerings is the BA (Hons) in Liberal Arts &amp; Humanities, which combines humanities, social sciences, and language studies with elective specialization.\nIn Africa.\nThree institutions in Africa are members of the Global Liberal Arts Alliance: Al Akhawayn University in Morocco, American University of Cairo in Egypt, and American University of Nigeria. The Egyptian and Nigerian schools are universities with a liberal arts component, but Al Akhawayn was founded on the model of an American liberal arts college.\nAshesi University is a liberal arts college located in Berekuso, Ghana, established in 2002. The school's president, Patrick Awuah, described the school's mission as \"educating a new generation of leaders in Africa who think ethically and who are problem solvers and have the ability and the desire to confront problems on the continent\".\nIn Australia.\nCampion College is a Roman Catholic dedicated liberal arts college located in the western suburbs of Sydney. Founded in 2006, it is the first tertiary educational liberal arts college of its kind in Australia. Campion offers a Bachelor of Arts in the Liberal Arts as its sole undergraduate degree. The key disciplines studied are history, literature, philosophy and theology.\nThe Millis Institute is the School of Liberal Arts at Christian Heritage College located in Brisbane. It offers a Bachelor of Arts in Liberal Arts in which students can choose to major in Philosophy, Theology, History or Literature.\nA new School of Liberal Arts has been formed in the University of Wollongong; the new Arts course entitled 'Western Civilisation' was first offered in 2020. The interdisciplinary curriculum focuses on the classic intellectual and artistic literature of the Western tradition. Courses in the liberal arts have also been developed at the University of Sydney and University of Notre Dame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18614", "revid": "2136253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18614", "title": "Language acquisition", "text": "Process in which a first language is being acquired \nLanguage acquisition is the process by which humans acquire the capacity to perceive and comprehend language. In other words, it is how human beings gain the ability to be aware of language, to understand it, and to produce and use words and sentences to communicate.\nLanguage acquisition involves structures, rules, and representation. The capacity to successfully use language requires human beings to acquire a range of tools, including phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and an extensive vocabulary. Language can be vocalized as in speech, or manual as in sign. Human language capacity is represented in the brain. Even though human language capacity is finite, one can say and understand an infinite number of sentences, which is based on a syntactic principle called recursion. Evidence suggests that every individual has three recursive mechanisms that allow sentences to go indeterminately. These three mechanisms are: \"relativization\", \"complementation\" and \"coordination\".\nThere are two main guiding principles in first-language acquisition: speech perception always precedes speech production, and the gradually evolving system by which a child learns a language is built up one step at a time, beginning with the distinction between individual phonemes.\nFor many years, linguists interested in child language acquisition have questioned how language is acquired. Lidz et al. state, \"The question of how these structures are acquired, then, is more properly understood as the question of how a learner takes the surface forms in the input and converts them into abstract linguistic rules and representations.\"\nLanguage acquisition usually refers to first-language acquisition. It studies infants' acquisition of their native language, whether that is a spoken language or a sign language, though it can also refer to bilingual first language acquisition (BFLA), referring to an infant's simultaneous acquisition of two native languages. This is distinguished from \"second-language acquisition\", which deals with the acquisition (in both children and adults) of additional languages. On top of speech, reading and writing a language with an entirely different script increases the complexities of true foreign language literacy. Language acquisition is one of the quintessential human traits.\nHistory.\nSome early observation-based ideas about language acquisition were proposed by Plato, who felt that word-meaning mapping in some form was innate. Additionally, Sanskrit grammarians debated for over twelve centuries whether humans' ability to recognize the meaning of words was god-given (possibly innate) or passed down by previous generations and learned from already established conventions: a child learning the word for \"cow\" by listening to trusted speakers talking about cows.\nPhilosophers in ancient societies were interested in how humans acquired the ability to understand and produce language well before empirical methods for testing those theories were developed, but for the most part they seemed to regard language acquisition as a subset of man's ability to acquire knowledge and learn concepts.\nEmpiricists, like Thomas Hobbes and John Locke, argued that knowledge (and, for Locke, language) emerge ultimately from abstracted sense impressions. These arguments lean towards the \"nurture\" side of the argument: that language is acquired through sensory experience, which led to Rudolf Carnap's Aufbau, an attempt to learn all knowledge from sense datum, using the notion of \"remembered as similar\" to bind them into clusters, which would eventually map into language.\nProponents of behaviorism argued that language may be learned through a form of operant conditioning. In B. F. Skinner's \"Verbal Behavior\" (1957), he suggested that the successful use of a sign, such as a word or lexical unit, given a certain stimulus, reinforces its \"momentary\" or contextual probability. Since operant conditioning is contingent on reinforcement by rewards, a child would learn that a specific combination of sounds means a specific thing through repeated successful associations made between the two. A \"successful\" use of a sign would be one in which the child is understood (for example, a child saying \"up\" when they want to be picked up) and rewarded with the desired response from another person, thereby reinforcing the child's understanding of the meaning of that word and making it more likely that they will use that word in a similar situation in the future. Some empiricist theories of language acquisition include the statistical learning theory. Charles F. Hockett of language acquisition, relational frame theory, functionalist linguistics, social interactionist theory, and usage-based language acquisition.\nSkinner's behaviorist idea was strongly attacked by Noam Chomsky in a review article in 1959, calling it \"largely mythology\" and a \"serious delusion.\" Arguments against Skinner's idea of language acquisition through operant conditioning include the fact that children often ignore language corrections from adults. Instead, children typically follow a pattern of using an irregular form of a word correctly, making errors later on, and eventually returning to the proper use of the word. For example, a child may correctly learn the word \"gave\" (past tense of \"give\"), and later on use the word \"gived\". Eventually, the child will typically go back to using the correct word, \"gave\". Chomsky claimed the pattern is difficult to attribute to Skinner's idea of operant conditioning as the primary way that children acquire language. Chomsky argued that if language were solely acquired through behavioral conditioning, children would not likely learn the proper use of a word and suddenly use the word incorrectly. Chomsky believed that Skinner failed to account for the central role of syntactic knowledge in language competence. Chomsky also rejected the term \"learning\", which Skinner used to claim that children \"learn\" language through operant conditioning. Instead, Chomsky argued for a mathematical approach to language acquisition, based on a study of syntax.\nAs a typically human phenomenon.\nThe capacity to acquire and use language is a key aspect that distinguishes humans from other beings. Although it is difficult to pin down what aspects of language are uniquely human, there are a few design features that can be found in all known forms of human language, but that are missing from forms of animal communication. For example, many animals are able to communicate with each other by signaling to the things around them, but this kind of communication lacks the arbitrariness of human vernaculars (in that there is nothing about the sound of the word \"dog\" that would hint at its meaning). Other forms of animal communication may utilize arbitrary sounds, but are unable to combine those sounds in different ways to create completely novel messages that can then be automatically understood by another. Hockett called this design feature of human language \"productivity\". It is crucial to the understanding of human language acquisition that humans are not limited to a finite set of words, but, rather, must be able to understand and utilize a complex system that allows for an infinite number of possible messages. So, while many forms of animal communication exist, they differ from human language in that they have a limited range of vocabulary tokens, and the vocabulary items are not combined syntactically to create phrases.\nHerbert S. Terrace conducted a study on a chimpanzee known as Nim Chimpsky in an attempt to teach him American Sign Language. This study was an attempt to further research done with a chimpanzee named Washoe, who was reportedly able to acquire American Sign Language. However, upon further inspection, Terrace concluded that both experiments were failures. While Nim was able to acquire signs, he never acquired a knowledge of grammar, and was unable to combine signs in a meaningful way. Researchers noticed that \"signs that seemed spontaneous were, in fact, cued by teachers\", and not actually productive. When Terrace reviewed Project Washoe, he found similar results. He postulated that there is a fundamental difference between animals and humans in their motivation to learn language; animals, such as in Nim's case, are motivated only by physical reward, while humans learn language in order to \"create a new type of communication\".\nIn another language acquisition study, Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard attempted to teach Victor of Aveyron, a feral child, how to speak. Victor was able to learn a few words, but ultimately never fully acquired language. Slightly more successful was a study done on Genie, another child never introduced to society. She had been entirely isolated for the first thirteen years of her life by her father. Caretakers and researchers attempted to measure her ability to learn a language. She was able to acquire a large vocabulary, but never acquired grammatical knowledge. Researchers concluded that the theory of a critical period was true\u200a\u2014\u200aGenie was too old to learn how to speak productively, although she was still able to comprehend language.\nGeneral approaches.\nA major debate in understanding language acquisition is how these capacities are picked up by infants from the linguistic input. Input in the linguistic context is defined as \"All words, contexts, and other forms of language to which a learner is exposed, relative to acquired proficiency in first or second languages\". Nativists such as Chomsky have focused on the hugely complex nature of human grammars, the finiteness and ambiguity of the input that children receive, and the relatively limited cognitive abilities of an infant. From these characteristics, they conclude that the process of language acquisition in infants must be tightly constrained and guided by the biologically given characteristics of the human brain. Otherwise, they argue, it is extremely difficult to explain how children, within the first five years of life, routinely master the complex, largely tacit grammatical rules of their native language. Additionally, the evidence of such rules in their native language is all indirect\u2014adult speech to children cannot encompass all of what children know by the time they have acquired their native language.\nOther scholars, however, have resisted the possibility that infants' routine success at acquiring the grammar of their native language requires anything more than the forms of learning seen with other cognitive skills, including such mundane motor skills as learning to ride a bike. In particular, there has been resistance to the possibility that human biology includes any form of specialization for language. This conflict is often referred to as the \"nature and nurture\" debate. Of course, most scholars acknowledge that certain aspects of language acquisition must result from the specific ways in which the human brain is \"wired\" (a \"nature\" component, which accounts for the failure of non-human species to acquire human languages) and that certain others are shaped by the particular language environment in which a person is raised (a \"nurture\" component, which accounts for the fact that humans raised in different societies acquire different languages). The as-yet unresolved question is the extent to which the specific cognitive capacities in the \"nature\" component are also used outside of language.\nEmergentism.\nEmergentist theories, such as Brian MacWhinney's competition model, posit that language acquisition is a cognitive process that emerges from the interaction of biological pressures and the environment. According to these theories, neither nature nor nurture alone is sufficient to trigger language learning; both of these influences must work together in order to allow children to acquire a language. The proponents of these theories argue that general cognitive processes subserve language acquisition and that the result of these processes is language-specific phenomena, such as word learning and grammar acquisition. The findings of many empirical studies support the predictions of these theories, suggesting that language acquisition is a more complex process than many have proposed.\nEmpiricism.\nAlthough Chomsky's theory of a generative grammar has been enormously influential in the field of linguistics since the 1950s, many criticisms of the basic assumptions of generative theory have been put forth by cognitive-functional linguists, who argue that language structure is created through language use. These linguists argue that the concept of a language acquisition device (LAD) is unsupported by evolutionary anthropology, which tends to show a gradual adaptation of the human brain and vocal cords to the use of language, rather than a sudden appearance of a complete set of binary parameters delineating the whole spectrum of possible grammars ever to have existed and ever to exist. On the other hand, cognitive-functional theorists use this anthropological data to show how human beings have evolved the capacity for grammar and syntax to meet our demand for linguistic symbols. (Binary parameters are common to digital computers, but may not be applicable to neurological systems such as the human brain.)\nFurther, the generative theory has several constructs (such as movement, empty categories, complex underlying structures, and strict binary branching) that cannot possibly be acquired from any amount of linguistic input. It is unclear that human language is actually \"anything like\" the generative conception of it. Since language, as imagined by nativists, is unlearnably complex, subscribers to this theory argue that it must, therefore, be innate. Nativists hypothesize that some features of syntactic categories exist even before a child is exposed to any experience\u2014categories on which children map words of their language as they learn their native language. A different theory of language, however, may yield different conclusions. While all theories of language acquisition posit some degree of innateness, they vary in how much value they place on this innate capacity to acquire language. Empiricism places less value on the innate knowledge, arguing instead that the input, combined with both general and language-specific learning capacities, is sufficient for acquisition.\nSince 1980, linguists studying children, such as Melissa Bowerman and Asifa Majid, and psychologists following Jean Piaget, like Elizabeth Bates and Jean Mandler, came to suspect that there may indeed be many learning processes involved in the acquisition process, and that ignoring the role of learning may have been a mistake.\nDuring the 1990s and 2000s, the debate surrounding the nativist position has centered on whether the inborn capabilities are language-specific or domain-general, such as those that enable the infant to visually make sense of the world in terms of objects and actions. The anti-nativist view has many strands, but a frequent theme is that language emerges from usage in social contexts, using learning mechanisms that are a part of an innate general cognitive learning apparatus. This position has been championed by David M. W. Powers, Elizabeth Bates, Catherine Snow, Anat Ninio, Brian MacWhinney, Michael Tomasello, Michael Ramscar, William O'Grady, and others. Philosophers, such as Fiona Cowie and Barbara Scholz with Geoffrey Pullum have also argued against certain nativist claims in support of empiricism.\nThe new field of cognitive linguistics has emerged as a specific counter to Chomsky's Generative Grammar and to Nativism.\nStatistical learning.\nSome language acquisition researchers, such as Elissa Newport, Richard Aslin, and Jenny Saffran, emphasize the possible roles of general learning mechanisms, especially statistical learning, in language acquisition. The development of connectionist models that when implemented are able to successfully learn words and syntactical conventions supports the predictions of statistical learning theories of language acquisition, as do empirical studies of children's detection of word boundaries. In a series of connectionist model simulations, Franklin Chang has demonstrated that such a domain general statistical learning mechanism could explain a wide range of language structure acquisition phenomena.\nStatistical learning theory suggests that, when learning language, a learner would use the natural statistical properties of language to deduce its structure, including sound patterns, words, and the beginnings of grammar. That is, language learners are sensitive to how often syllable combinations or words occur in relation to other syllables. Infants between 21 and 23 months old are also able to use statistical learning to develop \"lexical categories\", such as an animal category, which infants might later map to newly learned words in the same category. These findings suggest that early experience listening to language is critical to vocabulary acquisition.\nThe statistical abilities are effective, but also limited by what qualifies as input, what is done with that input, and by the structure of the resulting output. Statistical learning (and more broadly, distributional learning) can be accepted as a component of language acquisition by researchers on either side of the \"nature and nurture\" debate. From the perspective of that debate, an important question is whether statistical learning can, by itself, serve as an alternative to nativist explanations for the grammatical constraints of human language.\nChunking.\nThe central idea of these theories is that language development occurs through the incremental acquisition of meaningful chunks of elementary constituents, which can be words, phonemes, or syllables. Several studies conducted in 2005\u20132007 demonstrated the efficacy of this approach in simulating several phenomena in the acquisition of syntactic categories and the acquisition of phonological knowledge.\nChunking theories of language acquisition constitute a group of theories related to statistical learning theories, in that they assume that the input from the environment plays an essential role; however, they postulate different learning mechanisms.\nResearchers at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology have developed a computer model analyzing early toddler conversations to predict the structure of later conversations. They showed that toddlers develop their own individual rules for speaking, with 'slots' into which they put certain kinds of words. A significant outcome of this research is that rules inferred from toddler speech were better predictors of subsequent speech than traditional grammars.\nThis approach has several features that make it unique: the models are implemented as computer programs, which enables clear-cut and quantitative predictions to be made; they learn from naturalistic input\u2014actual child-directed utterances; and attempt to create their own utterances, the model was tested in languages including English, Spanish, and German. Chunking for this model was shown to be most effective in learning a first language but was able to create utterances learning a second language.\nRelational frame theory.\nThe relational frame theory (RFT) (Hayes, Barnes-Holmes, Roche, 2001), provides a wholly selectionist/learning account of the origin and development of language competence and complexity. Based upon the principles of Skinnerian behaviorism, RFT posits that children acquire language purely through interacting with the environment. RFT theorists introduced the concept of functional contextualism in language learning, which emphasizes the importance of predicting and influencing psychological events, such as thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, by focusing on manipulable variables in their own context. RFT distinguishes itself from Skinner's work by identifying and defining a particular type of operant conditioning known as derived relational responding, a learning process that, to date, appears to occur only in humans possessing a capacity for language. Empirical studies supporting the predictions of RFT suggest that children learn language through a system of inherent reinforcements, challenging the view that language acquisition is based upon innate, language-specific cognitive capacities.\nSocial interactionism.\nSocial interactionist theory is an explanation of language development emphasizing the role of social interaction between the developing child and linguistically knowledgeable adults. It is based largely on the socio-cultural theories of Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky, and was made prominent in the Western world by Jerome Bruner.\nUnlike other approaches, it emphasizes the role of feedback and reinforcement in language acquisition. Specifically, it asserts that much of a child's linguistic growth stems from modeling of and interaction with parents and other adults, who very frequently provide instructive correction. It is thus somewhat similar to behaviorist accounts of language learning. It differs substantially, though, in that it posits the existence of a social-cognitive model and other mental structures within children (a sharp contrast to the \"black box\" approach of classical behaviorism).\nAnother key idea within the theory of social interactionism is that of the zone of proximal development. This is a theoretical construct denoting the set of tasks a child is capable of performing with guidance but not alone. As applied to language, it describes the set of linguistic tasks (for example, proper syntax, suitable vocabulary usage) that a child cannot carry out on its own at a given time, but can learn to carry out if assisted by an able adult.\nSyntax, morphology, and generative grammar.\nAs syntax began to be studied more closely in the early 20th century in relation to language learning, it became apparent to linguists, psychologists, and philosophers that knowing a language was not merely a matter of associating words with concepts, but that a critical aspect of language involves knowledge of how to put words together; sentences are usually needed in order to communicate successfully, not just isolated words. A child will use short expressions such as \"Bye-bye Mummy\" or \"All-gone milk\", which actually are combinations of individual nouns and an operator, before they begin to produce gradually more complex sentences. In the 1990s, within the principles and parameters framework, this hypothesis was extended into a maturation-based structure building model of child language regarding the acquisition of functional categories. In this model, children are seen as gradually building up more and more complex structures, with lexical categories (like noun and verb) being acquired before functional-syntactic categories (like determiner and complementizer). It is also often found that in acquiring a language, the most frequently used verbs are irregular verbs. In learning English, for example, young children first begin to learn the past tense of verbs individually. However, when they acquire a \"rule\", such as adding \"-ed\" to form the past tense, they begin to exhibit occasional overgeneralization errors (e.g. \"runned\", \"hitted\") alongside correct past tense forms. One influential proposal regarding the origin of this type of error suggests that the adult state of grammar stores each irregular verb form in memory and also includes a \"block\" on the use of the regular rule for forming that type of verb. In the developing child's mind, retrieval of that \"block\" may fail, causing the child to erroneously apply the regular rule instead of retrieving the irregular.\nMerge (linguistics)-based theory.\nIn bare-phrase structure (minimalist program), theory-internal considerations define the specifier position of an internal-merge projection (phases vP and CP) as the only type of host which could serve as potential landing-sites for move-based elements displaced from lower down within the base-generated VP structure\u2014e.g. A-movement such as passives ([\"The apple was eaten by [John (ate the apple)\"]]), or raising [\"Some work does seem to remain [(There) does seem to remain (some work)\"]]). As a consequence, any strong version of a structure building model of child language which calls for an exclusive \"external-merge/argument structure stage\" prior to an \"internal-merge/scope-discourse related stage\" would claim that young children's stage-1 utterances lack the ability to generate and host elements derived via movement operations. In terms of a merge-based theory of language acquisition, complements and specifiers are simply notations for first-merge (= \"complement-of\" [head-complement]), and later second-merge (= \"specifier-of\" [specifier-head], with merge always forming to a head. First-merge establishes only a set {a, b} and is not an ordered pair\u2014e.g., an {N, N}-compound of 'boat-house' would allow the ambiguous readings of either 'a kind of house' and/or 'a kind of boat'. It is only with second-merge that order is derived out of a set {a {a, b}} which yields the recursive properties of syntax\u2014e.g., a 'house-boat' {house {house, boat}} now reads unambiguously only as a 'kind of boat'. It is this property of recursion that allows for projection and labeling of a phrase to take place; in this case, that the Noun 'boat' is the Head of the compound, and 'house' acting as a kind of specifier/modifier. External-merge (first-merge) establishes substantive 'base structure' inherent to the VP, yielding theta/argument structure, and may go beyond the lexical-category VP to involve the functional-category light verb vP. Internal-merge (second-merge) establishes more formal aspects related to edge-properties of scope and discourse-related material pegged to CP. In a Phase-based theory, this twin vP/CP distinction follows the \"duality of semantics\" discussed within the Minimalist Program, and is further developed into a dual distinction regarding a probe-goal relation. As a consequence, at the \"external/first-merge-only\" stage, young children would show an inability to interpret readings from a given ordered pair, since they would only have access to the mental parsing of a non-recursive set. (See Roeper for a full discussion of recursion in child language acquisition). In addition to word-order violations, other more ubiquitous results of a first-merge stage would show that children's initial utterances lack the recursive properties of inflectional morphology, yielding a strict Non-inflectional stage-1, consistent with an incremental Structure-building model of child language.\nGenerative grammar, associated especially with the work of Noam Chomsky, is currently one of the approaches to explaining children's acquisition of syntax. Its leading idea is that human biology imposes narrow constraints on the child's \"hypothesis space\" during language acquisition. In the principles and parameters framework, which has dominated generative syntax since Chomsky's (1980) \"Lectures on Government and Binding: The Pisa Lectures\", the acquisition of syntax resembles ordering from a menu: the human brain comes equipped with a limited set of choices from which the child selects the correct options by imitating the parents' speech while making use of the context.\nAn important argument which favors the generative approach, is the poverty of the stimulus argument. The child's input (a finite number of sentences encountered by the child, together with information about the context in which they were uttered) is, in principle, compatible with an infinite number of conceivable grammars. Moreover, rarely can children rely on corrective feedback from adults when they make a grammatical error; adults generally respond and provide feedback regardless of whether a child's utterance was grammatical or not, and children have no way of discerning if a feedback response was intended to be a correction. Additionally, when children do understand that they are being corrected, they don't always reproduce accurate restatements. Yet, barring situations of medical abnormality or extreme privation, all children in a given speech-community converge on very much the same grammar by the age of about five years. An especially dramatic example is provided by children who, for medical reasons, are unable to produce speech and, therefore, can never be corrected for a grammatical error but nonetheless, converge on the same grammar as their typically developing peers, according to comprehension-based tests of grammar.\nConsiderations such as those have led Chomsky, Jerry Fodor, Eric Lenneberg and others to argue that the types of grammar the child needs to consider must be narrowly constrained by human biology (the nativist position). These innate constraints are sometimes referred to as universal grammar, the human \"language faculty\", or the \"language instinct\".\nComparative method of crosslinguistic research.\nThe comparative method of crosslinguistic research applies the comparative method used in historical linguistics to psycholinguistic research. In historical linguistics the comparative method uses comparisons between historically related languages to reconstruct a proto-language and trace the history of each daughter language. The comparative method can be repurposed for research on language acquisition by comparing historically related child languages. The historical ties within each language family provide a roadmap for research. For Indo-European languages, the comparative method would first compare language acquisition within the Slavic, Celtic, Germanic, Romance and Indo-Iranian branches of the family before attempting broader comparisons between the branches. For Otomanguean languages, the comparative method would first compare language acquisition within the Oto-pamean, Chinantecan, Tlapanecan, Popolocan, Zapotecan, Amuzgan and Mixtecan branches before attempting broader comparisons between the branches. The comparative method imposes an evaluation standard for assessing the languages used in language acquisition research.\nThe comparative method derives its power by assembling comprehensive datasets for each language. Descriptions of the prosody and phonology for each language inform analyses of morphology and the lexicon, which in turn inform analyses of syntax and conversational styles. Information on prosodic structure in one language informs research on the prosody of the related languages and vice versa. The comparative method produces a cumulative research program in which each description contributes to a comprehensive description of language acquisition for each language within a family as well as across the languages within each branch of the language family.\nComparative studies of language acquisition control the number of extraneous factors that impact language development. Speakers of historically related languages typically share a common culture that may include similar lifestyles and child-rearing practices. Historically related languages have similar phonologies and morphologies that impact early lexical and syntactic development in similar ways. The comparative method predicts that children acquiring historically related languages will exhibit similar patterns of language development, and that these common patterns may not hold in historically unrelated languages. The acquisition of Dutch will resemble the acquisition of German, but not the acquisition of Totonac or Mixtec. A claim about any universal of language acquisition must control for the shared grammatical structures that languages inherit from a common ancestor.\nSeveral language acquisition studies have accidentally employed features of the comparative method due to the availability of datasets from historically related languages. Research on the acquisition of the Romance and Scandinavian languages used aspects of the comparative method, but did not produce detailed comparisons across different levels of grammar. The most advanced use of the comparative method to date appears in research on the acquisition of the Mayan languages. This research has yielded detailed comparative studies on the acquisition of phonological, lexical, morphological and syntactic features in eight Mayan languages as well as comparisons of language input and language socialization.\nRepresentation in the brain.\nSeveral regions of the human brain participate in the reception, comprehension and production of language. These include the classical 'primary' language centers - Wernicke's area and Broca's area - along with several other brain structures. Recent advances in functional neuroimaging technology have allowed for a better understanding of how language acquisition is manifested physically in the brain. Language acquisition almost always occurs in children during a period of rapid increase in brain volume. At this point in development, a child has many more neural connections than he or she will have as an adult, allowing for the child to be more able to learn new things than he or she would be as an adult. Accordingly, the emergence of brain areas dedicated to language has been hypothesized to result from a combination of the genetically determined complexity of the human brain and the 'functional validation of synapses' during the extended period of human postnatal maturation that is unique among primates.\nSensitive period.\nLanguage acquisition has been studied from the perspective of developmental psychology and neuroscience, which looks at learning to use and understand language parallel to a child's brain development. It has been determined, through empirical research on developmentally normal children, as well as through some extreme cases of language deprivation, that there is a \"sensitive period\" of language acquisition in which human infants have the ability to learn any language. Several researchers have found that from birth until the age of six months, infants can discriminate the phonetic contrasts of all languages. Researchers believe that this gives infants the ability to acquire the language spoken around them. After this age, the child is able to perceive only the phonemes specific to the language being learned. The reduced phonemic sensitivity enables children to build phonemic categories and recognize stress patterns and sound combinations specific to the language they are acquiring. As Wilder Penfield noted, \"Before the child begins to speak and to perceive, the uncommitted cortex is a blank slate on which nothing has been written. In the ensuing years much is written, and the writing is normally never erased. After the age of ten or twelve, the general functional connections have been established and fixed for the speech cortex.\" According to the sensitive or critical period models, the age at which a child acquires the ability to use language is a predictor of how well he or she is ultimately able to use language. However, there may be an age at which becoming a fluent and natural user of a language is no longer possible; Penfield and Roberts (1959) cap their sensitive period at nine years old. The human brain may very well be automatically wired to learn languages, but this ability does not last into adulthood in the same way that it exists during childhood. By around age 12, language acquisition has typically been solidified, and it becomes more difficult to learn a language in the same way a native speaker would. Just like children who speak, deaf children go through a critical period for learning language. Deaf children who acquire their first language later in life show lower performance in complex aspects of grammar. At that point, it is usually a second language that a person is trying to acquire and not a first.\nAssuming that children are exposed to language during the critical period, acquiring language is almost never missed by cognitively normal children. Humans are so well-prepared to learn language that it becomes almost impossible not to. Researchers are unable to experimentally test the effects of the sensitive period of development on language acquisition, because it would be unethical to deprive children of language until this period is over. However, case studies on abused, language-deprived children show that they exhibit extreme limitations in language skills, even after instruction.\nAt a very young age, children can distinguish different sounds but cannot yet produce them. During infancy, children begin to babble. Deaf babies babble in the same patterns as hearing babies do, showing that babbling is not a result of babies simply imitating certain sounds, but is actually a natural part of the process of language development. Deaf babies do, however, often babble less than hearing babies, and they begin to babble later on in infancy\u2014at approximately 11 months as compared to approximately 6 months for hearing babies.\nPrelinguistic language abilities that are crucial for language acquisition have been seen even earlier than infancy. There have been many different studies examining different modes of language acquisition prior to birth. The study of language acquisition in fetuses began in the late 1980s when several researchers independently discovered that very young infants could discriminate their native language from other languages. In \"Mehler et al. (1988)\", infants underwent discrimination tests, and it was shown that infants as young as 4 days old could discriminate utterances in their native language from those in an unfamiliar language, but could not discriminate between two languages when neither was native to them. These results suggest that there are mechanisms for fetal auditory learning, and other researchers have found further behavioral evidence to support this notion. Fetus auditory learning through environmental habituation has been seen in a variety of different modes, such as fetus learning of familiar melodies, story fragments (DeCasper &amp; Spence, 1986), recognition of mother's voice, and other studies showing evidence of fetal adaptation to native linguistic environments.\nProsody is the property of speech that conveys an emotional state of the utterance, as well as the intended form of speech, for example, question, statement or command. Some researchers in the field of developmental neuroscience argue that fetal auditory learning mechanisms result solely from discrimination of prosodic elements. Although this would hold merit in an evolutionary psychology perspective (i.e. recognition of mother's voice/familiar group language from emotionally valent stimuli), some theorists argue that there is more than prosodic recognition in elements of fetal learning. Newer evidence shows that fetuses not only react to the native language differently from non-native languages, but that fetuses react differently and can accurately discriminate between native and non-native vowel sounds (Moon, Lagercrantz, &amp; Kuhl, 2013). Furthermore, a 2016 study showed that newborn infants encode the edges of multisyllabic sequences better than the internal components of the sequence (Ferry et al., 2016). Together, these results suggest that newborn infants have learned important properties of syntactic processing in utero, as demonstrated by infant knowledge of native language vowels and the sequencing of heard multisyllabic phrases. This ability to sequence specific vowels gives newborn infants some of the fundamental mechanisms needed in order to learn the complex organization of a language. \nFrom a neuroscientific perspective, neural correlates have been found that demonstrate human fetal learning of speech-like auditory stimuli that most other studies have been analyzing (Partanen et al., 2013). In a study conducted by Partanen et al. (2013), researchers presented fetuses with certain word variants and observed that these fetuses exhibited higher brain activity in response to certain word variants as compared to controls. In this same study, \"a significant correlation existed between the amount of prenatal exposure and brain activity, with greater activity being associated with a higher amount of prenatal speech exposure,\" pointing to the important learning mechanisms present before birth that are fine-tuned to features in speech (Partanen et al., 2013).\nVocabulary acquisition.\nLearning a new word, that is, learning to speak this word and speak it on the appropriate occasions, depends upon many factors. First, the learner needs to be able to hear what they are attempting to pronounce. Also required is the capacity to engage in speech repetition. Children with reduced ability to repeat non-words (a marker of speech repetition abilities) show a slower rate of vocabulary expansion than children with normal ability. Several computational models of vocabulary acquisition have been proposed. Various studies have shown that the size of a child's vocabulary by the age of 24 months correlates with the child's future development and language skills. If a child knows fifty or fewer words by the age of 24 months, he or she is classified as a late-talker, and future language development, like vocabulary expansion and the organization of grammar, is likely to be slower and stunted.\nTwo more crucial elements of vocabulary acquisition are word segmentation and statistical learning (described above). Word segmentation, or the ability to break down words into syllables from fluent speech can be accomplished by eight-month-old infants. By the time infants are 17 months old, they are able to link meaning to segmented words.\nRecent evidence also suggests that motor skills and experiences may influence vocabulary acquisition during infancy. Specifically, learning to sit independently between 3 and 5 months of age has been found to predict receptive vocabulary at both 10 and 14 months of age, and independent walking skills have been found to correlate with language skills at around 10 to 14 months of age. These findings show that language acquisition is an embodied process that is influenced by a child's overall motor abilities and development. Studies have also shown a correlation between socioeconomic status and vocabulary acquisition.\nMeaning.\nChildren learn, on average, ten to fifteen new word meanings each day, but only one of these can be accounted for by direct instruction. The other nine to fourteen word meanings must have been acquired in some other way. It has been proposed that children acquire these meanings through processes modeled by latent semantic analysis; that is, when they encounter an unfamiliar word, children use contextual information to guess its rough meaning correctly. A child may expand the meaning and use of certain words that are already part of their mental lexicon in order to denominate anything that is somehow related but for which they do not know the specific word. For instance, a child may broaden the use of \"mummy\" and \"dada\" in order to indicate anything that belongs to their mother or father, or perhaps every person who resembles their own parents; another example might be to say \"rain\" while meaning \"I don't want to go out\".\nThere is also reason to believe that children use various heuristics to infer the meaning of words properly. Markman and others have proposed that children assume words to refer to objects with similar properties (\"cow\" and \"pig\" might both be \"animals\") rather than to objects that are thematically related (\"cow\" and \"milk\" are probably not both \"animals\"). Children also seem to adhere to the \"whole object assumption\" and think that a novel label refers to an entire entity rather than to one of its parts. This assumption along with other resources, such as grammar and morphological cues or lexical constraints, may help the child in acquiring word meaning, but conclusions based on such resources may sometimes conflict.\nGenetic and neurocognitive research.\nAccording to several linguists, neurocognitive research has confirmed many standards of language learning, such as: \"learning engages the entire person (cognitive, affective, and psychomotor domains), the human brain seeks patterns in its searching for meaning, emotions affect all aspects of learning, retention and recall, past experience always affects new learning, the brain's working memory has a limited capacity, lecture usually results in the lowest degree of retention, rehearsal is essential for retention, practice [alone] does not make perfect, and each brain is unique\" (Sousa, 2006, p.\u00a0274). In terms of genetics, the gene ROBO1 has been associated with phonological buffer integrity or length.\nGenetic research has found two major factors predicting successful language acquisition and maintenance. These include inherited intelligence, and the lack of genetic anomalies that may cause speech pathologies, such as mutations in the FOXP2 gene which cause verbal dyspraxia. The role of inherited intelligence increases with age, accounting for 20% of IQ variation in infants, and for 60% in adults. It affects a vast variety of language-related abilities, from spatio-motor skills to writing fluency. There have been debates in linguistics, philosophy, psychology, and genetics, with some scholars arguing that language is fully or mostly innate, but the research evidence points to genetic factors only working in interaction with environmental ones.\nAlthough it is difficult to determine without invasive measures which exact parts of the brain become most active and important for language acquisition, fMRI and PET technology has allowed for some conclusions to be made about where language may be centered. Kuniyoshi Sakai has proposed, based on several neuroimaging studies, that there may be a \"grammar center\" in the brain, whereby language is primarily processed in the left lateral premotor cortex (located near the pre central sulcus and the inferior frontal sulcus). Additionally, these studies have suggested that first language and second language acquisition may be represented differently in the cortex. In a study conducted by Newman et al., the relationship between cognitive neuroscience and language acquisition was compared through a standardized procedure involving native speakers of English and native Spanish speakers who all had a similar length of exposure to the English language (averaging about 26 years). It was concluded that the brain does in fact process languages differently, but rather than being related to proficiency levels, language processing relates more to the function of the brain itself.\nDuring early infancy, language processing seems to occur over many areas in the brain. However, over time, it gradually becomes concentrated into two areas\u2014Broca's area and Wernicke's area. Broca's area is in the left frontal cortex and is primarily involved in the production of the patterns in vocal and sign language. Wernicke's area is in the left temporal cortex and is primarily involved in language comprehension. The specialization of these language centers is so extensive that damage to them can result in aphasia.\nLanguage diversity.\nKelly et al. (2015: 286) comment that \u201cThere is a dawning realization that the field of child language needs data from the broadest typological array of languages and language-learning environments.\u201d This realization is part of a broader recognition in psycholinguistics for the need to document diversity. Children's linguistic accomplishments are all the more impressive with recognition of the diversity that exists at every level of the language system. Different levels of grammar interact in language-specific ways so that differences in morphosyntax build on differences in prosody, which in turn reflect differences in conversational style. The diversity of adult languages results in diverse child language phenomena that challenge every acquisition theory.\nOne such challenge is to explain how children acquire complex vowels in Otomanguean and other languages. The complex vowels in these languages combine oral and laryngeal gestures produced with laryngeal constriction [\u0294] or laryngeal spreading [h]. The production of the laryngealized vowels is complicated by the production of tonal contrasts, which rely upon contrasts in vocal fold vibration. Otomanguean languages manage the conflict between tone and laryngeal gesture by timing the gesture at the start, middle or end of the vowel, e.g. \u0294V, V\u0294V and V\u0294. The phonetic realization of laryngealized vowels gives rise to the question of whether children acquire laryngealized vowels as single phonemes or sequences of phonemes. The unit analysis enlarges the vowel inventory but simplifies the syllable inventory, while the sequence analysis simplifies the vowel inventory but complicates the syllable inventory. The Otomanguean languages exhibit language-specific differences in the types and timing of the laryngeal gestures, and thus children must learn the specific laryngeal gestures that contribute to the phonological contrasts in the adult language.\nAn acquisition challenge in morphosyntax is to explain how children acquire ergative grammatical structures. Ergative languages treat the subject of intransitive verbs like the object of transitive verbs at the level of morphology, syntax or both. At the level of morphology, ergative languages assign an ergative marker to the subject of transitive verbs. The ergative marking may be realized by case markers on nouns or agreement markers on verbs. At the level of syntax, ergative languages have syntactic operations that treat the subject of transitive verbs differently from the subject of intransitive verbs. Languages with ergative syntax like K'iche' may restrict the use of subject questions for transitive verbs but not intransitive verbs. The acquisition challenge that ergativity creates is to explain how children acquire the language-specific manifestations of morphological and syntactic ergativity in the adult languages. The Mayan language Mam has ergative agreement making on its transitive verbs but extends the ergative marking to both the subject of intransitive verbs and the object of transitive verbs yielding transitive verbs with two ergative agreement markers. The contexts for extended ergative marking differ in type and frequency between Mayan languages, but two-year-old children produce extended ergative marking equally proficiently despite vast differences in the frequency of extended ergative marking in the adult languages.\nChildren acquire language through exposure to a diverse variety of cultural practices. Local groups vary in size and mobility depending on their means of subsistence. Some cultures require men to marry women who speak another language. Their children may be exposed to their mother's language for several years before moving in with their father and learning his language. Language groups have diverse beliefs about when children say their first words and what words they say. Such beliefs shape the time when parents perceive that children understand language. In many cultures, children hear more speech directed to others than to themselves, yet children acquire language in all cultures.\nDocumenting the diversity of child languages is made more urgent by the rapid loss of languages around the world. It may not be possible to document child language in half of the world's languages by the end of this century. Documenting child language should be a part of every language documentation project, and has an important role to play in revitalizing local languages. Documenting child language preserves cultural modes of language transmission and can emphasize their significance throughout the language community.\nArtificial intelligence.\nSome algorithms for language acquisition are based on statistical machine translation. Language acquisition can be modeled as a machine learning process, which may be based on learning semantic parsers or grammar induction algorithms.\nPrelingual deafness.\nPrelingual deafness is defined as hearing loss that occurred at birth or before an individual has learned to speak. In the United States, 2 to 3 out of every 1000 children are born deaf or hard of hearing. Even though it might be presumed that deaf children acquire language in different ways since they are not receiving the same auditory input as hearing children, many research findings indicate that deaf children acquire language in the same way that hearing children do and when given the proper language input, understand and express language just as well as their hearing peers. Babies who learn sign language produce signs or gestures that are more regular and more frequent than hearing babies acquiring spoken language. Just as hearing babies babble, deaf babies acquiring sign language will babble with their hands, otherwise known as manual babbling. Therefore, as many studies have shown, language acquisition by deaf children parallels the language acquisition of a spoken language by hearing children because humans are biologically equipped for language regardless of the modality.\nSigned language acquisition.\nDeaf children's visual-manual language acquisition not only parallel spoken language acquisition but by the age of 30 months, most deaf children that were exposed to a visual language had a more advanced grasp with subject-pronoun copy rules than hearing children. Their vocabulary bank at the ages of 12\u201317 months exceed that of a hearing child's, though it does even out when they reach the two-word stage. The use of space for absent referents and the more complex handshapes in some signs prove to be difficult for children between 5 and 9 years of age because of motor development and the complexity of remembering the spatial use.\nCochlear implants.\nOther options besides sign language for kids with prelingual deafness include the use of hearing aids to strengthen remaining sensory cells or cochlear implants to stimulate the hearing nerve directly. Cochlear implants (often known simply as CIs) are hearing devices that are placed behind the ear and contain a receiver and electrodes which are placed under the skin and inside the cochlea. Despite these developments, there is still a risk that prelingually deaf children may not develop good speech and speech reception skills. Although cochlear implants produce sounds, they are unlike typical hearing and deaf and hard of hearing people must undergo intensive therapy in order to learn how to interpret these sounds. They must also learn how to speak given the range of hearing they may or may not have. However, deaf children of deaf parents tend to do better with language, even though they are isolated from sound and speech because their language uses a different mode of communication that is accessible to them: the visual modality of language.\nAlthough cochlear implants were initially approved for adults, now there is pressure to implant children early in order to maximize auditory skills for mainstream learning which in turn has created controversy around the topic. Due to recent advances in technology, cochlear implants allow some deaf people to acquire some sense of hearing. There are interior and exposed exterior components that are surgically implanted. Those who receive cochlear implants earlier on in life show more improvement on speech comprehension and language. Spoken language development does vary widely for those with cochlear implants though due to a number of different factors including: age at implantation, frequency, quality and type of speech training. Some evidence suggests that speech processing occurs at a more rapid pace in some prelingually deaf children with cochlear implants than those with traditional hearing aids. However, cochlear implants may not always work.\nResearch shows that people develop better language with a cochlear implant when they have a solid first language to rely on to understand the second language they would be learning. In the case of prelingually deaf children with cochlear implants, a signed language, like American Sign Language would be an accessible language for them to learn to help support the use of the cochlear implant as they learn a spoken language as their L2. Without a solid, accessible first language, these children run the risk of language deprivation, especially in the case that a cochlear implant fails to work. They would have no access to sound, meaning no access to the spoken language they are supposed to be learning. If a signed language was not a strong language for them to use and neither was a spoken language, they now have no access to any language and run the risk of missing their critical period.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18615", "revid": "35019008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18615", "title": "Left Behind", "text": "Multimedia franchise based on the novels by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins\nLeft Behind is a multimedia franchise of apocalyptic fiction written by Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins, released by Tyndale House Publishers from 1995 to 2007. The bestselling novels are Christian eschatological narratives expounding LaHaye's dispensationalist interpretation of the New Testament's Book of Revelation. This includes the rapture of Christian believers prior to a tumultuous seven-year period known as the Great Tribulation, the main conflict narrated by the original 12 books. After rising to power, the Antichrist installs a new world order that oppresses Christian converts and forces them into hiding until Jesus's Second Coming, preceding a thousand years of peace.\nThe series has achieved significant commercial success, with multiple titles reaching the top of \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list and over 65 million copies sold worldwide by 2016. Critically, the series has been both influential and controversial, reflecting shifts in American evangelicalism, particularly a move toward political and social activism and a more divisive view of non-Christians. Scholars and critics have noted its triumphalist theology, perceived anti-Catholicism, sensational depictions of violence, and alignment with conspiratorial fears of globalism and one-world government, themes that some link to later movements, including QAnon. While praised by figures such as Jerry Falwell for its religious impact, others have criticized its theology, political messaging, and literary quality, with some viewing it as representative of American exceptionalism and neoliberal values.\nThe series has been adapted into five films. The original series of three films are ' (2000), ' (2002), and ' (2005). A reboot starring Nicolas Cage, entitled \"Left Behind\", was released in 2014 through Cloud Ten Pictures. A sequel, ', directed by and starring Kevin Sorbo, was released in 2023. The series inspired an audio drama as well as the PC game \"\" (2006) and its several .\nBooks.\nMain series.\n\"Left Behind\" tells an apocalyptic story about the ending of Earth (set in the contemporary era) over a period of seven years. The true believers in Jesus Christ have been raptured (taken instantly to heaven), leaving non-believers behind on Earth, now a shattered and chaotic world. As people scramble for answers, an obscure Romanian politician named Nicolae Jetty Carpathia rises to become secretary-general of the United Nations, promising to restore peace and stability to all nations. What most of the world does not realize is that Carpathia is actually the Antichrist foretold in the Bible. Coming to grips with the truth and becoming born-again Christians, airline pilot Rayford Steele, his daughter Chloe, their pastor Bruce Barnes, and young journalist Cameron \"Buck\" Williams begin their quest as the Tribulation Force to help save the lost and prepare for the coming Tribulation, in which God will rain down judgment on the world for seven years.\nAccording to James Bielo, it is based on a dispensationalist interpretation of prophecies in the Biblical books of Revelation, Daniel, Isaiah and Ezekiel.\nInfluences on the authors.\nLaHaye and Jenkins cite the influence of Russell Doughten, an Iowa-based filmmaker who directed the \"Thief in the Night\" series, a series of four low-budget but popular feature-length films in the 1970s and 1980s about the Rapture and Second Coming, starting with 1972's \"A Thief in the Night\". Indeed, the title \"Left Behind\" echoes the refrain of \"Thief\"'s early Christian rock theme song by Larry Norman, \"I Wish We'd All Been Ready,\" in which he sings, \"There's no time to change your mind, the Son has come and you've been left behind.\"\nThe success of Frank Peretti's pioneering Christian spiritual warfare thrillers in the 1980s and 1990s was a significant influence on the authors as well.\nReception.\nMultiple books in the series have been on the \"New York Times\" Bestseller List. Starting in 2000, Books 7 and 8 reached number one on the list followed by book 10, which debuted at number one.\nIn 2016, several books in the series were bestsellers and 65 million copies were sold in various languages.\nCritical response.\nEvangelical shift and views on non-Christians.\nIn 1999, journalist Adam Davidson placed the series in the context of a shift in evangelical views over the last several decades on non-believers. He argues that evangelicals went from \"[not yet knowing] who they were in the American public sphere\" in the 1960s and early 1970s to a \"major shift in evangelical thought which allowed for political and social activism\" by the late 1990s, more negative and divisive. Evangelicals, Davidson states, had previously been more separatist, with little interest in attempting to create large-scale religious, moral, and political change. He uses the 1972 Christian end-times film \"A Thief in the Night\" as an example of this former approach, with its compassionate view towards unbelievers: \"This is a portrait of regular people who don't know what to do and happen to make the wrong choice\". In contrast, \"Left Behind\", he contends, has a contemptuous and triumphant view of non-Christians and their suffering in the end times that he sees as symptomatic of a larger change in evangelicalism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While predicting the apocalypse may be a constant, the way evangelicals think about it has undergone a massive overhaul. The progression (or regression) is the move from rural towns to the halls of power. It's the expansion of the evangelical sphere of concern from the very local (my friends, my church) to the national and global (my president, my international policy). It's a move from a complex view of the individual to an oversimplification that identifies everyone as either good-believer or bad-heathen. It's also a change in sentiment towards the unbeliever from sadness, caring, and invitation to triumph, judgement, and dismissal. It's a chilling mutation, and has entrenched evangelical Christianity in an antagonism to secular America that borders, at times, on cruelty.\nWhile writing that the series fulfills the norms of mass-market fiction, magazine writer Michelle Goldberg also characterized the books as an attack on Judaism and liberal secularism, and suggested that the near-future \"end times\" in which the books are set seem to reflect the actual worldview of millions of Americans, including many prominent conservative leaders.\nAnti-Catholicism.\nThe books are written from an evangelical Protestant viewpoint. Some believe the books are anti-Catholic, noting that many Catholics were not raptured, concluding that no religion is free of false converts and that the new pope establishes a false religion. While the fictional Pope, John XXIV, was raptured, he is described as \"promoting Lutheran reform\", and it is implied that he was raptured for this reason. His successor, Pope Peter II, becomes Pontifex Maximus of Enigma Babylon One World Faith, an amalgam of all remaining world faiths and religions. \"Catholic Answers\" describes the series as anti-Catholic.\nThe co-author of the book, Jerry B. Jenkins, as well as LaHaye, stated that their books are not anti-Catholic and that they have many faithful Catholic readers and friends. According to LaHaye, \"the books don't suggest any particular theology, but try to introduce people to a more personal relationship with Jesus\".\nViolence and war.\nSome practicing Christians, evangelical and otherwise, along with non-Christians have shown concern that the social perspectives promoted in the \"Left Behind\" series unduly sensationalize the death and destruction of masses of people. Harvey Cox, a professor of divinity at Harvard, says part of the appeal of the books lies in the \"lip-licking anticipation of all the blood\", and Lutheran theologian Barbara Rossing, author of \"The Rapture Exposed: The Message of Hope in the Book of Revelation\", said the books glorify violence. Additionally, Paul Nuechterlein accused the authors of re-sacralizing violence, adding that \"we human beings are the ones who put our faith in superior firepower. But in the \"Left Behind\" novels, the darkness of that human, satanic violence is once again attributed to God\". \"Time\" said \"the nuclear frights of, say, Tom Clancy's \"The Sum of All Fears\" wouldn't fill a chapter in the \"Left Behind\" series. (Large chunks of several U.S. cities have been bombed to smithereens by page 110 of Book 3.)\"\nDavid Carlson, a Professor of Religious Studies and a member of the Greek Orthodox Church, wrote that the theology underpinning the \"Left Behind\" series promotes a \"skewed view of the Christian faith that welcomes war and disaster, while dismissing peace efforts in the Middle East and elsewhere\u2014all in the name of Christ\".\nB. D. Forbes \"locates the series in the context of a well-established tradition of American popular culture...that presents the good-evil struggle as 'evil [coming] from the outside' with 'the solution [as] the destruction of the evil-doers\".\nRelationship to believed prophetic events.\nSeveral scholars comment on the series' setting in time and relationship to perceived real, future events: religious studies scholar Mark Juergensmeyer argues that the \"Left Behind\" books are seen as fictional representations of future events, drawing a connection between the future violence portrayed in the books and \"the violence in imagined worlds in the here-and now\". Similarly, Andrew Strombeck additionally links the books to Derrida's \"spectral time\": \"neither the future nor the present but a kind of ghostly future that haunts the present\". Glenn Shuck also contends that \"Left Behind\" \"does not...describe an other-worldly dystopia: it provides the shock-value of uncanny recognition of the present in a different form.\" Doris Buss and Didi Herman write, \"While there is clearly some element of drama and 'play' to the 'Left Behind' opus...the series remains, at its core, a statement of how the authors and many other conservative Christians believe this world will end and a new one begin. In their detail, the 'Left Behind' 'novels' are indistinguishable from many works of ostensible 'nonfiction' penned by other [Christian right] writers.\"\nApocalypticism, conspiratorialism, and militias.\nThe series' focus on apocalypticism, totalitarian conspiracies, and militias has been noted by writers including Gershom Gorenberg, Michael Joseph Gross, and Andrew Strombeck. They note themes such as fear of one-world government (in the form of the United Nations led by the Antichrist), global religion, and global currency \u2013 fought against by militias \"structurally equivalent to Christians\". Didi Herman places the series' depiction of the United Nations as an anti-Christian organization intent on implementing globalism, and thereby the New World Order, in the context of Christian right end-times scenarios, along with Pat Robertson's \"New World Order\" and Hal Lindsey's \"Late Great Planet Earth\". University of Notre Dame religion scholar Jason Springs regards the series' apocalypticism as one aspect that would later feed into the evangelical adoption of QAnon.\nLaurie Goodstein, writing in 1998 for \"The New York Times\", placed what she called the \"\"Left Behind\" phenomenon\" in the calendrical context of the approaching year 2000. Goodstein noted a 'proliferation' of similarly apocalyptic texts appearing at that time, by authors such as Jim Bakker and John Hagee. Goodstein cited the opinion of University of Wisconsin historian Paul Boyer, who described such authors as \"cashing in on the public preoccupation with the year 2000\".\nAmerican Century and American exceptionalism.\nMarisa Ronan places the series in the context of the American Century and American exceptionalism, \"proving at the fin-de-si\u00e8cle that not only was the twentieth century American, it was Christian\". Ronan notes that American evangelicals are portrayed as taking center stage in the apocalypse, fighting a spiritual battle against the UN's successor \u2013 headed by the Antichrist \u2013 which in part seeks to usurp the superpower status of the United States.\nEnd-times theology and premillennial dispensationalism.\nAlong with some other rapture fiction novels, the \"Left Behind\" series demonstrates a specific interpretation of the Gospel and the Christian life, one with which many have taken issue theologically. The books have not sold particularly well outside of the United States. Dispensationalism remains a minority view among theologians. For instance, amillennial and postmillennial Christians do not believe in the same timeline of the Second Coming as premillennialists, while preterist Christians interpret the Book of Revelation as events that have already been fulfilled in the 1st century. Brian McLaren of the Emergent Church compares the \"Left Behind\" series to \"The Da Vinci Code\", and states, \"What the \"Left Behind\" novels do, the way they twist scripture toward a certain theological and political end, I think [Dan] Brown is twisting scripture, just to other political ends.\" John Dart, writing in \"Christian Century\", characterized the works as \"beam me up theology.\" Jason Springs argues that evangelical beliefs on the role of the modern state of Israel have been shaped by the books.\nNeoliberalism.\nAndrew Strombeck focuses on the series' neoliberalism: \"in the midst of the apocalypse, good is privatized and evil state-run\"; he notes the characters' depictions as \"rational market actors first, Christians second\".\nPacing.\nOne reason cited for the books' popularity is the quick pacing and action, and that they reflect the public's overall concern and fascination with the Apocalypse as portrayed in the biblical book of Revelation. Michelle Goldberg has written that, \"On one level, the attraction of the \"Left Behind\" books isn't that much different from that of, say, Tom Clancy or Stephen King. The plotting is brisk and the characterizations Manichaean. People disappear and things blow up.\" The \"New York Times\" also compared the series to Clancy's works. However, those views are not universally shared. Other reviewers have called the series \"almost laughably tedious\" and \"fatuous and boring.\"\nRelated series.\n\"Left Behind: The Kids\" series.\n\"Left Behind: The Kids\" is a series of forty novellas written for teenagers. It has the same plot as the adult series, but the main protagonists are teenagers.\nSpinoff books.\nWilliams professor Glenn Shuck has written the book \"Marks of the Beast: The Left Behind Novels and the Struggle for Evangelical Identity,\" published by NYU Press in 2005. He followed this with a collection of original essays co-edited with Jeffrey J. Kripal of Rice University on the Esalen Institute in California, published by Indiana University Press in 2005.\nStarting in 2003, the series was expanded upon by Mel Odom with his \"Apocalypse\" military series and Neesa Hart with her political thriller series, both taking place concurrently with the main series.\nGraphic novels.\nIn 2002, a series of graphic novels published by Tyndale House was launched that comprised the first two books in the series, \"Left Behind\" and \"Tribulation Force\". The original idea was to release sets of three to five novels (each about 45\u201350 pages) for each book in the original series. However, after the fifth and final novel for \"Tribulation Force\" was released, the graphic novel series was discontinued, and the novels that were released are as of December\u00a02006[ [update]] out of print. A compilation of the graphic novels for the first book was later released as one novel.\nFilm adaptations.\nThe success of the \"Left Behind\" books has led to the release of five motion pictures based on the series so far. All four have been produced by brothers Paul and Peter LaLonde, and have been released through Cloud Ten Pictures, an independent Canadian-based Christian film studio.\nThe first, \"\", was based on the first book of the series and was released in 2000. In a very unusual marketing scheme, the studio released the film on home video, and then theatrically. It fared poorly in theaters. The film starred former \"Growing Pains\" star Kirk Cameron as Buck Williams. Cameron, who praised the book series as \"inspiring\", became a practicing evangelist (and co-host with Ray Comfort on the TV show \"The Way of the Master\").\nThe sequel, \"\", based on the second book, \"Tribulation Force\", was released in 2002. The film debuted at #2 on Nielson's video scan reports, behind \"Spider-Man\", and was #1 in terms of overall sales for two days on Amazon.com.\nThe second sequel, \"\", was released first to churches on October 21, 2005, for church theatrical viewings and was released via home media on October 25. Much of the main cast from the previous two films, excluding Clarence Gilyard, reprised their respective roles for \"World at War\". Gilyard, who played Bruce Barnes, was unable to return due to a scheduling conflict with a play in New York. It is based very loosely on the final 50 pages of \"Tribulation Force\" and features Louis Gossett Jr. as the President of the United States, Gerald Fitzhugh. The third installment was the least identifiable with events in any of the books. Recognizable events were the marriages of Buck with Chloe Steele, and of Rayford Steele with Amanda White; the death of Bruce Barnes; and President Fitzhugh's heading an attack, resulting in World War III, with Great Britain and Egypt fighting against the Global Community. Major parts, however, were taken from subsequent books; these events include the poisoning of Barnes by GC forces, instead of Nicolae Carpathia himself, and an attempt by Fitzhugh to assassinate Carpathia. Buck's meeting with the President in the books takes a different form in the film.\nThe film series have been criticized for, among other things, low production values. A \"Slate\" reviewer commented that in 2004, Cloud Ten Pictures made a deal with Sony Pictures Entertainment to release all of its pictures under their banner and has been doing so ever since.\nIn 2010, Cloud Ten announced that a remake of the \"Left Behind\" series was in development, with production set to begin in late 2012 for an October 2014 release date. The reboot, starring Nicolas Cage as Steele and Chad Michael Murray as Buck Williams, was released to theaters October 3, 2014. It focused mainly on the very beginnings of the first book and added much to the plot. The remake focuses on the experiences of the passengers on the plane and partially on Chloe Steele as she comes to terms with her missing family. It earned overwhelmingly negative reviews and flopped at the box office.\n', a spin-off film based on the spin-off series ' released on September 28, 2016. The film was developed by Tim LaHaye's grandson, Randy LaHaye and was well received by the book author.\nIn November 2021, LaLonde announced the beginning of production on \", with Kevin Sorbo directing and replacing Nicolas Cage as Rayford Steele. The film is set six months after the events of the 2014 film and is an adaptation of the rest of book one in the series. The film makes a few small changes to be more relevant for modern times.\nVideo game.\nA video game, \", (2006) and its three sequels, \"Left Behind: Tribulation Forces\", \"Left Behind 3: Rise of the Antichrist\" and \"Left Behind 4: World at War\", were developed by a publicly traded company, Left Behind Games. The games are real-time strategy games wherein the player controls a \"Tribulation Forces\" team and allows the player to \"use the power of prayer to strengthen your troops in combat and wield modern military weaponry throughout the game world.\" The original game was released in the United States on November 14, 2006, and received mixed reviews. Distribution was initially planned to work through churches and megachurches.\nAlthough the original game was accused of encouraging religious violence, not all reviewers of the game or critics of the \"Left Behind\" series shared that view. Representatives of the company have responded that the game's message is pacifist, because shooting nonbelievers instead of converting them costs the player \"spirit points\", which can be recovered by pausing to pray. The company also responded to these criticisms in an online newsletter, stating, \"There is no violence, only conflict,\" and, \"The most successful way to fight, is through the means of spiritual warfare; PRAYER and WORSHIP. Soldiers and military weaponry are available, but once anyone plays the game, they'll see how difficult it is to succeed by using these less effective means of warfare.\"\nMusic.\nThe album \"People Get Ready: A Musical Collection Inspired by The Left Behind Series\" was released in 1998.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18616", "revid": "47298399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18616", "title": "Lollardy", "text": "Radical Christian reform movement\nLollardy was a proto-Protestant Christian religious movement that was active in England from the mid-14th century until the 16th-century English Reformation. It was initially led by John Wycliffe, a Catholic theologian who was later dismissed from the University of Oxford in 1381 for heresy. The Lollards' demands were primarily for reform of Western Christianity. They formulated their beliefs in the Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards. Early it became associated with regime change uprisings and assassinations of high government officials, and was suppressed.\nEtymology.\n\"Lollard\", \"Lollardi\", or \"Loller\" was the popular derogatory nickname given to those without an academic background, educated, if at all, mainly in English, who were reputed to follow the teachings of John Wycliffe in particular. By the mid-15th century, \"lollard\" had come to mean a heretic in general. The alternative term \"Wycliffite\" is generally accepted to be a more neutral term covering those of similar opinions, but having an academic background.\nThe term is said to have been coined by the Anglo-Irish cleric Henry Crumpe, but its origin is uncertain. The earliest official use of the name in England occurs in 1387 in a mandate of the Bishop of Worcester against five \"poor preachers\", \"nomine seu ritu Lollardorum confoederatos\". According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", it most likely derives from Middle Dutch \"\" (\"mumbler, mutterer\"), from a verb \"lollen\" (\"to mutter, mumble\"). The word is much older than its English use; there were Lollards in the Netherlands at the beginning of the 14th\u00a0century who were akin to the Fraticelli, Beghards, and other sectaries similar to the recusant Franciscans.\nOriginally the Dutch word was a colloquial name for a group of buriers of the dead during the Black Death, in the 14th\u00a0century, known as Alexians, Alexian Brothers or Cellites. These were known colloquially as ' (Middle Dutch for \"mumbling brothers\"), or ', from (\"to sing softly\"), from their chants for the dead. Middle English \"\" (akin to the verb \"loll\", \"lull\", the English cognate of Dutch \"lollen\" \"to mutter, mumble\") is recorded as an alternative spelling of \"Lollard\", while its generic meaning \"a lazy vagabond, an idler, a fraudulent beggar\" is not recorded before 1582.\nTwo other possibilities for the derivation of \"Lollard\" are mentioned by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\":\nBeliefs.\nAccording to scholar Margaret Aston, as Wycliffe's academic theology percolated to the masses, it changed measureably, some parts strengthening and others weakening. Historian John Thomson is paraphrased \"Rather than a specific creed of well thought out theological doctrine, Lollard beliefs are more aptly described as a set of consistent attitudes.\"\nEucharist.\nWith regard to the Eucharist, Lollards such as John Wycliffe, William Thorpe and John Oldcastle taught a view of the mystical real presence of Christ in Holy Communion known as \"consubstantiation\" but did not accept the formulation of transubstantiation, which the Roman Catholic Church required the faithful not to deny. Wycliffite teachings on the Eucharist were declared heresy at the Blackfriars Council of 1382, and later by the Pope and the Council of Constance.\n\"The Plowman's Tale\", a medieval Lollard poem, argues that theological debate about orthodox doctrine is less important than the Real Presence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWilliam Sawtry, a priest, was reportedly burned in 1401 for his preaching that \"bread remains in the same nature as before\" after consecration by a priest. A suspect in 1517 summed up the Lollards' position: \"Summe folys cummyn to churche thynckyng to see the good Lorde \u2013 what shulde they see there but bredde and wyne?\"\nIn the mid 15th century a priest named Richard Wyche was accused of false doctrine that corrupted the faith of Northumbrians, and left a letter detailing his version of the inquisitional proceedings, where a succession of theologians and others attempted to convince him of the Catholic position or to find some compromise wording that involved him not denying transubstantiation. When asked about transubstantiation during his questioning, he repeated only his belief in the Real Presence. When asked if the host was still bread even after consecration, he answered only: \"I believe that the host is the real body of Christ in the form of bread\". Throughout his questioning he insisted that he was \"not bound to believe otherwise than Holy Scripture says\" and resorted to various loopholes. Following the questioning, he claimed he had been allowed to swear an oath on his heart; later his inquisitors denied this, saying he had sworn a different oath, which would have actually freed him; his denial of having taken that oath was taken as a re-canting by the bishop, preventing his attempted appeal to the Pope, so he was excommunicated, defrocked, imprisoned and eventually executed.\nLollard teachings on the Eucharist are attested to in numerous primary source documents. It is the fourth of the \"Twelve Conclusions\" and the first of the \"Sixteen Points on which the Bishops accuse Lollards\". It is discussed in \"The Testimony of William Thorpe\", the \"Apology for Lollard Doctrines\", \"Jack Upland\", and \"Opus Arduum\".\nDenial of sacraments and sacramentals.\nThe Lollards did not believe that the church practices of baptism and confession were necessary for salvation.\nBelieving in a universal priesthood, the Lollards challenged the Church's authority to invest or to deny the divine authority to make a man a priest. Denying any special status to the priesthood, Lollards thought confession to a priest was unnecessary since according to them priests did not have the ability to forgive sins. However, while it is beneficial to confess to a good priest, it is perilous to confess to a bad one. Lollards challenged the practice of clerical celibacy and believed priests should not hold government positions as such temporal matters would likely interfere with their spiritual mission.\nThey considered praying to saints and honouring of their images to be a form of idolatry. Oaths, fasting and prayers for the dead were thought to have no scriptural basis. They had a poor opinion of the trappings of the Catholic Church, including holy water, bells, organs, and church buildings. They rejected the value of papal pardons.\nThe Twelve Conclusions.\nOne group of Lollards petitioned Parliament with the Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards by posting them on the doors of Westminster Hall in February 1395. While by no means a central statement of belief of the Lollards, the Twelve Conclusions reveal certain basic Lollard ideas.\nLater, an expanded version the \"Thirty Seven Conclusions\" or \"Remonstrances\" was submitted in the late 1390s; the author is not known.\nVernacular scripture.\nLollardy was a religion of vernacular scripture. Lollards opposed many practices of the Catholic church. Anne Hudson has written that a form of \"sola scriptura\" underpinned Wycliffe's beliefs, but distinguished it from the more radical ideology that anything not permitted by scripture is forbidden. Instead, Hudson notes that Wycliffe's \"sola scriptura\" held the Bible to be \"the only valid source of doctrine and the only pertinent measure of legitimacy.\"\nLater Lollards believed that people deserved access to a copy of their own Bible. Many attempted to distribute English copies. Due to the lack of a printing press and low literacy levels, it was difficult to accomplish this goal.\nHowever, a notable feature of some Lollard inquisitions was the common claim of illiteracy, or vision impairment, as a defence against the suspicion of Lollardy raised by possession of suspect vernacular texts.\nDespite popular beliefs to the contrary: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no doubt that the Lollards (as Wycliffe's followers were called) were persecuted, but it does not appear that the possession, use, or manufacture of an English version of the Bible was one of the charges specially urged against them. The subject is not raised in the extant list of articles upon which the suspected were to be questioned.\u2014\u200a\nCatholic practices.\nLollards did not observe fasting and abstinence in the Catholic Church. In heresy proceedings against Margery Baxter it was presented as evidence that a servant girl found bacon in a pot of oatmeal on the first Saturday of Lent. Non-observance of dietary restrictions was used as evidence of heresy in another Norfolk case against Thomas Mone, where it was alleged that a piglet was eaten for Easter dinner when eating meat was forbidden.\nSpecial vows were considered to be in conflict with the divine order established by Christ and were regarded as anathema.\nLollards had a tendency toward iconoclasm.\nSome Lollards believed work was permissible on Sundays.\nFoxe.\nSixteenth-century martyrologist John Foxe reduced the main beliefs of Lollardy to four (none of which correspond exactly to the five solae alleged of Protestantism), marginalizing the Wycliffite doctrine of \"dominium\", claiming they were:\nHistory.\nAlthough Lollardy was denounced as a heresy by the Catholic Church, initially Wycliffe and the Lollards were sheltered by politically-influential nobleman John of Gaunt and other anti-clerical nobility, who may have wanted to use Lollard-advocated clerical reform to acquire new sources of revenue from England's monasteries. The University of Oxford also protected Wycliffe and similar academics on the grounds of academic freedom and, initially, allowed such persons to retain their positions despite their controversial views.\nTwo primary religious opponents of the Wycliffites were Archbishop of Canterbury William Courtenay and his successor Thomas Arundel, assisted by bishops like Henry le Despenser of Norwich, whom the chronicler Thomas Walsingham praised for his zeal.\nHistorian T. Waugh suggests the Lollard movement was small with little appeal to the upper classes, who liked the anti-clerical politics but not the religious doctrines. \"Notices of Lollardy after the death of Wycliffe are scattered and meagre. Sixteenth century Protestantism invested the Lollards with a posthumous renown, but there can be little doubt that, when their first energy had spent itself, they speedily became an obscure sect, destitute of living leaders, and vaguely re-echoing the teaching of a deceased founder whom they only half understood.\"\nOxford Lollards.\nThe initial Lollards were a small group of scholars, particularly at Merton College, Oxford University, some with important positions, who came under the influence of Wycliffe in the 1360s and 1370s. After Wycliffe's natural death, all of them eventually submitted to Archbishop of Canterbury William Courtenay to renounce Wycliffe's contentious doctrines, and none suffered long-term consequences. These notably included Nicholas Hereford, who is usually named as the translator of most of the Old Testament of the Wycliffean Middle English Bible.\nPeasants' Revolt.\nLollards first faced serious persecution after the Peasants' Revolt in 1381. While Wycliffe and other Lollards opposed the revolt, one of the peasants' leaders, John Ball, preached Lollardy. Prior to 1382, Wycliffite beliefs were tolerated in government as they endorsed in royal superiority to bishops. However, the government and royals were hesitant, as they did not want to encourage subjects to criticize religious powers.\nAfter 1382, royalty and nobility found Lollardy to be a threat not only to the Church, but to English society in general. The Lollards' small measure of protection evaporated. This change in status was also affected by the departure of John of Gaunt (Duke of Lancaster, patron of Chaucer and protector of John Wycliffe) who left England in 1386 to pursue the Crown of Castile.\nPaul Strohm has asked: \"Was the Lollard a genuine threat or a political pawn, agent of destabilising challenge, or a hapless thread of self-legitimizing Lancastrian discourse?\"\nLollard Knights.\nA group of gentry active during the reign of Richard II (1377\u201399) were known as \"Lollard Knights\" either during or after their lives due to their acceptance of Wycliffe's claims. Henry Knighton, in his Chronicle, identifies the principal Lollard Knights as Thomas Latimer, John Trussell, Lewis Clifford, Sir John Peche (son of John Peche of Wormleighton), Richard Storey, and Reginald Hilton. Thomas Walsingham's Chronicle adds William Nevil and John Clanvowe to the list, and other potential members of this circle have been identified by their wills, which contain Lollard-inspired language about how their bodies are to be plainly buried and permitted to return to the soil whence they came.\nThere is little indication that the Lollard Knights were specifically known as such during their lifetimes. They were men of discretion, and unlike Sir John Oldcastle years later, rarely gave any hint of open rebellion. However, they displayed a remarkable ability to retain important positions, without falling victim to the prosecutions of Wycliffe's followers during their lifetimes.\nLegal response.\nReligious and secular authorities strongly opposed Lollardy. In eventual response to the revolting Lollards, the law \"De heretico comburendo\" was enacted in 1401 during the reign of Henry IV; traditionally heresy had been defined as an error in theological belief, but this statute equated theological heresy with sedition against political rulers.\nBy the early 15th century, stern measures were undertaken by Church and state which drove Lollardy underground. One such measure was the 1410 burning at the stake of John Badby, a layman and craftsman who refused to renounce his Lollardy. He was the first layman to suffer capital punishment in England for the crime of heresy.\nOldcastle Revolt.\nJohn Oldcastle, a close friend of Henry V of England and the basis for Falstaff in the Shakespearean history \"Henry IV, Part 1\", was brought to trial in 1413 after evidence of his Lollard beliefs was uncovered. Oldcastle escaped from the Tower of London and organized an insurrection, which included an attempted kidnapping of the king. The rebellion failed, and Oldcastle was executed. Oldcastle's revolt made Lollardy seem even more threatening to the state, and persecution of Lollards became more severe.\n1428 Kentish Insurrection.\nAn insurrection was nipped in the bud in 1428, feared to involve several thousand Lollards, intent on \"destroying the English church.\" It was associated with Lollard missionary William White.\nLate Lollardy in the 1500s.\nLollards were effectively absorbed into Protestantism during the English Reformation, in which Lollardy played a role. Since Lollards had been underground for more than a hundred years, the extent of Lollardy and its ideas at the time of the Reformation is uncertain and a point of debate. Ancestors of Blanche Parry, the closest person to Elizabeth I for 56 years, and of Blanche Milborne, who raised Edward VI and Elizabeth I, had Lollard associations.\nMany critics of the Reformation, including Thomas More, equated Protestants with Lollards. Leaders of the English Reformation, including Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, referred to Lollardy as well, and Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall of London called Lutheranism the \"foster-child\" of the Wycliffite heresy. Scholars debate whether Protestants actually drew influence from Lollardy, or whether they referred to it to create a sense of tradition. Late Lollards had little direct connection to Wycliffe's ideas.\nOther martyrs for the Lollard cause were executed during the next century, including the Amersham Martyrs in the early 1500s and Thomas Harding in 1532, one of the last Lollards to be persecuted. A gruesome reminder of this persecution is the 'Lollards Pit' in Thorpe Wood, now Thorpe Hamlet, Norwich, Norfolk, \"where men are customablie burnt\", including Thomas Bilney.\nDespite the debate about the extent of Lollard influence there are ample records of the persecution of Lollards from this period. In the Diocese of London, there are records of about 310 Lollards being prosecuted or forced to abjure from 1510 to 1532. In Lincoln diocese, 45 cases against Lollardy were heard in 1506\u20131507. In 1521, there were 50 abjurations and 5 burnings of Lollards. In 1511, Archbishop Warham presided over the abjuration of 41 Lollards from Kent and the burning of 5.\nIn 1529, Simon Fish wrote an incendiary pamphlet \"Supplication for the Beggars\", including his denial of purgatory and teachings that priestly celibacy was an invention of the Antichrist. He argued that earthly rulers have the right to strip Church properties, and that tithing was against the Gospel, Protestant views that echo the Wycliffite/Lollard teaching. He advocated closing of all monasteries, and notably provided economic estimates of the revenues of various monastic and church institutions.\nThe extent of Lollardy in the general populace at this time is unknown. The prevalence of Protestant iconoclasm in England suggests Lollard ideas may still have had some popular influence if Huldrych Zwingli was not the source, as Lutheranism did not advocate iconoclasm. Lollards were persecuted again between 1554 and 1559 during the Revival of the Heresy Acts under the Catholic Mary I, which specifically suppressed heresy and Lollardy.\nThe similarity between Lollards and later English Protestant groups, such as the Baptists, Puritans, and Quakers, also suggests some continuation of Lollard ideas through the Reformation.\nRepresentations in art and literature.\nThe Roman Catholic Church used art as an anti-Lollard weapon. Lollards were represented on misericords as foxes dressed as monks or priests preaching to a flock of geese. These representations alluded to the story of the preaching fox found in popular medieval literature such as \"The History of Reynard the Fox\" and \"The Shifts of Raynardine\". The fox lured the geese closer and closer with its eloquent words, until it was able to snatch a victim to devour. The moral of the story is that foolish people are seduced by false teachers.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18620", "revid": "7410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18620", "title": "Legal property", "text": ""}
{"id": "18621", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18621", "title": "Louvre Museum", "text": ""}
