{"id": "13578", "revid": "332841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13578", "title": "Hermann Hesse", "text": "German writer (1877\u20131962)\nHermann Karl Hesse (; 2 July 1877 \u2013 9 August 1962) was a German-Swiss poet and novelist, and winner of the 1946 Nobel Prize in Literature. His interest in Eastern religious, spiritual, and philosophical traditions, combined with his involvement with Jungian analysis, helped to shape his literary work. His best-known novels include \"Demian\", \"Steppenwolf\", \"Siddhartha\", \"Narcissus and Goldmund\", and \"The Glass Bead Game\", each of which explores an individual's search for authenticity, self-knowledge, and spirituality. \nHesse was a widely read author in German-speaking countries during his lifetime, but his more enduring international fame did not come until a few years after his death, when, in the mid-1960s, his works became enormously popular with post-World War II generation readers in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere. \nLife and work.\nFamily background.\nHermann Karl Hesse was born on 2 July 1877 in the Black Forest town of Calw, in W\u00fcrttemberg, German Empire. His grandparents served in India at a mission under the auspices of the Basel Mission, a Protestant Christian missionary society. His grandfather Hermann Gundert compiled a Malayalam grammar and a Malayalam-English dictionary, and also contributed to a translation of the Bible into Malayalam in South India. Hesse's mother, Marie Gundert, was born at such a mission in South India in 1842. In describing her own childhood, she said, \"A happy child I was not ...\". As was usual among missionaries at the time, she was left behind in Europe at the age of four when her parents returned to India.\nHesse's father, Johannes Hesse, the son of a doctor, was born in 1847 in Weissenstein, Governorate of Estonia, in the Russian Empire (now Paide, Estonia). His son Hermann was at birth a dual citizen of the German Empire and the Russian Empire. Hermann had five siblings, but two of them died in infancy. In 1873, the Hesse family moved to Calw, where Johannes worked for Calwer Verlagsverein, a publishing house specializing in theological texts and schoolbooks. Marie's father, Hermann Gundert (also the namesake of his grandson), managed the publishing house at the time, and Johannes Hesse succeeded him in 1893.\nHesse grew up in a Swabian Pietist household, with the Pietist tendency to insulate believers into small, deeply thoughtful groups. Furthermore, Hesse described his father's Baltic German heritage as \"an important and potent fact\" of his developing identity. His father, Hesse stated, \"always seemed like a very polite, very foreign, lonely, little-understood guest\". His father's tales from Estonia instilled a contrasting sense of religion in young Hermann. \"[It was] an exceedingly cheerful, and, for all its Christianity, a merry world ... We wished for nothing so longingly as to be allowed to see this Estonia ... where life was so paradisiacal, so colourful and happy.\" Hesse's sense of estrangement from the Swabian petite bourgeoisie grew further through his relationship with his maternal grandmother Julie Gundert, n\u00e9e Dubois, whose French-Swiss heritage kept her from ever quite fitting in among that milieu.\nChildhood.\nFrom childhood, Hesse was headstrong and hard for his family to handle. In a letter to her husband, Hermann's mother Marie wrote: \"The little fellow has a life in him, an unbelievable strength, a powerful will, and, for his four years of age, a truly astonishing mind. How can he express all that? It truly gnaws at my life, this internal fighting against his tyrannical temperament, his passionate turbulence [...] God must shape this proud spirit, then it will become something noble and magnificent \u2013 but I shudder to think what this young and passionate person might become should his upbringing be false or weak.\"\nHesse showed signs of serious depression as early as his first year at school. In his juvenilia collection \"Gerbersau\", Hesse vividly describes experiences and anecdotes from his childhood and youth in Calw: the atmosphere and adventures by the river, the bridge, the chapel, the houses leaning closely together, hidden nooks and crannies, as well as the inhabitants with their admirable qualities, their oddities, and their idiosyncrasies. The fictional town of Gerbersau is pseudonymous for Calw, imitating the real name of the nearby town of Hirsau. It is derived from the German words \"gerber\", meaning \"tanner\", and \"aue\", meaning \"meadow\". Calw had a centuries-old leather-working industry, and during Hesse's childhood the tanneries' influence on the town was still very much in evidence. Hesse's favourite place in Calw was the St. Nicholas Bridge (\"Nikolausbr\u00fccke\"), which is why a Hesse monument was built there in 2002.\nHermann Hesse's grandfather Hermann Gundert, a doctor of philosophy and fluent in multiple languages, encouraged the boy to read widely, giving him access to his library, which was filled with works of world literature. All this instilled a sense in Hermann Hesse that he was a citizen of the world. His family background became, he noted, \"the basis of an isolation and a resistance to any sort of nationalism that so defined my life\".\nYoung Hesse shared a love of music with his mother. Both music and poetry were important in his family. His mother wrote poetry, and his father was known for his use of language in both his sermons and the writing of religious tracts. His first role model for becoming an artist was his half-brother, Theo, who rebelled against the family by entering a music conservatory in 1885. Hesse showed a precocious ability to rhyme, and by 1889\u201390 had decided that he wanted to be a writer.\nEducation.\nIn 1881, when Hesse was four, the family moved to Basel, Switzerland, staying for six years and then returning to Calw. After successful attendance at the Latin School in G\u00f6ppingen, Hesse entered the Evangelical Theological Seminary of Maulbronn Abbey in 1891. The pupils lived and studied at the abbey, one of Germany's most beautiful and well-preserved, attending 41 hours of classes a week. Although Hesse did well during the first months, writing in a letter that he particularly enjoyed writing essays and translating classic Greek poetry into German, his time in Maulbronn was the beginning of a serious personal crisis. In March 1892, Hesse showed his rebellious character, and, in one instance, he fled from the Seminary and was found in a field a day later. Hesse began a journey through various institutions and schools and experienced intense conflicts with his parents. In May, after an attempt at suicide, he spent time at an institution in Bad Boll under the care of theologian and minister Christoph Friedrich Blumhardt. Later, he was placed in a mental institution in Stetten im Remstal, and then a boys' institution in Basel. At the end of 1892, he attended the Gymnasium in Cannstatt, now part of Stuttgart. In 1893, he passed the One Year Examination, which concluded his schooling. The same year, he began spending time with older companions and took up drinking and smoking.\nAfter this, Hesse began a bookshop apprenticeship in Esslingen am Neckar, but quit after three days. Then, in the early summer of 1894, he began a 14-month mechanic apprenticeship at a clock tower factory in Calw. The monotony of soldering and filing work made him turn himself toward more spiritual activities. In October 1895, he was ready to begin wholeheartedly a new apprenticeship with a bookseller in T\u00fcbingen. This experience from his youth, especially his time spent at the seminary in Maulbronn, he later returned to in his novel \"Beneath the Wheel\".\nBecoming a writer.\nOn 17 October 1895 Hesse began working in the bookshop in T\u00fcbingen, which had a specialized collection in theology, philology, and law. Hesse's tasks consisted of organizing, packing, and archiving the books. After the end of each twelve-hour workday, Hesse pursued his own work, and he spent his long, idle Sundays with books rather than friends. Hesse studied theological writings and later Goethe, Lessing, Schiller, and Greek mythology. He also began reading Nietzsche in 1895, and that philosopher's ideas of \"dual\u2026impulses of passion and order\" in humankind was a heavy influence on most of his novels.\nBy 1898 Hesse had a respectable income that enabled financial independence from his parents. During this time, he concentrated on the works of the German Romantics, including much of the work of Clemens Brentano, Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff, Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin, and Novalis. In letters to his parents, he expressed a belief that \"the morality of artists is replaced by aesthetics\".\nDuring this time, he was introduced to the home of Fr\u00e4ulein von Reutern, a friend of his family's. There, he met with people his own age. His relationships with his contemporaries were \"problematic\", in that most of them were now at university. This usually left him feeling awkward in social situations.\nIn 1896 his poem \"Madonna\" appeared in a Viennese periodical and Hesse released his first small volume of poetry, \"Romantic Songs\". In 1897, a published poem of his, \"Grand Valse\", drew him a fan letter. It was from Helene Voigt, who the next year married Eugen Diederichs, a young publisher. To please his wife, Diederichs agreed to publish Hesse's collection of prose entitled \"One Hour After Midnight\" in 1898 (although it is dated 1899). Neither work was a commercial success. In two years, only 54 of the 600 printed copies of \"Romantic Songs\" were sold, and \"One Hour After Midnight\" received only one printing and sold sluggishly. Furthermore, Hesse \"suffered a great shock\" when his mother disapproved of \"Romantic Songs\" on the grounds that they were too secular and even \"vaguely sinful\".\nFrom late 1899 Hesse worked in a distinguished antique bookshop in Basel. Through family contacts, he stayed with the intellectual families of Basel. In this environment with rich stimuli for his pursuits, he further developed spiritually and artistically. At the same time, Basel offered the solitary Hesse many opportunities for withdrawal into a private life of artistic self-exploration, journeys and wanderings. In 1900, Hesse was exempted from compulsory military service due to an eye condition. This, along with nerve disorders and persistent headaches, affected him his entire life.\nIn 1901 Hesse undertook to fulfill a long-held dream and travelled for the first time to Italy. In the same year, Hesse changed jobs and began working at the antiquarium Wattenwyl in Basel. Hesse had more opportunities to release poems and small literary texts to journals. These publications now provided honorariums. His new bookstore agreed to publish his next work, \"Posthumous Writings and Poems of Hermann Lauscher\". In 1902, his mother died after a long and painful illness. He could not bring himself to attend her funeral, stating in a letter to his father: \"I think it would be better for us both that I do not come, in spite of my love for my mother\".\nDue to the good notices that Hesse received for \"Lauscher\", the publisher Samuel Fischer became interested in Hesse and, with the novel \"Peter Camenzind\", which appeared first as a pre-publication in 1903 and then as a regular printing by Fischer in 1904, came a breakthrough: from now on, Hesse could make a living as a writer. The novel became popular throughout Germany. Sigmund Freud \"praised \"Peter Camenzind\" as one of his favourite readings\".\nFamily life on Lake Constance and travels to South and Southeast Asia.\nHaving realised he could make a living as a writer, Hesse finally married Maria Bernoulli (of the famous family of mathematicians) in 1904, while her father, who disapproved of their relationship, was away for the weekend. The couple settled down in Gaienhofen on Lake Constance, and began a family, eventually having three sons. In Gaienhofen, he wrote his second novel, \"Beneath the Wheel\", which was published in 1906. In the following time, he composed primarily short stories and poems. His story \"The Wolf\", written in 1906\u201307, was \"quite possibly\" a foreshadowing of \"Steppenwolf\".\nHis next novel, \"Gertrude\", published in 1910, revealed a production crisis. He had to struggle through writing it and would later describe it as \"a miscarriage\". Gaienhofen was the place where Hesse's interest in Buddhism was re-sparked. Following a letter to Kapff in 1895 entitled \"Nirvana\", Hesse had ceased alluding to Buddhist references in his work. In 1904, however, Arthur Schopenhauer and his philosophical ideas started receiving attention again, and Hesse discovered theosophy. Schopenhauer and theosophy renewed Hesse's interest in India. Although it was many years before the publication of Hesse's \"Siddhartha\" (1922), this masterpiece was to be derived from these new influences.\nDuring this time there also was increased dissonance between him and Maria, and in 1911 Hesse left for a long trip to Sri Lanka and Indonesia. He also visited Borneo and Burma, but \"the physical experience ... was to depress him\". Any spiritual or religious inspiration that he was looking for eluded him, but the journey made a strong impression on his literary work. Following Hesse's return, the family moved to Bern (1912), but the change of environment could not solve the marriage problems, as he himself confessed in his novel \"Rosshalde\" from 1914.\nDuring the First World War.\nAt the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Hesse registered himself as a volunteer with the Imperial Army, saying that he could not sit inactively by a warm fireplace while other young authors were dying on the front. He was found unfit for combat duty, but was assigned to service involving the care of prisoners of war. While most poets and authors of the warring countries quickly became embroiled in a tirade of mutual hate, Hesse, seemingly immune to the general war enthusiasm of the time, wrote an essay titled \"O Friends, Not These Tones\" (\"O Freunde, nicht diese T\u00f6ne\"), which was published in the , on 3 November. In this essay he appealed to his fellow intellectuals not to fall for nationalistic madness and hatred. Calling for subdued voices and recognition of Europe's common heritage, Hesse wrote: \"That love is greater than hate, understanding greater than ire, peace nobler than war, this exactly is what this unholy World War should burn into our memories, more so than ever felt before\". What followed from this, Hesse later indicated, was a great turning point in his life. For the first time, he found himself in the middle of a serious political conflict, attacked by the German press, the recipient of hate mail, and distanced from old friends. However, he did receive support from his friend Theodor Heuss, and the French writer Romain Rolland, who visited Hesse in August 1915. In 1917, Hesse wrote to Rolland, \"The attempt...to apply love to matters political has failed\".\nThis public controversy was not yet resolved when a deeper life crisis befell Hesse with the death of his father on 8 March 1916, the serious illness of his son Martin, and his wife's schizophrenia. He was forced to leave his military service and begin receiving psychotherapy. This began for Hesse a long preoccupation with psychoanalysis, through which he came to know Carl Jung personally, and was challenged to new creative heights. Hesse and Jung both later maintained a correspondence with Chilean author, diplomat and Nazi sympathizer Miguel Serrano, who detailed his relationship with both figures in the book \"C. G. Jung &amp; Hermann Hesse: A Record of Two Friendships\". During a three-week period in September and October 1917, Hesse penned his novel \"Demian\", which would be published following the armistice in 1919 under the pseudonym Emil Sinclair.\nCasa Camuzzi.\nBy the time Hesse returned to civilian life in 1919, his marriage had fallen apart. His wife, Maria, had a severe episode of psychosis, but, even after her recovery, Hesse saw no possible future with her. Their home in Bern was divided, their children were accommodated in boarding houses and by relatives, and Hesse resettled alone in the middle of April in Ticino. He occupied a small farmhouse near Minusio (close to Locarno), living from 25 April to 11 May in Sorengo. On 11 May, he moved to the town Montagnola and rented four small rooms in a castle-like building, the Casa Camuzzi. Here, he explored his writing projects further; he began to paint, an activity reflected in his next major story, \"Klingsor's Last Summer\", published in 1920. This new beginning in different surroundings brought him happiness, and Hesse later called his first year in Ticino \"the fullest, most prolific, most industrious and most passionate time of my life\". In 1922, Hesse's novella \"Siddhartha\" appeared, which showed the love for Indian culture and Buddhist philosophy that had already developed earlier in his life. In 1924, Hesse married the singer Ruth Wenger, the daughter of the Swiss writer Lisa Wenger and aunt of M\u00e9ret Oppenheim. This marriage was short-lived, and they divorced in 1927.\nIn 1923 Hesse was granted Swiss citizenship. His next major works, \"Kurgast\" (1925) and \"The Nuremberg Trip\" (1927), were autobiographical narratives with ironic undertones and foreshadowed Hesse's following novel, \"Steppenwolf\", which was published in 1927. In the year of his 50th birthday, the first biography of Hesse appeared, written by his friend Hugo Ball. Shortly after his new successful novel, he turned away from the solitude of \"Steppenwolf\" and started a cohabitation with art historian Ninon Dolbin, n\u00e9e Ausl\u00e4nder. This change to companionship was reflected in the novel \"Narcissus and Goldmund\", appearing in 1930.\nLater life and death.\nIn 1931 Hesse left the Casa Camuzzi and moved with Ninon to a larger house, also near Montagnola, which was built for him to use for the rest of his life, by his friend and patron Hans C. Bodmer. In the same year, Hesse married Ninon, and began planning what would become his last major work, \"The Glass Bead Game\" (a.k.a. \"Magister Ludi\"). In 1932, as a preliminary study, he released the novella \"Journey to the East\".\nHesse observed the rise to power of Nazism in Germany with concern. In 1933, Bertolt Brecht and Thomas Mann made their travels into exile, each aided by Hesse. In this way, Hesse attempted to work against Hitler's suppression of art and literature that protested Nazi ideology. Hesse's third wife was Jewish, and he had publicly expressed his opposition to anti-Semitism long before then. Hesse was criticized for not condemning the Nazi Party, but his failure to criticize or support any political idea stemmed from his \"politics of detachment [...] At no time did he openly condemn (the Nazis), although his detestation of their politics is beyond question.\" In March 1933, seven weeks after Hitler took power, Hesse wrote to a correspondent in Germany, \"It is the duty of spiritual types to stand alongside the spirit and not to sing along when the people start belting out the patriotic songs their leaders have ordered them to sing.\" In the 1930s Hesse made a quiet statement of resistance by reviewing and publicizing the work of banned Jewish authors, including Franz Kafka. In the late 1930s, German journals stopped publishing Hesse's work, and the Nazis eventually banned it.\nAccording to Hesse, he \"survived the years of the Hitler regime and the Second World War through the eleven years of work that [he] spent on [\"The Glass Bead Game\"]\".\"\" Printed in 1943 in Switzerland, this was to be his last novel. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1946.\nDuring the last twenty years of his life, Hesse wrote many short stories (chiefly recollections of his childhood) and poems (frequently with nature as their theme). Hesse also wrote ironic essays about his alienation from writing (for instance, the mock autobiographies: \"Life Story Briefly Told\" and \"Aus den Briefwechseln eines Dichters\") and spent much time pursuing his interest in watercolours. Hesse also occupied himself with the steady stream of letters he received as a result of the Nobel Prize and as a new generation of German readers explored his work. In one essay, Hesse reflected wryly on his lifelong failure to acquire a talent for idleness and speculated that his average daily correspondence exceeded 150 pages. He died on 9 August 1962, aged 85, in Montagnola, Switzerland and was buried in the cemetery of Sant\u2019Abbondio in Gentilino, where his friend and biographer Hugo Ball and another German personality, the conductor Bruno Walter, are also buried.\nReligious views.\nAs reflected in \"Demian\" and other works, he believed that \"for different people, there are different ways to God\". Despite the influence he drew from Hindu and Buddhist philosophies, he stated about his parents that \"their Christianity, one not preached but lived, was the strongest of the powers that shaped and moulded me\".\nInfluence.\nInfluence in German-speaking countries.\nIn his time, Hesse was a popular and influential author in the German-speaking world; worldwide fame only came later. Hesse's first great novel, \"Peter Camenzind\", was received enthusiastically by young Germans desiring a different and more \"natural\" way of life in this time of great economic and technological progress in the country (see also Wandervogel movement). \"Demian\" had a strong and enduring influence on the generation returning home from the First World War. Similarly, \"The Glass Bead Game\", with its disciplined intellectual world of Castalia and the powers of meditation and humanity, captivated Germans' longing for a new order amid the chaos of a broken nation following the loss in the Second World War.\nTowards the end of his life, German (born Bavarian) composer Richard Strauss (1864\u20131949) set three of Hesse's poems to music in his song cycle \"Four Last Songs\" for soprano and orchestra (composed 1948, first performed posthumously in 1950): \"Fr\u00fchling\" (\"Spring\"), \"September\", and \"Beim Schlafengehen\" (\"On Going to Sleep\").\nIn the 1950s Hesse's popularity began to wane, while literature critics and intellectuals turned their attention to other subjects. In 1955 sales of Hesse's books by his publisher Suhrkamp reached an all-time low. However, after Hesse's death in 1962, posthumously published writings, including letters and previously unknown pieces of prose, contributed to a new level of understanding and appreciation of his works.\nThroughout Germany many schools are named after Hesse. The Hermann-Hesse-Literaturpreis is a literary prize associated with the city of Karlsruhe that has been awarded since 1957. Since 1990, the Calw Hermann Hesse Prize has been awarded every two years alternately to a German-language literary journal and a translator of Hesse's work. \nThe Internationale Hermann-Hesse-Gesellschaft (unofficial English name International Hermann Hesse Society) was founded in 2002 on Hesse's 125th birthday and began awarding its Hermann Hesse prize in 2017.\n1960s \"Hesse Boom\".\nBy the time of Hesse's death in 1962, his works were still relatively little read in the United States, despite his status as a Nobel laureate. A memorial published in \"The New York Times\" went so far as to claim that Hesse's works were largely \"inaccessible\" to American readers.\nThe situation changed in the mid-1960s when his works suddenly became bestsellers in the United States, with many of the novels republished in inexpensive paperback editions. The revival in popularity of Hesse's works has been credited to their association with some of the popular themes of the 1960s counterculture (or hippie) movement. In particular, the quest-for-enlightenment themes of \"Siddhartha\", \"Journey to the East\", \"Narcissus and Goldmund\" and \"The Glass Bead Game\" resonated with those espousing counter-cultural ideals. The \"magic theatre\" sequences in \"Steppenwolf\" were interpreted by some as drug-induced psychedelia, although there is no evidence that Hesse ever took psychedelic drugs or recommended their use. In large part, the Hesse boom in the United States can be traced back to enthusiastic writings by two influential counterculture figures: Colin Wilson and Timothy Leary. \nFrom the United States the Hesse renaissance spread to other parts of the world and even back to Germany: more than 800,000 copies were sold in the German-speaking world from 1972 to 1973. To date, his works have sold more than 100 million copies worldwide, making Hesse one of the 100 top selling fiction authors of all time. \nAs an effect of the worldwide Hesse boom, \"Siddhartha\" became one of the most popular Western novels set in India. An authorized translation of \"Siddhartha\" was published in the Malayalam language in 1990, the language that surrounded Hesse's grandfather, Hermann Gundert, for most of his life. A Hermann Hesse Society of India has also been formed. It aims to bring out authentic translations of \"Siddhartha\" in all Indian languages and has already prepared the Sanskrit,\nMalayalam and Hindi translations of \"Siddhartha\".\nReferences in Popular Culture.\nThe Magic Theatre in San Francisco, its name referring to \"The Magic Theatre for Madmen Only\" in \"Steppenwolf\" (a kind of spiritual and somewhat nightmarish cabaret attended by some of the characters, including Harry Haller), was founded in 1967 to perform works by new playwrights.\nThe 1960s rock band Steppenwolf took its name from Hesse's novel and the Steppenwolf Theatre in Chicago was also named after that novel.\nThere is a quote from \"Demian\" on the cover of Santana's 1970 album \"Abraxas\", revealing the source of the album's title.\nMusician Steve Adey adapted Hesse's poem \"How Heavy the Days\" on his 2017 LP \"Do Me a Kindness\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13579", "revid": "33718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13579", "title": "Hunebeds", "text": ""}
{"id": "13580", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13580", "title": "Hydrodynamics", "text": "Study of liquids in motion"}
{"id": "13584", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13584", "title": "History of the Mediterranean region", "text": "The history of the Mediterranean region and of the cultures and people of the Mediterranean Basin is important for understanding the origin and development of the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Canaanite, Phoenician, Hebrew, Carthaginian, Minoan, Greek, Persian, Illyrian, Thracian, Etruscan, Iberian, Roman, Byzantine, Bulgarian, Arab, Berber, Ottoman, Christian and Islamic cultures. The Mediterranean Sea was the central superhighway of transport, trade and cultural exchange between diverse peoples encompassing three continents: Western Asia, North Africa, and Southern Europe.\nVarious articles are available under the category: \nEarly history.\nL\u00e9zignan-la-C\u00e8be in France, Orce in Spain, Monte Poggiolo in Italy and Kozarnika in Bulgaria are amongst the oldest Paleolithic sites in Europe and are located around the Mediterranean Basin.\nThere is evidence of stone tools on Crete in 130,000 years BC, which indicates that early humans were capable of using boats to reach the island.\nThe cultural stage of civilization (organised society structured around urban centers) first arises in Southwest Asia, as an extension of the Neolithic trend, from as early as the 8th millennium BC, of proto-urban centers such as \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck. Urban civilizations proper begin to emerge in the Chalcolithic, in 5th-to-4th-millennium Egypt and in Mesopotamia.\nThe Black Sea area is a cradle of the European civilization. The site of Solnitsata (5500 BC - 4200 BC) is believed to be the oldest town in Europe - prehistoric fortified (walled) stone settlement (prehistoric city). The first gold artifacts in the world appear from the 5th millennium BC, such as those found in a burial site from 4569 to 4340 BC and one of the most important archaeological sites in world prehistory \u2013 the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna in Bulgaria, thought to be the earliest \"well-dated\" find of gold artifacts.\nAs of 1990, gold artifacts found at the Wadi Qana cave cemetery of the 4th millennium BC in the West Bank were the earliest from the Levant.\nThe Bronze Age arises in this region during the final centuries of the 4th millennium BC. The urban civilizations of the Fertile Crescent now have writing systems and develop bureaucracy, by the mid-3rd millennium leading to the development of the earliest empires. In the 2nd millennium, the eastern coastlines of the Mediterranean are dominated by the Hittite and Egyptian empires, competing for control over the city states in the Levant (Canaan). The Minoans are trading throughout much of the Mediterranean.\nThe Bronze Age collapse is the transition from the Late Bronze Age to the Early Iron Age, expressed by the collapse of palace economies of the Aegean and Anatolia, which were replaced after a hiatus by the isolated village cultures of the ancient Near East. Some have gone so far as to call the catalyst that ended the Bronze Age a \"catastrophe\". The Bronze Age collapse may be seen in the context of a technological history that saw the slow, comparatively continuous spread of iron-working technology in the region, beginning with precocious iron-working in what is now Romania in the 13th and 12th centuries. The cultural collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms, the Hittite Empire in Anatolia and Syria, and the Egyptian Empire in Syria and Israel, the scission of long-distance trade contacts and sudden eclipse of literacy occurred between 1206 and 1150 BC. In the first phase of this period, almost every city between Troy and Gaza was violently destroyed, and often left unoccupied thereafter (for example, Hattusas, Mycenae, Ugarit). The gradual end of the Dark Age that ensued saw the rise of settled Neo-Hittite Aramaean kingdoms of the mid-10th century BC, and the rise of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nWhile the cultural advances during the Bronze Age had mostly been confined to the eastern parts of the Mediterranean, with the Iron Age, the entire coastal region surrounding the Mediterranean now becomes involved, significantly due to the Phoenician expansion from the Levant, beginning in ca. the 12th century. Fernand Braudel remarked in \"The Perspective of the World\" that Phoenicia was an early example of a \"world-economy\" surrounded by empires. The high point of Phoenician culture and sea power is usually placed ca. 1200\u2013800\u00a0BC. Many of the most important Phoenician settlements had been established long before this: Byblos, Tyre, Sidon, Simyra, Arwad, and Berytus, all appear in the Amarna tablets.\nThe Phoenicians and the Assyrians transported elements of the Late Bronze Age culture of the Near East to Iron Age Greece and Italy, but also further afield to Northwestern Africa and to Iberia, initiating the beginning of Mediterranean history now known as Classical Antiquity.\nThey notably spread alphabetic writing, which would become the hallmark of the Mediterranean civilizations of the Iron Age, in contrast to the cuneiform writing of Assyria and the logographic system in the Far East (and later the abugida systems of India).\nClassical antiquity.\nTwo of the most notable Mediterranean civilizations in classical antiquity were the Greek city-states and the Phoenicians whose cities were also city-states. The Greeks spread to the shores of the Black Sea, Southern Italy (the so-called \"Magna Graecia\") Gaul and Asia Minor. The Phoenicians spread through the western Mediterranean reaching North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula then beyond the Straits of Gibraltar. From the 6th century BC up to including the 5th century BC, many of the significant Mediterranean peoples were under Persian rule, making them dominate the Mediterranean during these years. Both the Phoenicians and some of the Greek city states in Asia Minor provided the naval forces of the Achaemenid Persian Empire. Persian dominance ended after the Greco-Persian War in the 5th century BC and Persia was crippled by Macedonia in the 4th century BC. The Odrysian Kingdom existed between the 5th century BC and the 1st century AD as the most important and powerful thracian state formation.\nPersian period.\nFrom the 6th century BC up to including the first half of the 4th century BC, many of the significant Mediterranean peoples came under Achaemenid Persian rule, making them dominate the Mediterranean during all these years. The empire, founded by Cyrus the Great, would include Macedonia, Thrace and the western Black Sea coast (modern day southeastern and eastern Bulgaria), Egypt, Anatolia, the Phoenician lands, the Levant, and many other basin regions of the Mediterranean later on. Darius the Great (Darius I) is to be credited as the first Achaemenid king to invest in a Persian fleet. Even by then no true \"imperial navy\" had existed either in Greece or Egypt. Persia would become the first empire, under Darius, to inaugurate and deploy the first regular imperial navy. Both the Phoenicians and the Greeks provided the bulk of the naval forces of the Achaemenid Persian Empire, alongside the Cypriots and Egyptians. Full Persian dominance in the Mediterranean ended after the Greco-Persian War in the 5th century BC, and Persia eventually lost all her influence in the Mediterranean in the late 4th century BC following Alexander's conquests.\nHellenistic period.\nIn the northernmost part of ancient Greece, in the ancient kingdom of Macedonia, technological and organizational skills were forged with a long history of cavalry warfare. The \"hetairoi\" (Companion cavalry) was considered the strongest of their time. Under Alexander the Great, this force turned east, and in a series of decisive battles, it routed the Persian forces and took over as the dominant empire of the Mediterranean. Their Macedonia empire included present-day Greece, Bulgaria, Egypt, the Phoenician lands and many other basin regions of the Mediterranean and Asia Minor.\nThe major centres of the Mediterranean at the time became part of Alexander's empire as a result. His empire quickly disintegrated, and the Middle East, Egypt, and Greece were soon again independent. Alexander's conquests spread Greek knowledge and ideas throughout the region.\nResearch indicates that between 1,500 BC and 200 BC, the sea level was around 2.5 metres below current levels and rose rapidly to present levels between 200 BC and 200 AD.\nRoman\u2013Carthaginian rivalry.\nThese eastern powers soon began to be overshadowed by those farther west. In North Africa, the former Phoenician colony of Carthage rose to dominate its surroundings with an empire that contained many of the former Phoenician holdings. However, it was a city on the Italian Peninsula, Rome, that would eventually dominate the entire Mediterranean basin. Spreading first through Italy, Rome defeated Carthage in the Punic Wars, despite Hannibal's famous efforts against Rome in the Second Punic War.\nAfter the Third Punic War, Rome then became the leading force in the Mediterranean region. The Romans soon spread east, taking Greece, and spreading Latin knowledge and ideas throughout the place. By this point the coastal trading cultures were thoroughly dominant over the inland river valleys that had once been the heart of the great powers. Egyptian power moved from the Nile cities to the coastal ones, especially Alexandria. Mesopotamia became a fringe border region between the Roman Empire and the Persians.\nRoman \"Mare Nostrum\".\nWhen Augustus founded the Roman Empire, the Mediterranean Sea began to be called \"Mare Nostrum\" (Latin: \"Our Sea\") by the Romans. Their empire was centered on this sea and all the area was full of commerce and naval development. For the first time in history, an entire sea (the Mediterranean) was free of piracy. For several centuries, the Mediterranean was a \"Roman Lake\", surrounded on all sides by the empire.\nThe empire began to crumble in the 3rd century. It recovered briefly, only to begin its decline again. By 435 AD it had lost southern France and all of Iberia to the Visigoths, and much of North Africa to the Vandals, thus ending its monopoly over the Mediterranean coast. Despite this, the Roman Empire did not collapse until May 29, 1453 AD.\nSasanian and Byzantine times.\nThe Eastern Roman or Byzantine empire began its domination of the Levant during its wars with neighbouring Sassanid Persia. The rule through the 6th century AD saw climatic instability, causing inconsistent production, distribution, and a general economic decline. The Sasanians gained territory on Mediterranean land regularly, but the Eastern Romans remained superior in the Mediterranean sea for centuries. In the first quarter of the 7th century CE, the Sasanians took swaths of the Mediterranean region from the Eastern Romans during the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628, though the Sasanians lost territories by the end of the war. Ultimately, Byzantine domination in the region was forever finished by invasions of the Arabs and later the Turks.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarly Arab (Islamic) period.\nAnother power was rising in the east, that of Islam, whilst the Eastern Roman Empire and Sassanid Persian empires were both weakened by centuries of stalemate warfare during the Roman\u2013Persian Wars. In a series of rapid Muslim conquests, the Arab armies, motivated by Islam and led by the Caliphs and skilled military commanders such as Khalid ibn al-Walid, swept through most of the Middle East; reducing Byzantine lands by more than half and completely engulfing the Persian lands.\nThe Arab invasions disrupted the trade relations between Western and Eastern Europe while cutting the trade route with Oriental lands. This however had the indirect effect of promoting the trade across the Caspian Sea. The export of grains from Egypt was re-routed towards the Eastern world. Oriental goods like silk and spices were carried from Egypt to ports like Venice and Constantinople by sailors and Jewish merchants. The Viking raids further disrupted the trade in western Europe and brought it to a halt. However, the Norsemen developed the trade from Norway to the White Sea, while also trading in luxury goods from Spain and the Mediterranean. The Byzantines in the mid-8th century retook control of the area around the north-eastern part of the Mediterranean. Venetian ships from the 9th century armed themselves to counter the harassment by Arabs while concentrating trade of oriental goods at Venice.\nThe powerful and long-lived Bulgarian Empire was the main European rival in the region of the Mediterranean Balkan peninsula between the 7th and the 14th centuries, creating an important cultural, political, linguistic and religious legacy during the Middle Ages.\nIn Anatolia, the Muslim expansion was blocked by the still capable Byzantines with the help of the Tervel of Bulgaria. The Byzantine provinces of Roman Syria, North Africa, and Sicily, however, could not mount such a resistance, and the Muslim conquerors swept through those regions. At the far west, they crossed the sea taking Visigothic Hispania before being halted in southern France by the Franks. At its greatest extent, the Arab Empire controlled three-quarters of the Mediterranean coast, and fostered an economic interrelationship between the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean. Much of North Africa became a peripheral area to the main Muslim centers in the Middle East, but Al Andalus and Morocco soon broke from this distant control and became highly advanced societies in their own right.\nBetween 831 and 1071, the Emirate of Sicily was one of the major centres of Islamic culture in the Mediterranean. After its conquest by the Christian Normans, the island developed its own distinct culture with the fusion of Latin and Byzantine influences. Palermo remained a leading artistic and commercial centre of the Mediterranean well into the Middle Ages.\nThe Fatimids maintained trade relations with the Italian city-states like Amalfi and Genoa before the Crusades, according to the Cairo Geniza documents. A document dated 996 mentions Amalfian merchants living in Cairo. Another letter states that the Genoese had traded with Alexandria. The caliph al-Mustansir had allowed Amalfian merchants to reside in Jerusalem about 1060 in place of the Latin hospice.\nMuslim\u2013Christian rivalry.\nMore organized and centralized states gradually began to form in Europe during the later Middle Ages. Motivated by religion and dreams of conquest, the kings of Europe launched a number of Crusades to try to roll back Muslim power and retake the Holy Land. The Crusades were unsuccessful in this goal, but they were far more effective in weakening the already tottering Byzantine Empire that began to lose increasing amounts of territory to the Seljuk Turks and later to the Ottoman Turks. They also rearranged the balance of power in the Muslim world as Egypt once again emerged as a major power in the eastern Mediterranean.\nThe Crusades led to flourishing of trade between Europe and the \"outremer\" region. Genoa, Venice and Pisa created colonies in regions controlled by the Crusaders and came to control the trade with the Orient. These colonies also allowed them to trade with the Eastern world. Though the fall of the Crusader states and attempts at banning of trade relations with Muslim states by the Popes temporarily disrupted the trade with the Orient, it however continued.\nThe Zirid state in eastern Maghreb developed around the great metropolis of Kairouan collapsed in mid 12th century, with a henceforth fragmented Ifriqiya becoming a ground for competing external powers from then on. The high Middle Ages also saw the successive rise of two Berber powers, the Almoravids and the Almohads, in the Western Maghreb, fostering the developments of cities such as Marrakesh and Fez upon their control over Trans-Saharan trade. Cities in southern Iberia such as Almer\u00eda (under Almoravid rule) also thrived in the High Middle Ages. The 12th century also saw increasing naval and trading progress on the part of Christian powers in the northern shores of the Mediterranean (including Genoa, Pisa, and Aragon), seemingly offering a challenge to the balance of power in the Western Mediterranean.\nSlavery.\nSlavery was a strategic and very important part of all Mediterranean societies during the Middle Ages. The threat of becoming a slave was a constant fear for peasants, fishermen and merchants. Those with money or who had financial backing only feared the lack of support, should they be threatened with abduction for ransom.\nThere were several things which could happen to people in the Mediterranean region of the Middle Ages:\nEmperors would take large numbers of prisoners, parade them through the capital, hold feasts in honour of their capture and parade diplomats in front of them as a display of victory.\nLate Middle Ages.\nThe \"Repubbliche Marinare\" (Maritime republics) of Amalfi, Gaeta, Venice, Genoa, Ancona, Pisa and Ragusa developed their own empires in the Mediterranean shores. The Islamic states had never been major naval powers, and trade from the east to Europe was soon in the hands of Italian traders, especially the Genoese and the Venetians, who profited immensely from it. The Republic of Pisa and later the Republic of Ragusa used diplomacy to further trade and maintained a libertarian approach in civil matters to further sentiment in its inhabitants.\nThe Republic of Venice got to dominate the eastern mediterranean shores after the Fourth Crusade.\nBetween 1275 and 1344 a struggle for the control of the Strait of Gibraltar took place. Featuring the Marinid Sultanate, the Nasrid Kingdom of Granada, the Crown of Castile, the Crown of Arag\u00f3n, the Kingdom of Portugal and the Republic of Genoa, it was characterized by changing alliances between the main actors. The iberian cities of Tarifa, Ceuta, Algeciras or Ronda and the African port of Ceuta were at stake. The Western Mediterranean sea was dominated by the Crown of Aragon: thanks to their possessions of Sicily, the Kingdom of Naples, the Kingdom of Sardinia, the Balearic Islands, the Duchy of Athens the Duchy of Neopatria, and several northern African cities.\nIn 1347 the Black Death spread from Constantinople across the mediterranean basin.\nOttoman power continued to grow, and in 1453, the Byzantine Empire was extinguished with the fall of Constantinople. The Ottomans already controlled Greece, Bulgaria and much of the Balkans and soon also began to spread through North Africa. North Africa had grown wealthy from the trade across the Sahara Desert, but the Portuguese, who, along with other Christian powers, had been engaged in a long campaign to evict the Muslims from Iberia, had found a method to circumvent this trade by trading directly with West Africa. This was enabled by a new type of ships, the caravel, that made trade in the rough Atlantic waters profitable for the first time. The reduction in the Saharan trade weakened North Africa and made them an easy target for the Ottomans.\nCeuta was ultimately taken by the Kingdom of Portugal in 1415, searching to undermine Castilian, Aragonese, and Genoese interests in the area.\nDuring the Middle Ages, rival Christian and Muslim kingdoms forbade the trade of particular goods to enemy kingdoms including weaponry and other contraband items. The popes forbade the export of these commodities to the Islamic world. The Ottomans too forbade the export of weapons and other strategic items, declaring them \"memnu e\u015fya\" or \"memnu olan\" to Christian states even in peace treaties, however friendly states could import some of the prohibited goods through capitulations. Despite these prohibitions, trade of contraband occurred on both sides. The European merchants traded in illegal goods with Muslims. The Ottomans were unable to suppress the trade with smuggling being undertaken mainly in the winter when the Ottoman Navy stationed at the Istanbul Arsenal was unable to stop Ottoman and non-Ottoman vessels from indulging in the trade.\nModern era.\nThe growing naval prowess of the European powers confronted further rapid Ottoman expansion in the region when the Battle of Lepanto checked the power of the Ottoman navy. However, as Braudel argued forcefully, this only slowed the Ottoman expansion instead of ending it. The prized island of Cyprus became Ottoman in 1571. The last resistance in Tunisia ended in 1574 and almost a generation long siege in Crete pushed Venetians out of this strategic island in 1669.\nA balance of power was then established between the Spanish Crown and the Ottoman Empire until the 18th century, each dominating their respective half of Mediterranean, reducing Italian navies as naval powers increasingly more irrelevant. Furthermore, the Ottoman Empire had succeeded in their objective of extending Muslim rule across the North African coast.\nThe development of long-range seafaring had an influence upon the entire Mediterranean. While once all trade from the east had passed through the region, the circumnavigation of Africa allowed gold, spices, and dyes to be imported directly to the Atlantic ports of western Europe. The Americas were also a source of extreme wealth to the western powers, from which some of the Mediterranean states were largely cut off.\nThe base of European power thus shifted northward and the once wealthy Italy became a peripheral area dominated by foreigners. The Ottoman Empire also began a slow decline that saw its North African possessions gain de facto independence and its European holdings gradually reduced by the territorial gains of Austria and the Russian Empire. In the wake of the aftermath of the 1768\u20131774 Russo-Turkish War, the Russian empire gained direct access to the Black Sea.\nBy the nineteenth century the European States were vastly more powerful, and began to colonize North Africa. France spread its power south by starting their conquest of the Regency of Algiers in 1830 and later gaining control over the Beylik of Tunis. Following the British capture of Gibraltar (1713), Malta (1814) and Cyprus (1878), the British Empire occupied Egypt as a result of the 1882 Anglo-Egyptian War. The Suez Canal was opened during this period, with far-reaching consequences for trade between Asia, East Africa and Europe. The Mediterranean countries were preferred because of the shorter route, and port cities such as Trieste with their direct, fast access to Central and Northern Europe were booming. Italy conquered Libya from the Ottomans in 1911. Greece achieved independence in 1832. The Ottoman Empire finally collapsed in the First World War, and its holdings were carved up among France and Britain. The rump state of the wider Ottoman Empire became the independent state of Turkey in 1923. Yugoslavia was created from the former Austro-Hungarian empire at the end of the First World War.\nDuring the first half of the twentieth century the Mediterranean was at the center of the expansion of the Kingdom of Italy, and was one of the main areas of battle during World War II between the Axis and the Allies. Post-world war period was marked by increasing activity in the Eastern Mediterranean, where naval actions formed part of ongoing Arab\u2013Israeli conflict and Turkey had occupied the northern part of Cyprus. Cold War tensions split the Mediterranean into pro-American and pro-Soviet factions, with Turkey, Greece, Spain, Italy and France being NATO members. Syria was socialist and a pro-Soviet regime, offering the Soviets a port for their navy from an agreement in 1971. Yugoslavia was Communist but in neither the Soviet nor American camps. Egypt tilted towards the Soviets during the time of Nasser but then turned towards American influence during the time of Sadat. Israel and Egypt both received massive American military aid. American naval power made the Mediterranean a base for the United States Sixth Fleet during the Cold war.\nToday, the Mediterranean Sea is the southern border of the European Union and represents one of the largest area by Trade in the World. The Maltese prime minister described the Mediterranean sea as a \"cemetery\" due to the large amounts of migrants who drown there. Following the 2013 Lampedusa migrant shipwreck, the Italian government, has decided to strengthen the national system for the patrolling of the Mediterranean Sea by authorizing Operation Mare Nostrum, a military and humanitarian operation in order to rescue the migrants and arrest the traffickers of immigrants.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13585", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13585", "title": "Hugo de Garis", "text": "Australian AI researcher (born 1947)\nHugo de Garis (born 1947) is an Australian retired researcher in the sub-field of artificial intelligence (AI) known as evolvable hardware. In the 1990s and early 2000s, he performed research on the use of genetic algorithms to evolve artificial neural networks using three-dimensional cellular automata inside field programmable gate arrays. He has written about his belief in an coming war between the supporters and opponents of intelligent machines, with the potential for the elimination of humanity by artificial superintelligences.\nCareer.\nDe Garis originally studied theoretical physics, but he abandoned this field in favour of artificial intelligence. In 1992 he received his PhD from Universit\u00e9 Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium. \nFrom 1993 to 2000 de Garis was a researcher at the Advanced Telecommunications Research Institute International in Kansai Science City, Japan. At ATR's Human Information Processing Research Laboratories (ATR-HIP), he aimed to create a billion-neuron artificial brain he called a \"cellular automata machine brain\" (CAM-brain) by the year 2001. He predicted CAM-brains could scale indefinitely and could be used to create asteroid-sized brain-like computers. De Garis moved to Starlab in Brussels in 2000, and the HIP laboratory was closed in February 2001. Starlab went bankrupt in 2001. De Garis published his last \"CAM-Brain\" research paper in 2002.\nHe was associate professor of computer science at Utah State University from 2001 to 2006. Starting in June 2006 he was part of the advisory board of Novamente, a commercial company which aimed to create artificial general intelligence. After 2006 he was a professor at Xiamen University and Wuhan University where he taught theoretical physics and computer science. In 2008 he received a 3\u00a0million Chinese yuan grant (around $436,000) to build an artificial brain for China as part of the \"Brain Builder Group\" at Wuhan University. He served on the editorial board of \"Engineering Letters\".\nDe Garis retired in late 2010.\nBeliefs.\nDuring his work on CAM-Brain, De Garis began publicly expressing concerns about existential risk from artificial intelligence. In 2005, he published the book \"The Artilect War: Cosmists vs. Terrans: A Bitter Controversy Concerning Whether Humanity Should Build Godlike Massively Intelligent Machines\". In his book, De Garis predicts that by the end of the 21st century artificial superintelligences, which he calls \"artificial intellects\" or \"artilects\", will threaten to attain hegemony over the Earth. He foresees a major war between supporters of artilects and their opponents, resulting in billions of deaths. The supporters he calls \"Cosmists\", who will support artilects that they expect to colonise the universe, leaving Earth and humans behind to a sooner-or-later extinction. The opponents, \"Terrans\", will focus on the fate of Earth and its inhabitants, and the existential risk posed by artilects. Differences between the two groups will be irreconcilable, leading to war. He also predicts a third group, \"Cyborgs\", who aim to become artilects themselves by altering their own human brains, rather than falling into obsolescence. Although de Garis makes arguments in favor of each side throughout the book, he concludes that he is a Cosmist.\nReligious studies professor Robert M. Geraci describes \"The Artilect War\" as a religious apocalyptic scenario.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13586", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13586", "title": "HTTPS", "text": "HTTP extension supporting TLS encryption\nHypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) is an extension of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). It uses encryption for secure communication over a computer network, and is widely used on the Internet. In HTTPS, the communication protocol is encrypted using Transport Layer Security (TLS) or, formerly, Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). The protocol is therefore also referred to as HTTP over TLS, or HTTP over SSL.\nThe principal motivations for HTTPS are authentication of the accessed website and protection of the privacy and integrity of the exchanged data while it is in transit. It protects against man-in-the-middle attacks, and the bidirectional block cipher encryption of communications between a client and server protects the communications against eavesdropping and tampering. The authentication aspect of HTTPS requires a trusted third party to sign server-side digital certificates. This was historically an expensive operation, which meant fully authenticated HTTPS connections were usually found only on secured payment transaction services and other secured corporate information systems on the World Wide Web. In 2016, a campaign by the Electronic Frontier Foundation with the support of web browser developers led to the protocol becoming more prevalent. HTTPS has since 2018 been used more often by web users than non-secure HTTP, primarily to protect page authenticity on all types of websites, secure accounts, and keep user communications, identity, and web browsing private.\nOverview.\nThe Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) scheme \"HTTPS\" has identical usage syntax to the HTTP scheme. However, HTTPS signals the browser to use an added encryption layer of SSL/TLS to protect the traffic. SSL/TLS is especially suited for HTTP, since it can provide some protection even if only one side of the communication is authenticated. This is the case with HTTP transactions over the Internet, where typically only the server is authenticated (by the client examining the server's certificate).\nHTTPS creates a secure channel over an insecure network. This ensures reasonable protection from eavesdroppers and man-in-the-middle attacks, provided that adequate cipher suites are used and that the server certificate is verified and trusted.\nBecause HTTPS piggybacks HTTP entirely on top of TLS, the entirety of the underlying HTTP protocol can be encrypted. This includes the request's URL, query parameters, headers, and cookies (which often contain identifying information about the user). However, because website addresses and port numbers are necessarily part of the underlying TCP/IP protocols, HTTPS cannot protect their disclosure. In practice this means that even on a correctly configured web server, eavesdroppers can infer the IP address and port number of the web server, and sometimes even the domain name (e.g. www.example.org, but not the rest of the URL) that a user is communicating with, along with the amount of data transferred and the duration of the communication, though not the content of the communication.\nWeb browsers know how to trust HTTPS websites based on certificate authorities that come pre-installed in their software. Certificate authorities are in this way being trusted by web browser creators to provide valid certificates. Therefore, a user should trust an HTTPS connection to a website if and only if all of the following are true:\nHTTPS is especially important over insecure networks and networks that may be subject to tampering. Insecure networks, such as public Wi-Fi access points, allow anyone on the same local network to packet-sniff and discover sensitive information not protected by HTTPS. Additionally, some free-to-use and paid WLAN networks have been observed tampering with webpages by engaging in packet injection in order to serve their own ads on other websites. This practice can be exploited maliciously in many ways, such as by injecting malware onto webpages and stealing users' private information.\nHTTPS is also important for connections over the Tor network, as malicious Tor nodes could otherwise damage or alter the contents passing through them in an insecure fashion and inject malware into the connection. This is one reason why the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Tor Project started the development of HTTPS Everywhere, which is included in Tor Browser.\nAs more information is revealed about global mass surveillance and criminals stealing personal information, the use of HTTPS security on all websites is becoming increasingly important regardless of the type of Internet connection being used. Even though metadata about individual pages that a user visits might not be considered sensitive, when aggregated it can reveal a lot about the user and compromise the user's privacy.\nDeploying HTTPS also allows the use of HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 (and their predecessors SPDY and QUIC), which are new HTTP versions designed to reduce page load times, size, and latency.\nIt is recommended to use HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS) with HTTPS to protect users from man-in-the-middle attacks, especially SSL stripping.\nHTTPS should not be confused with the seldom-used Secure HTTP (S-HTTP) specified in RFC 2660.\nUsage in websites.\nAs of \u00a02018[ [update]], 33.2% of Alexa top 1,000,000 websites use HTTPS as default and 70% of page loads (measured by Firefox Telemetry) use HTTPS. As of \u00a02022[ [update]], 58.4% of the Internet's 135,422 most popular websites have a secure implementation of HTTPS, However, despite TLS 1.3's release in 2018, adoption has been slow, with many still remaining on the older TLS 1.2 protocol.\nBrowser integration.\nMost browsers display a warning if they receive an invalid certificate. Older browsers, when connecting to a site with an invalid certificate, would present the user with a dialog box asking whether they wanted to continue. Newer browsers display a warning across the entire window. Newer browsers also prominently display the site's security information in the address bar. Extended validation certificates show the legal entity on the certificate information. Most browsers also display a warning to the user when visiting a site that contains a mixture of encrypted and unencrypted content. Additionally, many web filters return a security warning when visiting prohibited websites.\nThe Electronic Frontier Foundation, opining that \"In an ideal world, every web request could be defaulted to HTTPS\", has provided an add-on called HTTPS Everywhere for Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Chromium, and Android, which enables HTTPS by default for hundreds of frequently used websites.\nForcing a web browser to load only HTTPS content has been supported in Firefox starting in version 83. Starting in version 94, Google Chrome is able to \"always use secure connections\" if toggled in the browser's settings.\nSecurity.\nThe security of HTTPS is that of the underlying TLS, which typically uses long-term public and private keys to generate a short-term session key, which is then used to encrypt the data flow between the client and the server. X.509 certificates are used to authenticate the server (and sometimes the client as well). As a consequence, certificate authorities and public key certificates are necessary to verify the relation between the certificate and its owner, as well as to generate, sign, and administer the validity of certificates. While this can be more beneficial than verifying the identities via a web of trust, the 2013 mass surveillance disclosures drew attention to certificate authorities as a potential weak point allowing man-in-the-middle attacks. An important property in this context is forward secrecy, which ensures that encrypted communications recorded in the past cannot be retrieved and decrypted should long-term secret keys or passwords be compromised in the future. Not all web servers provide forward secrecy.\nFor HTTPS to be effective, a site must be completely hosted over HTTPS. If some of the site's contents are loaded over HTTP (scripts or images, for example), or if only a certain page that contains sensitive information, such as a log-in page, is loaded over HTTPS while the rest of the site is loaded over plain HTTP, the user will be vulnerable to attacks and surveillance. Additionally, cookies on a site served through HTTPS must have the secure attribute enabled. On a site that has sensitive information on it, the user and the session will get exposed every time that site is accessed with HTTP instead of HTTPS.\nTechnical.\nDifference from HTTP.\nHTTPS URLs begin with \"https://\" and use port 443 by default, whereas HTTP URLs begin with \"http://\" and use port 80 by default.\nHTTP is not encrypted and thus is vulnerable to man-in-the-middle and eavesdropping attacks, which can let attackers gain access to website accounts and sensitive information, and modify webpages to inject malware or advertisements. HTTPS is designed to withstand such attacks and is considered secure against them (with the exception of HTTPS implementations that use deprecated versions of SSL).\nNetwork layers.\nHTTP operates at the highest layer of the TCP/IP model\u2014the application layer; as does the TLS security protocol (operating as a lower sublayer of the same layer), which encrypts an HTTP message prior to transmission and decrypts a message upon arrival. Strictly speaking, HTTPS is not a separate protocol, but refers to the use of ordinary HTTP over an encrypted SSL/TLS connection.\nHTTPS encrypts all message contents, including the HTTP headers and the request/response data. With the exception of the possible CCA cryptographic attack described in the limitations section below, an attacker should at most be able to discover that a connection is taking place between two parties, along with their domain names and IP addresses.\nServer setup.\nTo prepare a web server to accept HTTPS connections, the administrator must create a public key certificate for the web server. This certificate must be signed by a trusted certificate authority for the web browser to accept it without warning. The authority certifies that the certificate holder is the operator of the web server that presents it. Web browsers are generally distributed with a list of signing certificates of major certificate authorities so that they can verify certificates signed by them.\nAcquiring certificates.\nA number of commercial certificate authorities exist, offering paid-for SSL/TLS certificates of a number of types, including Extended Validation Certificates.\nLet's Encrypt, launched in April 2016, provides free and automated service that delivers basic SSL/TLS certificates to websites. According to the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Let's Encrypt will make switching from HTTP to HTTPS \"as easy as issuing one command, or clicking one button.\" The majority of web hosts and cloud providers now leverage Let's Encrypt, providing free certificates to their customers.\nUse as access control.\nThe system can also be used for client authentication in order to limit access to a web server to authorized users. To do this, the site administrator typically creates a certificate for each user, which the user loads into their browser. Normally, the certificate contains the name and e-mail address of the authorized user and is automatically checked by the server on each connection to verify the user's identity, potentially without even requiring a password.\nIn case of compromised secret (private) key.\nAn important property in this context is perfect forward secrecy (PFS). Possessing one of the long-term asymmetric secret keys used to establish an HTTPS session should not make it easier to derive the short-term session key to then decrypt the conversation, even at a later time. Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange (DHE) and Elliptic-curve Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange (ECDHE) are in 2013 the only schemes known to have that property. In 2013, only 30% of Firefox, Opera, and Chromium Browser sessions used it, and nearly 0% of Apple's Safari and Microsoft Internet Explorer sessions. TLS 1.3, published in August 2018, dropped support for ciphers without forward secrecy. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], 96.6% of web servers surveyed support some form of forward secrecy, and 52.1% will use forward secrecy with most browsers. As of \u00a02023[ [update]], 99.6% of web servers surveyed support some form of forward secrecy, and 75.2% will use forward secrecy with most browsers.\nCertificate revocation.\nA certificate may be revoked before it expires, for example because the secrecy of the private key has been compromised. Newer versions of popular browsers such as Firefox, Opera, and Internet Explorer on Windows Vista implement the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) to verify that this is not the case. The browser sends the certificate's serial number to the certificate authority or its delegate via OCSP (Online Certificate Status Protocol) and the authority responds, telling the browser whether the certificate is still valid or not. The CA may also issue a CRL to tell people that these certificates are revoked. CRLs are no longer required by the CA/Browser forum, nevertheless, they are still widely used by the CAs. Most revocation statuses on the Internet disappear soon after the expiration of the certificates.\nLimitations.\nSSL (Secure Sockets Layer) and TLS (Transport Layer Security) encryption can be configured in two modes: \"simple\" and \"mutual\". In simple mode, authentication is only performed by the server. The mutual version requires the user to install a personal client certificate in the web browser for user authentication. In either case, the level of protection depends on the correctness of the implementation of the software and the cryptographic algorithms in use.\nSSL/TLS does not prevent the indexing of the site by a web crawler, and in some cases the URI of the encrypted resource can be inferred by knowing only the intercepted request/response size. This allows an attacker to have access to the plaintext (the publicly available static content), and the encrypted text (the encrypted version of the static content), permitting a cryptographic attack.\nBecause TLS operates at a protocol level below that of HTTP and has no knowledge of the higher-level protocols, TLS servers can only strictly present one certificate for a particular address and port combination. In the past, this meant that it was not feasible to use name-based virtual hosting with HTTPS. A solution called Server Name Indication (SNI) exists, which sends the hostname to the server before encrypting the connection, although older browsers do not support this extension. Support for SNI is available since Firefox 2, Opera 8, Apple Safari 2.1, Google Chrome 6, and Internet Explorer 7 on Windows Vista.\nA sophisticated type of man-in-the-middle attack called SSL stripping was presented at the 2009 Blackhat Conference. This type of attack defeats the security provided by HTTPS by changing the link into an link, taking advantage of the fact that few Internet users actually type \"https\" into their browser interface: they get to a secure site by clicking on a link, and thus are fooled into thinking that they are using HTTPS when in fact they are using HTTP. The attacker then communicates in clear with the client. This prompted the development of a countermeasure in HTTP called HTTP Strict Transport Security.\nHTTPS has been shown to be vulnerable to a range of traffic analysis attacks. Traffic analysis attacks are a type of side-channel attack that relies on variations in the timing and size of traffic in order to infer properties about the encrypted traffic itself. Traffic analysis is possible because SSL/TLS encryption changes the contents of traffic, but has minimal impact on the size and timing of traffic. In May 2010, a research paper by researchers from Microsoft Research and Indiana University discovered that detailed sensitive user data can be inferred from side channels such as packet sizes. The researchers found that, despite HTTPS protection in several high-profile, top-of-the-line web applications in healthcare, taxation, investment, and web search, an eavesdropper could infer the illnesses/medications/surgeries of the user, his/her family income, and investment secrets.\nThe fact that most modern websites, including Google, Yahoo!, and Amazon, use HTTPS causes problems for many users trying to access public Wi-Fi hot spots, because a captive portal Wi-Fi hot spot login page fails to load if the user tries to open an HTTPS resource. Several websites, such as NeverSSL, guarantee that they will always remain accessible by HTTP.\nHistory.\nNetscape Communications created HTTPS in 1994 for its Netscape Navigator web browser. Originally, HTTPS was used with the SSL protocol. The original SSL protocol was developed by Taher Elgamal, chief scientist at Netscape Communications. As SSL evolved into Transport Layer Security (TLS), HTTPS was formally specified by RFC 2818 in May 2000. Google announced in February 2018 that its Chrome browser would mark HTTP sites as \"Not Secure\" after July 2018. This move was to encourage website owners to implement HTTPS, as an effort to make the World Wide Web more secure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13588", "revid": "839494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13588", "title": "History of Egypt", "text": "Egypt, one of the world's oldest civilizations, was unified around 3150 BC by King Narmer. It later came under Persian, Greek, Roman, and Islamic rule before joining the Ottoman Empire in 1517. Controlled by Britain in the late 19th century, it became a republic in 1953. After several political transitions, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi currently leads the country.\nPredynastic Egypt (pre-3150 BC).\nThere is evidence of petroglyphs along the Nile terraces and in desert oases. In the 10th millennium BC, a culture of hunter-gatherers and fishermen was replaced by a grain-grinding culture. Climate changes and/or overgrazing around 6000 BC began to desiccate the pastoral lands of Egypt, forming the Sahara. Early tribal peoples migrated to the Nile River, where they developed a settled agricultural economy and more centralized society.\nBy about 6000 BC, a Neolithic culture had taken root in the Nile Valley. During the Neolithic era, several predynastic cultures developed independently in Upper and Lower Egypt. The Badari culture and the successor Naqada series are generally regarded as precursors to dynastic Egypt. The earliest known Lower Egyptian site, Merimde, predates the Badarian by about seven hundred years. Contemporaneous Lower Egyptian communities coexisted with their southern counterparts for more than two thousand years, remaining culturally distinct, but maintaining frequent contact through trade. The earliest known evidence of Egyptian hieroglyphic inscriptions appeared during the predynastic period on Naqada III pottery vessels, dated to about 3200 BC.\nIn Upper Egypt, the predynastic Badari culture was followed by the Naqada culture (Amratian), being closely related to the Lower Nubian; other northeast African populations, with some affinities with other coastal communities from the Maghreb, some tropical African groups, and possibly inhabitants of the Middle East. Upper Egypt is considered to have formed the pre-dominant basis for the cultural development of Pharaonic Egypt and the Proto-dynastic kings emerged from the Naqada region.\nHistorical scholarship has generally regarded the peopling of the Egyptian Nile Valley from archaeological and biological data, to be the result of interaction between coastal northern Africans, \"neolithic\" Saharans, Nilotic hunters, and riverine proto-Nubians with some influence and migration from the Levant (Hassan, 1988). \nAs of 2025, the earliest full-genome analysis of an ancient Egyptian is that of Old Kingdom individual (NUE001) (2855\u20132570 BCE), with implications for the genetic makeup of Early Dynastic Egyptians in general: the study shows that the genetic profile of this individual was most closely represented by a two-source model, in which 77.6%\u2009\u00b1\u20093.8% of the ancestry corresponded to genomes from the Middle Neolithic Moroccan site of Skhirat-Rouazi (SKH, dated to 4780\u20134230 BCE), itself consisting of predominantly Levant Neolithic ancestry (76.4\u2009\u00b1\u20094.0%) and minor Iberomaurusian ancestry (22.4\u2009\u00b1\u20093.8%), with the remaining (22.4%\u2009\u00b1\u20093.8%) most closely related to known genomes from Neolithic Mesopotamia (dated to 9000-8000\u2009BCE).\nDynastic Egypt (3150\u2013332 BC).\nEarly Dynastic Period and the Old Kingdom.\nA unified kingdom was formed in 3150 BC by King Menes, leading to a series of dynasties that ruled Egypt for the next three millennia. Egyptian culture flourished during this long period and remained distinctively Egyptian in its religion, arts, language and customs.\nThe first two ruling dynasties of a unified Egypt set the stage for the Old Kingdom period (c. 2700\u20132200 BC), which constructed many pyramids, most notably the pyramid of Djoser, constructed during the Third Dynasty and the Giza Pyramids, constructed in the Fourth Dynasty.\nFirst Intermediate Period, the Middle Kingdom and the Second Intermediate Period.\nThe First Intermediate Period ushered in a time of political upheaval for about 150 years. Stronger Nile floods and stabilization of government, however, brought back renewed prosperity for the country in the Middle Kingdom c. 2040 BC, reaching a peak during the reign of Pharaoh Amenemhat III. A second period of disunity heralded the arrival of the first foreign ruling dynasty in Egypt, that of the Semitic-speaking Hyksos. The Hyksos migrants took over much of Lower Egypt around 1650 BC and founded a new capital at Avaris. They were driven out by an Upper Egyptian force led by Ahmose I, who founded the Eighteenth Dynasty and relocated the capital from Memphis to Thebes.\nNew Kingdom, Third Intermediate Period and Late Period.\nThe New Kingdom (c. 1550\u20131070 BC) began with the Eighteenth Dynasty, marking the rise of Egypt as an international power that expanded during its greatest extension to an empire from Syria to Upper Nubia. This period is noted for some of the most well known Pharaohs, including Hatshepsut, Thutmose III, Akhenaten and his wife Nefertiti, Tutankhamun and Ramesses II. The first historically attested expression of monotheism came during this period as Atenism, although some consider Atenism to be a form of monolatry rather than of monotheism. Frequent contacts with other nations brought new ideas to the New Kingdom. The country was later ruled and invaded by Libyans, Nubians and Assyrians, but native Egyptians eventually drove them out and regained control of their country.\nAchaemenid rule.\nIn the sixth century BC, the Achaemenid Empire conquered Egypt. The entire Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt, from 525 BC to 402 BC, save for Petubastis III and possibly Psammetichus IV, was an entirely Persian-ruled period, with the Achaemenid kings being granted the title of pharaoh. Amyrtaeus' successful rebellion ended the first Achaemenid rule and inaugurated Egypt's last significant phase of independence under native rulers. The Thirtieth Dynasty was the last native ruling dynasty during the Pharaonic epoch. It fell to the Persians again in 343 BC after the last native Pharaoh, King Nectanebo II, was defeated in battle.\nSecond Achaemenid conquest.\nThe Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt, also known as the Second Egyptian Satrapy, was effectively a short-living province of the Achaemenid Empire between 343 BC to 332 BC. After an interval of independence, during which three indigenous dynasties reigned (the 28th, 29th and 30th dynasty), Artaxerxes III (358\u2013338 BC) reconquered the Nile valley for a brief second period (343\u2013332 BC), which is called the Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt, thus starting another period of pharaohs of Persian origin.\nA team led by Johannes Krause managed the first reliable sequencing of the genomes of 90 mummified individuals in 2017. Whilst not conclusive, because of the non-exhaustive time frame and restricted location that the mummies represent, their study nevertheless showed that these Ancient Egyptians \"closely resembled ancient and modern Near Eastern populations, especially those in the Levant, and had almost no DNA from sub-Saharan Africa. What's more, the genetics of the mummies remained remarkably consistent even as different powers\u2014including Nubians, Greeks, and Romans\u2014conquered the empire\".\nGreek rule.\nPtolemaic Kingdom.\nThe Ptolemaic Kingdom was a powerful Hellenistic state extending from southern Syria in the east, to Cyrene to the west, and south to the frontier with Nubia. Alexandria became the capital city and a center of Greek culture and trade. To gain recognition by the native Egyptian populace, they named themselves as the successors to the Pharaohs. The later Ptolemies took on Egyptian traditions, had themselves portrayed on public monuments in Egyptian style and dress, and participated in Egyptian religious life.\nThe last ruler from the Ptolemaic dynasty was Cleopatra, who committed suicide following the burial of her lover Mark Antony, who had died in her arms (from a self-inflicted stab wound) after Augustus had captured Alexandria and her mercenary forces had fled.\nThe Ptolemies faced rebellions of native Egyptians, often caused by an unwanted regime, and were involved in foreign and civil wars that led to the decline of the kingdom and its annexation by Rome. Nevertheless, Hellenistic culture continued to thrive in Egypt well after the Muslim conquest. The native Egyptian/Coptic culture continued to exist as well (the Coptic language itself was Egypt's most widely spoken language until at least the 10th century).\nRoman Egypt.\nRoman province of Egypt.\nEgypt quickly became the Empire's breadbasket supplying the greater portion of the Empire's grain in addition to flax, papyrus, glass and many other finished goods. The city of Alexandria became a key trading outpost for the Roman Empire (by some accounts, the most important for a time). Shipping from Egypt regularly reached India and Ethiopia among other international destinations. It was also a leading (perhaps \"the\" leading) scientific and technological center of the Empire. Scholars such as Ptolemy, Hypatia, and Heron broke new ground in astronomy, mathematics, and other disciplines. Culturally, the city of Alexandria at times rivaled Rome in its importance.\nDiocese of Egypt.\nChristianity reached Egypt relatively early in the evangelist period of the first century (traditionally credited to Mark the Evangelist). Alexandria, Egypt and Antioch, Syria quickly became the leading centers of Christianity. Diocletian's reign marked the transition from the classical Roman to the Late antique/Byzantine era in Egypt, when a great number of Egyptian Christians were persecuted. The New Testament had by then been translated into Egyptian. After the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, a distinct Egyptian Coptic Church was firmly established.\nSassanid Conquest of Egypt.\nSasanian Egypt (known in Middle Persian sources as \"Agiptus\") refers to the brief rule of Egypt and parts of Libya by the Sasanian Empire, which lasted from 619 to 629, until the Sasanian rebel Shahrbaraz made an alliance with the Byzantine emperor Heraclius and had control over Egypt returned to him.\nEarly Islamic Egypt.\nThe Byzantines were able to regain control of the country after a brief Persian invasion early in the 7th century, until 639\u2013642, when Egypt was invaded and conquered by the Arab Islamic Empire. The final loss of Egypt was of incalculable significance to the Byzantine Empire, which had relied on Egypt for many agricultural and manufactured goods.\nWhen they defeated the Byzantine armies in Egypt, the Arabs brought Sunni Islam to the country. Early in this period, Egyptians began to blend their new faith with their Christian traditions as well as other indigenous beliefs and practices, leading to various Sufi orders that have flourished to this day. These earlier rites had survived the period of Coptic Christianity.\nLate Medieval Egypt.\nMuslim rulers nominated by the Islamic Caliphate remained in control of Egypt for the next six centuries, with Cairo as the seat of the Caliphate under the Fatimids. With the end of the Kurdish Ayyubid dynasty, the Mamluks, a Turco-Circassian military caste, took control about AD 1250. By the late 13th century, Egypt linked the Red Sea, India, Malaya, and East Indies. The Greek and Coptic languages and cultures went into a steep decline in favor of Arabic culture (though Coptic managed to last as a spoken language until the 17th century and remains a liturgical language today).\nThe Mamluks continued to govern the country until the conquest of Egypt by the Ottoman Turks in 1517, after which it became a province of the Ottoman Empire. The mid-14th-century Black Death killed about 40% of the population of Egypt.\nOttoman Egypt.\nAfter the 15th century, the Ottoman invasion pushed the Egyptian system into decline. The defensive militarization damaged its civil society and economic institutions. The weakening of the economic system combined with the effects of the plague left Egypt vulnerable to foreign invasion. Portuguese traders took over their trade. Egypt suffered six famines between 1687 and 1731. The 1784 famine cost it roughly one-sixth of its population.\nThe brief French invasion of Egypt led by Napoleon Bonaparte began in 1798. The campaign eventually led to the discovery of the Rosetta Stone, creating the field of Egyptology. Despite early victories and an initially successful expedition into Syria, Napoleon and his Arm\u00e9e d'Orient were eventually defeated and forced to withdraw, especially after suffering the defeat of the supporting French fleet at the Battle of the Nile.\nMuhammad Ali Dynasty.\nThe expulsion of the French in 1801 by Ottoman, Mamluk, and British forces was followed by four years of anarchy in which Ottomans, Mamluks, and Albanians \u2014 who were nominally in the service of the Ottomans \u2013 wrestled for power. Out of this chaos, the commander of the Albanian regiment, Muhammad Ali (Kavalali Mehmed Ali Pasha) emerged as a dominant figure and in 1805 was acknowledged by the Sultan in Istanbul as his viceroy in Egypt; the title implied subordination to the Sultan but this was in fact a polite fiction: Ottoman power in Egypt was finished and Muhammad Ali, an ambitious and able leader, established a dynasty that was to rule Egypt until the revolution of 1952. After 1882 the dynasty became a British puppet.\nMuhammad Ali's primary focus was military: he annexed Northern Sudan (1820\u20131824), Syria (1833), and parts of Arabia and Anatolia; but in 1841 the European powers, fearful lest he topple the Ottoman Empire itself, forced him to return most of his conquests to the Ottomans. He kept the Sudan and his title to Egypt was made hereditary. A more lasting result of his military ambition is that it required him to modernize the country. Eager to adopt the military (and therefore industrial) techniques of the great powers, he sent students to the West and invited training missions to Egypt. He built industries, a system of canals for irrigation and transport, and reformed the civil service.\nThe introduction in 1820 of long-staple cotton, the Egyptian variety of which became notable, transformed its agriculture into a cash-crop monoculture before the end of the century. The social effects of this were enormous: land ownership became concentrated and many foreigners arrived, shifting production towards international markets.\nBritish Protectorate (1882\u20131952).\nBritish indirect rule lasted from 1882, when the British succeeded in defeating the Egyptian Army at Tel el-Kebir in September and took control of the country, to the 1952 Egyptian revolution which made Egypt a republic and when British advisers were expelled.\nMuhammad Ali was succeeded briefly by his son Ibrahim (in September 1848), then by a grandson Abbas I (in November 1848), then by Said (in 1854), and Isma'il (in 1863).\nAbbas I was cautious. Said and Ismail were ambitious developers, but they spent beyond their means. The Suez Canal, built in partnership with the French, was completed in 1869. The cost of this and other projects had two effects: it led to enormous debt to European banks, and caused popular discontent because of the onerous taxation it required. In 1875, Ismail sold Egypt's 44% share in the canal to the British Government.\nIsmail also tried to conquer the Ethiopian Empire and was defeated twice at Gundet in 1875 and again at the Battle of Gura in 1876.\nWithin three years this led to the imposition of British and French controllers who sat in the Egyptian cabinet, and, \"with the financial power of the bondholders behind them, were the real power in the Government.\"\nLocal dissatisfaction with Ismail and with European intrusion led to the formation of the first nationalist groupings in 1879, with Ahmad Urabi a prominent figure. In 1882 he became head of a nationalist-dominated ministry committed to democratic reforms including parliamentary control of the budget. Fearing a reduction of their control, Britain and France intervened militarily, bombarding Alexandria and crushing the Egyptian army at the battle of Tel el-Kebir. They reinstalled Ismail's son Tewfik as the figurehead of a \"de facto\" British protectorate.\nIn 1914, the Protectorate was made official, and the Ottoman Empire no longer had a role. The title for the head of state, which in 1867 had changed from \"pasha\" to \"khedive\", was changed again to \"sultan\". Abbas II was deposed as khedive and replaced by his uncle, Hussein Kamel, as sultan.\nIn 1906, the Dinshaway Incident prompted many neutral Egyptians to join the nationalist movement. After the First World War, Saad Zaghlul and the Wafd Party led the Egyptian nationalist movement to a majority at the local Legislative Assembly. When the British exiled Zaghlul and his associates to Malta on 8 March 1919, the country arose in its first modern revolution. The revolt led the UK government to issue a unilateral declaration of Egypt's independence on 22 February 1922.\nThe new government drafted and implemented a constitution in 1923 based on a parliamentary system. Saad Zaghlul was popularly elected as Prime Minister of Egypt in 1924. In 1936, the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty was concluded. Continued instability due to remaining British influence and increasing political involvement by the king led to the dissolution of the parliament in a military \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" known as the 1952 Revolution. The Free Officers Movement forced King Farouk to abdicate in support of his son Fuad.\nBritish military presence in Egypt lasted until 1954.\nRepublican Egypt (since 1953).\nOn 18 June 1953, the Egyptian Republic was declared, with General Muhammad Naguib as the first President of the Republic. Naguib was forced to resign in 1954 by Gamal Abdel Nasser\u00a0\u2013 the real architect of the 1952 movement\u00a0\u2013 and was later put under house arrest.\nNasser era.\nNasser assumed power as president in June 1956. British forces completed their withdrawal from the occupied Suez Canal Zone on 13 June 1956. He nationalized the Suez Canal on 26 July 1956, prompting the 1956 Suez Crisis.\nIn 1958, Egypt and Syria formed a sovereign union known as the United Arab Republic. The union was short-lived, ending in 1961 when Syria seceded, thus ending the union. During most of its existence, the United Arab Republic was also in a loose confederation with North Yemen (the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen) known as the United Arab States.\nIn the 1967 Six-Day War, Israel invaded and occupied Egypt's Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza Strip, which Egypt had occupied since the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Three years later (1970), President Nasser died and was succeeded by Anwar Sadat.\nSadat era.\nSadat switched Egypt's Cold War allegiance from the Soviet Union to the United States, expelling Soviet advisors in 1972. He launched the Infitah economic reform policy, while clamping down on religious and secular opposition.\nIn 1973, Egypt, along with Syria, launched the October War, a surprise attack against the Israeli forces occupying the Sinai Peninsula and the Golan Heights. It was an attempt to regain part of the Sinai territory that Israel had captured six years earlier. Sadat hoped to seize some territory through military force, and then regain the rest of the peninsula by diplomacy. The conflict sparked an international crisis between the US and the USSR, both of whom intervened. The second UN-mandated ceasefire halted military action. While the war ended with a military stalemate, it presented Sadat with a political victory that later allowed him to regain the Sinai in return for peace with Israel.\nSadat made a historic visit to Israel in 1977, which led to the 1979 peace treaty in exchange for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai. Sadat's initiative sparked enormous controversy in the Arab world and led to Egypt's expulsion from the Arab League, but it was supported by most Egyptians. On 6 October 1981, Sadat and six diplomats were assassinated while observing a military parade commemorating the eighth anniversary of the October 1973 War. He was succeeded by Hosni Mubarak.\nTerrorist insurgency.\nIn 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s, terrorist attacks in Egypt became numerous and severe, and began to target Copts and foreign tourists as well as government officials. Some scholars and authors have credited Islamist writer Sayyid Qutb, who was executed in 1967, as the inspiration for the new wave of attacks.\nThe 1990s saw an Islamist group, al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya, engage in an extended campaign of violence, from the murders and attempted murders of prominent writers and intellectuals, to the repeated targeting of tourists and foreigners. Serious damage was done to the largest sector of Egypt's economy\u2014tourism\u2014and in turn to the government, but it also devastated the livelihoods of many of the people on whom the group depended for support.\nVictims of the campaign against the Egyptian state from 1992 to 1997 exceeded 1,200 and included the head of the counter-terrorism police (Major General Raouf Khayrat), a speaker of parliament (Rifaat el-Mahgoub), dozens of European tourists and Egyptian bystanders, and over 100 Egyptian police. At times, travel by foreigners in parts of Upper Egypt was severely restricted and dangerous. On 17 November 1997, 62 people, mostly tourists, were killed near Luxor. The assailants trapped the people in the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut. During this period, Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya was given support by the governments of Iran and Sudan, as well as al-Qaeda. The Egyptian government received support during that time from the United States.\nCivil unrest (2011\u201314).\nRevolution.\nIn 2003, the \"Kefaya\" (\"Egyptian Movement for Change\"), was launched to oppose the Mubarak regime and to establish democratic reforms and greater civil liberties.\nOn 25 January 2011, widespread protests began against Mubarak's government. The objective of the protest was the removal of Mubarak from power. These took the form of an intensive campaign of civil resistance supported by a very large number of people and mainly consisting of continuous mass demonstrations. By 29 January, it was becoming clear that Mubarak's government had lost control when a curfew order was ignored, and the army took a semi-neutral stance on enforcing the curfew decree.\nOn 11 February 2011, Mubarak resigned and fled Cairo. Vice President Omar Suleiman announced that Mubarak had stepped down and that the Egyptian military would assume control of the nation's affairs in the short term. Jubilant celebrations broke out in Tahrir Square at the news. Mubarak may have left Cairo for Sharm el-Sheikh the previous night, before or shortly after the airing of a taped speech in which Mubarak vowed he would not step down or leave.\nOn 13 February 2011, the high level military command of Egypt announced that both the constitution and the parliament of Egypt had been dissolved. The parliamentary election was to be held in September.\nA constitutional referendum was held on 19 March 2011. On 28 November 2011, Egypt held its first parliamentary election since the Mubarak regime fell. Turnout was high and there were no reports of violence, although members of some parties broke the ban on campaigning at polling places by handing out pamphlets and banners. There were, however, complaints of irregularities.\nMorsi's presidency.\nThe first round of a presidential election was held in Egypt on 23 and 24 May 2012. Mohamed Morsi won 25% of the vote and Ahmed Shafik, the last prime minister under deposed leader Hosni Mubarak, 24%. A second round was held on 16 and 17 June. On 24 June 2012, the election commission announced that Mohamed Morsi had won the election, making him the first democratically elected president of Egypt. According to official results, Morsi took 51.7 percent of the vote while Shafik received 48.3 percent. On 30 June 2012, Mohamed Morsi was sworn in as Egypt's new president.\nOn 8 July 2012, Egypt's new president Mohamed Morsi announced he was overriding the military edict that dissolved the country's elected parliament and called lawmakers back into session.\nOn 10 July 2012, the Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt negated the decision by Morsi to call the nation's parliament back into session. On 2 August 2012, Egypt's Prime Minister Hisham Qandil announced his 35-member cabinet, including 28 newcomers, of whom four came from the influential Muslim Brotherhood while six and the former interim military ruler Mohamed Hussein Tantawi as the Defence Minister came from the previous Government.\nOn 22 November 2012, Morsi issued a declaration immunizing his decrees from challenge and seeking to protect the work of the constituent assembly drafting the new constitution. The declaration also requires a retrial of those accused in the Mubarak-era killings of protesters, who had been acquitted, and extends the mandate of the constituent assembly by two months. Additionally, the declaration authorizes Morsi to take any measures necessary to protect the revolution. Liberal and secular groups previously walked out of the constitutional constituent assembly because they believed that it would impose strict Islamic practices, while Muslim Brotherhood backers threw their support behind Morsi.\nThe move was criticized by Mohamed ElBaradei, the leader of Egypt's Constitution Party, who stated \"Morsi today usurped all state powers &amp; appointed himself Egypt's new pharaoh\" on his Twitter feed. The move led to massive protests and violent action throughout Egypt. On 5 December 2012, Tens of thousands of supporters and opponents of Egypt's president clashed, hurling rocks and Molotov cocktails and brawling in Cairo's streets, in what was described as the largest violent battle between Islamists and their foes since the country's revolution. Six senior advisors and three other officials resigned from the government and the country's leading Islamic institution called on Morsi to stem his powers. Protesters also clamored from coastal cities to desert towns.\nMorsi offered a \"national dialogue\" with opposition leaders but refused to cancel a 15 December vote on a draft constitution written by an Islamist-dominated assembly that has ignited two weeks of political unrest.\nA constitutional referendum was held in two rounds on 15 and 22 December 2012, with 64% support, and 33% against. It was signed into law by a presidential decree issued by Morsi on 26 December 2012. On 3 July 2013, the constitution was suspended by order of the Egyptian army.\nOn 30 June 2013, on the first anniversary of the election of Morsi, millions of protesters across Egypt took to the streets and demanded the immediate resignation of the president. On 1 July, the Egyptian Armed Forces issued a 48-hour ultimatum that gave the country's political parties until 3 July to meet the demands of the Egyptian people. The presidency rejected the Egyptian Army's 48-hour ultimatum, vowing that the president would pursue his own plans for national reconciliation to resolve the political crisis. On 3 July, General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, head of the Egyptian Armed Forces, announced that he had removed Morsi from power, suspended the constitution and would be calling new presidential and Shura Council elections and named Supreme Constitutional Court's leader, Adly Mansour as acting president. Mansour was sworn in on 4 July 2013.\nAfter Morsi.\nDuring the months after the coup d'\u00e9tat, a new constitution was prepared, which took effect on 18 January 2014. After that, presidential and parliamentary elections have to be held in June 2014. On 24 March 2014, 529 Morsi's supporters were sentenced to death, while the trial of Morsi himself was still ongoing. Having delivered a final judgement, 492 sentences were commuted to life imprisonment with 37 death sentences being upheld. On 28 April, another mass trial took place with 683 Morsi supporters sentenced to death for killing 1 police officer. In 2015, Egypt participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen.\nEl-Sisi Presidency.\nIn the elections of June 2014 El-Sisi won with a percentage of 96.1%. On 8 June 2014, Abdel Fatah el-Sisi was officially sworn in as Egypt's new president. Egypt has implemented a rigorous policy of controlling the border to the Gaza Strip, including the dismantling of tunnels between the Gaza strip and Sinai.\nIn April 2018, El-Sisi was re-elected by landslide in election with no real opposition. In April 2019, Egypt's parliament extended presidential terms from four to six years. President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi was also allowed to run for third term in next election in 2024.\nUnder El-Sisi Egypt is said to have returned to authoritarianism. New constitutional reforms have been implemented, meaning strengthening the role of military and limiting the political opposition. The constitutional changes were accepted in a referendum in April 2019.\nIn December 2020, final results of the parliamentary election confirmed a clear majority of the seats for Egypt's Mostaqbal Want (Nation's Future) Party, which strongly supports president El-Sisi. The party even increased its majority, partly because of new electoral rules.\nDuring the 2020\u20132021 Tigray War, Egypt was also involved. On 19 December 2020, an EEPA report stated, based on testimonials of three Egyptian officials and one European diplomat, that the UAE used its base in Assab (Eritrea) to launch drones strikes against Tigray. The investigative platform Bellingcat confirmed the presence of Chinese-produced drones at the UAE's military base in Assab, Eritrea. Egyptian officials were concerned about strengthening ties between the UAE and Israel. They fear that both countries will collaborate in the construction of an alternative to the Suez Canal, starting from Haifa in Israel. On 19 December 2020, Egypt was reportedly encouraging Sudan to support the TPLF in Tigray. It wants to strengthen a joint position in relation to negotiations on the GERD Dam, which impacts both countries downstream."}
{"id": "13590", "revid": "50013433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13590", "title": "House", "text": "Building comprising a single dwelling\nA house is a single-unit residential building. It may range in complexity from a rudimentary hut to a complex structure of wood, masonry, concrete or other material, outfitted with plumbing, electrical, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems. Houses use a range of different roofing systems to keep precipitation such as rain from getting into the dwelling space. Houses generally have doors or locks to secure the dwelling space and protect its inhabitants and contents from burglars or other trespassers. Most conventional modern houses in Western cultures will contain one or more bedrooms and bathrooms, a kitchen or cooking area, and a living room. A house may have a separate dining room, or the eating area may be integrated into the kitchen or another room. Some large houses in North America have a recreation room. In traditional agriculture-oriented societies, domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock (like cattle) may share part of the house with humans.\nThe social unit that lives in a house is known as a household. Most commonly, a household is a family unit of some kind, although households may also have other social groups, such as roommates or, in a rooming house, unconnected individuals, that typically use a house as their home. Some houses only have a dwelling space for one family or similar-sized group; larger houses called townhouses or row houses may contain numerous family dwellings in the same structure. A house may be accompanied by outbuildings, such as a garage for vehicles or a shed for gardening equipment and tools. A house may have a backyard, a front yard or both, which serve as additional areas where inhabitants can relax, eat, or exercise.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"house\" derives directly from the Old English word , meaning \"dwelling, shelter, home, house,\" which in turn derives from Proto-Germanic \"husan\" (reconstructed by etymological analysis) which is of unknown origin. The term house itself gave rise to the letter 'B' through an early Proto-Semitic hieroglyphic symbol depicting a house. The symbol was called \"bayt\", \"bet\" or \"beth\" in various related languages, and became \"beta\", the Greek letter, before it was used by the Romans. in Arabic means house, while in Maltese refers to the roof of the house.\nElements.\nLayout.\nIdeally, architects of houses design rooms to meet the needs of the people who will live in the house. Feng shui, originally a Chinese method of moving houses according to such factors as rain and micro-climates, has recently expanded its scope to address the design of interior spaces, with a view to promoting harmonious effects on the people living inside the house, although no actual effect has ever been demonstrated. Feng shui can also mean the \"aura\" in or around a dwelling, making it comparable to the real estate sales concept of \"indoor-outdoor flow\".\nThe square footage of a house in the United States reports the area of \"living space\", excluding the garage and other non-living spaces. The \"square metres\" figure of a house in Europe reports the area of the walls enclosing the home, and thus includes any attached garage and non-living spaces. The number of floors or levels making up the house can affect the square footage of a home.\nHumans often build houses for domestic or wild animals, often resembling smaller versions of human domiciles. Familiar animal houses built by humans include birdhouses, hen houses and dog houses, while housed agricultural animals more often live in barns and stables.\nParts.\nMany houses have several large rooms with specialized functions and several very small rooms for other various reasons. These may include a living/eating area, a sleeping area, and (if suitable facilities and services exist) separate or combined washing and lavatory areas. Some larger properties may also feature rooms such as a spa room, indoor pool, indoor basketball court, and other 'non-essential' facilities. In traditional agriculture-oriented societies, domestic animals such as chickens or larger livestock often share part of the house with humans. Most conventional modern houses will at least contain a bedroom, bathroom, kitchen or cooking area, and a living room.\nThe names of parts of a house often echo the names of parts of other buildings, but could typically include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistory.\nLittle is known about the earliest origin of the house and its interior; however, it can be traced back to the simplest form of shelters. An exceptionally well-preserved house dating to the fifth millennium BC and with its contents still preserved was for example excavated at Tell Madhur in Iraq. Roman architect Vitruvius' theories have claimed the first form of architecture as a frame of timber branches finished in mud, also known as the primitive hut.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, the Manor Houses facilitated different activities and events. Furthermore, the houses accommodated numerous people, including family, relatives, employees, servants and their guests. Their lifestyles were largely communal, as areas such as the Great Hall enforced the custom of dining and meetings and the Solar intended for shared sleeping beds.\nDuring the 15th and 16th centuries, the Italian Renaissance Palazzo consisted of plentiful rooms of connectivity. Unlike the qualities and uses of the Manor Houses, most rooms of the palazzo contained no purpose, yet were given several doors. These doors adjoined rooms in which Robin Evans describes as a \"matrix of discrete but thoroughly interconnected chambers.\" The layout allowed occupants to freely walk room to room from one door to another, thus breaking the boundaries of privacy. \n\"Once inside it is necessary to pass from one room to the next, then to the next to traverse the building. Where passages and staircases are used, as inevitably they are, they nearly always connect just one space to another and never serve as general distributors of movement. Thus, despite the precise architectural containment offered by the addition of room upon room, the villa was, in terms of occupation, an open plan, relatively permeable to the numerous members of the household.\" Although very public, the open plan encouraged sociality and connectivity for all inhabitants.\nAn early example of the segregation of rooms and consequent enhancement of privacy may be found in 1597 at the Beaufort House built in Chelsea, London. It was designed by English architect John Thorpe who wrote on his plans, \"A Long Entry through all\". The separation of the passageway from the room developed the function of the corridor. This new extension was revolutionary at the time, allowing the integration of one door per room, in which all universally connected to the same corridor. English architect Sir Roger Pratt states \"the common way in the middle through the whole length of the house, [avoids] the offices from one molesting the other by continual passing through them.\" Social hierarchies within the 17th century were highly regarded, as architecture was able to epitomize the servants and the upper class. More privacy is offered to the occupant as Pratt further claims, \"the ordinary servants may never publicly appear in passing to and fro for their occasions there.\" This social divide between rich and poor favored the physical integration of the corridor into housing by the 19th century.\nSociologist Witold Rybczynski wrote, \"the subdivision of the house into day and night uses, and into formal and informal areas, had begun.\" Rooms were changed from public to private as single entryways forced notions of entering a room with a specific purpose.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nCompared to the large scaled houses in England and the Renaissance, the 17th Century Dutch house was smaller, and was only inhabited by up to four to five members. This was because they embraced \"self-reliance\" in contrast to the dependence on servants, and a design for a lifestyle centered on the family. It was important for the Dutch to separate work from domesticity, as the home became an escape and a place of comfort.\nBy the end of the 17th century, the house layout was transformed to become employment-free, enforcing these ideas for the future. This came in favour for the Industrial Revolution, gaining large-scale factory production and workers.\n19th and 20th centuries.\n In the American context, some professions, such as doctors, in the 19th and early 20th centuries typically operated out of the front room or parlor or had a two-room office on their property, which was detached from the house. By the mid 20th century, the increase in high-tech equipment created a marked shift whereby the contemporary doctor typically worked from an office or hospital.\nTechnology and electronic systems have caused privacy issues and issues with segregating personal life from remote work. Technological advances in surveillance and communications allow insight into personal habits and private lives. As a result, the \"private becomes ever more public, [and] the desire for a protective home life increases, fuelled by the very media that undermine it,\" writes Jonathan Hill. Work has been altered by the increase of communications. The \"deluge of information\" has expressed the efforts of work conveniently gaining access inside the house. Although commuting is reduced, the desire to separate working and living remains apparent. On the other hand, some architects have designed homes in which eating, working and living are brought together.\nConstruction.\nIn many parts of the world, houses are constructed using scavenged materials. In Manila's Payatas neighborhood, slum houses are often made of material sourced from a nearby garbage dump. In Dakar, it is common to see houses made of recycled materials standing atop a mixture of garbage and sand which serves as a foundation. The garbage-sand mixture is also used to protect the house from flooding.\nIn the United States, modern house construction techniques include light-frame construction (in areas with access to supplies of wood) and adobe or sometimes rammed-earth construction (in arid regions with scarce wood-resources). Some areas use brick almost exclusively, and quarried stone has long provided foundations and walls. To some extent, aluminum and steel have displaced some traditional building materials. Increasingly popular alternative construction materials include insulating concrete forms (foam forms filled with concrete), structural insulated panels (foam panels faced with oriented strand board or fiber cement), light-gauge steel, and steel framing. More generally, people often build houses out of the nearest available material, and often tradition or culture govern construction-materials, so whole towns, areas, counties or even states/countries may be built out of one main type of material. For example, a large portion of American houses use wood, while most British and many European houses use stone, brick, or mud.\nIn the early 20th century, some house designers started using prefabrication. Sears, Roebuck &amp; Co. first marketed their Sears Catalog Homes to the general public in 1908. Prefab techniques became popular after World War II. First small inside rooms framing, then later, whole walls were prefabricated and carried to the construction site. The original impetus was to use the labor force inside a shelter during inclement weather. More recently, builders have begun to collaborate with structural engineers who use finite element analysis to design prefabricated steel-framed homes with known resistance to high wind loads and seismic forces. These newer products provide labor savings, more consistent quality, and possibly accelerated construction processes.\nLesser-used construction methods have gained (or regained) popularity in recent years. Though not in wide use, these methods frequently appeal to homeowners who may become actively involved in the construction process. They include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the developed world, energy-conservation has grown in importance in house design. Housing produces a major proportion of carbon emissions (studies have shown that it is 30% of the total in the United Kingdom).\nDevelopment of a number of types and techniques continues. They include the zero-energy house, the passive solar house, the autonomous buildings, the super insulated houses and houses built to the \"Passivhaus\" standard.\nLegal issues.\nBuildings with historical importance have legal restrictions. New houses in the UK are not covered by the Sale of Goods Act. When purchasing a new house, the buyer has different legal protection than when buying other products. New houses in the UK are covered by a National House Building Council guarantee.\nIdentification and symbolism.\nWith the growth of dense settlement, humans designed ways of identifying houses and parcels of land. Individual houses sometimes acquire proper names, and those names may acquire in their turn considerable emotional connotations. A more systematic and general approach to identifying houses may use various methods of house numbering.\nHouses may express the circumstances or opinions of their builders or their inhabitants. Thus, a vast and elaborate house may serve as a sign of conspicuous wealth whereas a low-profile house built of recycled materials may indicate support of energy conservation. Houses of particular historical significance (former residences of the famous, for example, or even just very old houses) may gain a protected status in town planning as examples of built heritage or of streetscape. Commemorative plaques may mark such structures. Home ownership provides a common measure of prosperity in economics. Contrast the importance of house-destruction, tent dwelling and house rebuilding in the wake of many natural disasters.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBuilding\nFunctions\nTypes\nEconomics\nMiscellaneous\nInstitutions\nLists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13591", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13591", "title": "HOWTOs", "text": ""}
{"id": "13592", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13592", "title": "How-tos", "text": ""}
{"id": "13593", "revid": "5254933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13593", "title": "Java applet", "text": "Small application written in Java\nJava applets are small applications written in the Java programming language, or another programming language that compiles to Java bytecode, and delivered to users in the form of Java bytecode.\nAt the time of their introduction, the intended use was for the user to launch the applet from a web page, and for the applet to then execute within a Java virtual machine (JVM) in a process separate from the web browser itself. A Java applet could appear in a frame of the web page, a new application window, a program from Sun called appletviewer, or a stand-alone tool for testing applets.\nJava applets were introduced in the first version of the Java language, which was released in 1995. Beginning in 2013, major web browsers began to phase out support for NPAPI, the underlying technology applets used to run. with applets becoming completely unable to be run by 2015\u20132017. Java applets were deprecated by Java 9 in 2017. Java applets were \"deprecated for removal\" by Java 17 in 2021. Java applets are targeted to be removed by Java 26 in 2026.\nJava applets were usually written in Java, but other languages such as Jython, JRuby, Pascal, Scala, NetRexx, or Eiffel (via SmartEiffel) could be used as well.\nUnlike early versions of JavaScript, Java applets had access to 3D hardware acceleration, making them well-suited for non-trivial, computation-intensive visualizations. Since applets' introduction, JavaScript has gained support for hardware-accelerated graphics via canvas technology (or specifically WebGL, then later WebGPU in the case of 3D graphics), as well as just-in-time compilation.\nSince Java bytecode is cross-platform (or platform independent), Java applets could be executed by clients for many platforms, including Microsoft Windows, FreeBSD, Unix, macOS and Linux. They could not be run on mobile devices, which do not support running standard Oracle JVM bytecode. Android devices can run code written in Java compiled for the Android Runtime.\nOverview.\nThe applets are used to provide interactive features to web applications that cannot be provided by HTML alone. They can capture mouse input and also have controls like buttons or check boxes. In response to user actions, an applet can change the provided graphic content. This makes applets well-suited for demonstration, visualization, and teaching. There are online applet collections for studying various subjects, from physics to heart physiology.\nAn applet can also be a text area only; providing, for instance, a cross-platform command-line interface to some remote system. If needed, an applet can leave the dedicated area and run as a separate window. However, applets have very little control over web page content outside the applet's dedicated area, so they are less useful for improving the site appearance in general, unlike other types of browser extensions (while applets like news tickers or WYSIWYG editors are also known). Applets can also play media in formats that are not natively supported by the browser.\nPages coded in HTML may embed parameters within them that are passed to the applet. Because of this, the same applet may have a different appearance depending on the parameters that were passed.\nAs applets were available before HTML5, modern CSS and JavaScript interface DOM were standard, they were also widely used for trivial effects such as mouseover and navigation buttons. This approach, which posed major problems for accessibility and misused system resources, is no longer in use and was strongly discouraged even at the time.\nTechnical information.\nMost browsers executed Java applets in a \"sandbox\", preventing applets from accessing local data like the file system. The code of the applet was downloaded from a web server, after which the browser either embedded the applet into a web page or opened a new window showing the applet's user interface.\nThe first implementations involved downloading an applet class by class. While classes are small files, there are often many of them, so applets got a reputation as slow-loading components. However, since codice_1 files were introduced, an applet is usually delivered as a single file that has a size similar to an image file (hundreds of kilobytes to several megabytes).\nJava system libraries and runtimes are backwards-compatible, allowing one to write code that runs both on current and on future versions of the Java virtual machine.\nSimilar technologies.\nMany Java developers, blogs and magazines recommended that the Java Web Start technology be used in place of applets. Java Web Start allowed the launching of unmodified applet code, which then ran in a separate window (not inside the invoking browser).\nA Java Servlet is sometimes informally compared to be \"like\" a server-side applet, but it is different in its language, functions, and in each of the characteristics described here about applets.\nEmbedding into a web page.\nThe applet would be displayed on the web page by making use of the deprecated codice_2 HTML element, or the recommended codice_3 element. The codice_4 element can be used with Mozilla family browsers (codice_4 was deprecated in HTML 4 but is included in HTML 5). This specifies the applet's source and location. Both codice_3 and codice_4 tags can also download and install Java virtual machine (if required) or at least lead to the plugin page. codice_2 and codice_3 tags also support loading of the serialized applets that start in some particular (rather than initial) state. Tags also specify the message that shows up in place of the applet if the browser cannot run it due to any reason.\nHowever, despite codice_3 being officially a recommended tag in 2010, the support of the codice_3 tag was not yet consistent among browsers and Sun kept recommending the older codice_2 tag for deploying in multibrowser environments, as it remained the only tag consistently supported by the most popular browsers. To support multiple browsers, using the codice_3 tag to embed an applet would require JavaScript (that recognizes the browser and adjusts the tag), usage of additional browser-specific tags or delivering adapted output from the server side.\nThe Java browser plug-in relied on NPAPI, which nearly all web browser vendors have removed support for, or do not implement, due to its age and security issues. In January 2016, Oracle announced that Java runtime environments based on JDK 9 will discontinue the browser plug-in.\nAdvantages.\nA Java applet could have any or all of the following advantages:\nDisadvantages.\nJava applets had the following disadvantages compared to other client-side web technologies:\nCompatibility-related lawsuits.\nSun made considerable efforts to ensure compatibility is maintained between Java versions as they evolve, enforcing Java portability by law if required. Oracle seems to be continuing the same strategy.\n1997: Sun vs Microsoft.\nThe 1997 lawsuit, was filed after Microsoft created a modified Java Virtual Machine of their own, which shipped with Internet Explorer. Microsoft added about 50 methods and 50 fields into the classes within the \"java.awt, java.lang\", and \"java.io\" packages. Other modifications included removal of RMI capability and replacement of Java Native Interface from JNI to RNI, a different standard. RMI was removed because it only easily supports Java to Java communications and competes with Microsoft DCOM technology. Applets that relied on these changes or just inadvertently used them worked only within Microsoft's Java system. Sun sued for breach of trademark, as the point of Java was that there should be no proprietary extensions and that code should work everywhere. Microsoft agreed to pay Sun $20 million, and Sun agreed to grant Microsoft limited license to use Java without modifications only and for a limited time.\n2002: Sun vs Microsoft.\nMicrosoft continued to ship its own unmodified Java virtual machine. Over the years it became extremely outdated yet still default for Internet Explorer. A later study revealed that applets of this time often contain their own classes that mirror Swing and other newer features in a limited way. In 2002, Sun filed an antitrust lawsuit, claiming that Microsoft's attempts at illegal monopolization had harmed the Java platform. Sun demanded Microsoft distribute Sun's current, binary implementation of Java technology as part of Windows, distribute it as a recommended update for older Microsoft desktop operating systems and stop the distribution of Microsoft's Virtual Machine (as its licensing time, agreed in the prior lawsuit, had expired). Microsoft paid $700 million for pending antitrust issues, another $900 million for patent issues and a $350 million royalty fee to use Sun's software in the future.\nSecurity.\nThere were two applet types with very different security models: signed applets and unsigned applets. Starting with Java SE 7 Update 21 (April 2013) applets and Web-Start Apps are encouraged to be signed with a trusted certificate, and warning messages appear when running unsigned applets. Further, starting with Java 7 Update 51 unsigned applets were blocked by default; they could be run by creating an exception in the Java Control Panel.\nUnsigned.\nLimits on unsigned applets were understood as \"draconian\": they have no access to the local filesystem and web access limited to the applet download site; there are also many other important restrictions. For instance, they cannot access all system properties, use their own class loader, call native code, execute external commands on a local system or redefine classes belonging to core packages included as part of a Java release. While they can run in a standalone frame, such frame contains a header, indicating that this is an untrusted applet. Successful initial call of the forbidden method does not automatically create a security hole as an access controller checks the entire stack of the calling code to be sure the call is not coming from an improper location.\nAs with any complex system, many security problems have been discovered and fixed since Java was first released. Some of these (like the Calendar serialization security bug) persisted for many years with nobody being aware. Others have been discovered in use by malware in the wild.\nSome studies mention applets crashing the browser or overusing CPU resources but these are classified as nuisances and not as true security flaws. However, unsigned applets may be involved in combined attacks that exploit a combination of multiple severe configuration errors in other parts of the system. An unsigned applet can also be more dangerous to run directly on the server where it is hosted because while code base allows it to talk with the server, running inside it can bypass the firewall. An applet may also try DoS attacks on the server where it is hosted, but usually people who manage the web site also manage the applet, making this unreasonable. Communities may solve this problem via source code review or running applets on a dedicated domain.\nThe unsigned applet can also try to download malware hosted on originating server. However it could only store such file into a temporary folder (as it is transient data) and has no means to complete the attack by executing it. There were attempts to use applets for spreading Phoenix and Siberia exploits this way, but these exploits do not use Java internally and were also distributed in several other ways.\nSigned.\nA signed applet contains a signature that the browser should verify through a remotely running, independent certificate authority server. Producing this signature involves specialized tools and interaction with the authority server maintainers. Once the signature is verified, and the user of the current machine also approves, a signed applet can get more rights, becoming equivalent to an ordinary standalone program. The rationale is that the author of the applet is now known and will be responsible for any deliberate damage. This approach allows applets to be used for many tasks that are otherwise not possible by client-side scripting. However, this approach requires more responsibility from the user, deciding whom he or she trusts. The related concerns include a non-responsive authority server, wrong evaluation of the signer identity when issuing certificates, and known applet publishers still doing something that the user would not approve of. Hence signed applets that appeared from Java 1.1 may actually have more security concerns.\nSelf-signed.\nSelf-signed applets, which are applets signed by the developer themselves, may potentially pose a security risk; java plugins provide a warning when requesting authorization for a self-signed applet, as the function and safety of the applet is guaranteed only by the developer itself, and has not been independently confirmed. Such self-signed certificates are usually only used during development prior to release where third-party confirmation of security is unimportant, but most applet developers will seek third-party signing to ensure that users trust the applet's safety.\nJava security problems are not fundamentally different from similar problems of any client-side scripting platform. In particular, all issues related to signed applets also apply to Microsoft ActiveX components.\nAs of 2014, self-signed and unsigned applets are no longer accepted by the commonly available Java plugins or Java Web Start. Consequently, developers who wish to deploy Java applets have no alternative but to acquire trusted certificates from commercial sources.\nAlternatives.\nAlternative technologies exist (for example, WebAssembly and JavaScript) that satisfy all or more of the scope of what was possible with an applet. JavaScript could coexist with applets in the same page, assist in launching applets (for instance, in a separate frame or providing platform workarounds) and later be called from the applet code. As JavaScript gained in features and performance, the support for and use of applets declined, until their eventual removal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13595", "revid": "46938359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13595", "title": "Heathrow Airport", "text": "International airport in Greater London, England\nHeathrow Airport (), also known as London Heathrow Airport and named \"London Airport\" until 1966, is the primary and largest international airport serving England and the United Kingdom. It is the largest of the six international airports in the London airport system (the others being Gatwick, Stansted, Luton, City and Southend).\nThe airport is owned and operated by Heathrow Airport Holdings. In 2024, Heathrow was the busiest airport in Europe, the fifth-busiest airport in the world by passenger traffic and the second-busiest airport in the world by international passenger traffic. Heathrow was the airport with the most international connections in the world in 2024.\nHeathrow was founded as a small airfield in 1930 but was developed into a much larger airport after World War II. It lies west of Central London on a site that covers . It was gradually expanded over 75 years and now has two parallel east\u2013west runways, four operational passenger terminals and one cargo terminal. The airport is the primary hub for British Airways and Virgin Atlantic.\nHistory.\nThe airport was opened on 25 March 1946 as London Airport; it was renamed Heathrow Airport in the last week of September 1966, to avoid confusion with the other two airports which serve London, Gatwick and Stansted. The airport's Central Terminal Area (CTA) was designed by Sir Frederick Gibberd, who set out the terminals and central-area buildings, including the control tower and the multi-faith Chapel of St George's.\nOperations.\nFacilities.\nHeathrow Airport is used by over 89 airlines flying to 214 destinations in 84 countries. The airport is the primary hub for British Airways and Virgin Atlantic. It has four passenger terminals (numbered 2 to 5) and a cargo terminal. In 2021 Heathrow served 19.4 million passengers, of which 17 million were international and 2.4 million domestic. The busiest year ever recorded was 2019 when 80.9 million passengers travelled through the airport. Heathrow is the UK's largest port by value with a network of over 218 destinations worldwide. The busiest single destination in passenger numbers is New York, with over threemillion passengers flying between Heathrow and JFK Airport in 2021.\nIn the 1950s, Heathrow had six runways, arranged in three pairs at different angles in the shape of a hexagram with the permanent passenger terminal in the middle and the older terminal along the north edge of the field; two of its runways would always be within 30\u00b0 of the wind direction. As the required length for runways has grown, Heathrow now has only two parallel runways running east\u2013west. These are extended versions of the two east\u2013west runways from the original hexagram. From the air, almost all of the original runways can still be seen, incorporated into the present system of taxiways.\nNorth of the northern runway and the former taxiway and aprons, now the site of extensive car parks, is the entrance to the access tunnel and the site of Heathrow's unofficial \"gate guardian\". For many years the home of a 40% scale model of a British Airways Concorde, G-CONC; the site has been occupied by a model of an Emirates Airbus A380 since 2008.\nHeathrow Airport has Anglican, Catholic, Free Church, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim and Sikh chaplains. There is a multi-faith prayer room and counselling room in each terminal, in addition to St. George's Interdenominational Chapel in an underground vault adjacent to the old control tower, where Christian services take place. The chaplains organise and lead prayers at certain times in the prayer room.\nThe airport has its resident press corps, consisting of six photographers and one TV crew, serving all the major newspapers and television stations around the world.\nCargo.\nThe top cargo export destinations include the United States, China and the United Arab Emirates handling 1.4 million tonnes of cargo in 2022. The top products exported were books, salmon and medicine.\nFlight movements.\nAircraft destined for Heathrow are usually routed to one of four holding points. Air traffic controllers at Heathrow Approach Control (based in Swanwick, Hampshire) then guide the aircraft to their final approach, merging aircraft from the four holds into a single stream of traffic, sometimes as close as apart. Considerable use is made of continuous descent approach techniques to minimise the environmental effects of incoming aircraft, particularly at night. Once an aircraft is established on its final approach, control is handed over to Heathrow Tower.\nWhen runway alternation was introduced, aircraft generated significantly more noise on departure than when landing, so a preference for westerly operations during daylight was introduced, which continues to this day. In this mode, aircraft take off towards the west and land from the east over London, thereby minimising the impact of noise on the most densely populated areas. Heathrow's two runways generally operate in segregated mode, whereby landings are allocated to one runway and takeoffs to the other. To further reduce noise nuisance, the use of runways 27R and 27L is swapped at 15:00 local each day if the wind is from the west. When landings are easterly there is no alternation; 09L remains the landing runway and 09R the takeoff runway due to the legacy of the now rescinded Cranford Agreement, pending taxiway works to allow the roles to be reversed. As of 2025, Hillingdon Council are considering plans submitted by Heathrow Airport Limited for infrastructure works that would facilitate runway alternation during easterly operation. Occasionally, landings are allowed on the nominated departure runway, to help reduce airborne delays and to position landing aircraft closer to their terminal, reducing taxi times.\nNight-time flights at Heathrow are subject to restrictions. Between 23:00 and 04:00, the noisiest aircraft (rated QC/8 and QC/16) cannot be scheduled for operation. Also, during the night quota period (23:30\u201306:00) there are four limits:\nA trial of \"noise-relief zones\" ran from December 2012 to March 2013, which concentrated approach flight paths into defined areas compared with the existing paths which were spread out. The zones used alternated weekly, meaning residents in the \"no-fly\" areas received respite from aircraft noise for set periods. However, it was concluded that some residents in other areas experienced more noise as a consequence of the trial and that it should therefore not be taken forward in its current form. Heathrow received more than 25,000 noise complaints in just three months over the summer of 2016, but around half were made by the same ten people.\nIn 2017, Heathrow introduced \"Fly Quiet &amp; Green\", a quarterly published league table (suspended in 2020 due to the Covid pandemic) that awards points to the 50 busiest airlines at the airport, ostensibly based on their performance relative to each other across a range of seven environmental benchmarks, such as emissions. Heathrow has acknowledged, but not attempted to refute, criticism over discrepancies and a lack of transparency over the way in which the figures are calculated. The airport has always refused to publish a breakdown showing how many \"Fly Quiet points\" each performance benchmark has contributed towards the total score it awards to an airline, thereby putting obstacles in the way of any independent auditing of the published results. Among other criticisms of the league table are the unexplained omission of some of the poorer performers among the 50 busiest airlines and the emphasis on relative rather than absolute performance, so an airline could well improve its \"Fly Quiet\" score quarter-on-quarter even if its environmental performance had in fact worsened over the period. In October 2024, Heathrow finally reinstated the programme, rebadged as \u201cFly Quieter &amp; Greener\u201d. Two more environmental benchmarks were added to the previous seven, but in all other respects the aforementioned deficiencies of the original scheme remain.\nDue to the COVID-19 pandemic Heathrow has seen a large increase in cargo-only flights, not only by already established carriers at the airport operating cargo-only flights using passenger aircraft but also by several cargo-only airlines.\nArrival stacks.\nInbound aircraft to London Heathrow Airport typically follow one of several Standard Arrival Routes (STARs). The STARs each terminate at one of four different VOR installations, and these also define four \"stacks\" where aircraft can be held if necessary until they are cleared to begin their approach to land.\nThird runway.\nIn September 2012, the British government established the Airports Commission, an independent commission chaired by Sir Howard Davies to examine various options for increasing capacity at UK airports. In July 2015, the commission backed a third runway at Heathrow, which the government approved in October 2016. However, the Court of Appeal rejected this plan, on the basis that the government failed to consider climate change and the environmental impact of aviation. On 16 December 2020, the UK Supreme Court lifted the ban on the third runway expansion, allowing the construction plan to go ahead.\nRegulation.\nUntil it was required to sell Gatwick and Stansted Airports, Heathrow Airport Holdings, owned mostly by FGP and Qatar Investment Authority and CDPQ held a dominant position in the London aviation market and has been heavily regulated by the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) as to how much it can charge airlines to land. The annual increase in landing charge per passenger was capped at inflation minus 3% until 1 April 2003. From 2003 to 2007 charges increased by inflation plus 6.5% per year, taking the fee to \u00a39.28 per passenger in 2007. In March 2008, the CAA announced that the charge would be allowed to increase by 23.5% to \u00a312.80 from 1 April 2008 and by inflation plus 7.5% for each of the following four years. In April 2013, the CAA announced a proposal for Heathrow to charge fees calculated by inflation minus 1.3%, continuing until 2019. Whilst the charges for landing at Heathrow are determined by the CAA and Heathrow Airport Holdings, the allocation of landing slots to airlines is carried out by Airport Co-ordination Limited (ACL).\nUntil 2008, air traffic between Heathrow and the United States was strictly governed by the countries' bilateral Bermuda II treaty. The treaty originally allowed only British Airways, Pan Am and TWA to fly from Heathrow to designated gateways in the US. In 1991, Pan Am and TWA sold their rights to United Airlines and American Airlines respectively, while Virgin Atlantic was added to the list of airlines allowed to operate on these routes. The Bermuda II Air Service Agreement was superseded by a new \"open skies\" agreement that was signed by the United States and the European Union on 30 April 2007 and came into effect on 30 March 2008. Shortly afterwards, additional US airlines, including Northwest Airlines, Continental Airlines, US Airways and Delta Air Lines started services to Heathrow after previously having to use Gatwick Airport. Following Brexit, the US and UK signed a new US-UK Air Transport Agreement in November 2020 incorporating the essential elements of Open Skies, which came into effect in March 2021.\nThe airport was criticised in 2007 for overcrowding and delays; according to Heathrow Airport Holdings, Heathrow's facilities were originally designed to accommodate 55million passengers annually. The number of passengers using the airport reached a record 70million in 2012. In 2007 the airport was voted the world's least favourite, alongside Chicago O'Hare, in a TripAdvisor survey. However, the opening of Terminal 5 in 2008 has relieved some pressure on terminal facilities, increasing the airport's terminal capacity to 90million passengers per year. A tie-up is also in place with McLaren Applied Technologies to optimise the general procedure, reducing delays and pollution.\nWith only two runways operating at over 98% of their capacity, Heathrow has little room for more flights, although the use of larger aircraft such as the Airbus A380 has allowed some increase in passenger numbers. It is difficult for existing airlines to obtain landing slots to enable them to increase their services from the airport, or for new airlines to start operations. To increase the number of flights, Heathrow Airport Holdings has proposed using the existing two runways in 'mixed mode' whereby aircraft would be allowed to take off and land on the same runway. This would increase the airport's capacity from its current 480,000 movements per year to as many as 550,000 according to former British Airways CEO Willie Walsh. Heathrow Airport Holdings has also proposed building a third runway to the north of the airport, which would significantly increase traffic capacity.\nSecurity.\nPolicing of the airport is the responsibility of the aviation security, a unit of the Metropolitan Police, although the British Army, including armoured vehicles of the Household Cavalry, has occasionally been deployed at the airport during periods of heightened security. Full body scanners are now used at the airport, and passengers who refuse to use them are required to submit to a hand search in a private room. The scanners display passengers' bodies as cartoon figures, with indicators showing where concealed items may be.\nFor many decades Heathrow had a reputation for theft from baggage by baggage handlers. This led to the airport being nicknamed \"Thiefrow\", with periodic arrests of baggage handlers.\nFollowing the widespread disruption caused by reports of drone sightings at Gatwick Airport, and a subsequent incident at Heathrow, a drone-detection system was installed airport-wide to attempt to combat disruption caused by the illegal use of drones.\nTerminal 2.\nThe airport's newest terminal, officially known as the Queen's Terminal, was opened on 4 June 2014 and has 24 gates. Designed by Spanish architect Luis Vidal, it was built on the site that had been occupied by the original Terminal 2 and the Queens Building. The main complex was completed in November 2013 and underwent six months of testing before opening to passengers. It includes a satellite pier (T2B), a 1,340-space car park, and a cooling station to generate chilled water. There are 52 shops and 17 bars and restaurants.\nThe airlines moved from their original locations over six months, with only 10% of flights operating from there in the first six weeks (United Airlines' transatlantic flights) to avoid the opening problems seen at Terminal 5. On 4 June 2014, United became the first airline to move into Terminal 2 from Terminals 1 and 4 followed by All Nippon Airways, Air Canada and Air China from Terminal 3. Air New Zealand, Asiana Airlines, Croatia Airlines, LOT Polish Airlines, South African Airways, and TAP Air Portugal moved in on 22 October 2014.\nFlights using Terminal 2 primarily originate from northern Europe or western Europe. It is primarily used by Star Alliance airlines (consolidating the airlines under Star Alliance's co-location policy \"Move Under One Roof\"). The terminal is also used by a few non-aligned airlines. Terminal 2 is one of the two terminals that operate UK domestic and Irish flights. Although Scandinavian Airlines is now part of the SkyTeam alliance as of 1 September 2024, it still uses Terminal 2.\nThe original Terminal 2 opened as the Europa Building in 1955 and was the airport's oldest terminal. It had an area of and was designed to handle around 1.2million passengers annually. In its final years, it accommodated up to 8million. A total of 316million passengers passed through the terminal in its lifetime. The building was demolished in 2010, along with the Queens Building which had housed airline company offices.\nTerminal 3.\nTerminal 3 opened as the Oceanic Terminal on 13 November 1961 to handle flight departures for long-haul routes for foreign carriers to the United States and Asia. At this time the airport had a direct helicopter service to central London from the gardens on the roof of the terminal building. Renamed Terminal 3 in 1968, it was expanded in 1970 with the addition of an arrivals building. Other facilities added included the UK's first moving walkways. In 2006, the new \u00a3105million Pier 6 was completed to accommodate the Airbus A380 superjumbo; Emirates and Qantas operate regular flights from Terminal 3 using the Airbus A380.\nRedevelopment of Terminal 3's forecourt by the addition of a new four-lane drop-off area and a large pedestrianised plaza, complete with a canopy to the front of the terminal building, was completed in 2007. These improvements were intended to improve passengers' experience, reduce traffic congestion and improve security. As part of this project, Virgin Atlantic was assigned its dedicated check-in area, known as 'Zone A', which features a large sculpture and atrium.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], Terminal 3 has an area of with 28 gates, and in 2011 it handled 19.8million passengers on 104,100flights.\nMost flights from Terminal 3 are long-haul flights from North America, Asia and other foreign countries other than Europe. Terminal 3 is home to Oneworld members (with the exception of Malaysia Airlines, Qatar Airways and Royal Air Maroc, all of which use Terminal 4), SkyTeam members Aerom\u00e9xico, China Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Middle East Airlines, Virgin Atlantic, and several long haul unaffiliated carriers. British Airways also operates several flights from this terminal, as do Iberia and Vueling.\nTerminal 4.\nOpened in 1986, Terminal 4 has 22 gates. It is situated to the south of the southern runway next to the cargo terminal and is connected to Terminals 2 and 3 by the Heathrow Cargo Tunnel. The terminal has an area of and is now home to the SkyTeam alliance; except Scandinavian Airlines which uses Terminal 2, and China Airlines, Aerom\u00e9xico, Delta Air Lines, Middle East Airlines, and Virgin Atlantic which use Terminal 3. This terminal is also the base for several Oneworld carriers such as Malaysia Airlines, Qatar Airways, and Royal Air Maroc, besides few unaffiliated carriers such as Etihad Airways, Gulf Air, Royal Brunei Airlines, and WestJet. It has undergone a \u00a3200million upgrade to enable it to accommodate 45airlines with an upgraded forecourt to reduce traffic congestion and improve security. Most flights using Terminal 4 are those from/to East Europe, Central Asia, North Africa and the Middle East as well as a few flights from/to Europe. An extended check-in area with renovated piers and departure lounges and a new baggage system were installed, and four new stands were built to accommodate the Airbus A380; Qatar Airways operates regular A380 flights.\nTerminal 5.\nTerminal 5 lies between the northern and southern runways at the western end of the Heathrow site and was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 14 March 2008, 19 years after its inception; then it opened to the public on 27 March 2008. The first passenger to enter Terminal 5 was a UK ex-pat from Kenya who passed through security at 04:30 on the day. He was presented with a boarding pass by British Airways CEO Willie Walsh for the first departing flight, BA302 to Paris. During the two weeks after its opening, operations were disrupted by problems with the terminal's IT systems, coupled with insufficient testing and staff training, which caused over 500 flights to be cancelled.\nTerminal 5 is exclusively used by British Airways as its global hub. However, because of the merger, between 25 March 2012 and 12 July 2022, Iberia's operations at Heathrow were moved to the terminal, making it the home of International Airlines Group. On 12 July 2022, Iberia's flight operations were moved back to Terminal 3. On 7 July 2020, American moved to Terminal 5, to allow for easier connections from American's transatlantic flights to British Airways flights during the pandemic. China Southern Airlines used Terminal 5 due to the pandemic until it was relocated to Terminal 4 in November 2022.\nBuilt for \u00a34.3billion, the terminal consists of a four-story main terminal building (Concourse A) and two satellite buildings linked to the main terminal by an underground people mover transit system. Concourse A is dedicated to British Airways's narrowbody fleet for flights around the UK and the rest of Europe, the first satellite (Concourse B) includes dedicated stands for BA and Iberia's widebody fleet except for the Airbus A380, and the second satellite (Concourse C), includes 7 dedicated aircraft stands for the A380. It became fully operational on 1 June 2011. Terminal 5 was voted Skytrax World's Best Airport Terminal 2014 in the Annual World Airport Awards.\nThe main terminal building (Concourse A) has an area of while Concourse B covers . It has 60 aircraft stands and capacity for 30million passengers annually as well as more than 100shops and restaurants. It is also home to British Airways' Flagship lounge, the Concorde Room, alongside four further British Airways branded lounges. One of those lounges is the British Airways Arrivals Lounge which is located land-side.\nA further building, designated Concourse D and of similar size to Concourse C, may yet be built to the east of the existing site, providing up to another 16stands. Following British Airways' merger with Iberia, this may become a priority since the combined business will require accommodation at Heathrow under one roof to maximise the cost savings envisaged under the deal. A proposal for Concourse D was featured in Heathrow's Capital Investment Plan 2009.\nThe transport network around the airport has been extended to cope with the increase in passenger numbers. New branches of both the Heathrow Express and the Underground's Piccadilly line serve a new shared Heathrow Terminal 5 station. A dedicated motorway spur links the terminal to the M25 (between junctions 14 and 15). The terminal has 3,800spaces multi-storey car park. A more distant long-stay car park for business passengers is connected to the terminal by a personal rapid transit system, the Heathrow Pod, which became operational in the spring of 2011. An automated people mover (APM) system, known as the Transit, transports airside passengers between the main terminal building and the satellite concourses.\nTerminal assignments.\nAs of 2025, Heathrow's four passenger terminals are assigned as follows:\nFollowing the opening of Terminal 5 in March 2008, a complex programme of terminal moves was implemented. This saw many airlines move to be grouped in terminals by airline alliance as far as possible.\nFollowing the opening of Phase 1 of the new Terminal 2 in June 2014, all Star Alliance member airlines (with the exception of new member Air India which moved in early 2017) along with Aer Lingus and Germanwings relocated to Terminal 2 in a phased process completed on 22 October 2014. Additionally, by 30 June 2015 all airlines left Terminal 1 in preparation for its demolition to make room for the construction of Phase 2 of Terminal 2. Some other airlines made further minor moves at a later point, e.g. Delta Air Lines merging all departures in Terminal 3 instead of a split between Terminals 3 and 4. Iberia moved to Terminal 5 on 1 June 2023.\nTerminal usage during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nHeathrow Airport has four terminals with a total of 115 gates, 66 of which can support wide-body aircraft and 24 gates that can support an Airbus A380. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Heathrow's services were sharply reduced. It announced that as of 6 April 2020, the airport would be transitioning to single-runway operations and that it would be temporarily closing Terminals 3 and 4, moving all remaining flights into Terminals 2 or 5. Dual runway operations were restored in August 2020. Heathrow returned to single-runway operations on 9 November 2020. On 11 December 2020, Heathrow announced Terminal 4 would be shut until the end of 2021. Terminal 4 was used sporadically during 2021 for red list passengers who would be subject to mandatory hotel quarantine. Terminal 3 was reopened for use by Virgin Atlantic and Delta on 15 July 2021, and Terminal 4 was reopened to normal operations on 14 June 2022.\nFormer Terminal 1.\nTerminal 1 opened in 1968 and was inaugurated by Queen Elizabeth II in April 1969. Terminal 1 was the Heathrow base for British Airways' domestic and European network and a few of its long haul routes before Terminal 5 opened. The acquisition of British Midland International (BMI) in 2012 by British Airways' owner International Airlines Group meant British Airways took over BMI's short-haul and medium-haul destinations from the terminal. Terminal 1 was also the main base for most Star Alliance members though some were also based at Terminal 3. Prior to the opening of Terminal 5, all domestic and Common Travel Area departures and arrivals needed to use Terminal 1, which had separate departure piers for these flights.\nTerminal 1 closed at the end of June 2015, and the site is now being used to extend Terminal 2 which opened in June 2014. A number of the newer gates used by Terminal 1 were built as part of the Terminal 2 development and are being retained. The last tenants along with British Airways were El Al, Icelandair (moved to Terminal 2 on 25 March 2015) and LATAM Brasil (the third to move in to Terminal 3 on 27 May 2015). British Airways was the last operator in Terminal 1. Two flights of this carrier, one departing to Hanover and one arriving from Baku, marked the terminal closure on 29 June 2015. British Airways operations have been relocated to Terminals 3 and 5. Since closure, it has been used as a location for emergency services' training and testing.\nAirlines and destinations.\nPassenger.\nThe following airlines operate regularly scheduled passenger flights at London Heathrow Airport:\nAir traffic and statistics.\nOverview.\nWhen ranked by passenger traffic, Heathrow is the eighth busiest airport internationally, behind Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Denver International Airport, Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Dubai International Airport, Los Angeles International Airport, and Istanbul Airport, for the 12 months ending December 2022. London Heathrow Airport was noted as the best-connected airport globally in 2019 according to the OAG's Megahubs Index with a connectivity score of 317. Dominant carrier British Airways was recorded as holding a 51% share of flights at the hub.\nIn 2015, Heathrow was the busiest airport in Europe in total passenger traffic, with 14% more passengers than Paris\u2013Charles de Gaulle Airport and 22% more than Istanbul Atat\u00fcrk Airport. Heathrow was the fourth busiest European airport by cargo traffic in 2013, after Frankfurt Airport, Paris\u2013Charles de Gaulle and Amsterdam Airport Schiphol.\nIn 2020, Heathrow's passenger numbers dropped sharply by over 72%, (a decrease of 58million travellers compared to 2019), due to the impact caused by restrictions and/or bans on travel caused by the global COVID-19 pandemic. More than four million passengers travelled on domestic and international flights in and out of Heathrow in March 2023, meaning it was once again the busiest airport in Europe after falling to the second spot in November 2022.\nOn 29 November 2024, it was reported that Heathrow Airport is testing the usage of Artificial Intelligence, a system known as Amy, to assist air controllers in managing one of the world's busiest airports. The system, which relies heavily on the efficiency of coordination, is capable of tracking aircraft across a wide airspace with the combination of radar and video data collected from the ground.\nAnnual traffic statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther facilities.\nThe head office of Heathrow Airport Holdings (formerly BAA Limited) is located in the Compass Centre by Heathrow's northern runway, a building that previously served as a British Airways flight crew centre. The World Business Centre Heathrow consists of three buildings. 1 World Business Centre houses offices of Heathrow Airport Holdings, Heathrow Airport itself, and Scandinavian Airlines. Previously International Airlines Group had its head office in 2 World Business Centre.\nAt one time the British Airways head office was located within Heathrow Airport at Speedbird House before the completion of Waterside, the current BA head office in Harmondsworth, in June 1998.\nTo the north of the airfield lies the Northern Perimeter Road, along which most of Heathrow's car rental agencies are based, and Bath Road, which runs parallel to it, but outside the airport campus.\nGround transport.\nPublic transport.\nTrain.\nThere are three train services to Central London:\nBus and coach.\nMany bus and coach services operate from Heathrow Central bus station, which serves Terminal 2 and Terminal 3. Services also operate from the bus stations located at Terminal 4 and Terminal 5.\nInter-terminal transport.\nTerminals 2 and 3 are within walking distance of each other. Transfers from Terminals 2 and 3 to Terminals 4 and 5 are provided by Elizabeth line and Heathrow Express trains and the London Underground Piccadilly line. Direct transfer between Terminals 4 and 5 is provided for free by route H30, introduced by Diamond Buses on 1 December 2022.\nTransit passengers remaining airside are provided with free dedicated transfer buses between terminals. These use dedicated airside tunnels (Heathrow Cargo Tunnel between Terminals 2/3 and 4, Heathrow Airside Road Tunnel between Terminals 2/3 and 5) to minimise disruption to aircraft operations.\nThe Heathrow Pod personal rapid transit system shuttles passengers between Terminal 5 and the business car park using 21 small, driverless transportation pods. The pods are battery-powered and run on-demand on a track, each able to carry up to four adults, two children, and their luggage. Plans exist to extend the Pod system to connect Terminals 2 and 3 to remote car parks.\nAn underground automated people mover system known as the \"Transit\" operates within Terminal 5, linking the main terminal with the satellite Terminals 5B and 5C. The Transit operates entirely airside using Bombardier Innovia APM 200 people mover vehicles.\nHotel access.\nSome hotels are directly connected to the terminals, and therefore are walkable without any transfers. Many more hotels are easily accessible using the local buses which depart from all terminals.\nThe Hotel Hoppa bus network also connects all terminals to major hotels in the area.\nTaxi.\nTaxis are available at all terminals.\nCar.\nHeathrow is accessible via the nearby M4 motorway or A4 road (Terminals 2\u20133), the M25 motorway (Terminals 4 and 5) and the A30 road (Terminal 4). There are drop-off and pick-up areas at all terminals and short- and long-stay multi-storey car parks. All the Heathrow forecourts are drop-off only. There are further car parks, not run by Heathrow Airport Holdings, just outside the airport: the most recognisable is the National Car Parks facility, although there are many other options; these car parks are connected to the terminals by shuttle buses.\nBicycle.\nThere are (mainly off-road) bicycle routes to some of the terminals. Free bicycle parking places are available in car parks 1 and 1A, at Terminal 4, and to the north and south of Terminal 5's Interchange Plaza. Cycling is not currently allowed through the main tunnel to access the central area and Terminals 2 and 3.\nFuture expansion and plans.\nThird runway and terminal expansion.\nThere is a long history of expansion proposals for Heathrow since it was first designated as a civil airport. Following the cancellation of the Maplin project in 1974, a fourth terminal was proposed but expansion beyond this was ruled out. However, the Airports Inquiries of 1981\u201383 and the 1985 Airports Policy White Paper considered further expansion and, following a four-year-long public inquiry in 1995\u201399, Terminal 5 was approved. In 2003, after many studies and consultations, the Future of Air Transport White Paper was published which proposed a third runway at Heathrow, as well as a second runway at Stansted Airport. In January 2009, the Transport Secretary at the time, Geoff Hoon announced that the British government supported the expansion of Heathrow by building a third runway and a sixth terminal building. This decision followed the 2003 white paper on the future of air transport in the UK, and a public consultation in November 2007. This was a controversial decision which met with widespread opposition because of the expected greenhouse gas emissions, impact on local communities, as well as noise and air pollution concerns.\nBefore the 2010 general election, the Conservative and Liberal Democrat parties announced that they would prevent the construction of any third runway or further material expansion of the airport's operating capacity. The Mayor of London, then Boris Johnson, took the position that London needs more airport capacity, favouring the construction of an entirely new airport in the Thames Estuary rather than expanding Heathrow. After the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition took power, it was announced that the third runway expansion was cancelled. Two years later, leading Conservatives were reported to have changed their minds on the subject.\nAnother proposal for expanding Heathrow's capacity was the Heathrow Hub, which aims to extend both runways to a total length of about 7,000 metres and divide them into four so that they each provide two, full-length runways, allowing simultaneous take-offs and landings while decreasing noise levels.\nIn July 2013, the airport submitted three new proposals for expansion to the Airports Commission, which was established to review airport capacity in the southeast of England. The Airports Commission was chaired by Sir Howard Davies. He, at the time of his appointment, was in the employ of GIC Private Limited (formerly known as Government Investment Corporation of Singapore) and a member of its International Advisory Board. GIC Private Limited was then (2012), as it remains today, one of Heathrow's principal owners. Sir Howard Davies resigned from these positions upon confirmation of his appointment to lead the Airports Commission, although it has been observed that he failed to identify these interests when invited to complete the Airports Commission's register of interests. Each of the three proposals that were to be considered by Sir Howard Davies's commission involved the construction of a third runway, either to the north, northwest or southwest of the airport.\nThe commission released its interim report in December 2013, shortlisting three options: the north-west third runway option at Heathrow, extending an existing runway at Heathrow, and a second runway at Gatwick Airport. After this report was published, the government confirmed that no options had been ruled out for airport expansion in the South-east and that a new runway would not be built at Heathrow before 2015. The full report was published on 1 July 2015, and backed a third, north-west, runway at Heathrow. Reaction to the report was generally adverse, particularly from London Mayor Boris Johnson. One senior Conservative told Channel 4: \"Howard Davies has dumped an utter steaming pile of poo on the Prime Minister's desk.\" On 25 October 2016, the government confirmed that Heathrow would be allowed to build a third runway; however, a final decision would not be taken until winter of 2017/18, after consultations and government votes. The earliest opening year would be 2025.\nOn 5 June 2018, the UK Cabinet approved the third runway, with a full vote planned for Parliament. On 25 June 2018, the House of Commons voted, 415\u2013119, in favour of the third runway. The bill received support from most MPs in the Conservative and Labour parties. A judicial review against the decision was launched by four London local authorities affected by the expansion\u2014Wandsworth, Richmond, Hillingdon and Hammersmith and Fulham\u2014in partnership with Greenpeace and London mayor Sadiq Khan. Khan previously stated he would take legal action if it were passed by Parliament.\nIn February 2020, the Court of Appeal ruled that the plans for a third runway were illegal since they did not adequately take into account the government's commitments to the Paris climate agreement. However, this ruling was later overturned by the Supreme Court in December 2020. The plan stalled after a fall in passenger numbers during the COVID pandemic and concerns about investment costs, but came back into the spotlight after the Labour Party won the 2024 UK general election. The airport's CEO indicated in November 2024 that he would seek a \"final\" decision from the government by the end of 2025.\nNew transport proposals.\nCurrently, all rail connections with Heathrow Airport run along an east\u2013west alignment to and from central London, and a number of schemes have been proposed over the years to develop new rail transport links with other parts of London and with stations outside the city. This mainline rail service has been extended with the opening of the Elizabeth Line.\nA 2009 proposal to create a southern link with London Waterloo via the Waterloo\u2013Reading line was abandoned in 2011 due to lack of funding and difficulties with a high number of level crossings on the route into London, and a plan to link Heathrow to the planned High Speed 2 (HS2) railway line (with a new station, Heathrow Hub) was also dropped from the HS2 plans in March 2015.\nAmong other schemes that have been considered is a rapid transport link between Heathrow and Gatwick Airports, known as \"Heathwick\", which would allow the airports to operate jointly as an airline hub; In 2018, the Department for Transport began to invite proposals for privately funded rail links to Heathrow Airport. Projects being considered under this initiative include:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13596", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13596", "title": "Heat Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "13598", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13598", "title": "HPV", "text": ""}
{"id": "13600", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13600", "title": "Hipparchus", "text": "2nd-century BC Greek astronomer, geographer and mathematician\nHipparchus (; , ; c.\u2009190\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009120\u00a0BC) was a Greek astronomer, geographer, and mathematician. He is considered the founder of trigonometry, but is most famous for his incidental discovery of the precession of the equinoxes. Hipparchus was born in Nicaea, Bithynia, and probably died on the island of Rhodes, Greece. He is known to have been a working astronomer between 162 and 127\u00a0BC.\nHipparchus is considered the greatest ancient astronomical observer and, by some, the greatest overall astronomer of antiquity. He was the first whose quantitative and accurate models for the motion of the Sun and Moon survive. For this he certainly made use of the observations and perhaps the mathematical techniques accumulated over centuries by the Babylonians and by Meton of Athens (fifth century BC), Timocharis, Aristyllus, Aristarchus of Samos, and Eratosthenes, among others.\nHe developed trigonometry and constructed trigonometric tables, and he solved several problems of spherical trigonometry. His other reputed achievements include the discovery and measurement of Earth's precession, the compilation of the first known comprehensive star catalog from the western world, and possibly the invention of the astrolabe, as well as of the armillary sphere that he may have used in creating the star catalogue. Hipparchus is sometimes called the \"father of astronomy\", a title conferred on him by Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre in 1817.\nLife and work.\nHipparchus was born in Nicaea (), in Bithynia. The exact dates of his life are not known, but Ptolemy attributes astronomical observations to him in the period from 147 to 127\u00a0BC, and some of these are stated as made in Rhodes; earlier observations since 162\u00a0BC might also have been made by him. His birth date (c.\u2009190\u00a0BC) was calculated by Delambre based on clues in his work. Hipparchus must have lived some time after 127\u00a0BC because he analyzed and published his observations from that year. Hipparchus obtained information from Alexandria as well as Babylon, but it is not known when or if he visited these places. He is believed to have died on the island of Rhodes, where he seems to have spent most of his later life.\nIn the second and third centuries, coins were made in his honour in Bithynia that bear his name and show him with a globe.\nRelatively little of Hipparchus's direct work survives into modern times. Although he wrote at least fourteen books, only his commentary on the popular astronomical poem by Aratus was preserved by later copyists. Most of what is known about Hipparchus comes from Strabo's \"Geography\" and Pliny's \"Natural History\" in the first century; Ptolemy's second-century \"Almagest\"; and additional references to him in the fourth century by Pappus and Theon of Alexandria in their commentaries on the \"Almagest\".\nHipparchus's only preserved work is \"Commentary on the Phaenomena of Eudoxus and Aratus\" (). This is a highly critical commentary in the form of two books on a popular poem by Aratus based on the work by Eudoxus. Hipparchus also made a list of his major works that apparently mentioned about fourteen books, but which is only known from references by later authors. His famous star catalog was incorporated into the one by Ptolemy and may be almost perfectly reconstructed by subtraction of two and two-thirds degrees from the longitudes of Ptolemy's stars . The first trigonometric table was apparently compiled by Hipparchus, who is consequently now known as \"the father of trigonometry\".\nBabylonian sources.\nEarlier Greek astronomers and mathematicians were influenced by Babylonian astronomy to some extent, for instance the period relations of the Metonic cycle and Saros cycle may have come from Babylonian sources (see \"Babylonian astronomical diaries\"). Hipparchus seems to have been the first to exploit Babylonian astronomical knowledge and techniques systematically. Eudoxus in the 4th century BC and Timocharis and Aristillus in the 3rd century BC already divided the ecliptic in 360 parts (our degrees, Greek: moira) of 60 arcminutes and Hipparchus continued this tradition. It was only in Hipparchus's time (2nd century BC) when this division was introduced (probably by Hipparchus's contemporary Hypsicles) for all circles in mathematics. Eratosthenes (3rd century BC), in contrast, used a simpler sexagesimal system dividing a circle into 60 parts. Hipparchus also adopted the Babylonian astronomical \"cubit\" unit (Akkadian \"ammatu\", Greek \u03c0\u1fc6\u03c7\u03c5\u03c2 \"p\u0113chys\") that was equivalent to 2\u00b0 or 2.5\u00b0 ('large cubit').\nHipparchus probably compiled a list of Babylonian astronomical observations; Gerald J. Toomer, a historian of astronomy, has suggested that Ptolemy's knowledge of eclipse records and other Babylonian observations in the \"Almagest\" came from a list made by Hipparchus. Hipparchus's use of Babylonian sources has always been known in a general way, because of Ptolemy's statements, but the only text by Hipparchus that survives does not provide sufficient information to decide whether Hipparchus's knowledge (such as his usage of the units cubit and finger, degrees and minutes, or the concept of hour stars) was based on Babylonian practice. However, Franz Xaver Kugler demonstrated that the synodic and anomalistic periods that Ptolemy attributes to Hipparchus had already been used in Babylonian ephemerides, specifically the collection of texts nowadays called \"System B\" (sometimes attributed to Kidinnu).\nHipparchus's long draconitic lunar period (5,458 months = 5,923 lunar nodal periods) also appears a few times in Babylonian records. But the only such tablet explicitly dated is post-Hipparchus, so the direction of transmission is not settled by the tablets.\nGeometry, trigonometry and other mathematical techniques.\nHipparchus was recognized as the first mathematician known to have possessed a trigonometric table, which he needed when computing the eccentricity of the orbits of the Moon and Sun. He tabulated values for the chord function, which for a central angle in a circle gives the length of the straight line segment between the points where the angle intersects the circle. He may have computed this for a circle with a circumference of 21,600 units and a radius (rounded) of 3,438 units; this circle has a unit length for each arcminute along its perimeter. (This was \u201cproven\u201d by Toomer, but he later \u201ccast doubt\u201c upon his earlier affirmation. Other authors have argued that a circle of radius 3,600 units may instead have been used by Hipparchus.) He tabulated the chords for angles with increments of 7.5\u00b0. In modern terms, the chord subtended by a central angle in a circle of given radius R equals R times twice the sine of half of the angle, i.e.:\nformula_1\nThe now-lost work in which Hipparchus is said to have developed his chord table, is called \"T\u014dn en kukl\u014di euthei\u014dn\" (\"Of Lines Inside a Circle\") in Theon of Alexandria's fourth-century commentary on section I.10 of the \"Almagest\". Some claim the table of Hipparchus may have survived in astronomical treatises in India, such as the \"Surya Siddhanta\". Trigonometry was a significant innovation, because it allowed Greek astronomers to solve any triangle, and made it possible to make quantitative astronomical models and predictions using their preferred geometric techniques.\nHipparchus must have used a better approximation for \u03c0 than the one given by Archimedes of between &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+10\u204471 (\u2248\u20093.1408) and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20447 (\u2248\u20093.1429). Perhaps he had the approximation later used by Ptolemy, sexagesimal 3;08,30 (\u2248\u20093.1417) (\"Almagest\" VI.7).\nHipparchus could have constructed his chord table using the Pythagorean theorem and a theorem known to Archimedes. He also might have used the relationship between sides and diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral, today called Ptolemy's theorem because its earliest extant source is a proof in the \"Almagest\" (I.10).\nThe stereographic projection was ambiguously attributed to Hipparchus by Synesius (c. 400 AD), and on that basis Hipparchus is often credited with inventing it or at least knowing of it. However, some scholars believe this conclusion to be unjustified by available evidence. The oldest extant description of the stereographic projection is found in Ptolemy's \"Planisphere\" (2nd century AD).\nBesides geometry, Hipparchus also used arithmetic techniques developed by the Chaldeans. He was one of the first Greek mathematicians to do this and, in this way, expanded the techniques available to astronomers and geographers.\nThere are several indications that Hipparchus knew spherical trigonometry, but the first surviving text discussing it is by Menelaus of Alexandria in the first century, who now, on that basis, commonly is credited with its discovery. (Previous to the finding of the proofs of Menelaus a century ago, Ptolemy was credited with the invention of spherical trigonometry.) Ptolemy later used spherical trigonometry to compute things such as the rising and setting points of the ecliptic, or to take account of the lunar parallax. If he did not use spherical trigonometry, Hipparchus may have used a globe for these tasks, reading values off coordinate grids drawn on it, or he may have made approximations from planar geometry, or perhaps used arithmetical approximations developed by the Chaldeans.\nLunar and solar theory.\nMotion of the Moon.\nHipparchus also studied the motion of the Moon and confirmed the accurate values for two periods of its motion that Chaldean astronomers are widely presumed to have possessed before him. The traditional value (from Babylonian System B) for the mean synodic month is 29\u00a0days; 31,50,8,20 (sexagesimal) = 29.5305941... days. Expressed as 29\u00a0days + 12\u00a0hours + \u00a0hours this value has been used later in the Hebrew calendar. The Chaldeans also knew that 251 synodic months \u2248 269 anomalistic months. Hipparchus used the multiple of this period by a factor of 17, because that interval is also an eclipse period, and is also close to an integer number of years (4,267 moons : 4,573 anomalistic periods : 4,630.53 nodal periods : 4,611.98 lunar orbits : 344.996 years : 344.982 solar orbits : 126,007.003 days : 126,351.985 rotations). What was so exceptional and useful about the cycle was that all 345-year-interval eclipse pairs occur slightly more than 126,007 days apart within a tight range of only approximately \u00b1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 hour, guaranteeing (after division by 4,267) an estimate of the synodic month correct to one part in order of magnitude 10 million.\nHipparchus could confirm his computations by comparing eclipses from his own time (presumably 27 January 141\u00a0BC and 26 November 139\u00a0BC according to Toomer) with eclipses from Babylonian records 345 years earlier (\"Almagest\" IV.2).\nLater al-Biruni (\"Qanun\" VII.2.II) and Copernicus (\"de revolutionibus\" IV.4) noted that the period of 4,267 moons is approximately five minutes longer than the value for the eclipse period that Ptolemy attributes to Hipparchus. However, the timing methods of the Babylonians had an error of no fewer than eight minutes. Modern scholars agree that Hipparchus rounded the eclipse period to the nearest hour, and used it to confirm the validity of the traditional values, rather than to try to derive an improved value from his own observations. From modern ephemerides and taking account of the change in the length of the day (see \u0394T) we\n estimate that the error in the assumed length of the synodic month was less than 0.2 second in the fourth century\u00a0BC and less than 0.1 second in Hipparchus's time.\nOrbit of the Moon.\nIt had been known for a long time that the motion of the Moon is not uniform: its speed varies. This is called its \"anomaly\" and it repeats with its own period; the anomalistic month. The Chaldeans took account of this arithmetically, and used a table giving the daily motion of the Moon according to the date within a long period. However, the Greeks preferred to think in geometrical models of the sky. At the end of the third century BC, Apollonius of Perga had proposed two models for lunar and planetary motion:\nApollonius demonstrated that these two models were in fact mathematically equivalent. However, all this was theory and had not been put to practice. Hipparchus is the first astronomer known to attempt to determine the relative proportions and actual sizes of these orbits. Hipparchus devised a geometrical method to find the parameters from three positions of the Moon at particular phases of its anomaly. In fact, he did this separately for the eccentric and the epicycle model. Ptolemy describes the details in the \"Almagest\" IV.11. Hipparchus used two sets of three lunar eclipse observations that he carefully selected to satisfy the requirements. The eccentric model he fitted to these eclipses from his Babylonian eclipse list: 22/23 December 383\u00a0BC, 18/19 June 382\u00a0BC, and 12/13 December 382\u00a0BC. The epicycle model he fitted to lunar eclipse observations made in Alexandria at 22 September 201\u00a0BC, 19 March 200\u00a0BC, and 11 September 200\u00a0BC.\nThese figures are due to the cumbersome unit he used in his chord table and may partly be due to some sloppy rounding and calculation errors by Hipparchus, for which Ptolemy criticised him while also making rounding errors. A simpler alternate reconstruction agrees with all four numbers. Hipparchus found inconsistent results; he later used the ratio of the epicycle model (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3122+1\u20442 : &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;247+1\u20442), which is too small (60 : 4;45 sexagesimal). Ptolemy established a ratio of 60 : &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20444. (The maximum angular deviation producible by this geometry is the arcsin of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20444 divided by 60, or approximately 5\u00b0 1', a figure that is sometimes therefore quoted as the equivalent of the Moon's equation of the center in the Hipparchan model.)\nApparent motion of the Sun.\nBefore Hipparchus, Meton, Euctemon, and their pupils at Athens had made a solstice observation (i.e., timed the moment of the summer solstice) on 27 June 432\u00a0BC (proleptic Julian calendar). Aristarchus of Samos is said to have done so in 280\u00a0BC, and Hipparchus also had an observation by Archimedes. He observed the summer solstices in 146 and 135\u00a0BC both accurately to a few hours, but observations of the moment of equinox were simpler, and he made twenty during his lifetime. Ptolemy gives an extensive discussion of Hipparchus's work on the length of the year in the \"Almagest\" III.1, and quotes many observations that Hipparchus made or used, spanning 162\u2013128\u00a0BC, including an equinox timing by Hipparchus (at 24 March 146\u00a0BC at dawn) that differs by 5 hours from the observation made on Alexandria's large public equatorial ring that same day (at 1 hour before noon). Ptolemy claims his solar observations were on a transit instrument set in the meridian.\nAt the end of his career, Hipparchus wrote a book entitled \"Peri eniaus\u00edou meg\u00e9thous\" (\"On the Length of the Year\") regarding his results. The established value for the tropical year, introduced by Callippus in or before 330\u00a0BC was &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 days. Speculating a Babylonian origin for the Callippic year is difficult to defend, since Babylon did not observe solstices thus the only extant System B year length was based on Greek solstices (see below). Hipparchus's equinox observations gave varying results, but he points out (quoted in \"Almagest\" III.1(H195)) that the observation errors by him and his predecessors may have been as large as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 day. He used old solstice observations and determined a difference of approximately one day in approximately 300 years. So he set the length of the tropical year to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;365+1\u20444 \u2212 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044300 days (= 365.24666... days = 365\u00a0days 5\u00a0hours 55\u00a0min, which differs from the modern estimate of the value (including earth spin acceleration), in his time of approximately 365.2425 days, an error of approximately 6\u00a0min per year, an hour per decade, and ten hours per century.\nBetween the solstice observation of Meton and his own, there were 297 years spanning 108,478 days; this implies a tropical year of 365.24579... days = 365\u00a0days;14,44,51 (sexagesimal; = 365\u00a0days + + + ), a year length found on one of the few Babylonian clay tablets which explicitly specifies the System B month. Whether Babylonians knew of Hipparchus's work or the other way around is debatable.\nHipparchus also gave the value for the sidereal year to be 365 + + days (= 365.25694... days = 365\u00a0days 6\u00a0hours 10\u00a0min). Another value for the sidereal year that is attributed to Hipparchus (by the physician Galen in the second century AD) is 365 + + days (= 365.25347... days = 365\u00a0days 6\u00a0hours 5\u00a0min), but this may be a corruption of another value attributed to a Babylonian source: 365 + + days (= 365.25694... days = 365\u00a0days 6\u00a0hours 10\u00a0min). It is not clear whether Hipparchus got the value from Babylonian astronomers or calculated by himself.\nOrbit of the Sun.\nBefore Hipparchus, astronomers knew that the lengths of the seasons are not equal. Hipparchus made observations of equinox and solstice, and according to Ptolemy (\"Almagest\" III.4) determined that spring (from spring equinox to summer solstice) lasted 94&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 days, and summer (from summer solstice to autumn equinox) &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;92+1\u20442 days. This is inconsistent with a premise of the Sun moving around the Earth in a circle at uniform speed. Hipparchus's solution was to place the Earth not at the center of the Sun's motion, but at some distance from the center. This model described the apparent motion of the Sun fairly well. It is known today that the planets, including the Earth, move in approximate ellipses around the Sun, but this was not discovered until Johannes Kepler published his first two laws of planetary motion in 1609. The value for the eccentricity attributed to Hipparchus by Ptolemy is that the offset is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204424 of the radius of the orbit (which is a little too large), and the direction of the apogee would be at longitude 65.5\u00b0 from the vernal equinox. Hipparchus may also have used other sets of observations, which would lead to different values. One of his two eclipse trios' solar longitudes are consistent with his having initially adopted inaccurate lengths for spring and summer of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;95+3\u20444 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;91+1\u20444 days. His other triplet of solar positions is consistent with &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;94+1\u20444 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;92+1\u20442 days, an improvement on the results (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;94+1\u20442 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;92+1\u20442 days) attributed to Hipparchus by Ptolemy. Ptolemy made no change three centuries later, and expressed lengths for the autumn and winter seasons which were already implicit (as shown, e.g., by A. Aaboe).\nDistance, parallax, size of the Moon and the Sun.\nHipparchus also undertook to find the distances and sizes of the Sun and the Moon, in the now-lost work \"On Sizes and Distances\" ( ). His work is mentioned in Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" V.11, and in a commentary thereon by Pappus; Theon of Smyrna (2nd century) also mentions the work, under the title \"On Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon\".\nHipparchus measured the apparent diameters of the Sun and Moon with his \"diopter\". Like others before and after him, he found that the Moon's size varies as it moves on its (eccentric) orbit, but he found no perceptible variation in the apparent diameter of the Sun. He found that at the \"mean\" distance of the Moon, the Sun and Moon had the same apparent diameter; at that distance, the Moon's diameter fits 650 times into the circle, i.e., the mean apparent diameters are &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;360\u2044650 = 0\u00b033\u203214\u2033.\nLike others before and after him, he also noticed that the Moon has a noticeable parallax, i.e., that it appears displaced from its calculated position (compared to the Sun or stars), and the difference is greater when closer to the horizon. He knew that this is because in the then-current models the Moon circles the center of the Earth, but the observer is at the surface\u2014the Moon, Earth and observer form a triangle with a sharp angle that changes all the time. From the size of this parallax, the distance of the Moon as measured in Earth radii can be determined. For the Sun however, there was no observable parallax (we now know that it is about 8.8\", several times smaller than the resolution of the unaided eye).\nIn the first book, Hipparchus assumes that the parallax of the Sun is 0, as if it is at infinite distance. He then analyzed a solar eclipse, which Toomer presumes to be the eclipse of 14 March 190\u00a0BC. It was total in the region of the Hellespont (and in his birthplace, Nicaea); at the time Toomer proposes the Romans were preparing for war with Antiochus III in the area, and the eclipse is mentioned by Livy in his \"Ab Urbe Condita Libri\" VIII.2. It was also observed in Alexandria, where the Sun was reported to be obscured 4/5ths by the Moon. Alexandria and Nicaea are on the same meridian. Alexandria is at about 31\u00b0 North, and the region of the Hellespont about 40\u00b0 North. (It has been contended that authors like Strabo and Ptolemy had fairly decent values for these geographical positions, so Hipparchus must have known them too. However, Strabo's Hipparchus dependent latitudes for this region are at least 1\u00b0 too high, and Ptolemy appears to copy them, placing Byzantium 2\u00b0 high in latitude.) Hipparchus could draw a triangle formed by the two places and the Moon, and from simple geometry was able to establish a distance of the Moon, expressed in Earth radii. Because the eclipse occurred in the morning, the Moon was not in the meridian, and it has been proposed that as a consequence the distance found by Hipparchus was a lower limit. In any case, according to Pappus, Hipparchus found that the least distance is 71 (from this eclipse), and the greatest 83 Earth radii.\nIn the second book, Hipparchus starts from the opposite extreme assumption: he assigns a (minimum) distance to the Sun of 490 Earth radii. This would correspond to a parallax of 7\u2032, which is apparently the greatest parallax that Hipparchus thought would not be noticed (for comparison: the typical resolution of the human eye is about 2\u2032; Tycho Brahe made naked eye observation with an accuracy down to 1\u2032). In this case, the shadow of the Earth is a cone rather than a cylinder as under the first assumption. Hipparchus observed (at lunar eclipses) that at the mean distance of the Moon, the diameter of the shadow cone is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 lunar diameters. That apparent diameter is, as he had observed, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;360\u2044650 degrees. With these values and simple geometry, Hipparchus could determine the mean distance; because it was computed for a minimum distance of the Sun, it is the maximum mean distance possible for the Moon. With his value for the eccentricity of the orbit, he could compute the least and greatest distances of the Moon too. According to Pappus, he found a least distance of 62, a mean of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;67+1\u20443, and consequently a greatest distance of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;72+2\u20443 Earth radii. With this method, as the parallax of the Sun decreases (i.e., its distance increases), the minimum limit for the mean distance is 59 Earth radii\u2014exactly the mean distance that Ptolemy later derived.\nHipparchus thus had the problematic result that his minimum distance (from book 1) was greater than his maximum mean distance (from book 2). He was intellectually honest about this discrepancy, and probably realized that especially the first method is very sensitive to the accuracy of the observations and parameters. (In fact, modern calculations show that the size of the 14.03.190\u00a0BC solar eclipse at Alexandria must have been closer to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;9\u204410ths and not the reported &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20445ths, a fraction more closely matched by the degree of totality at Alexandria of eclipses occurring on 15.08.310 and 20.11.129\u00a0BC which were also nearly total in the Hellespont and are thought by many to be more likely possibilities for the eclipse Hipparchus used for his computations.)\nPtolemy later measured the lunar parallax directly (\"Almagest\" V.13), and used the second method of Hipparchus with lunar eclipses to compute the distance of the Sun (\"Almagest\" V.15). He criticizes Hipparchus for making contradictory assumptions, and obtaining conflicting results (\"Almagest\" V.11): but apparently he failed to understand Hipparchus's strategy to establish limits consistent with the observations, rather than a single value for the distance. His results were the best so far: the actual mean distance of the Moon is 60.3 Earth radii, within his limits from Hipparchus's second book.\nTheon of Smyrna wrote that according to Hipparchus, the Sun is 1,880 times the size of the Earth, and the Earth twenty-seven times the size of the Moon; apparently this refers to volumes, not diameters. From the geometry of book 2 it follows that the Sun is at 2,550 Earth radii, and the mean distance of the Moon is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;60+1\u20442 radii. Similarly, Cleomedes quotes Hipparchus for the sizes of the Sun and Earth as 1050:1; this leads to a mean lunar distance of 61 radii. Apparently Hipparchus later refined his computations, and derived accurate single values that he could use for predictions of solar eclipses.\nSee Toomer (1974) for a more detailed discussion.\nEclipses.\nPliny (\"Naturalis Historia\" II.X) tells us that Hipparchus demonstrated that lunar eclipses can occur five months apart, and solar eclipses seven months (instead of the usual six months); and the Sun can be hidden twice in thirty days, but as seen by different nations. Ptolemy discussed this a century later at length in \"Almagest\" VI.6. The geometry, and the limits of the positions of Sun and Moon when a solar or lunar eclipse is possible, are explained in \"Almagest\" VI.5. Hipparchus apparently made similar calculations. The result that two solar eclipses can occur one month apart is important, because this can not be based on observations: one is visible on the northern and the other on the southern hemisphere\u2014as Pliny indicates\u2014and the latter was inaccessible to the Greek.\nPrediction of a solar eclipse, i.e., exactly when and where it will be visible, requires a solid lunar theory and proper treatment of the lunar parallax. Hipparchus must have been the first to be able to do this. A rigorous treatment requires spherical trigonometry, thus those who remain certain that Hipparchus lacked it must speculate that he may have made do with planar approximations. He may have discussed these things in \"Per\u00ed t\u0113s kat\u00e1 pl\u00e1tos m\u0113nia\u00edas t\u0113s sel\u0113n\u0113s kin\u0113se\u014ds\" (\"On the monthly motion of the Moon in latitude\"), a work mentioned in the \"Suda\".\nPliny also remarks that \"he also discovered for what exact reason, although the shadow causing the eclipse must from sunrise onward be below the earth, it happened once in the past that the Moon was eclipsed in the west while both luminaries were visible above the earth\" (translation H. Rackham (1938), Loeb Classical Library 330 p.\u00a0207). Toomer argued that this must refer to the large total lunar eclipse of 26 November 139\u00a0BC, when over a clean sea horizon as seen from Rhodes, the Moon was eclipsed in the northwest just after the Sun rose in the southeast. This would be the second eclipse of the 345-year interval that Hipparchus used to verify the traditional Babylonian periods: this puts a late date to the development of Hipparchus's lunar theory. We do not know what \"exact reason\" Hipparchus found for seeing the Moon eclipsed while apparently it was not in exact opposition to the Sun. Parallax lowers the altitude of the luminaries; refraction raises them, and from a high point of view the horizon is lowered.\nAstronomical instruments and astrometry.\nHipparchus and his predecessors used various instruments for astronomical calculations and observations, such as the gnomon, the astrolabe, and the armillary sphere.\nHipparchus is credited with the invention or improvement of several astronomical instruments, which were used for a long time for naked-eye observations. According to Synesius of Ptolemais (4th century) he made the first \"astrolabion\": this may have been an armillary sphere (which Ptolemy however says he constructed, in \"Almagest\" V.1); or the predecessor of the planar instrument called astrolabe (also mentioned by Theon of Alexandria). With an astrolabe Hipparchus was the first to be able to measure the geographical latitude and time by observing fixed stars. Previously this was done at daytime by measuring the shadow cast by a gnomon, by recording the length of the longest day of the year or with the portable instrument known as a \"scaphe\".\nPtolemy mentions (\"Almagest\" V.14) that he used a similar instrument as Hipparchus, called \"dioptra\", to measure the apparent diameter of the Sun and Moon. Pappus of Alexandria described it (in his commentary on the \"Almagest\" of that chapter), as did Proclus (\"Hypotyposis\" IV). It was a four-foot rod with a scale, a sighting hole at one end, and a wedge that could be moved along the rod to exactly obscure the disk of Sun or Moon.\nHipparchus also observed solar equinoxes, which may be done with an equatorial ring: its shadow falls on itself when the Sun is on the equator (i.e., in one of the equinoctial points on the ecliptic), but the shadow falls above or below the opposite side of the ring when the Sun is south or north of the equator. Ptolemy quotes (in \"Almagest\" III.1 (H195)) a description by Hipparchus of an equatorial ring in Alexandria; a little further he describes two such instruments present in Alexandria in his own time.\nHipparchus applied his knowledge of spherical angles to the problem of denoting locations on the Earth's surface. Before him a grid system had been used by Dicaearchus of Messana, but Hipparchus was the first to apply mathematical rigor to the determination of the latitude and longitude of places on the Earth. Hipparchus wrote a critique in three books on the work of the geographer Eratosthenes of Cyrene (3rd century\u00a0BC), called \"Pr\u00f2s t\u00e8n Eratosth\u00e9nous geograph\u00edan\" (\"Against the Geography of Eratosthenes\"). It is known to us from Strabo of Amaseia, who in his turn criticised Hipparchus in his own \"Geographia\". Hipparchus apparently made many detailed corrections to the locations and distances mentioned by Eratosthenes. It seems he did not introduce many improvements in methods, but he did propose a means to determine the geographical longitudes of different cities at lunar eclipses (Strabo \"Geographia\" 1 January 2012). A lunar eclipse is visible simultaneously on half of the Earth, and the difference in longitude between places can be computed from the difference in local time when the eclipse is observed. His approach would give accurate results if it were correctly carried out but the limitations of timekeeping accuracy in his era made this method impractical.\nStar catalog.\nLate in his career (possibly about 135\u00a0BC) Hipparchus compiled his star catalog. Scholars have been searching for it for centuries. In 2022, it was announced that a part of it was discovered in a medieval parchment manuscript, Codex Climaci Rescriptus, from Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt as hidden text (palimpsest). This finding was questioned in 2024, with a rebuttal by the discoverers in 2025. There is ongoing scholarly debate about the interpretation of the discovery.\nHipparchus also constructed a celestial globe depicting the constellations, based on his observations. His interest in the fixed stars may have been inspired by the observation of a supernova (according to Pliny), or by his discovery of precession, according to Ptolemy, who says that Hipparchus could not reconcile his data with earlier observations made by Timocharis and Aristillus. For more information see Discovery of precession. In Raphael's painting \"The School of Athens\", Hipparchus may be depicted holding his celestial globe, as the representative figure for astronomy. It is not certain that the figure is meant to represent him.\nPreviously, Eudoxus of Cnidus in the fourth century\u00a0BC had described the stars and constellations in two books called \"Phaenomena\" and \"Entropon\". Aratus wrote a poem called \"Phaenomena\" or \"Arateia\" based on Eudoxus's work. Hipparchus wrote a commentary on the \"Arateia\"\u2014his only preserved work\u2014which contains many stellar positions and times for rising, culmination, and setting of the constellations, and these are likely to have been based on his own measurements.\nAccording to Roman sources, Hipparchus made his measurements with a scientific instrument and he obtained the positions of roughly 850 stars. Pliny the Elder writes in book II, 24\u201326 of his Natural History:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This same Hipparchus, who can never be sufficiently commended, ... discovered a new star that was produced in his own age, and, by observing its motions on the day in which it shone, he was led to doubt whether it does not often happen, that those stars have motion which we suppose to be fixed. And the same individual attempted, what might seem presumptuous even in a deity, viz. to number the stars for posterity and to express their relations by appropriate names; having previously devised instruments, by which he might mark the places and the magnitudes of each individual star. In this way it might be easily discovered, not only whether they were destroyed or produced, but whether they changed their relative positions, and likewise, whether they were increased or diminished; the heavens being thus left as an inheritance to any one, who might be found competent to complete his plan.\nThis passage reports that\nIt is unknown what instrument he used. The armillary sphere was probably invented only later\u2014maybe by Ptolemy 265 years after Hipparchus. The historian of science S. Hoffmann found clues that Hipparchus may have observed the longitudes and latitudes in different coordinate systems and, thus, with different instrumentation. Right ascensions, for instance, could have been observed with a clock, while angular separations could have been measured with another device.\nStellar magnitude.\nHipparchus is conjectured to have ranked the apparent magnitudes of stars on a numerical scale from 1, the brightest, to 6, the faintest. This hypothesis is based on the vague statement by Pliny the Elder but cannot be proven by the data in Hipparchus's commentary on Aratus's poem. In this only work by his hand that has survived until today, he does not use the magnitude scale but estimates brightnesses unsystematically. However, this does not prove or disprove anything because the commentary might be an early work while the magnitude scale could have been introduced later. Yet, it was proven that the error bars of magnitudes in ancient star catalogue is 1.5 mag which suggests that these numbers are not based on measurements. There were several suggestions on measurement methodologies and feasibility studies. In all cases, the error bars would be smaller. Hence, Hoffmann (2022) suggested that the magnitudes were not measured at all but mere estimates for globe makers to improve pattern recognition on globes as astronomer's computing machines.\nNevertheless, this system certainly precedes Ptolemy, who used it extensively about AD 150. This system was made more precise and extended by N. R. Pogson in 1856, who placed the magnitudes on a logarithmic scale, making magnitude 1 stars 100 times brighter than magnitude 6 stars, thus each magnitude is 5\u221a100 or 2.512 times brighter than the next faintest magnitude.\nCoordinate System.\nIt is disputed which coordinate system(s) he used. Ptolemy's catalog in the \"Almagest\", which is derived from Hipparchus's catalog, is given in ecliptic coordinates. Although Hipparchus strictly distinguishes between \"signs\" (30\u00b0 section of the zodiac) and \"constellations\" in the zodiac, it is highly questionable whether or not he had an instrument to directly observe / measure units on the ecliptic. He probably marked them as a unit on his celestial globe but the instrumentation for his observations is unknown.\nDelambre in his (1817) concluded that Hipparchus knew and used the equatorial coordinate system, a conclusion challenged by Otto Neugebauer in his \"History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy\" (1975). Hipparchus seems to have used a mix of ecliptic coordinates and equatorial coordinates: in his commentary on Eudoxus he provides stars' polar distance (equivalent to the declination in the equatorial system), right ascension (equatorial), longitude (ecliptic), polar longitude (hybrid), but not celestial latitude. This opinion was confirmed by the careful investigation of Hoffmann who independently studied the material, potential sources, techniques and results of Hipparchus and reconstructed his celestial globe and its making.\nAs with most of his work, Hipparchus's star catalog was adopted and perhaps expanded by Ptolemy, who has (since Brahe in 1598) been accused by some of fraud for stating (\"Syntaxis\", book 7, chapter 4) that he observed all 1025 stars\u2014critics claim that, for almost every star, he used Hipparchus's data and precessed it to his own epoch &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+2\u20443 centuries later by adding 2\u00b040' to the longitude, using an erroneously small precession constant of 1\u00b0 per century. This claim is highly exaggerated because it applies modern standards of citation to an ancient author. True is only that \"the ancient star catalogue\" that was initiated by Hipparchus in the second century BC, was reworked and improved multiple times in the 265 years to the Almagest (which is good scientific practise even today). Although the Almagest star catalogue is based upon Hipparchus's, it is not only a blind copy but enriched, enhanced, and thus (at least partially) re-observed.\nCelestial globe.\nHipparchus's celestial globe was an instrument similar to modern electronic computers. He used it to determine risings, settings and culminations (cf. also Almagest, book VIII, chapter 3). Therefore, his globe was mounted in a horizontal plane and had a meridian ring with a scale. In combination with a grid that divided the celestial equator into 24 hour lines (longitudes equalling our right ascension hours) the instrument allowed him to determine the hours. The ecliptic was marked and divided in 12 sections of equal length (the \"signs\", which he called or in order to distinguish them from constellations (). The globe was virtually reconstructed by a historian of science.\nArguments for and against Hipparchus's star catalog in the Almagest.\nFor:\nAgainst:\nConclusion: Hipparchus's star catalogue is one of the sources of the Almagest star catalogue but not the only source.\nPrecession of the equinoxes (146\u2013127\u00a0BC).\nHipparchus is generally recognized as discoverer of the precession of the equinoxes in 127\u00a0BC. His two books on precession, \"On the Displacement of the Solstitial and Equinoctial Points\" and \"On the Length of the Year\", are both mentioned in the \"Almagest\" of Claudius Ptolemy. According to Ptolemy, Hipparchus measured the longitude of Spica and Regulus and other bright stars. Comparing his measurements with data from his predecessors, Timocharis and Aristillus, he concluded that Spica had moved 2\u00b0 relative to the autumnal equinox. He also compared the lengths of the tropical year (the time it takes the Sun to return to an equinox) and the sidereal year (the time it takes the Sun to return to a fixed star), and found a slight discrepancy. Hipparchus concluded that the equinoxes were moving (\"precessing\") through the zodiac, and that the rate of precession was not less than 1\u00b0 in a century.\nGeography.\nHipparchus's treatise \"Against the Geography of Eratosthenes\" in three books is not preserved. \nMost of our knowledge of it comes from Strabo, according to whom Hipparchus thoroughly and often unfairly criticized Eratosthenes, mainly for internal contradictions and inaccuracy in determining positions of geographical localities. Hipparchus insists that a geographic map must be based only on astronomical measurements of latitudes and longitudes and triangulation for finding unknown distances. \nIn geographic theory and methods Hipparchus introduced three main innovations.\nHe was the first to use the grade grid, to determine geographic latitude from star observations, and not only from the Sun's altitude, a method known long before him, and to suggest that geographic longitude could be determined by means of simultaneous observations of lunar eclipses in distant places. In the practical part of his work, the so-called \"table of climata\", Hipparchus listed latitudes for several tens of localities. In particular, he improved Eratosthenes's values for the latitudes of Athens, Sicily, and southern extremity of India. In calculating latitudes of climata (latitudes correlated with the length of the longest solstitial day), Hipparchus used an unexpectedly accurate value for the obliquity of the ecliptic, 23\u00b040' (the actual value in the second half of the second century\u00a0BC was approximately 23\u00b043'), whereas all other ancient authors knew only a roughly rounded value 24\u00b0, and even Ptolemy used a less accurate value, 23\u00b051'.\nHipparchus opposed the view generally accepted in the Hellenistic period that the Atlantic and Indian Oceans and the Caspian Sea are parts of a single ocean. At the same time he extends the limits of the oikoumene, i.e. the inhabited part of the land, up to the equator and the Arctic Circle. Hipparchus's ideas found their reflection in the \"Geography\" of Ptolemy. In essence, Ptolemy's work is an extended attempt to realize Hipparchus's vision of what geography ought to be.\nModern speculation.\nHipparchus was in the international news in 2005, when it was again proposed (as in 1898) that the data on the celestial globe of Hipparchus or in his star catalog may have been preserved in the only surviving large ancient celestial globe which depicts the constellations with moderate accuracy, the globe carried by the Farnese Atlas. Evidence suggests that the Farnese globe may show constellations in the Aratean tradition and deviate from the constellations used by Hipparchus.\nA line in Plutarch's \"Table Talk\" states that Hipparchus counted 103,049 compound propositions that can be formed from ten simple propositions. 103,049 is the tenth Schr\u00f6der\u2013Hipparchus number, which counts the number of ways of adding one or more pairs of parentheses around consecutive subsequences of two or more items in any sequence of ten symbols. This has led to speculation that Hipparchus knew about enumerative combinatorics, a field of mathematics that developed independently in modern mathematics.\nHipparchos was suggested in a 2013 paper to have accidentally observed the planet Uranus in 128 BC and catalogued it as a star, over a millennium and a half before its formal discovery in 1781.\nLegacy.\nHipparchus may be depicted opposite Ptolemy in Raphael's 1509\u20131511 painting \"The School of Athens\", although this figure is usually identified as Zoroaster.\nThe formal name for the ESA's Hipparcos Space Astrometry Mission is High Precision Parallax Collecting Satellite, making a backronym, HiPParCoS, that echoes and commemorates the name of Hipparchus.\nThe lunar crater Hipparchus, the Martian crater Hipparchus, and the asteroid 4000 Hipparchus are named after him.\nHe was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 2004.\nJean Baptiste Joseph Delambre, historian of astronomy, mathematical astronomer and director of the Paris Observatory, in his history of astronomy in the 18th century (1821), considered Hipparchus along with Johannes Kepler and James Bradley the greatest astronomers of all time.\nThe \"Astronomers Monument\" at the Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles, California, United States features a relief of Hipparchus as one of six of the greatest astronomers of all time and the only one from Antiquity.\nJohannes Kepler had great respect for Tycho Brahe's methods and the accuracy of his observations, and considered him to be the new Hipparchus, who would provide the foundation for a restoration of the science of astronomy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13601", "revid": "16163452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13601", "title": "Hebrew (disambiguation)", "text": "Hebrew is a language native to Israel.\nHebrew may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13602", "revid": "1319898750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13602", "title": "Huldrych Zwingli", "text": "Protestant Reformation leader in Switzerland, Swiss Reformed Church founder (1484\u20131531)\nHuldrych or Ulrich Zwingli (1 January 1484\u00a0\u2013 11 October 1531) was a Swiss Christian theologian, musician, and leader of the Reformation in Switzerland. Born during a time of emerging Swiss patriotism and increasing criticism of the Swiss mercenary system, he attended the University of Vienna and the University of Basel, a scholarly center of Renaissance humanism. He continued his studies while he served as a pastor in Glarus and later in Einsiedeln, where he was influenced by the writings of Erasmus. During his tenures at Basel and Einsiedeln, Zwingli began to familiarize himself with many criticisms Christian institutions were facing regarding their reform guidance and garnered scripture which aimed to address such criticisms.\nIn 1519, Zwingli became the (people's priest) of the Grossm\u00fcnster in Zurich where he began to preach ideas on reform of the Catholic Church. In his first public controversy in 1522, he attacked the custom of fasting during Lent. In his publications, he noted corruption in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, promoted clerical marriage, and attacked the use of images in places of worship. Among his most notable contributions to the Reformation was his expository preaching, starting in 1519, through the Gospel of Matthew, before eventually using Biblical exegesis to go through the entire New Testament, a radical departure from the Catholic mass. In 1525, he introduced a new communion liturgy to replace the Mass. He also clashed with the Anabaptists, which resulted in their persecution. Historians have debated whether or not he turned Zurich into a theocracy.\nThe Reformation spread to other parts of the Swiss Confederation, but several cantons resisted, preferring to remain Catholic. Zwingli formed an alliance of Reformed cantons which divided the Confederation along religious lines. In 1529, a war was averted at the last moment between the two sides. Meanwhile, Zwingli's ideas came to the attention of Martin Luther and other reformers. They met at the Marburg Colloquy and agreed on many points of doctrine, but they could not reach an accord on the doctrine of the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist.\nIn 1531, Zwingli's alliance applied an unsuccessful food blockade on the Catholic cantons. The cantons responded with an attack at a moment when Zurich was ill-prepared, and Zwingli died on the battlefield. His legacy lives on in the confessions, liturgy, and church orders of the Reformed churches of today.\nHistorical context.\nThe Swiss Confederation in Huldrych Zwingli's time consisted of thirteen states (cantons) as well as affiliated areas and common lordships. Unlike the modern state of Switzerland, which operates under a federal government, each of the thirteen cantons was nearly independent, conducting its own domestic and foreign affairs. Each canton formed its own alliances within and without the Confederation. This relative independence served as the basis for conflict during the time of the Reformation when the various cantons divided between different confessional camps. Military ambitions gained an additional impetus with the competition to acquire new territory and resources, as seen for example in the Old Zurich War of 1440\u20131446.\nThe wider political environment in Europe during the 15th and 16th centuries was also volatile. For centuries the relationship with the Confederation's powerful neighbour, France, determined the foreign policies of the Swiss. Nominally, the Confederation formed a part of the Holy Roman Empire. However, through a succession of wars culminating in the Swabian War in 1499, the Confederation had become \"de facto\" independent. As the two continental powers and minor regional states such as the Duchy of Milan, the Duchy of Savoy, and the Papal States competed and fought against each other, there were far-reaching political, economic, and social consequences for the Confederation. During this time the mercenary pension system became a subject of disagreement. The religious factions of Zwingli's time debated vociferously the merits of sending young Swiss men to fight in foreign wars mainly for the enrichment of the cantonal authorities.\nThese internal and external factors contributed to the rise of a Confederation national consciousness, in which the term \"fatherland\" () began to take on meaning beyond a reference to an individual canton. At the same time, Renaissance humanism, with its universal values and emphasis on scholarship (as exemplified by Erasmus, the \"prince of humanism\"), had taken root in the Confederation. Within this environment, defined by the confluence of Swiss patriotism and humanism, Zwingli was born in 1484.\nLife.\nEarly years (1484\u20131518).\nHuldrych Zwingli was born on 1 January 1484 in Wildhaus, in the Toggenburg valley of Switzerland, to a family of farmers, the third child of eleven. His father, Ulrich, played a leading role in the administration of the community (\"Amtmann\" or chief local magistrate). Zwingli's primary schooling was provided by his uncle, Bartholomew, a cleric in Weesen, where he probably met Katharina von Zimmern. At ten years old, Zwingli was sent to Basel to obtain his secondary education where he learned Latin under Magistrate Gregory B\u00fcnzli. After three years in Basel, he stayed a short time in Bern with the humanist Henry W\u00f6lfflin. The Dominicans in Bern tried to persuade Zwingli to join their order and it is possible that he was received as a novice.\nHowever, his father and uncle disapproved of such a course and he left Bern without completing his Latin studies. He enrolled in the University of Vienna in the winter semester of 1498 but was expelled, according to the university's records. However, it is not certain that Zwingli was indeed expelled, and he re-enrolled in the summer semester of 1500; his activities in 1499 are unknown. Zwingli continued his studies in Vienna until 1502, after which he transferred to the University of Basel where he received the Master of Arts degree (\"Magister\") in 1506. In Basel, one of Zwingli's teachers was Thomas Wyttenbach from Biel, with whom he later corresponded on the doctrine of transubstantiation.\nZwingli was ordained in Constance, the seat of the local diocese, by Bishop Hugo von Hohenlandenberg, and he celebrated his first Mass in his hometown, Wildhaus, on 29 September 1506. As a young priest he had studied little theology, but this was not considered unusual at the time. His first ecclesiastical post was the pastorate of the town of Glarus, where he stayed for ten years. It was in Glarus, whose soldiers were used as mercenaries in Europe, that Zwingli became involved in politics. The Swiss Confederation was embroiled in various campaigns with its neighbours: the French, the Habsburgs, and the Papal States. Zwingli placed himself solidly on the side of the Roman See. In return, Pope Julius II honoured Zwingli by providing him with an annual pension. He took the role of chaplain in several campaigns in Italy, including the Battle of Novara in 1513.\nHowever, the decisive defeat of the Swiss in the Battle of Marignano caused a shift in mood in Glarus in favour of the French rather than the pope. Zwingli, the papal partisan, found himself in a difficult position and he decided to retreat to Einsiedeln in the canton of Schwyz. By this time, he had become convinced that mercenary service was immoral and that Swiss unity was indispensable for any future achievements. Some of his earliest extant writings, such as \"The Ox\" (1510) and \"The Labyrinth\" (1516), attacked the mercenary system using allegory and satire. His countrymen were presented as virtuous people within a French, imperial, and papal triangle.\nZwingli stayed in Einsiedeln for two years during which he withdrew completely from politics in favour of ecclesiastical activities and personal studies. His time as pastor of Glarus and Einsiedeln was characterized by inner growth and development. He perfected his Greek and he took up the study of Hebrew. His library contained over three hundred volumes from which he was able to draw upon classical, patristic, and scholastic works. He exchanged scholarly letters with a circle of Swiss humanists and began to study the writings of Erasmus. He continued his studies while he served as a pastor in Glarus and later in Einsiedeln, where he was influenced by the writings of Erasmus. Zwingli took the opportunity to meet him while Erasmus was in Basel between August 1514 and May 1516. Zwingli's turn to relative pacifism and his focus on preaching can be traced to the influence of Erasmus.\nIn late 1518, the post of the \"Leutpriestertum\" (people's priest) of the Grossm\u00fcnster at Zurich became vacant. The canons of the foundation that administered the Grossm\u00fcnster recognised Zwingli's reputation as a fine preacher and writer. His connection with humanists was a decisive factor as several canons were sympathetic to Erasmian reform. In addition, his opposition to the French and to mercenary service was welcomed by Zurich politicians. On 11 December 1518, the canons elected Zwingli to become the stipendiary priest and on 27 December he moved permanently to Zurich.\nBeginning of Zurich ministry (1519\u20131521).\nOn 1 January 1519, Zwingli gave his first sermon in Zurich. Deviating from the prevalent practice of basing a sermon on the Gospel lesson of a particular Sunday, Zwingli, using Erasmus' New Testament as a guide, began to read through the Gospel of Matthew, giving his interpretation during the sermon, known as the method of \"lectio continua\". He continued to read and interpret the book on subsequent Sundays until he reached the end and then proceeded in the same manner with the Acts of the Apostles, the New Testament epistles, and finally the Old Testament. His motives for doing this are not clear, but in his sermons he used exhortation to achieve moral and ecclesiastical improvement which were goals comparable with Erasmian reform. Sometime after 1520, Zwingli's theological model began to evolve into an idiosyncratic form that was neither Erasmian nor Lutheran. Scholars do not agree on the process of how he developed his own unique model. One view is that Zwingli was trained as an Erasmian humanist and Luther played a decisive role in changing his theology.\nAnother view is that Zwingli did not pay much attention to Luther's theology and in fact he considered it as part of the humanist reform movement. A third view is that Zwingli was not a complete follower of Erasmus, but had diverged from him as early as 1516 and that he independently developed his theology.\nZwingli's theological stance was gradually revealed through his sermons. He attacked moral corruption and in the process he named individuals who were the targets of his denunciations. Monks were accused of indolence and high living. In 1519, Zwingli specifically rejected the veneration of saints and called for the need to distinguish between their true and fictional accounts. He cast doubts on hellfire, asserted that unbaptised children were not damned, and questioned the power of excommunication. His attack on the claim that tithing was a divine institution, however, had the greatest theological and social impact. This contradicted the immediate economic interests of the foundation. One of the elderly canons who had supported Zwingli's election, Konrad Hofmann, complained about his sermons in a letter. Some canons supported Hofmann, but the opposition never grew very large. Zwingli insisted that he was not an innovator and that the sole basis of his teachings was Scripture.\nWithin the diocese of Constance, Bernhardin Sanson was offering a special indulgence for contributors to the building of St Peter's in Rome. When Sanson arrived at the gates of Zurich at the end of January 1519, parishioners prompted Zwingli with questions. He responded with displeasure that the people were not being properly informed about the conditions of the indulgence and were being induced to part with their money on false pretences. This was over a year after Martin Luther published his Ninety-five theses (31 October 1517). The council of Zurich refused Sanson entry into the city. As the authorities in Rome were anxious to contain the fire started by Luther, the Bishop of Constance denied any support of Sanson and he was recalled.\nIn August 1519, Zurich was struck by an outbreak of the plague during which at least one in four persons died. All of those who could afford it left the city, but Zwingli remained and continued his pastoral duties. In September, he caught the disease and nearly died. He described his preparation for death in a poem, Zwingli's \"Pestlied\", consisting of three parts: the onset of the illness, the closeness to death, and the joy of recovery. The final verses of the first part read:\nIn the years following his recovery, Zwingli's opponents remained in the minority. When a vacancy occurred among the canons of the Grossm\u00fcnster, Zwingli was elected to fulfill that vacancy on 29 April 1521. In becoming a canon, he became a full citizen of Zurich. He also retained his post as the people's priest of the Grossm\u00fcnster.\nFirst rifts (1522\u20131524).\nThe first public controversy regarding Zwingli's preaching broke out during the season of Lent in 1522. On the first fasting Sunday, 9 March, Zwingli and about a dozen other participants consciously transgressed the fasting rule by cutting and distributing two smoked sausages (the \"Wurstessen\" in Christoph Froschauer's workshop). Zwingli defended this act in a sermon which was published on 16 April, under the title \"Von Erkiesen und Freiheit der Speisen\" (Regarding the Choice and Freedom of Foods). He noted that no general valid rule on food can be derived from the Bible and that to transgress such a rule is not a sin. The event, which came to be referred to as the Affair of the Sausages, is considered to be the start of the Reformation in Switzerland.\nEven before the publication of this treatise, the diocese of Constance reacted by sending a delegation to Zurich. The city council condemned the fasting violation, but assumed responsibility over ecclesiastical matters and requested the religious authorities clarify the issue. The bishop responded on 24 May by admonishing the Grossm\u00fcnster and city council and repeating the traditional position.\nFollowing this event, Zwingli and other humanist friends petitioned the bishop on 2 July to abolish the requirement of celibacy on the clergy. Two weeks later the petition was reprinted for the public in German as \"Eine freundliche Bitte und Ermahnung an die Eidgenossen\" (A Friendly Petition and Admonition to the Confederates). The issue was not just an abstract problem for Zwingli, as he had secretly married a widow, Anna Reinhart, earlier in the year. Their cohabitation was well-known and their public wedding took place on 2 April 1524, three months before the birth of their first child. They would have four children: Regula, William, Huldrych, and Anna. As the petition was addressed to the secular authorities, the bishop responded at the same level by notifying the Zurich government to maintain the ecclesiastical order. Other Swiss clergymen joined in Zwingli's cause which encouraged him to make his first major statement of faith, \"Apologeticus Archeteles\" (The First and Last Word). He defended himself against charges of inciting unrest and heresy. He denied the ecclesiastical hierarchy any right to judge on matters of church order because of its corrupted state.\nZurich disputations (1523).\nThe events of 1522 brought no clarification on the issues. Not only did the unrest between Zurich and the bishop continue, tensions were growing among Zurich's Confederation partners in the Swiss Diet. On 22 December, the Diet recommended that its members prohibit the new teachings, a strong indictment directed at Zurich. The city council felt obliged to take the initiative and find its own solution.\nFirst Disputation.\nOn 3 January 1523, the Zurich city council invited the clergy of the city and outlying region to a meeting to allow the factions to present their opinions. The bishop was invited to attend or to send a representative. The council would render a decision on who would be allowed to continue to proclaim their views. This meeting, the first Zurich disputation, took place on 29 January 1523.\nThe meeting attracted a large crowd of approximately six hundred participants. The bishop sent a delegation led by his vicar general, Johannes Fabri. Zwingli summarised his position in the \"Schlussreden\" (Concluding Statements or the Sixty-seven Articles). Fabri, who had not envisaged an academic disputation in the manner Zwingli had prepared for, was forbidden to discuss high theology before laymen, and simply insisted on the necessity of the ecclesiastical authority. The decision of the council was that Zwingli would be allowed to continue his preaching and that all other preachers should teach only in accordance with Scripture.\nSecond Disputation.\nIn September 1523, Leo Jud, Zwingli's closest friend and colleague and pastor of St Peterskirche, publicly called for the removal of statues of saints and other icons. This led to demonstrations and iconoclastic activities. The city council decided to work out the matter of images in a second disputation. The essence of the Mass and its sacrificial character was also included as a subject of discussion. Supporters of the Mass claimed that the Eucharist was a true sacrifice, while Zwingli claimed that it was a commemorative meal. As in the first disputation, an invitation was sent out to the Zurich clergy and the bishop of Constance. This time, however, the lay people of Zurich, the dioceses of Chur and Basel, the University of Basel, and the twelve members of the Confederation were also invited. About nine hundred persons attended this meeting, but neither the bishop nor the Confederation sent representatives. The disputation started on 26 October 1523 and lasted two days.\nZwingli again took the lead in the disputation. His opponent was the aforementioned canon, Konrad Hofmann, who had initially supported Zwingli's election. Also taking part was a group of young men demanding a much faster pace of reformation, who among other things pleaded for replacing infant baptism with adult baptism. This group was led by Conrad Grebel, one of the initiators of the Anabaptist movement. During the first three days of dispute, although the controversy of images and the mass were discussed, the arguments led to the question of whether the city council or the ecclesiastical government had the authority to decide on these issues.\nAt this point, Konrad Schmid, a priest from Aargau and follower of Zwingli, made a pragmatic suggestion. As images were not yet considered to be valueless by everyone, he suggested that pastors preach on this subject under threat of punishment. He believed the opinions of the people would gradually change and the voluntary removal of images would follow. Hence, Schmid rejected the radicals and their iconoclasm, but supported Zwingli's position. In November the council passed ordinances in support of Schmid's motion. Zwingli wrote a booklet on the evangelical duties of a minister, \"Kurze, christliche Einleitung\" (Short Christian Introduction), and the council sent it out to the clergy and the members of the Confederation.\nReformation progresses in Zurich (1524\u20131525).\nHuldrych Zwingli was a major figure in the Swiss Reformation, advocating for the authority of scripture and the rejection of religious practices not supported by the Bible. His preaching and teachings helped spread Reformation ideas beyond Switzerland and influenced the development of Protestantism throughout Europe.\nIn December 1523, the council set a deadline of Pentecost in 1524 for a solution to the elimination of the Mass and images. Zwingli gave a formal opinion in \"Vorschlag wegen der Bilder und der Messe\" (Proposal Concerning Images and the Mass). He did not urge an immediate, general abolition. The council decided on the orderly removal of images within Zurich, but rural congregations were granted the right to remove them based on majority vote. The decision on the Mass was postponed.\nEvidence of the effect of the Reformation was seen in early 1524. Candlemas was not celebrated, processions of robed clergy ceased, worshippers did not go with palms or relics on Palm Sunday to the Lindenhof, and triptychs remained covered and closed after Lent. Opposition to the changes came from Konrad Hofmann and his followers, but the council decided in favour of keeping the government mandates. When Hofmann left the city, opposition from pastors hostile to the Reformation broke down. The bishop of Constance tried to intervene in defending the Mass and the veneration of images. Zwingli wrote an official response for the council and the result was the severance of all ties between the city and the diocese.\nAlthough the council had hesitated in abolishing the Mass, the decrease in the exercise of traditional piety allowed pastors to be unofficially released from the requirement of celebrating Mass. As individual pastors altered their practices as each saw fit, Zwingli was prompted to address this disorganised situation by designing a communion liturgy in the German language. This was published in \"Aktion oder Brauch des Nachtmahls\" (Act or Custom of the Supper). Shortly before Easter, Zwingli and his closest associates requested the council to cancel the Mass and to introduce the new public order of worship.\nOn Maundy Thursday, 13 April 1525, Zwingli celebrated communion under his new liturgy. Wooden cups and plates were used to avoid any outward displays of formality. The congregation sat at set tables to emphasise the meal aspect of the sacrament. The sermon was the focal point of the service and there was no organ music or singing. The importance of the sermon in the worship service was underlined by Zwingli's proposal to limit the celebration of communion to four times a year.\nFor some time Zwingli had accused mendicant orders of hypocrisy and demanded their abolition in order to support the truly poor. He suggested the monasteries be changed into hospitals and welfare institutions and incorporate their wealth into a welfare fund. This was done by reorganising the foundations of the Grossm\u00fcnster and Fraum\u00fcnster and pensioning off remaining nuns and monks. The council secularised the church properties (Fraum\u00fcnster handed over to the city of Zurich by Zwingli's acquaintance Katharina von Zimmern in 1524) and established new welfare programs for the poor.\nZwingli requested permission to establish a Latin school, the \"Prophezei\" (Prophecy) or \"Carolinum\", at the Grossm\u00fcnster. The council agreed and it was officially opened on 19 June 1525 with Zwingli and Jud as teachers. It served to retrain and re-educate the clergy. The Zurich Bible translation, traditionally attributed to Zwingli and printed by Christoph Froschauer, bears the mark of teamwork from the Prophecy school. Scholars have not yet attempted to clarify Zwingli's share of the work based on external and stylistic evidence.\nConflict with the Anabaptists (1525\u20131527).\nShortly after the second Zurich disputation, many in the radical wing of the Reformation became convinced that Zwingli was making too many concessions to the Zurich council. They rejected the role of civil government and demanded the immediate establishment of a congregation of the faithful. Conrad Grebel, the leader of the radicals and the emerging Anabaptist movement, spoke disparagingly of Zwingli in private. The Anabaptists in Zurich believed Zwingli's conception of the Reformed faith and the church conflicted their teachings and attempted to claim legislation of Zwingli's early teachings. On 15 August 1524, the council insisted on the obligation to baptise all newborn infants. Zwingli secretly conferred with Grebel's group and late in 1524, the council called for official discussions. When talks were broken off, Zwingli published \"Wer Ursache gebe zu Aufruhr\" (Whoever Causes Unrest) clarifying the opposing points of view. On 17 January 1525, a public debate was held, and the council decided in favour of Zwingli. Anyone refusing to have their children baptised was required to leave Zurich. The radicals ignored these measures and on 21 January, they met at the house of the mother of another radical leader, Felix Manz. Grebel and a third leader, George Blaurock, performed the first recorded Anabaptist adult baptisms.\nOn 2 February, the council repeated the requirement on the baptism of all babies and some who failed to comply were arrested and fined, Manz and Blaurock among them. Zwingli and Jud interviewed them and more debates were held before the Zurich council. Meanwhile, the new teachings continued to spread to other parts of the Confederation as well as a number of Swabian towns. On 6\u20138 November, the last debate on the subject of baptism took place in the Grossm\u00fcnster. Grebel, Manz, and Blaurock defended their cause before Zwingli, Jud, and other reformers. There was no serious exchange of views as each side would not move from their positions and the debates degenerated into an uproar, each side shouting abuse at the other.\nThe Zurich council decided that no compromise was possible. On 7 March 1526, it released the notorious mandate that no one shall rebaptise another under the penalty of death. Although Zwingli, technically, had nothing to do with the mandate, there is no indication that he disapproved. Felix Manz, who had sworn to leave Zurich and not to baptise any more, had deliberately returned and continued the practice. After he was arrested and tried, he was executed on 5 January 1527 by being drowned in the Limmat. He was the first Anabaptist martyr; three more were to follow, after which all others either fled or were expelled from Zurich.\nReformation in the Confederation (1526\u20131528).\nOn 8 April 1524, five cantons\u2014Lucerne, Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden, and Zug\u2014formed an alliance, \"die f\u00fcnf Orte\" (the Five States), to defend themselves from Zwingli's Reformation. They contacted the opponents of Martin Luther including John Eck, who had debated Luther in the Leipzig Disputation of 1519. Eck offered to dispute Zwingli and he accepted. However, they could not agree on the selection of the judging authority, the location of the debate, and the use of the Swiss Diet as a court. Because of the disagreements, Zwingli decided to boycott the disputation. On 19 May 1526, all the cantons sent delegates to Baden. Although Zurich's representatives were present, they did not participate in the sessions. Eck led the Catholic party while the reformers were represented by Johannes Oecolampadius of Basel, a theologian from W\u00fcrttemberg who had carried on an extensive and friendly correspondence with Zwingli. While the debate proceeded, Zwingli was kept informed of the proceedings and printed pamphlets giving his opinions. It was of little use as the Diet decided against Zwingli. He was to be banned and his writings were no longer to be distributed. Of the thirteen Confederation members, Glarus, Solothurn, Fribourg, and Appenzell as well as the Five States voted against Zwingli. Bern, Basel, Schaffhausen, and Zurich supported him.\nThe Baden disputation exposed a deep rift in the Confederation on matters of religion. The Reformation was now emerging in other states. The city of St Gallen, an affiliated state to the Confederation, was led by a reformed mayor, Joachim Vadian, and the city abolished the mass in 1527, just two years after Zurich. In Basel, although Zwingli had a close relationship with Oecolampadius, the government did not officially sanction any reformatory changes until 1 April 1529 when the mass was prohibited. Schaffhausen, which had closely followed Zurich's example, formally adopted the Reformation in September 1529.\nIn the case of Bern, Berchtold Haller, the priest at St Vincent M\u00fcnster, and Niklaus Manuel, the poet, painter, and politician, had campaigned for the reformed cause. But it was only after another disputation that Bern counted itself as a canton of the Reformation. Three hundred and fifty persons participated,144 including pastors from Bern and other cantons as well as theologians from outside the Confederation such as Martin Bucer and Wolfgang Capito from Strasbourg, Ambrosius Blarer from Constance, and Andreas Althamer from Nuremberg. Eck and Fabri refused to attend and the Catholic cantons did not send representatives. The meeting started on 6 January 1528 and lasted nearly three weeks. Zwingli assumed the main burden of defending the Reformation and he preached twice in the M\u00fcnster. On 7 February 1528 the council decreed that the Reformation be established in Bern.\nFirst Kappel War (1529).\nEven before the Bern Disputation, Zwingli was canvassing for an alliance of reformed cities. Once Bern officially accepted the Reformation, a new alliance, \"das Christliche Burgrecht\" (the Christian Civic Union) was created. The first meetings were held in Bern between representatives of Bern, Constance, and Zurich on 5\u20136 January 1528. Other cities, including Basel, Biel, M\u00fclhausen, Schaffhausen, and St Gallen, eventually joined the alliance. The Five (Catholic) States felt encircled and isolated, so they searched for outside allies. After two months of negotiations, the Five States formed \"die Christliche Vereinigung\" (the Christian Alliance) with Ferdinand of Austria on 22 April 1529.\nSoon after the Austrian treaty was signed, a reformed preacher, Jacob Kaiser, was captured in Uznach and executed in Schwyz. This triggered a strong reaction from Zwingli; he drafted \"Ratschlag \u00fcber den Krieg\" (Advice About the War) for the government. He outlined justifications for an attack on the Catholic states and other measures to be taken. Before Zurich could implement his plans, a delegation from Bern that included Niklaus Manuel arrived in Zurich. The delegation called on Zurich to settle the matter peacefully. Manuel added that an attack would expose Bern to further dangers as Catholic Valais and the Duchy of Savoy bordered its southern flank. He then noted, \"You cannot really bring faith by means of spears and halberds.\" Zurich, however, decided that it would act alone, knowing that Bern would be obliged to acquiesce. War was declared on 8 June 1529. Zurich was able to raise an army of 30,000 men. The Five States were abandoned by Austria and could raise only 9,000 men. The two forces met near Kappel, but war was averted due to the intervention of Hans Aebli, a relative of Zwingli, who pleaded for an armistice.\nZwingli was obliged to state the terms of the armistice. He demanded the dissolution of the Christian Alliance; unhindered preaching by reformers in the Catholic states; prohibition of the pension system; payment of war reparations; and compensation to the children of Jacob Kaiser. Manuel was involved in the negotiations. Bern was not prepared to insist on the unhindered preaching or the prohibition of the pension system. Zurich and Bern could not agree and the Five (Catholic) States pledged only to dissolve their alliance with Austria. This was a bitter disappointment for Zwingli and it marked his decline in political influence. The first Land Peace of Kappel, \"der erste Landfriede\", ended the war on 24 June.\nMarburg Colloquy (1529).\nWhile Zwingli carried on the political work of the Swiss Reformation, he developed his theological views with his colleagues. The famous disagreement between Luther and Zwingli on the interpretation of the eucharist originated when Andreas Karlstadt, Luther's former colleague from Wittenberg, published three pamphlets on the Lord's Supper in which Karlstadt rejected the idea of a real presence in the elements. These pamphlets, published in Basel in 1524, received the approval of Oecolampadius and Zwingli. Luther rejected Karlstadt's arguments and considered Zwingli primarily to be a partisan of Karlstadt. Zwingli began to express his thoughts on the eucharist in several publications including \"de Eucharistia\" (On the Eucharist). Understanding that Christ had ascended to heaven and was sitting at the Father's right hand, Zwingli criticized the idea that Christ's humanity could be in two places at once. Unlike his divinity, Christ's human body was not omnipresent and so could not be in heaven and at the same time be present in the elements.\nBy spring 1527, Luther reacted strongly to Zwingli's views in the treatise \"Dass Diese Worte Christi \"Das ist mein Leib etc.\" noch fest stehen wider die Schwarmgeister\" (That These Words of Christ \"This is My Body etc.\" Still Stand Firm Against the Fanatics). The controversy continued until 1528 when efforts to build bridges between the Lutheran and the Zwinglian views began. Martin Bucer tried to mediate while Philip of Hesse, who wanted to form a political coalition of all Protestant forces, invited the two parties to Marburg to discuss their differences. This event became known as the Marburg Colloquy.\nZwingli accepted Philip's invitation fully believing that he would be able to convince Luther. In contrast, Luther did not expect anything to come out of the meeting and had to be urged by Philip to attend. Zwingli, accompanied by Oecolampadius, arrived on 28 September 1529, with Luther and Philipp Melanchthon arriving shortly thereafter. Other theologians also participated including Martin Bucer, Andreas Osiander, Johannes Brenz, and Justus Jonas.\nThe debates were held from 1\u20134 October and the results were published in the fifteen \"Marburg Articles\". The participants were able to agree on fourteen of the articles, but the fifteenth article established the differences in their views on the presence of Christ in the eucharist. Professor George summarized the incompatible views, \"On this issue, they parted without having reached an agreement. Both Luther and Zwingli agreed that the bread in the Supper was a sign. For Luther, however, that which the bread signified, namely the body of Christ, was present \"in, with, and under\" the sign itself. For Zwingli, though, sign and thing signified were separated by a distance\u2014the width between heaven and earth.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Luther claimed that the body of Christ was not eaten in a gross, material way but rather in some mysterious way, which is beyond human understanding. Yet, Zwingli replied, if the words were taken in their literal sense, the body had to be eaten in the most grossly material way. \"For this is the meaning they carry: this bread is that body of mine which is given for you. It was given for us in grossly material form, subject to wounds, blows and death. As such, therefore, it must be the material of the supper.\" Indeed, to press the literal meaning of the text even farther, it follows that Christ would have again to suffer pain, as his body was broken again\u2014this time by the teeth of communicants. Even more absurdly, Christ's body would have to be swallowed, digested, even eliminated through the bowels! Such thoughts were repulsive to Zwingli. They smacked of cannibalism on the one hand and of the pagan mystery religions on the other. The main issue for Zwingli, however, was not the irrationality or exegetical fallacy of Luther's views. It was rather that Luther put \"the chief point of salvation in physically eating the body of Christ,\" for he connected it with the forgiveness of sins. The same motive that had moved Zwingli so strongly to oppose images, the invocation of saints, and baptismal regeneration was present also in the struggle over the Supper: the fear of idolatry. Salvation was by Christ alone, through faith alone, not through faith and bread. The object of faith was that which is not seen (Heb 11:1) and which therefore cannot be eaten except, again, in a nonliteral, figurative sense. \"Credere est edere,\" said Zwingli: \"To believe is to eat.\" To eat the body and to drink the blood of Christ in the Supper, then, simply meant to have the body and blood of Christ present in the mind.\"\nThe failure to find agreement resulted in strong emotions on both sides. \"When the two sides departed, Zwingli cried out in tears, \"There are no people on earth with whom I would rather be at one than the [Lutheran] Wittenbergers.\"\"\nDue to these differences, Luther initially refused to acknowledge Zwingli and his followers as Christians.\nPolitics, confessions, the Kappel Wars and death (1529\u20131531).\nWith the failure of the Marburg Colloquy and the split of the Confederation, Zwingli set his goal on an alliance with Philip of Hesse. He kept up a lively correspondence with Philip. Bern refused to participate, but after a long process, Zurich, Basel, and Strasbourg signed a mutual defence treaty with Philip in November 1530. Zwingli also personally negotiated with France's diplomatic representative, but the two sides were too far apart. France wanted to maintain good relations with the Five States. Approaches to Venice and Milan also failed.\nAs Zwingli was working on establishing these political alliances, Charles V, the Holy Roman Emperor, invited Protestants to the Augsburg Diet to present their views so that he could make a verdict on the issue of faith. The Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession. Under the leadership of Martin Bucer, the cities of Strasbourg, Constance, Memmingen, and Lindau produced the Tetrapolitan Confession. This document attempted to take a middle position between the Lutherans and Zwinglians.\nIt was too late for the \"Burgrecht\" cities to produce a confession of their own. Zwingli then produced his own private confession, \"Fidei ratio\" (Account of Faith) in which he explained his faith in twelve articles conforming to the articles of the Apostles' Creed. The tone was strongly anti-Catholic as well as anti-Lutheran. The Lutherans did not react officially, but criticised it privately. Zwingli's and Luther's old opponent, Johann Eck, counter-attacked with a publication, \"Refutation of the Articles Zwingli Submitted to the Emperor\".\nWhen Philip of Hesse formed the Schmalkaldic League at the end of 1530, the four cities of the Tetrapolitan Confession joined on the basis of a Lutheran interpretation of that confession. Given the flexibility of the league's entrance requirements, Zurich, Basel, and Bern also considered joining. However, Zwingli could not reconcile the Tetrapolitan Confession with his own beliefs and wrote a harsh refusal to Bucer and Capito. This offended Philip to the point where relations with the League were severed. The \"Burgrecht\" cities now had no external allies to help deal with internal Confederation religious conflicts.\nThe peace treaty of the First Kappel War did not define the right of unhindered preaching in the Catholic states. Zwingli interpreted this to mean that preaching should be permitted, but the Five States suppressed any attempts to reform. The \"Burgrecht\" cities considered different means of applying pressure to the Five States. Basel and Schaffhausen preferred quiet diplomacy while Zurich wanted armed conflict. Zwingli and Jud unequivocally advocated an attack on the Five States. Bern took a middle position which eventually prevailed. In May 1531, Zurich reluctantly agreed to impose a food blockade. It failed to have any effect and in October, Bern decided to withdraw the blockade. Zurich urged its continuation and the \"Burgrecht\" cities began to quarrel among themselves.\nOn 9 October 1531, in a surprise move, the Five States declared war on Zurich. Zurich's mobilisation was slow due to internal squabbling and, on 11 October, 3500 poorly deployed men encountered a Five States force nearly double their size near Kappel. Many pastors, including Zwingli, were among the soldiers. The battle lasted less than one hour and Zwingli was among the 500 casualties in the Zurich army.\nZwingli had considered himself first and foremost a soldier of Christ; second a defender of his country, the Confederation; and third a leader of his city, Zurich, where he had lived for the previous twelve years. He died at the age of 47.\nIn Tabletalk, Luther is recorded saying: \"They say that Zwingli recently died thus; if his error had prevailed, we would have perished, and our church with us. It was a judgment of God. That was always a proud people. The others, the papists, will probably also be dealt with by our Lord God.\"\nErasmus wrote, \"We are freed from great fear by the death of the two preachers, Zwingli and Oecolampadius, whose fate has wrought an incredible change in the mind of many. This is the wonderful hand of God on high.\" Oecolampadius had died on 24 November. Erasmus also wrote, \"If Bellona had favoured them, it would have been all over with us.\"\nTheology.\nAccording to Zwingli, the cornerstone of theology is the Bible. Zwingli appealed to scripture constantly in his writings. He placed its authority above other sources such as the ecumenical councils or the Church Fathers, although he did not hesitate to use other sources to support his arguments. The principles that guide Zwingli's interpretations are derived from his rationalist humanist education and his Reformed understanding of the Bible. He rejected literalist interpretations of a passage, such as those of the Anabaptists, and used synecdoche and analogies, methods he describes in \"A Friendly Exegesis\" (1527). Two analogies that he used quite effectively were between Baptism and circumcision and between the Eucharist and Passover. He also paid attention to the immediate context and attempted to understand the purpose behind it, comparing passages of scripture with each other.\nZwingli rejected the word \"sacrament\" in the popular usage of his time. For ordinary people, the word meant some kind of holy action of which there is inherent power to free the conscience from sin. For Zwingli, a sacrament was an initiatory ceremony or a pledge, pointing out that the word was derived from \"sacramentum\" meaning an oath. (However, the word is also translated \"mystery\".) In his early writings on baptism, he noted that baptism was an example of such a pledge. He challenged Catholics by accusing them of superstition when they ascribed the water of baptism a certain power to wash away sin. Later, in his conflict with the Anabaptists, he defended the practice of infant baptism, noting that there is no law forbidding the practice. He argued that baptism was a sign of a covenant with God, thereby replacing circumcision in the Old Testament.\nZwingli approached the Eucharist in a similar manner to baptism. During the first Zurich disputation in 1523, he denied that an actual sacrifice occurred during the Mass, arguing that Christ made the sacrifice only once and for all eternity. Hence, the Eucharist was \"a memorial of the sacrifice\". Following this argument, he further developed his view, coming to the conclusion of the \"signifies\" interpretation for the words of the institution. He used various passages of scripture to argue against transubstantiation as well as Luther's views, the key text being John 6:63, \"It is the Spirit who gives life, the flesh is of no avail\". Zwingli's approach and interpretation of scripture to understand the meaning of the eucharist was one reason he could not reach a consensus with Luther.\nThe impact of Luther on Zwingli's theological development has long been a source of interest and discussion among Lutheran scholars, who seek to firmly establish Luther as the first Reformer. Zwingli himself asserted vigorously his independence of Luther and the most recent studies have lent credibility to this claim. Zwingli appears to have read Luther's books in search of confirmation from Luther for his own views. He agreed with the stand Luther took against the pope. Like Luther, Zwingli was also a student and admirer of Augustine.\nIn contrast to Luther, Zwingli adhered to official church theology on Judaism. However, as most Protestants and Catholics did at the time, he believed that the crucifixion of Christ led to the dispersal of Jews from Jerusalem. In contrast, Zwingli's creed was convinced that the papacy and its military power derived from Jewish influences. Together with John Calvin, he protracted Jewish influences in Christian churches and advocated the \"Principle of Sola Scriptura\", in which the Old Testament and its subjects would remain a constant influence in future churches. He thereby opposed the anti-Semitic tendencies of Luther, and placed himself closer to Catholicism during the Reformation.\nMusic.\nZwingli enjoyed music and could play several instruments, including the violin, harp, flute, dulcimer and hunting horn. He would sometimes amuse the children of his congregation on his lute and was so well known for his playing that his enemies mocked him as \"the evangelical lute-player and fifer.\" Three of Zwingli's \"Lieder\" or hymns have been preserved: the \"Pestlied\" mentioned above, an adaptation of Psalm 65 (c.\u20091525), and the \"Kappeler Lied\", which is believed to have been composed during the campaign of the first war of Kappel (1529). These songs were not meant to be sung during worship services and are not identified as hymns of the Reformation, though they were published in some 16th-century hymnals.\nZwingli criticized the practice of priestly chanting and monastic choirs. The criticism dates from 1523 when he attacked certain worship practices. His arguments are detailed in the Conclusions of 1525, in which, Conclusions 44, 45 and 46 are concerned with musical practices under the rubric of \"prayer\". He associated music with images and vestments, all of which he felt diverted people's attention from true spiritual worship. It is not known what he thought of the musical practices in early Lutheran churches. Zwingli, however, eliminated instrumental music from worship in the church, stating that God had not commanded it in worship. The organist of the People's Church in Zurich is recorded as weeping upon seeing the great organ broken up. Although Zwingli did not express an opinion on congregational singing, he made no effort to encourage it. Nevertheless, scholars have found that Zwingli was supportive of a role for music in the church. Gottfried W. Locher writes, \"The old assertion 'Zwingli was against church singing' holds good no longer\u00a0... Zwingli's polemic is concerned exclusively with the medieval Latin choral and priestly chanting and not with the hymns of evangelical congregations or choirs\". Locher goes on to say that \"Zwingli freely allowed vernacular psalm or choral singing. In addition, he even seems to have striven for lively, antiphonal, unison recitative\". Locher then summarizes his comments on Zwingli's view of church music as follows: \"The chief thought in his conception of worship was always 'conscious attendance and understanding'\u2014'devotion', yet with the lively participation of all concerned\".\nLegacy.\nZwingli was a humanist and a scholar with many devoted friends and disciples. He communicated as easily with the ordinary people of his congregation as with rulers such as Philip of Hesse. His reputation as a stern, stolid reformer is counterbalanced by the fact that he had an excellent sense of humour and used satiric fables, spoofing, and puns in his writings. Zwingli remains as a complex figure of the early Reformation's history, with many drawing comparisons between him and other characters like Martin Luther. He was more conscious of social obligations than was Luther, and he genuinely believed that the masses would accept a government guided by God's word. He tirelessly promoted assistance to the poor, who he believed should be cared for by a truly Christian community.\nIn December 1531 the Zurich council selected Heinrich Bullinger as Zwingli's successor. Bullinger immediately removed any doubts about Zwingli's orthodoxy and defended him as a prophet and a martyr. During Bullinger's ascendancy, the confessional divisions of the Swiss Confederation stabilised. Bullinger rallied the reformed cities and cantons and helped them to recover from the defeat at Kappel. Zwingli had instituted fundamental reforms; Bullinger consolidated and refined them.\nScholars have found it difficult to assess Zwingli's impact on history, for several reasons. There is no consensus on the definition of \"Zwinglianism\"; by any definition, Zwinglianism evolved under his successor, Heinrich Bullinger; and research into Zwingli's influence on Bullinger and John Calvin remains rudimentary. Bullinger adopted most of Zwingli's points of doctrine. Like Zwingli, he summarised his theology several times, the best-known example being the Second Helvetic Confession of 1566. Meanwhile, Calvin had taken over the Reformation in Geneva. Calvin differed with Zwingli on the eucharist and criticised him for regarding it as simply a metaphorical event. In 1549, Bullinger and Calvin succeeded in overcoming the differences in doctrine and produced the \"Consensus Tigurinus\" (Zurich Consensus). They declared that the eucharist was not just symbolic of the meal, but they also rejected the Lutheran position that the body and blood of Christ is in union with the elements. It was John Calvin's doctrine of a real spiritual presence of Christ in the Eucharist that became the doctrine of the Reformed Churches, while Zwingli's view was rejected by the Reformed Churches (though it was adopted by other traditions, such as the Plymouth Brethren). With this rapprochement, Calvin established his role in the Swiss Reformed Churches and eventually in the wider world.\nThe Swiss Reformed churches count Zwingli as their founder, as does the Reformed Church in the United States (both its present liberal and conservative descendant denominations, with the former taking a historical-critical interpretation of Zwinglian theology and using it as a basis for ecumenism, and the latter interpreting his teachings as binding upon consciences and, in effect, as inerrant as Scripture itself), according to 19th-century RCUS historian J.I. Good. Scholars speculate as to why Zwinglianism has not diffused more widely, even though Zwingli's theology is considered the first expression of Reformed theology. Although his name is not widely recognised, Zwingli's legacy lives on in the basic confessions of the Reformed churches of today. He is often called, after Martin Luther and John Calvin, the \"Third Man of the Reformation\".\nIn 2019 the Swiss director Stefan Haupt released a Swiss-German film on the career of the reformer: \"Zwingli\". It was filmed in Swiss German with French and English subtitles available.\n2019 began the 500th anniversary of the Swiss Reformation with a conference at John Calvin University, and renewed interest in revisiting the life and impact of Zwingli. Examples include the film \"Zwingli\", Bruce Gordon's book, \"Zwingli: God's Armed Prophet\" and an article by Thomas Quinn Marabello, \"The 500th Anniversary of the Swiss Reformation: How Zwingli changed and continues to impact Switzerland today\".\nList of works.\nZwingli's collected works are expected to fill 21 volumes. A collection of selected works was published in 1995 by the \"Zwingliverein\" in collaboration with the \"Theologischer Verlag Z\u00fcrich\". This four-volume collection contains the following works:\nThe complete 21-volume edition is being undertaken by the \"Zwingliverein\" in collaboration with the \"Institut f\u00fcr schweizerische Reformationsgeschichte\", and is projected to be organised as follows:\nVols. XIII and XIV have been published, vols. XV and XVI are under preparation. Vols. XVII to XXI are planned to cover the New Testament.\nOlder German / Latin editions available online include:\nSee also the following English translations of selected works by Zwingli:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13603", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13603", "title": "Homeschooling", "text": "Education of children outside of a school\nHomeschooling or home schooling (American English), also known as home education or elective home education (British English), is the education of school-aged children at home or a variety of places other than a school. Usually conducted by a parent, tutor, or online teacher, many homeschool families use less formal, more personalized and individualized methods of learning that are not always found in schools. The actual practice of homeschooling varies considerably. The spectrum ranges from highly structured forms based on traditional school lessons to more open, free forms such as unschooling, which is a lesson- and curriculum-free implementation of homeschooling. Some families who initially attended a school go through a deschooling process to decouple from school habits and prepare for homeschooling. While \"homeschooling\" is the term commonly used in North America, \"home education\" is primarily used in Europe and many Commonwealth countries. Homeschooling should not be confused with distance education, which generally refers to the arrangement where the student is educated by and conforms to the requirements of an online school rather than being educated independently and unrestrictedly by their parents or by themselves. \nBefore the introduction of compulsory school attendance laws, most childhood education was done by families and local communities. By the early 19th century, attending school became the most common means of education in the developed world. In the mid to late 20th century, more people began questioning the practice of school learning, which again led to an increase in the number of homeschoolers, especially in the Americas and some European countries. Homeschooling has become a common and legal alternative to public and private schools in many countries, largely due to the Internet, allowing quick access to information. The regulation and legality of homeschooling varies by jurisdiction. Homeschooling has evolved from a niche practice to a mainstream educational service in many countries; there has been a significant increase in homeschooling.\nThere are many reasons for homeschooling, ranging from personal interests to dissatisfaction with the school system. Homeschooling is also an option for families living in remote rural areas, those temporarily abroad, those who travel frequently and therefore face the physical impossibility or difficulty of getting their children into school, and those who want to spend more time with their children. Health reasons and special needs can also explain why children cannot attend an outside-the-home school regularly and are at least partially homeschooled.\nCritics of homeschooling argue that children may lack adequate socialization and, therefore, incompletely develop healthy social skills. Some are also concerned that parents may be unqualified to guide and advise their children or that abusive parents may use homeschooling to isolate their children. Critics also say that a child might not encounter people of other cultures, worldviews, and socioeconomic groups if not enrolled in a school. Therefore, these critics believe homeschooling cannot guarantee a comprehensive, neutral education without prescribed educational standards. Studies on homeschooled students typically rely on convenience sampling, which may disproportionately sample the highest-achieving homeschoolers. Researchers have identified a need for more representative samples in studying homeschooling.\nTerminology.\nWhile \"homeschooling\" is the term commonly used in the United States and other nations in North America, \"home education\" is primarily used in the United Kingdom, elsewhere in Europe and many Commonwealth countries.\nHistory.\nEducation began in ancient civilizations like Egypt, India, and China, where it was primarily reserved for elites and focused on religion, governance, and moral instruction. In classical Greece and Rome, education emphasized philosophy, rhetoric, and civic duty, laying the groundwork for Western educational thought. During the Middle Ages, religious institutions preserved knowledge and established early universities in Europe and the Islamic world. The Renaissance and Reformation sparked a shift toward humanism and literacy, expanding access to education. By the 19th and 20th centuries, public education systems emerged globally, evolving into the diverse, technology-driven models we see today.\nEarly history.\nFor most of history, home-based education was common. In many cultures, home education often consisted of literacy training centered around religious texts, as well as basic math skills needed in everyday life. In past Christian-majority cultures, reading aloud, reciting, and memorizing passages from the Christian Bible and other writings was central to this practice, as well as workplace-based education such as apprenticeships. Enlisting professional tutors was an option available only to the wealthy. \nHome education and apprenticeship remained the main form of education until the 1830s. However, in the 18th century, the majority of Europeans lacked formal education. In the early 19th century, formal classroom schooling became the most common means of schooling throughout developed countries. As laws enforcing public school attendance proliferated, movements to resist such laws began to form.\nHome education declined in the 19th and 20th centuries with the enactment of compulsory school attendance laws. However, it continued to be practised in isolated communities. What is now known as homeschooling began in the 1960s and 1970s with educational reformists dissatisfied with industrialized education. \nUnited States.\nResistance to laws mandating school attendance emerged as early as the end of the nineteenth century.16 Catholic groups in particular resisted the enforcement of Protestant ideals in public schools, as was observed in the 1844 Philadelphia nativist riots. Philadelphia's Roman Catholic bishop requested that Catholic schoolchildren be permitted to read the Catholic Douay bible in school rather than the Protestant King James Version, which was granted. This decision fanned anti-Catholic sentiment, sparking a rumor that Catholics were attempting to remove the Christian Bible from schools.16 Toledo, Ohio, minister Patrick Francis Quigley was put on trial in 1891 for resisting the requirement to report the names of students at his school, which he was principal of; he argued unsuccessfully that \"the state has no right to control the education of the child.\"16 Resistance to mandatory schooling was sporadic throughout the 19th century as the state undertook more responsibility in protecting the rights of children.\nIn 1913, the US Bureau of Education established the Home Education Division, an organization that worked with the National Council of Mothers and Parent-Teacher Associations to provide home curriculum materials; these were meant to supplement, not substitute, for public schooling. In the early 20th century, the headmaster of Baltimore's Calvert School, Virgil Hillyer, recognized that various students at his school were unable to attend due to ill health and began to send out lesson plans to those students' parents. The Calvert method became a popular early home curriculum. Its advertising in periodicals such as \"McClure's\" admonished parents that the curriculum was necessary to provide a proper education.26 This form of homeschooling was targeted primarily at those who needed to educate their children at home due to ill health, and many of their materials were dispatched to hospitals.26 In 1940, remote education began to be delivered via telephone.28\nIn the 1960s, theonomist Rousas John Rushdoony began to advocate homeschooling, which he saw as a way to combat the increasingly secular nature of the public school system in the United States. He vigorously attacked progressive school reformers such as Horace Mann and John Dewey and argued for the dismantling of the state's influence in education in three works: \"Intellectual Schizophrenia\", \"The Messianic Character of American Education\", and \"The Philosophy of the Christian Curriculum\". Rushdoony was frequently used as an expert witness by the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) in court cases. He often advocated the use of private schools. The HSLDA, founded in 1983, was highly successful in influencing the legal status of homeschooling in the United States. In the 1980s, homeschooling was illegal throughout much of the United States for parents who were not themselves trained educators. Today, the United States has some of the most lax laws around homeschooling, with most states requiring little to no oversight and no educational requirements for parents. Homeschooling is legal in all 50 states in the United States. Each state must follow regulations set by their states. \nProminent right-wing evangelical pastor and activist Jerry Falwell sought to terminate sex education and discussions of evolutionary biology from American school curricula, instead recommending replacing both topics with prayer and Christian Bible study.35 The movement embraced claims by Christian parents who advocated for homeschooling, such as Raymond and Dorothy Moore. Another influential figure associated with the rise of the homeschooling movement was John Holt. Holt believed that informal education was better than compulsory education and expressed these views in his books \"How Children Fail\" and \"How Children Learn\". Holt advocated for unschooling, whereby children learn without any formalized curricula or expectations. As homeschooling caught on in Evangelical Christian circles, the number of children being homeschooled increased massively, with some estimates suggesting the number went from under twenty thousand in the 1970s to nearly 500,000 by the end of the 1980s.74\nGermany.\nHomeschooling is heavily restricted in Germany. The history of public schooling dates back to the time of Martin Luther, who called on the government to provide schooling to both boys and girls in \"To the Councilmen of all Cities in Germany\" (\"An die Ratsherren aller St\u00e4dte deutschen Landes\"), so that they might read the Bible for themselves. Germany has one of the strictest compulsory education laws in Europe, rooted in the 1919 Reichsschulgesetz, which mandates physical attendance at a recognized school. This principle, known as Schulpflicht (school obligation), differs from Untterichtspflicht (education obligation) found in other countries, where homeschooling is often permitted as long as children receive an education.Attempts to homeschool without approval can result in fines, legal action, or even custody disputes, as local school authorities (Schulamt) strictly enforce attendance laws\nFrance.\nHomeschooling in France is permitted only in specific circumstances: for the child's health, for intensive artistic or sports training, for itinerant families, and for those who live too far from a school. To be granted the right to homeschool, parents must have a baccalaur\u00e9at or equivalent to prove they are qualified to teach. These restrictions were introduced in September 2022, known as \"loi contre le s\u00e9paratisme\": a law designed to reduce \"Islamist separatism\" and enforce secularism.\nAsia.\nA meta-analysis of studies on homeschooling in Asia found that most homeschoolers cited religion as their reason for homeschooling.In China, homeschooling is gaining traction among urban families in cities like Taipei and Hong Kong, driven by dissatisfaction with rigid school systems and a desire for more holistic, child-centered learning\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nBecause schools were widely shut down during the early part of the COVID-19 pandemic, many schools implemented distance education and online learning. This is not considered homeschooling since public schools direct students' education. However, the onset of the pandemic triggered a massive increase in the prevalence of homeschooling. An investigation by the \"Washington Post\" estimated that the United States saw a rise of homeschooled children from 1.5 million to between 1.9 and 2.7 million, a number comparable to the number of students in charter schools or Catholic schools. This increase was far-reaching across every measured demographic category and region. This increase has led to a rise in critical interest in the impacts of homeschooling, both positive and negative.\nIn Texas, homeschooling was already growing. According to Census Bureau's Household Pulse Survey in effort to explore the effect of COVID-19 on Texas families, the percent of families in Texas increased in 2020 going from 4.5% towards the end of the 2019\u20132020 school year to 12% at the beginning of the 2020\u20132021 school year. As stated by the Texas Tribune, data collected by the Texas Homeschool Coalition revealed that about 30,000 students across the state of Texas were withdrawn from a charter or public school and made the transition to homeschool during the spring of 2021. Which is a growth of 40% in comparison to the past year.\nMotivations.\nThere are many reasons why parents and children choose to homeschool, whether by necessity or by choice.\nHomeschool may be a necessity for a variety of reasons. For those who are in isolated rural locations that are too far from a conventional school, living abroad, or travel frequently, homeschool provides more consistency and convenience, eliminating the issues of distance or cultural barriers. Many young athletes, actors, and musicians are taught at home to accommodate their travel and practice schedules more conveniently. Mental and physical health issues are also a reason parents may homeschool or take distance education.\nParents commonly cite two main motivations for voluntarily homeschooling their children: dissatisfaction with the local schools and the interest in increased involvement with their children's learning and development. Parental dissatisfaction with available schools typically includes concerns about the school environment, the quality of academic instruction, the curriculum, bullying, the risk of school shootings, racism, and lack of faith in the school's ability to cater to their children's special needs. Some parents homeschool in order to have greater control over what and how their children are taught, to cater more adequately to an individual child's aptitudes and abilities, to provide instruction from a specific religious or and moral position, and to take advantage of the efficiency of one-to-one instruction and thus allow the child to spend more time on childhood activities, socializing, and non-academic learning.\nA 2023 survey of homeschooling parents in the United States found concerns about school environment, moral instruction, dissatisfaction with academics, concern about school shootings, and bullying to be the most common reasons for homeschooling. The need for distance learning during the COVID-19 pandemic caused many parents to consider homeschooling where they might not have before.\nConcerns about school environment - the most commonly cited reason for homeschooling - may comprise a number of issues with conventional schooling, such as protection against bullying, social exclusion, drugs, stress, sexualization, social pressures, excessive performance thoughts, social groups or role models with negative influences, and degrading treatment in school. Children may also learn more efficiently at home because they are not distracted by other students or typical school scheduling. Some parents are of the opinion that certain temperaments are promoted in school, while others are inhibited which may also be a reason to homeschool their children. Many parents also homeschool their children and return their child into the school system later on, for example because they think that their child is too young or not yet ready to start school. The homeschool setting is also crucial when children begin to develop theory of mind; everything in their homeschooling environment can affect the way their theory of mind develops.\nReligion.\nSome parents have objections to the secular nature of public schools and homeschool in order to give their children a religious education. Use of a religious curriculum such as Abeka is common among these families. In the United States, conservative Christians drove the movement to homeschool and made up the vast majority of homeschoolers until recent years. However, the percent of people who cited religion as the primary reason for homeschooling has declined drastically. In 2012, almost 2 of 3 homeschool parents did, while by 2023, the proportion dropped to just over 1 in 3. In a survey of adults homeschooled in Christian households, over half of respondents characterized their family as fundamentalist, and over 80% reported being taught Young Earth creationism as part of their science education. Homeschooling parents tend, in general, to lean more conservative than the general population.\nAccording to Texas Home School Coalition 21% of families in Texas chose to home school to insert religious or moral education. The Texas Home School Coalition also interviewed several families that chose homeschooling, and the Kim Family stated that they chose to homeschool because they are a Christian family, and did not want their children to develop false world views.\nIn Asia, the majority of homeschoolers cited religion - Christianity, Confucianism, or Islam - as their primary reason for homeschooling.\nRacism.\nSome African-American families choose to homeschool as a way of increasing their children's understanding of African-American history \u2013 such as the Jim Crow laws that resulted in African Americans being prevented from reading and writing \u2013 and to limit the harm caused by the unintentional and sometimes subtle systemic racism that affects most American schools. The increase of homeschooling post-COVID-19 pandemic saw the greatest increases among Black, Latino, and Asian American households. Many families cited concerns that their children, particularly boys, were perceived as threatening or violent at school due to racism, as well as the issue of school quality and funding.\nTeaching methods, forms and philosophies.\nHomeschooling is usually conducted by a parent, tutor, or an online teacher, but the concrete practice can vary widely. The spectrum ranges from highly structured forms based on traditional school lessons to more open, free forms like unschooling, which is a curriculum-free implementation of homeschooling that involves teaching children based on their interests.\nHomeschool families can utilize a wide variety of educational methods and materials with a wide range of educational paradigms. Some of the concepts homeschoolers can incorporate include classical education (including Trivium, Quadrivium), Charlotte Mason education, Montessori, theory of multiple intelligences, unschooling, Waldorf, school-at-home (curriculum choices from both secular and religious publishers), and A Thomas Jefferson Education. Homeschool educations may incorporate pre-made curriculum made up from private or small publishers, apprenticeship, hands-on-learning, distance learning (both online and correspondence), dual enrollment in local schools or colleges, and curriculum provided by local schools and many others.\nA student's education may be customized to support his or her learning level, style, and interests. It is not uncommon for a student to experience more than one approach as the family discovers what works best for their student. Some companies offer all-in-one homeschooling curricula. Purchased as a grade-level package or separately by subject, the package may contain all of the needed books, materials, tests, answer keys, and extensive teacher guides. However, many families use an eclectic approach, picking and choosing from various suppliers. For sources of curricula and books, a study found that 78 percent utilized \"a public library\"; 77 percent used \"a homeschooling catalogue, publisher, or individual specialist\"; 68 percent used \"retail bookstore or another store\"; 60 percent used \"an education publisher that was not affiliated with homeschooling.\" \"Approximately half\" used curriculum from \"a homeschooling organization\", 37 percent from a \"church, synagogue or other religious institution\" and 23 percent from \"their local public school or district.\" In 2003, 41 percent utilized some sort of distance learning, approximately 20 percent by \"television, video or radio\"; 19 percent via \"The Internet, e-mail, or the World Wide Web\"; and 15 percent taking a \"correspondence course by mail designed specifically for homeschoolers.\"\nIndividual governmental units, e.g. states and local districts, vary in official curriculum and attendance requirements.\nStructured versus unstructured.\nApproaches to homeschooling fall under two categories: structured and unstructured. Structured homeschooling includes any method or style of home education that follows a basic curriculum with articulated goals and outcomes. This style attempts to imitate the structure of a traditional school setting while personalizing the curriculum. Unstructured homeschooling, also known as unschooling, is any form of home education where parents do not construct a curriculum at all. This method attempts to teach through the child's daily experiences and focuses more on self-directed learning by the child, free of textbooks, teachers, and any formal assessment of success or failure.\nUnschooling and natural learning.\nThe term unschooling, coined by John Holt, describes an approach in which parents do not authoritatively direct the child's education, but interact with the child following the child's interests, leaving them free to explore and learn. Natural learning refers to a type of learning-on-demand where children pursue knowledge based on their interests and parents take an active part in facilitating activities and experiences conducive to learning but do not rely heavily on textbooks or spend much time \"teaching\", looking instead for \"learning moments\" throughout their daily activities. Parents see their role as that of affirming through positive feedback and modeling the necessary skills, and the child's role as being responsible for asking and learning.\nAnother prominent proponent of unschooling is John Taylor Gatto, author of \"Dumbing Us Down\", \"The Exhausted School\", \"A Different Kind of Teacher\", and \"Weapons of Mass Instruction\". Gatto argues that public education is the primary tool of \"state-controlled consciousness\" and serves as a prime illustration of the total institution \u2014 a social system which impels obedience to the state and quells free-thinking or dissent.\nInformal learning.\nInformal learning refers to the component of homeschooling which happens outside of the classroom. Informal learning is an everyday form of learning through participation and creation, in contrast with the traditional view of teacher-centered learning. The term is usually used synonymously with \"non-formal learning\" and \"self-directed learning.\" Informal learning differs from traditional learning as there are no expected objectives or outcomes. From the learner's standpoint, the knowledge that they receive is not intentional. Activities such as planting a garden, baking a cake or even talking to a technician at work about the installation of new software can be considered informal learning: the individual is completing a task with different intentions but ends up learning skills in the process. Children watching their tomato plants grow will not generate questions about photosynthesis but they will learn that their plants are growing with water and sunlight. This leads them to have a base understanding of complex scientific concepts without any background studying.\nDepending on the part of the world, informal learning can take on many different identities and has differing cultural importances. Many ways of organizing homeschooling draw on the model of apprenticeships and play-based learning. In some South American indigenous cultures, such as the Chillihuani community in Peru, children learn irrigation and farming technique through play, advancing them not only in their own village and society but also in their knowledge of realistic techniques that they will need to survive. In Western culture, children use informal learning in two main ways: through hands-on experience with new material, and by asking questions to someone who has more experience (i.e. parents, elders). The concept of informal learning depends on the inquisitiveness and interests of the child.\nUnit studies.\nIn a unit study approach, multiple subjects such as math, science, history, art, and geography, are studied in relation to a single topic. Unit studies are useful for teaching multiple grades simultaneously as the difficulty level can be adjusted for each student. An extended form of unit studies, Integrated Thematic Instruction utilizes one central theme integrated throughout the curriculum so that students finish a school year with a deep understanding of a certain broad subject or idea.\nAutonomous learning.\nAutonomous learning is a school of education which sees learners as individuals who can and should be ; i.e., be responsible for their own learning climate.\nAutonomous education helps students develop their self-consciousness, vision, practicality, and freedom of discussion. These attributes serve to aid the student in his/her independent learning. However, a student must not start their autonomous learning completely on their own. It is said that first having interaction with someone who has more knowledge in a subject will speed up the student's learning and allow them to learn more independently.\nSome degree of autonomous learning is popular with those who home educate their children. In true autonomous learning, the child usually gets to decide what projects they wish to tackle or what interests to pursue. In-home education, this can be instead of or in addition to regular subjects like doing math or English.\nHybrid homeschooling.\nHybrid homeschooling or flex-school is a form of homeschooling in which children split their time between homeschool and a more traditional schooling environment like a school. The number of students who participated in hybrid homeschooling increased during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nA commonly cited reason for choosing this model is that parents are not sure whether they can provide their children a comprehensive and neutral education at home or cannot devote themselves to homeschooling full-time due to time constraints or excessive stress. Some families also want their children to socialize with other children and find that schools are better suited for this purpose because social exchange does not only take place occasionally, but is an everyday experience there.\nHomeschool cooperatives.\nA homeschool cooperative is a cooperative of families who homeschool their children. It provides an opportunity for children to learn from other parents who are more specialized in certain areas or subjects. Co-ops also provide social interaction. They may take lessons together or go on field trips. Some co-ops also offer events such as prom and graduation for homeschoolers.\nHomeschoolers are beginning to utilize Web 2.0 as a way to simulate homeschool cooperatives online. With social networks, homeschoolers can chat, discuss threads in forums, share information and tips, and even participate in online classes via learning management systems similar to those used by colleges.\nResearch on outcomes.\nResearch on homeschooling faces a number of challenges and limitations. The documentation and regulation of homeschooling in the United States is highly variable among states, with a minority of states administering any rigorous testing or record-keeping of homeschooled children; in eleven states, no record of homeschooled students is kept at all. As of 2022, virtually all research on homeschooling used convenience sampling, leading to issues with selection bias. Homeschoolers as a demographic tend towards distrust of surveillance and institutions, making eliminating survey bias a challenge. Other common methodological problems commonly included the presence of confounding factors such as socioeconomic status and parental involvement, over-reliance on parental testimony, and taking into account the timing and duration of homeschooling (many homeschoolers only do so for a few years). Homeschooling research is often conducted on homeschooled children or their parents; surveys of adults who have been homeschooled are extremely limited.\nThe majority of homeschool research in the United States is done with the support of the homeschool advocacy group, the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA). A review of studies performed by prominent HSLDA-affiliated researcher Dr. Brian D. Ray found severe design limitations and demographic bias; nearly all subjects in his studies were White, Christian, and from households with two married parents who were more educated than average. Meanwhile, a 2016 federal survey of US homeschoolers found that over 40 percent of homeschoolers were not White, a majority had parents with less than a bachelor's degree, and over one in five lived in poverty.\nIn the UK, the government has noted that no figures are available on educational attainment for children educated at home: \"This means no assessment can be made of the impact on educational attainment of being home schooled\".In the 20th century, education was increasingly recognized as a fundamental human right, with organizations like UNESCO promoting universal access to schooling worldwide.\nAccording to the \"Texas Homeschool Coalition\" they calculated that there was an estimate of 300,000 children being homeschooled in Texas back in 2010. The primary reason for parents to homeschool there kids was that it will give there kids a better education experience on an individual basis in the comfort of there own home. Not like with public school where the students have to go with a curriculum set by a teacher. On the other hand, with homeschooling the curriculum its designed by the parents specifically for the individual student.\nAcademic.\nClaims by homeschooling proponents that homeschoolers fare better than traditionally schooled children are insufficiently supported by data.99 With the studies available, a 2022 review found it was unable to offer firm conclusions because of these issues, but did not find systematic evidence of poor educational or social outcomes. Another survey of studies related to homeschooling found that, controlling for demographic bias, homeschoolers were generally on par with non-homeschoolers, with a slight advantage in reading and writing, and a slight disadvantage in math. Additionally, a national study conducted on homeschooled kids' test scores for a variety of ages showed that the homeschooled kids tested equal to publicly schooled kids, and even sometimes scored higher.\nParental class.\nA study conducted by Ray in 2010 indicates that the higher the level of parents' income, the more likely the homeschooled child is able to achieve academic success, which is in alignment with the correlation between income and achievement for students at conventional schools. In one study of families with parents who had an average of 13 years of schooling, homeschooling was correlated with lower test scores, which was attributed to the relatively lower educational status of the parents in the sample group; meanwhile, in studies with highly educated parents, homeschooling for longer periods of time, on average, had no effect, positive or negative. A study which collected all homeschooling outcomes in Alaska (a state where homeschooling is extremely popular due to government financial incentives and support) found that low income students, students of color, and students with disabilities gained the most advantages when being homeschooled, while those from white, well-off families scored overall worse than their public school peers, and suffered the greatest disadvantage in math. This is notable as being the only study of homeschooling outcomes with a complete data set of all known homeschool children in a given population, which does not rely on volunteered information. However, the existence of a financial incentive to homeschool in Alaska does raise questions about the applicability of the results to other areas which do not have these programs in place.\nUnschooling.\nUnschooled children tend to score significantly below traditionally educated children, and higher parental involvement and the use of a structured curriculum is strongly positively correlated with homeschooling outcomes, as with conventionally schooled students.\n\"Math gap\".\nA survey of educational outcomes for homeschool students found that homeschoolers consistently scored below the average in math, but with mixed or average results in reading and writing. The exact cause of this is not known, but researchers speculated that this was due to the nature of curricula, which often consisted of being read to or self-directed reading, and a lack of parental training in math. Homeschooled children have been found to be less self-motivated when studying math than reading or writing. This gap in competency has also been suggested as a reason why homeschoolers are less likely to pursue higher education.\nHigher education.\nLooking beyond high school, a study by the 1990 National Home Education Research Institute (as cited by Wichers, 2001) found that at least 33% of homeschooled students attended a four-year college, and 17% attended a two-year college (with the national average being 40% and 20%, respectively). This same study examined the students after one year, finding that 17% pursued higher education. A study by the Kentucky Office Of Education Accountability found that homeschooled students attended college or university within Kentucky at less than half the rate of other Kentucky high school graduates, with the academic outcomes of other homeschooled students being unknown.\nAlthough educational outcomes of homeschoolers are difficult to track, especially where homeschooled students are not required to be registered, home-schoolers tend to take standardized college admission tests such as the SAT at a disproportionately low rate, suggesting they may be underrepresented in higher education. Some homeschoolers averaged higher scores on college entrance tests in South Carolina. Other scores (1999 data) showed mixed results, for example showing higher levels for homeschoolers in English (homeschooled 23.4 vs national average 20.5) and reading (homeschooled 24.4 vs national average 21.4) on the ACT, but mixed scores in math (homeschooled 20.4 vs national average 20.7 on the ACT as opposed to homeschooled 535 vs national average 511 on the 1999 SAT math).\nFor those homeschoolers who do pursue higher education, their GPA tends to be higher. Cogan (2010) found that homeschooled students at a doctoral program had higher high school GPAs (3.74) and transfer GPAs (3.65) than conventional students. Snyder (2013) provided corroborating evidence that homeschoolers at a Catholic university were outperforming their peers in the areas of standardized tests and overall GPAs. A limited amount of data exists that homeschoolers in college were much less likely than their peers to pursue degrees in STEM topics, and more likely to pursue creative degrees, which may be attributed to the \"math gap\" discussed above.\nThere is some evidence from 2009 that home-educated children in the UK are more likely to be NEET, Not in Employment, Education or Training, at age 16 to 18.\nSocial.\nDue to its qualitative nature and reliance on parental or self-assessment, the social outcomes of homeschooling are challenging to determine, despite being a major criticism of homeschooling as a phenomenon, and the quality of existing studies on this topic is poor, due to subject-typical problems with demographic bias.20\nHomeschooled children have been found to score higher than average in self-concept, a metric correlated to positive social outcomes. NHERI researcher Richard G. Medlin found that homeschooled children sampled from Christian homeschool co-ops self-reported higher in cooperation, assertiveness, empathy, and self-control than a random sample of children attending public schools. A study of the social connections of homeschooled children found that homeschoolers had an equal number of social connections as their peers, but that those connections had a larger range of ages. A review of studies on the topic found that while homeschoolers were slightly more likely to report feelings of social isolation and be less peer-oriented, this may have fostered a greater sense of independence and self-determination as well. \nHomeschooled youth are less likely to use illicit substances and are more likely to disapprove of using alcohol and marijuana.\nAlthough a large proportion of parents cited religion as their primary reason for homeschooling, a 2008 survey found that homeschooling had no effect on the religious behavior or affiliation of children, with parents holding the same degree of influence over their children regardless of their schooling method.\nHomeschooled students are more likely to vote than average, and homeschooled families were found to be more politically involved than those who did not homeschool.\nHomeschoolers tend to struggle adapting into a college setting. While some traditional and non-traditional homeschoolers do interact with other students like with extracurricular activities or studie groups. However homeschoolers do get the stereotype of being the \"Socially awkward\" type of a person, even though it is not factual and is all based on perception. It depends on if the students experience in homeschooling was more traditional or non-traditional, but at the same time it may or may not be the case.\nChild abuse and neglect.\nSome studies suggest homeschooled children are less likely to experience sexual abuse than children in public schools, while others find no or mixed results.\nAfter the death by abuse of homeschooled autistic teen Matthew Tirado, a Connecticut study was done to investigate the prevalence of neglect and abuse among homeschooled families. It found that 38% of children withdrawn from school to be homeschooled lived in families with one or more reports of abuse or neglect to the Department of Children and Families. In 1990, homeschool lobbyists defeated a proposed Florida law which would have required parents to be run against a child abuse registry before being allowed to homeschool their children. In the United States, only two states, Pennsylvania and Arkansas, prevent convicted child abusers and sex offenders from homeschooling.\nAdulthood.\nResearch on the long-term outcomes of homeschooled adults is severely lacking. An HSLDA survey, distributed by Evangelical Christian homeschooling networks, found extremely positive outcomes for homeschooled adults. A random survey of religious young adults found that those who were homeschooled got married younger, had fewer children, and divorced more frequently than other religious adults, controlled for background variables. The homeschool cohort reported lower SAT scores, less time in college, and higher rates of feeling helplessness about life and lack of direction. In a survey of homeschooled adults, the majority of respondents reported satisfaction with their homeschool experience, although some factors were strongly correlated with lower satisfaction in various areas. For instance, those who were offered fewer opportunities to socialize with peers reported significantly lower preparedness for adult life, and those who reported their parents as Christian fundamentalists reported higher rates of abuse and lower quality of academic instruction. The prevalence of mental health problems was roughly on par with the general populace.\nLegality and prevalence.\nTexas, United States There are only three rules for homeschooling in Texas according to Texas unschoolers. The first rule is that the instruction must be bona fide. The second rule is the instruction must be able to be visually seen through workbooks, or a video monitor. The third and final rule is that the curriculum must include the five primary subjects which are spelling, reading, grammar, mathematics, and good citizenship.\nAccording to Texas Education Agency homeschooling has been a legal option aside from public schools since 1994. In the case of \"Leeper et al. v. Arlington ISD et al.\" the Supreme Court of Texas approved the decision of the lower court that children being educated at home are excused from the compulsory attendance requirement to the same length as those students that are registered in private schools.\nStudents that are home schooled are still able to earn their diploma and graduate. According to Texas Home School Coalition parents are able to graduate their homeschool students, because homeschool falls under a private school in Texas therefore the administrant of a homeschool (the parents) have the authority to dictate the requirements needed to graduate, identical to private schools. Once the homeschooled student has finished the requirements from administrant, they can be graduated and granted a High School diploma.\nIn the state of Texas, as well as other states in the U.S. Texas is technically considered a \"Half-Way\" state. Meaning that homeschool students do have the choice to participate in public school extracurricular activities under the University Interscholastic League (UIL). Homeschool students still do have to obey the University Interscholastic League (UIL) guidelines as any public school student in the state of Texas. If given the green light, homeschoolers have access to participate in sports, plays, band etc. However this doesn't guarantee that homeschoolers will automatically partake in extracurricular activities, depending on the district the student resides in. This is under the 89th Texas Legislative, 2025-2026 school year: SB 401.\nAttitudes towards homeschooling.\nSome organizations of teachers and school districts resist homeschooling. The National Education Association, a United States teachers' union and professional association, has asserted that teachers should be licensed and that state-approved curricula should be used. Elizabeth Bartholet, a Harvard University professor of law and faculty director of the Law School's Child Advocacy Program, recommended a ban on home education in 2019, calling it a risky practice. Bartholet stated that homeschooling reduces a child's exposure to mandated reporters such as teachers, making children more susceptible to sustained, unreported abuse, and recommended that homeschooling be presumptively banned. While there is not enough data to determine exact rates of abuse in homeschooling there is, however, strong evidence to suggest that parents who engage in maltreatment and educational neglect are more likely to use homeschooling as a guise.\nGallup polls of American voters showed a significant change in attitude from 1985 to 2001, with respondents going from 73% opposed to homeschooling to 54% opposed. In 1988, when asked whether parents should have a right to choose homeschooling, 53 percent thought that they should, as revealed by another poll.\nPolitical scientist Rob Reich speculated in \"The Civic Perils of Homeschooling\" (2002) that homeschooling could threaten to \"insulate students from exposure to diverse ideas and people.\"\nIn 1986 the Texas Board of Education was going to enforce new regulations on private and homeschools. Having to abide by state standards. The parents and teachers of homeschooling (mainly being conservative, and religious) were livid on what could be enforced on their ways of homeschooling their children. So the family of private and homeschools formed the \"Austin TEA Party\" they wanted education without regulation. They marched to the University of Texas Austin, to fight for their traditional values of a family unit and liberty to keep the government away from how they want to teach their kids. In 1994, after an 8 year battle fighting the Texas Education Agency (TEA). The Texas Supreme Court ruled that homeschools are private schools, meaning that the Texas Government won't regulate homeschools. Parents were victorious on keeping their traditional values intact.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13605", "revid": "46523975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13605", "title": "Heteroatom", "text": "Atom which is not carbon or hydrogen\nIn chemistry, a heteroatom (from grc \" heteros\"\u00a0'different' and \" atomos\"\u00a0'uncut') is, strictly, any atom that is not carbon or hydrogen.\nOrganic chemistry.\nIn practice, the term is mainly used more specifically to indicate that non-carbon atoms have replaced carbon in the backbone of the molecular structure. Typical heteroatoms are nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), sulfur (S), phosphorus (P), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine (I), as well as the metals lithium (Li) and magnesium (Mg).\nProteins.\nIt can also be used with highly specific meanings in specialised contexts. In the description of protein structure, in particular in the Protein Data Bank file format, a heteroatom record (HETATM) describes an atom as belonging to a small molecule cofactor rather than being part of a biopolymer chain.\nZeolites.\nIn the context of zeolites, the term \"heteroatom\" refers to partial isomorphous substitution of the typical framework atoms (silicon, aluminium, and phosphorus) by other elements such as beryllium, vanadium, and chromium. The goal is usually to adjust properties of the material (e.g., Lewis acidity) to optimize the material for a certain application (e.g., catalysis).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13606", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13606", "title": "Half-life", "text": "Time for exponential decay to remove half of a quantity\nHalf-life (symbol \"t\"\u00bd) is the time required for a quantity (of substance) to reduce to half of its initial value. The term is commonly used in nuclear physics to describe how quickly unstable atoms undergo radioactive decay or how long stable atoms survive. The term is also used more generally to characterize any type of exponential (or, rarely, non-exponential) decay. For example, the medical sciences refer to the biological half-life of drugs and other chemicals in the human body. The converse of half-life is doubling time, an exponential property which increases by a factor of 2 rather than reducing by that factor.\nThe original term, \"half-life period\", dating to Ernest Rutherford's discovery of the principle in 1907, was shortened to \"half-life\" in the early 1950s. Rutherford applied the principle of a radioactive element's half-life in studies of age determination of rocks by measuring the decay period of radium to lead-206.\nHalf-life is constant over the lifetime of an exponentially decaying quantity, and it is a characteristic unit for the exponential decay equation. The accompanying table shows the reduction of a quantity as a function of the number of half-lives elapsed.\nProbabilistic nature.\nA half-life often describes the decay of discrete entities, such as radioactive atoms. In that case, it does not work to use the definition that states \"half-life is the time required for exactly half of the entities to decay\". For example, if there is just one radioactive atom, and its half-life is one second, there will \"not\" be \"half of an atom\" left after one second.\nInstead, the half-life is defined in terms of probability: \"Half-life is the time required for exactly half of the entities to decay \"on average\"\". In other words, the \"probability\" of a radioactive atom decaying within its half-life is 50%.\nFor example, the accompanying image is a simulation of many identical atoms undergoing radioactive decay. Note that after one half-life there are not \"exactly\" one-half of the atoms remaining, only \"approximately\", because of the random variation in the process. Nevertheless, when there are many identical atoms decaying (right boxes), the law of large numbers suggests that it is a \"very good approximation\" to say that half of the atoms remain after one half-life.\nVarious simple exercises can demonstrate probabilistic decay, for example involving flipping coins or running a statistical computer program.\nFormulas for half-life in exponential decay.\nAn exponential decay can be described by any of the following four equivalent formulas:formula_1\nwhere\nThe three parameters \"t\"\u00bd, \u03c4, and \u03bb are directly related in the following way:formula_2where ln(2) is the natural logarithm of 2 (approximately 0.693).\nHalf-life and reaction orders.\nIn chemical kinetics, the value of the half-life depends on the reaction order:\nZero order kinetics.\nThe rate of this kind of reaction does not depend on the substrate concentration, [A]. Thus the concentration decreases linearly.\nformula_3The integrated rate law of zero order kinetics is:\nformula_4In order to find the half-life, we have to replace the concentration value for the initial concentration divided by 2: formula_5and isolate the time:formula_6This \"t\"\u00bd formula indicates that the half-life for a zero order reaction depends on the initial concentration and the rate constant.\nFirst order kinetics.\nIn first order reactions, the rate of reaction will be proportional to the concentration of the reactant. Thus the concentration will decrease exponentially.\nformula_7as time progresses until it reaches zero, and the half-life will be constant, independent of concentration.\nThe time \"t\"\u00bd for [A] to decrease from [A]0 to [A]0 in a first-order reaction is given by the following equation:formula_8It can be solved forformula_9For a first-order reaction, the half-life of a reactant is independent of its initial concentration. Therefore, if the concentration of A at some arbitrary stage of the reaction is [A], then it will have fallen to [A] after a further interval of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; Hence, the half-life of a first order reaction is given as the following:formula_10The half-life of a first order reaction is independent of its initial concentration and depends solely on the reaction rate constant, k.\nSecond order kinetics.\nIn second order reactions, the rate of reaction is proportional to the square of the concentration. By integrating this rate, it can be shown that the concentration [A] of the reactant decreases following this formula:\nformula_11We replace [A] for in order to calculate the half-life of the reactant A formula_12and isolate the time of the half-life (\"t\"\u00bd):formula_13This shows that the half-life of second order reactions depends on the initial concentration and rate constant.\nDecay by two or more processes.\nSome quantities decay by two exponential-decay processes simultaneously. In this case, the actual half-life \"T\"\u00bd can be related to the half-lives \"t\"1 and \"t\"2 that the quantity would have if each of the decay processes acted in isolation:\nformula_14\nFor three or more processes, the analogous formula is:\nformula_15\nFor a proof of these formulas, see Exponential decay \u00a7 Decay by two or more processes.\nExamples.\nThere is a half-life describing any exponential-decay process. For example:\nIn non-exponential decay.\nThe term \"half-life\" is almost exclusively used for decay processes that are exponential (such as radioactive decay or the other examples above), or approximately exponential (such as biological half-life discussed below). In a decay process that is not even close to exponential, the half-life will change dramatically while the decay is happening. In this situation it is generally uncommon to talk about half-life in the first place, but sometimes people will describe the decay in terms of its \"first half-life\", \"second half-life\", etc., where the first half-life is defined as the time required for decay from the initial value to 50%, the second half-life is from 50% to 25%, and so on.\nIn biology and pharmacology.\nA biological half-life or elimination half-life is the time it takes for a substance (drug, radioactive nuclide, or other) to lose one-half of its pharmacologic, physiologic, or radiological activity. In a medical context, the half-life may also describe the time that it takes for the concentration of a substance in blood plasma to reach one-half of its steady-state value (the \"plasma half-life\").\nThe relationship between the biological and plasma half-lives of a substance can be complex, due to factors including accumulation in tissues, active metabolites, and receptor interactions.\nWhile a radioactive isotope decays almost perfectly according to first order kinetics, where the rate constant is a fixed number, the elimination of a substance from a living organism usually follows more complex chemical kinetics.\nFor example, the biological half-life of water in a human being is about 9 to 10 days, though this can be altered by behavior and other conditions. The biological half-life of caesium in human beings is between one and four months.\nThe concept of a half-life has also been utilized for pesticides in plants, and certain authors maintain that pesticide risk and impact assessment models rely on and are sensitive to information describing dissipation from plants.\nIn epidemiology, the concept of half-life can refer to the length of time for the number of incident cases in a disease outbreak to drop by half, particularly if the dynamics of the outbreak can be modeled exponentially.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13607", "revid": "7126605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13607", "title": "Humus", "text": "Organic matter in soils resulting from decay of plant and animal materials\nIn classical soil science, humus is the dark organic matter in soil that is formed by the decomposition of plant, microbial and animal matter. It is a kind of soil organic matter with distinct properties due to its high surface area. It is rich in nutrients and retains moisture in the soil, more especially in soils with a sandy texture. Humus is the Latin word for \"earth\" or \"ground\".\nIn agriculture, \"humus\" sometimes also is used to describe mature or natural compost extracted from a woodland or other spontaneous source for use as a soil conditioner. It is also used to describe a topsoil horizon that contains organic matter (\"humus type\", humus form, or \"humus profile\").\nHumus has many nutrients that improve soil health, nitrogen and phosphorus being the most important. The ratio of carbon to nitrogen (C:N) of humus commonly ranges between 8:1 and 15:1 with the median being about 12:1. It also significantly improves (decreases) the bulk density of soil. Humus is amorphous and lacks the cellular structure characteristic of organisms.\nThe solid residue of sewage sludge treatment, which is a secondary phase in the wastewater treatment process, is also called humus. When not judged contaminated by pathogens, toxic heavy metals, or persistent organic pollutants according to standard tolerance levels, it is sometimes composted and used as a soil amendment.\nDescription.\nThe primary materials needed for the process of humification are plant detritus, dead animals and microbes (necromass), excreta of all soil organisms, and also black carbon resulting from past fires. The composition of humus varies with that of primary (plant) materials and secondary microbial and animal products. The decomposition rate of the different compounds will affect the composition of the humus.\nIt is difficult to define humus precisely because it is a very complex substance which is still not fully understood. According to the classical conception of Selman Waksman, long-time reported in most textbooks of soil science, humus is different from decomposing soil organic matter. The latter looks rough and has visible remains of the original plant, animal or microbial matter, while fully humified humus, on the contrary, is amorphous and has a uniformly dark, spongy, and jelly-like appearance. However, when examined under a light microscope, humus may reveal tiny plant, animal, and microbial remains that have been mechanically, but not chemically, degraded. This suggests an ambiguous boundary between humus and soil organic matter, leading some authors to contest the use of the term \"humus\" and derived terms such as \"humic substances\" or \"humification\", proposing the \"Soil Continuum Model\" (SCM). However, humus can be considered as having distinct properties, mostly linked to its richness in functional groups, justifying its maintenance as a specific term.\nFully formed humus is essentially a collection of very large and complex molecules formed in part from lignin and other polyphenolic molecules of the original plant material (foliage, wood, bark), in part from similar molecules that have been produced by microbes. During decomposition processes these polyphenols are modified chemically so that they are able to join up with one another to form very large molecules. Some parts of these molecules are modified in such a way that protein molecules, amino acids, and amino sugars are able to attach themselves to the polyphenol \"base\" molecule. As protein contains both nitrogen and sulfur, this attachment gives humus a moderate content of these two important plant nutrients.\nRadiocarbon and other dating techniques have shown that the polyphenolic base of humus (mostly lignin and black carbon) can be very old, but the protein and carbohydrate attachments much younger, while to the light of modern concepts and methods the situation appears much more complex and unpredictable than previously thought. It seems that microbes are able to pull protein off humus molecules rather more readily than they are able to break the polyphenolic base molecule itself. As protein is removed its place may be taken by younger protein, or this younger protein may attach itself to another part of the humus molecule.\nThe most useful functions of humus are in improving soil structure, all the more when associated with cations (e.g. calcium), and in providing a very large surface area that can hold nutrient elements until required by plants, an ion exchange function comparable to that of clay particles.\nSoil carbon sequestration is a major property of the soil, also considered as an ecosystem service. Only when it becomes stable and acquires its multi-century permanence, mostly via multiple interactions with the soil matrix, should molecular soil humus be considered to be of significance in removing the atmosphere's current carbon dioxide overload.\nThere is little data available on the composition of humus because it is a complex mixture that is challenging for researchers to analyze. Researchers in the 1940s and 1960s tried using chemical separation to analyze plant and humic compounds in forest and agricultural soils, but this proved impossible because extractants interacted with the analysed organic matter and created many artefacts. Further research has been done in more recent years, though it remains an active field of study.\nHumification.\nMicroorganisms decompose a large portion of the soil organic matter into inorganic minerals that the roots of plants can absorb as nutrients. This process is termed \"mineralization\". In this process, nitrogen (nitrogen cycle) and the other nutrients (nutrient cycle) in the decomposed organic matter are recycled. Depending on the conditions in which the decomposition occurs, a fraction of the organic matter does not mineralize and instead is transformed by a process called \"humification\". Prior to modern analytical methods, early evidence led scientists to believe that humification resulted in concatenations of organic polymers resistant to the action of microorganisms, however recent research has demonstrated that microorganisms are capable of digesting humus.\nHumification can occur naturally in soil or artificially in the production of compost. Organic matter is humified by a combination of saprotrophic fungi, bacteria, microbes and animals such as earthworms, nematodes, protozoa, and arthropods (see Soil biology and Soil animals). Plant remains, including those that animals digested and excreted, contain organic compounds: sugars, starches, proteins, carbohydrates, lignins, waxes, resins, and organic acids. Decay in the soil begins with the decomposition of sugars and starches from carbohydrates, which decompose easily as detritivores initially invade the dead plant organs, while the remaining cellulose and lignin decompose more slowly. Simple proteins, organic acids, starches, and sugars decompose rapidly, while crude proteins, fats, waxes, and resins remain relatively unchanged for longer periods of time.\nLignin, which is quickly transformed by white-rot fungi, is one of the primary precursors of humus, together with by-products of microbial and animal activity. The humus produced by humification is thus a mixture of compounds and complex biological chemicals of plant, animal, and microbial origin that has many functions and benefits in soil. Some judge earthworm humus (vermicompost) to be the optimal organic manure.\nStability.\nMuch of the humus in most soils has persisted for more than 100 years, rather than having been decomposed into CO2, and can be regarded as stable; this organic matter has been protected from decomposition by microbial or enzyme action because it is hidden (occluded) inside small aggregates of soil particles, or tightly sorbed or complexed to clays. Most humus that is not protected in this way is decomposed within 10 years and can be regarded as less stable or more labile. The mixing activity of soil-consuming invertebrates (e.g. earthworms, termites, some millipedes) contribute to the stability of humus by favouring the formation of mineral-organic complexes with clay minerals at the inside of their guts, hence more carbon sequestration in humus forms such as mull and amphi, with well-developed mineral-organic horizons, when compared with moder and mor where most organic matter accumulates at the soil surface.\nStable humus contributes few plant-available nutrients in soil, but it helps maintain its physical structure. A very stable form of humus is formed from the slow oxidation of soil carbon after the incorporation of finely powdered charcoal into the topsoil, suggested to result from the grinding and mixing activity of a tropical earthworm. This process is speculated to have been important in the formation of the unusually fertile Amazonian , also called \"Amazonian Dark Earths\". However, some authors suggest that complex soil organic molecules may be much less stable than previously thought: \"the available evidence does not support the formation of large-molecular-size and persistent 'humic substances' in soils. Instead, soil organic matter is a continuum of progressively decomposing organic compounds.\u2033\nHorizons.\nHumus has a characteristic black or dark brown color and is organic due to an accumulation of organic carbon. Soil scientists use the capital letters O, A, B, C, and E to identify the master soil horizons, and lowercase letters for distinctions of these horizons. Most soils have three major horizons: the surface horizon (A), the subsoil (B), and the substratum (C). Most soils have an organic horizon (O) on the surface, but this horizon can also be buried. The master horizon (E) is used for subsurface horizons that have significantly lost minerals (eluviation). Bedrock, which is not soil, uses the letter R. The richness of soil horizons in humus determines their more or less dark color, generally decreasing from O to E, to the exception of deep horizons of podzolic soils enriched with colloidal humic substances which have been leached down the soil profile.\nBenefits of soil organic matter and humus.\nThe importance of chemically stable humus is thought by some to be the fertility it provides to soils in both a physical and chemical sense, though some agricultural experts put a greater focus on other features of it, such as its ability to control diseases. It helps the soil retain moisture by increasing microporosity and encourages the formation of good soil structure. The incorporation of oxygen into large organic molecular assemblages generates many active, negatively charged sites that bind to positively charged ions (cations) of plant nutrients, making them more available to the plant by way of ion exchange. Humus allows soil organisms to feed and reproduce and is often described as the \"life-force\" of the soil.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13609", "revid": "49926339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13609", "title": "Hydrogen bond", "text": "Intermolecular attraction between a hydrogen donor-and-acceptor pair\nIn chemistry, a hydrogen bond (H-bond) is a specific type of molecular interaction that exhibits partial covalent character and cannot be described as a purely electrostatic force. It occurs when a hydrogen (H) atom, covalently bonded to a more electronegative donor atom or group (Dn), interacts with another electronegative atom bearing a lone pair of electrons\u2014the hydrogen bond acceptor (Ac). Unlike simple dipole\u2013dipole interactions, hydrogen bonding arises from charge transfer (nB \u2192 \u03c3*AH), orbital interactions, and quantum mechanical delocalization, making it a resonance-assisted interaction rather than a mere electrostatic attraction.\nThe general notation for hydrogen bonding is Dn\u2212H\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7Ac, where the solid line represents a polar covalent bond, and the dotted or dashed line indicates the hydrogen bond. The most frequent donor and acceptor atoms are nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), and fluorine (F), due to their high electronegativity and ability to engage in stronger hydrogen bonding.\nThe term \"hydrogen bond\" is generally used for well-defined, localized interactions with significant charge transfer and orbital overlap, such as those in DNA base pairing or ice. In contrast, \"hydrogen-bonding interactions\" is a broader term used when the interaction is weaker, more dynamic, or delocalized, such as in liquid water, supramolecular assemblies (e.g.: lipid membranes, protein-protein interactions), or weak C-H\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7O interactions. This distinction is particularly relevant in structural biology, materials science, and computational chemistry, where hydrogen bonding spans a continuum from weak van der Waals-like interactions to nearly covalent bonding.\nHydrogen bonding can occur between separate molecules (intermolecular) or within different parts of the same molecule (intramolecular). Its strength varies considerably, depending on geometry, environment, and the donor-acceptor pair, typically ranging from 1 to 40 kcal/mol. This places hydrogen bonds stronger than van der Waals interactions but generally weaker than covalent or ionic bonds.\nHydrogen bonding plays a fundamental role in chemistry, biology, and materials science. It is responsible for the anomalously high boiling point of water, the stabilization of protein and nucleic acid structures, and key properties of materials like paper, wool, and hydrogels. In biological systems, hydrogen bonds mediate molecular recognition, enzyme catalysis, and DNA replication, while in materials science, they contribute to self-assembly, adhesion, and supramolecular organization.\nBonding.\nDefinitions and general characteristics.\nIn a hydrogen bond, the electronegative atom not covalently attached to the hydrogen is named the proton acceptor, whereas the one covalently bound to the hydrogen is named the proton donor. This nomenclature is recommended by the IUPAC. The hydrogen of the donor is protic and therefore can act as a Lewis acid and the acceptor is the Lewis base. Hydrogen bonds are represented as system, where the dots represent the hydrogen bond. Liquids that display hydrogen bonding (such as water) are called associated liquids.\nHydrogen bonds arise from a combination of electrostatics (multipole-multipole and multipole-induced multipole interactions), covalency (charge transfer by orbital overlap), and dispersion (London forces).\nIn weaker hydrogen bonds, hydrogen atoms tend to bond to elements such as sulfur (S) or chlorine (Cl); even carbon (C) can serve as a donor, particularly when the carbon or one of its neighbors is electronegative (e.g., in chloroform, aldehydes and terminal acetylenes). Gradually, it was recognized that there are many examples of weaker hydrogen bonding involving donor other than N, O, or F and/or acceptor Ac with electronegativity approaching that of hydrogen (rather than being much more electronegative). Although weak (\u22481\u00a0kcal/mol), \"non-traditional\" hydrogen bonding interactions are ubiquitous and influence structures of many kinds of materials.\nThe definition of hydrogen bonding has gradually broadened over time to include these weaker attractive interactions. In 2011, an IUPAC Task Group recommended a modern evidence-based definition of hydrogen bonding, which was published in the IUPAC journal \"Pure and Applied Chemistry\". This definition specifies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBond strength.\nHydrogen bonds can vary in strength from weak (1\u20132\u00a0kJ/mol) to strong (161.5\u00a0kJ/mol in the bifluoride ion, ). Typical enthalpies in vapor include:\nThe strength of intermolecular hydrogen bonds is most often evaluated by measurements of equilibria between molecules containing donor and/or acceptor units, most often in solution. The strength of intramolecular hydrogen bonds can be studied with equilibria between conformers with and without hydrogen bonds. The most important method for the identification of hydrogen bonds also in complicated molecules is crystallography, sometimes also NMR-spectroscopy. Structural details, in particular distances between donor and acceptor which are smaller than the sum of the van der Waals radii can be taken as indication of the hydrogen bond strength. One scheme gives the following somewhat arbitrary classification: those that are 15 to 40\u00a0kcal/mol, 5 to 15\u00a0kcal/mol, and &gt;0 to 5\u00a0kcal/mol are considered strong, moderate, and weak, respectively.\nHydrogen bonds involving C-H bonds are both very rare and weak.\nResonance assisted hydrogen bond.\nThe resonance assisted hydrogen bond (commonly abbreviated as RAHB) is a strong type of hydrogen bond. It is characterized by the \u03c0-delocalization that involves the hydrogen and cannot be properly described by the electrostatic model alone. This description of the hydrogen bond has been proposed to describe unusually short distances generally observed between or .\nStructural details.\nThe distance is typically \u2248110\u00a0pm, whereas the distance is \u2248160 to 200\u00a0pm. The typical length of a hydrogen bond in water is 197\u00a0pm. The ideal bond angle depends on the nature of the hydrogen bond donor. The following hydrogen bond angles between a hydrofluoric acid donor and various acceptors have been determined experimentally:\nSpectroscopy.\nStrong hydrogen bonds are revealed by downfield shifts in the 1H NMR spectrum. For example, the acidic proton in the enol tautomer of acetylacetone appears at &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;\u00a015.5, which is about 10\u00a0ppm downfield of a conventional alcohol.\nIn the IR spectrum, hydrogen bonding shifts the stretching frequency to lower energy (i.e. the vibration frequency decreases). This shift reflects a weakening of the bond. Certain hydrogen bonds - improper hydrogen bonds - show a blue shift of the stretching frequency and a decrease in the bond length. H-bonds can also be measured by IR vibrational mode shifts of the acceptor. The amide I mode of backbone carbonyls in \u03b1-helices shifts to lower frequencies when they form H-bonds with side-chain hydroxyl groups. The dynamics of hydrogen bond structures in water can be probed by this OH stretching vibration. In the hydrogen bonding network in protic organic ionic plastic crystals (POIPCs), which are a type of phase change material exhibiting solid-solid phase transitions prior to melting, variable-temperature infrared spectroscopy can reveal the temperature dependence of hydrogen bonds and the dynamics of both the anions and the cations. The sudden weakening of hydrogen bonds during the solid-solid phase transition seems to be coupled with the onset of orientational or rotational disorder of the ions.\nTheoretical considerations.\nHydrogen bonding is of persistent theoretical interest. According to a modern description integrates both the intermolecular O:H lone pair \":\" nonbond and the intramolecular polar-covalent bond associated with repulsive coupling.\nQuantum chemical calculations of the relevant interresidue potential constants (compliance constants) revealed large differences between individual H bonds of the same type. For example, the central interresidue hydrogen bond between guanine and cytosine is much stronger in comparison to the bond between the adenine-thymine pair.\nTheoretically, the bond strength of the hydrogen bonds can be assessed using NCI index, non-covalent interactions index, which allows a visualization of these non-covalent interactions, as its name indicates, using the electron density of the system.\nInterpretations of the anisotropies in the Compton profile of ordinary ice claim that the hydrogen bond is partly covalent. However, this interpretation was challenged and subsequently clarified.\nMost generally, the hydrogen bond can be viewed as a metric-dependent electrostatic scalar field between two or more intermolecular bonds. This is slightly different from the intramolecular bound states of, for example, covalent or ionic bonds. However, hydrogen bonding is generally still a bound state phenomenon, since the interaction energy has a net negative sum. The initial theory of hydrogen bonding proposed by Linus Pauling suggested that the hydrogen bonds had a partial covalent nature. This interpretation remained controversial until NMR techniques demonstrated information transfer between hydrogen-bonded nuclei, a feat that would only be possible if the hydrogen bond contained some covalent character.\nHistory.\nThe concept of hydrogen bonding once was challenging. Linus Pauling credits T. S. Moore and T. F. Winmill with the first mention of the hydrogen bond, in 1912. Moore and Winmill used the hydrogen bond to account for the fact that trimethylammonium hydroxide is a weaker base than tetramethylammonium hydroxide. The description of hydrogen bonding in its better-known setting, water, came some years later, in 1920, from Latimer and Rodebush. In that paper, Latimer and Rodebush cited the work of a fellow scientist at their laboratory, Maurice Loyal Huggins, saying, \"Mr. Huggins of this laboratory in some work as yet unpublished, has used the idea of a hydrogen kernel held between two atoms as a theory in regard to certain organic compounds.\"\nHydrogen bonds in small molecules.\nWater.\nAn ubiquitous example of a hydrogen bond is found between water molecules. In a discrete water molecule, there are two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. The simplest case is a pair of water molecules with one hydrogen bond between them, which is called the water dimer and is often used as a model system. When more molecules are present, as is the case with liquid water, more bonds are possible because the oxygen of one water molecule has two lone pairs of electrons, each of which can form a hydrogen bond with a hydrogen on another water molecule. This can repeat such that every water molecule is H-bonded with up to four other molecules, as shown in the figure (two through its two lone pairs, and two through its two hydrogen atoms). Hydrogen bonding strongly affects the crystal structure of ice, helping to create an open hexagonal lattice. The density of ice is less than the density of water at the same temperature; thus, the solid phase of water floats on the liquid, unlike most other substances.\nLiquid water's high boiling point is due to the high number of hydrogen bonds each molecule can form, relative to its low molecular mass. Owing to the difficulty of breaking these bonds, water has a very high boiling point, melting point, and viscosity compared to otherwise similar liquids not conjoined by hydrogen bonds. Water is unique because its oxygen atom has two lone pairs and two hydrogen atoms, meaning that the total number of bonds of a water molecule is up to four.\nThe number of hydrogen bonds formed by a molecule of liquid water fluctuates with time and temperature. From TIP4P liquid water simulations at 25\u00a0\u00b0C, it was estimated that each water molecule participates in an average of 3.59 hydrogen bonds. At 100\u00a0\u00b0C, this number decreases to 3.24 due to the increased molecular motion and decreased density, while at 0\u00a0\u00b0C, the average number of hydrogen bonds increases to 3.69. Another study found a much smaller number of hydrogen bonds: 2.357 at 25\u00a0\u00b0C. Defining and counting the hydrogen bonds is not straightforward however.\nBecause water may form hydrogen bonds with solute proton donors and acceptors, it may competitively inhibit the formation of solute intermolecular or intramolecular hydrogen bonds. Consequently, hydrogen bonds between or within solute molecules dissolved in water are almost always unfavorable relative to hydrogen bonds between water and the donors and acceptors for hydrogen bonds on those solutes. Hydrogen bonds between water molecules have an average lifetime of 10\u221211 seconds, or 10 picoseconds.\nBifurcated and over-coordinated hydrogen bonds in water.\nA single hydrogen atom can participate in two hydrogen bonds. This type of bonding is called \"bifurcated\" (split in two or \"two-forked\"). It can exist, for instance, in complex organic molecules. It has been suggested that a bifurcated hydrogen atom is an essential step in water reorientation.\nAcceptor-type hydrogen bonds (terminating on an oxygen's lone pairs) are more likely to form bifurcation (it is called overcoordinated oxygen, OCO) than are donor-type hydrogen bonds, beginning on the same oxygen atom's hydrogen atoms.\nOther liquids.\nFor example, hydrogen fluoride\u2014which has three lone pairs on the F atom but only one H atom\u2014can form only two bonds. Ammonia has the opposite problem: three hydrogen atoms but only one lone pair.\n&lt;chem&gt;H-F***H-F***H-F&lt;/chem&gt;\nHydrogen bonds in polymers.\nHydrogen bonding plays an important role in determining the three-dimensional structures and the properties adopted by many proteins. Compared to the , , and bonds that comprise most polymers, hydrogen bonds are far weaker, perhaps 5% as strong. Thus, hydrogen bonds can be broken by chemical or mechanical means while retaining the basic structure of the polymer backbone. This hierarchy of bond strengths (covalent bonds being stronger than hydrogen-bonds being stronger than van der Waals forces) is relevant in the properties of many materials.\nDNA.\nIn these macromolecules, bonding between parts of the same macromolecule cause it to fold into a specific shape, which helps determine the molecule's physiological or biochemical role. For example, the double helical structure of DNA is due largely to hydrogen bonding between its base pairs (as well as pi stacking interactions), which link one complementary strand to the other and enable replication.\nProteins.\nIn the secondary structure of proteins, hydrogen bonds form between the backbone oxygens and amide hydrogens. When the spacing of the amino acid residues participating in a hydrogen bond occurs regularly between positions \"i\" and \"i\" + 4, an alpha helix is formed. When the spacing is less, between positions \"i\" and \"i\" + 3, then a 310 helix is formed. When two strands are joined by hydrogen bonds involving alternating residues on each participating strand, a beta sheet is formed. Hydrogen bonds also play a part in forming the tertiary structure of protein through interaction of R-groups. (See also protein folding).\nBifurcated H-bond systems are common in alpha-helical transmembrane proteins between the backbone amide of residue \"i\" as the H-bond acceptor and two H-bond donors from residue \"i\" + 4: the backbone amide and a side-chain hydroxyl or thiol . The energy preference of the bifurcated H-bond hydroxyl or thiol system is \u22123.4\u00a0kcal/mol or \u22122.6\u00a0kcal/mol, respectively. This type of bifurcated H-bond provides an intrahelical H-bonding partner for polar side-chains, such as serine, threonine, and cysteine within the hydrophobic membrane environments.\nThe role of hydrogen bonds in protein folding has also been linked to osmolyte-induced protein stabilization. Protective osmolytes, such as trehalose and sorbitol, shift the protein folding equilibrium toward the folded state, in a concentration dependent manner. While the prevalent explanation for osmolyte action relies on excluded volume effects that are entropic in nature, circular dichroism (CD) experiments have shown osmolyte to act through an enthalpic effect. The molecular mechanism for their role in protein stabilization is still not well established, though several mechanisms have been proposed. Computer molecular dynamics simulations suggest that osmolytes stabilize proteins by modifying the hydrogen bonds in the protein hydration layer.\nSeveral studies have shown that hydrogen bonds play an important role for the stability between subunits in multimeric proteins. For example, a study of sorbitol dehydrogenase displayed an important hydrogen bonding network which stabilizes the tetrameric quaternary structure within the mammalian sorbitol dehydrogenase protein family.\nA protein backbone hydrogen bond incompletely shielded from water attack is a dehydron. Dehydrons promote the removal of water through proteins or ligand binding. The exogenous dehydration enhances the electrostatic interaction between the amide and carbonyl groups by de-shielding their partial charges. Furthermore, the dehydration stabilizes the hydrogen bond by destabilizing the nonbonded state consisting of dehydrated isolated charges.\nWool, being a protein fibre, is held together by hydrogen bonds, causing wool to recoil when stretched. However, washing at high temperatures can permanently break the hydrogen bonds and a garment may permanently lose its shape.\nOther polymers.\nThe properties of many polymers are affected by hydrogen bonds within and/or between the chains. Prominent examples include cellulose and its derived fibers, such as cotton and flax. In nylon, hydrogen bonds between carbonyl and the amide N\"H\" effectively link adjacent chains, which gives the material mechanical strength. Hydrogen bonds also affect the aramid fibre, where hydrogen bonds stabilize the linear chains laterally. The chain axes are aligned along the fibre axis, making the fibres extremely stiff and strong. Hydrogen-bond networks make both polymers sensitive to humidity levels in the atmosphere because water molecules can diffuse into the surface and disrupt the network. Some polymers are more sensitive than others. Thus nylons are more sensitive than aramids, and nylon 6 more sensitive than nylon-11.\nSymmetric hydrogen bond.\nA symmetric hydrogen bond is a special type of hydrogen bond in which the proton is spaced exactly halfway between two identical atoms. The strength of the bond to each of those atoms is equal. It is an example of a three-center four-electron bond. This type of bond is much stronger than a \"normal\" hydrogen bond. The effective bond order is 0.5, so its strength is comparable to a covalent bond. It is seen in ice at high pressure, and also in the solid phase of many anhydrous acids such as hydrofluoric acid and formic acid at high pressure. It is also seen in the bifluoride ion . Due to severe steric constraint, the protonated form of Proton Sponge (1,8-bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene) and its derivatives also have symmetric hydrogen bonds (), although in the case of protonated Proton Sponge, the assembly is bent.\nDihydrogen bond.\nThe hydrogen bond can be compared with the closely related dihydrogen bond, which is also an intermolecular bonding interaction involving hydrogen atoms. These structures have been known for some time, and well characterized by crystallography; however, an understanding of their relationship to the conventional hydrogen bond, ionic bond, and covalent bond remains unclear. Generally, the hydrogen bond is characterized by a proton acceptor that is a lone pair of electrons in nonmetallic atoms (most notably in the nitrogen, and chalcogen groups). In some cases, these proton acceptors may be pi-bonds or metal complexes. In the dihydrogen bond, however, a metal hydride serves as a proton acceptor, thus forming a hydrogen-hydrogen interaction. Neutron diffraction has shown that the molecular geometry of these complexes is similar to hydrogen bonds, in that the bond length is very adaptable to the metal complex/hydrogen donor system.\nApplication to drugs.\nThe hydrogen bond is relevant to drug design. According to Lipinski's rule of five the majority of orally active drugs have no more than five hydrogen bond donors and fewer than ten hydrogen bond acceptors. These interactions exist between nitrogen\u2013hydrogen and oxygen\u2013hydrogen centers. Many drugs do not, however, obey these \"rules\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13610", "revid": "50682994", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13610", "title": "Heraldry", "text": "Discipline of the design and study of coats of arms\nHeraldry (also known as armory) is a discipline relating to the design, display, study and transmission of armorial bearings. A full heraldic achievement may include a coat of arms on a shield, helmet and crest, together with accompanying devices, such as supporters, badges, heraldic banners and mottoes. Heraldic achievements are formally described in a blazon.\nAlthough the use of various devices to signify individuals and groups goes back to antiquity, both the form and use of such devices varied widely, as the concept of regular, hereditary designs, constituting the distinguishing feature of heraldry, did not develop until the High Middle Ages. It is often claimed that the use of helmets with face guards during this period made it difficult to recognize one's commanders in the field when large armies gathered together for extended periods, necessitating the development of heraldry as a symbolic language, but there is little support for this view.\nThe perceived beauty and pageantry of heraldic designs allowed them to survive the gradual abandonment of armour on the battlefield during the seventeenth century. Heraldry has been described poetically as \"the handmaid of history\", \"the shorthand of history\", and \"the floral border in the garden of history\". In modern times, individuals, public and private organizations, corporations, cities, towns, regions, and other entities use heraldry and its conventions to symbolize their heritage, achievements, and aspirations.\nRelated disciplines include vexillology (the study of flags), genealogy, and the studies of ceremony and rank.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nVarious symbols have been used to represent individuals or groups for thousands of years. The earliest representations of distinct persons and regions in Egyptian art show the use of standards topped with the images or symbols of various gods, and the names of kings appear upon emblems known as serekhs, representing the king's palace, and usually topped with a falcon representing the god Horus, of whom the king was regarded as the earthly incarnation. Similar emblems and devices are found in ancient Mesopotamian art of the same period, and the precursors of heraldic beasts such as the griffin can also be found. In the Bible, the \"Book of Numbers\" refers to the standards and ensigns of the children of Israel, who were commanded to gather beneath these emblems and declare their pedigrees. The Greek and Latin writers frequently describe the shields and symbols of various heroes, and units of the Roman army were sometimes identified by distinctive markings on their shields. At least one pre-historic European object, the Nebra sky disc, is also thought to serve as a heraldic precursor.\nUntil the nineteenth century, it was common for heraldic writers to cite examples such as these, and metaphorical symbols such as the \"Lion of Judah\" or \"Eagle of the Caesars\", as evidence of the antiquity of heraldry itself; and to infer that the great figures of ancient history bore arms representing their noble status and descent. The \"Book of Saint Albans\", compiled in 1486, declares that Christ himself was a gentleman of coat armour. These claims are now regarded as the fantasy of medieval heralds, as there is no evidence of a distinctive symbolic language akin to that of heraldry during this early period; nor do many of the shields described in antiquity bear a close resemblance to those of medieval heraldry; nor is there any evidence that specific symbols or designs were passed down from one generation to the next, representing a particular person or line of descent.\nThe medieval heralds also devised arms for various knights and lords from history and literature. Notable examples are the toads attributed to Pharamond, the cross and martlets of Edward the Confessor, and the various arms attributed to the Nine Worthies and the Knights of the Round Table. These too are readily dismissed as fanciful inventions, rather than evidence of the antiquity of heraldry.\nOrigins of modern heraldry.\nThe development of the modern heraldic language cannot be attributed to a single individual, time, or place. Although certain designs that are now considered heraldic were evidently in use during the eleventh century, most accounts and depictions of shields up to the beginning of the twelfth century contain little or no evidence of their heraldic character. For example, the Bayeux Tapestry, illustrating the Norman invasion of England in 1066, and probably commissioned about 1077, when the cathedral of Bayeux was rebuilt, depicts a number of shields of various shapes and designs, many of which are plain, while others are decorated with dragons, crosses, or other typically heraldic figures. Yet no individual is depicted twice bearing the same arms, nor are any of the descendants of the various persons depicted known to have borne devices resembling those in the tapestry.\nSimilarly, an account of the French knights at the court of the Byzantine emperor Alexius I at the beginning of the twelfth century describes their shields of polished metal, devoid of heraldic design. A Spanish manuscript from 1109 describes both plain and decorated shields, none of which appears to have been heraldic. The Abbey of St. Denis contained a window commemorating the knights who embarked on the Second Crusade in 1147, and was probably made soon after the event; but Montfaucon's illustration of the window before it was destroyed shows no heraldic design on any of the shields.\nIn England, from the time of the Norman conquest, official documents had to be sealed. Beginning in the twelfth century, seals assumed a distinctly heraldic character; a number of seals dating from between 1135 and 1155 appear to show the adoption of heraldic devices in England, France, Germany, Spain, and Italy. A notable example of an early armorial seal is attached to a charter granted by Philip I, Count of Flanders, in 1164. Seals from the latter part of the eleventh and early twelfth centuries show no evidence of heraldic symbolism, but by the end of the twelfth century, seals are uniformly heraldic in nature.\nOne of the earliest known examples of armory as it subsequently came to be practiced can be seen on the tomb of Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, who died in 1151. An enamel, probably commissioned by Geoffrey's widow between 1155 and 1160, depicts him carrying a blue shield decorated with six golden lions rampant. He wears a blue helmet adorned with another lion, and his cloak is lined in vair. A medieval chronicle states that Geoffrey was given a shield of this description when he was knighted by his father-in-law, Henry I, in 1128; but this account probably dates to about 1175.\nThe earlier heraldic writers attributed the lions of England to William the Conqueror, but the earliest evidence of the association of lions with the English crown is a seal bearing two lions passant, used by the future King John during the lifetime of his father, Henry II, who died in 1189. Since Henry was the son of Geoffrey Plantagenet, it seems reasonable to suppose that the adoption of lions as an heraldic emblem by Henry or his sons might have been inspired by Geoffrey's shield. John's elder brother, Richard the Lionheart, who succeeded his father on the throne, is believed to have been the first to have borne the arms of three lions passant-guardant, still the arms of England, having earlier used two lions rampant combatant, which arms may also have belonged to his father. Richard is also credited with having originated the English crest of a lion statant (now statant-guardant).\nThe origins of heraldry are sometimes associated with the Crusades, a series of military campaigns undertaken by Christian armies from 1096 to 1487, with the goal of reconquering Jerusalem and other former Byzantine territories captured by Muslim forces during the seventh century. While there is no evidence that heraldic art originated in the course of the Crusades, there is no reason to doubt that the gathering of large armies, drawn from across Europe for a united cause, would have encouraged the adoption of armorial bearings as a means of identifying one's commanders in the field, or that it helped disseminate the principles of armory across Europe. At least two distinctive features of heraldry are generally accepted as products of the crusaders: the surcoat, an outer garment worn over the armor to protect the wearer from the heat of the sun, was often decorated with the same devices that appeared on a knight's shield. It is from this garment that the phrase \"coat of arms\" is derived. Also the lambrequin, or mantling, that depends from the helmet and frames the shield in modern heraldry, began as a practical covering for the helmet and the back of the neck during the Crusades, serving much the same function as the surcoat. Its slashed or scalloped edge, today rendered as billowing flourishes, is thought to have originated from hard wearing in the field, or as a means of deadening a sword blow and perhaps entangling the attacker's weapon.\nHeralds and heraldic authorities.\nThe spread of armorial bearings across Europe gave rise to a new occupation: the herald, originally a type of messenger employed by noblemen, assumed the responsibility of learning and knowing the rank, pedigree, and heraldic devices of various knights and lords, as well as the rules governing the design and description, or \"blazoning\" of arms, and the precedence of their bearers. As early as the late thirteenth century, certain heralds in the employ of monarchs were given the title \"King of Heralds\", which eventually became \"King of Arms.\"\nIn the earliest period, arms were assumed by their bearers without any need for heraldic authority. However, by the middle of the fourteenth century, the principle that only a single individual was entitled to bear a particular coat of arms was generally accepted, and disputes over the ownership of arms seems to have led to gradual establishment of heraldic authorities to regulate their use. The earliest known work of heraldic jurisprudence, \"De Insigniis et Armis\", was written about 1350 by Bartolus de Saxoferrato, a professor of law at the University of Padua. The most celebrated armorial dispute in English heraldry is that of \"Scrope v Grosvenor\" (1390), in which two different men claimed the right to bear \"azure, a bend or\". The continued proliferation of arms, and the number of disputes arising from different men assuming the same arms, led Henry V to issue a proclamation in 1419, forbidding all those who had not borne arms at the Battle of Agincourt from assuming arms, except by inheritance or a grant from the crown.\nBeginning in the reign of Henry VIII of England, the English Kings of Arms were commanded to make \"visitations\", in which they traveled about the country, recording arms borne under proper authority, and requiring those who bore arms without authority either to obtain authority for them, or cease their use. Arms borne improperly were to be taken down and defaced. The first such visitation began in 1530, and the last was carried out in 1700, although no new commissions to carry out visitations were made after the accession of William III in 1689. There is little evidence that Scottish heralds ever went on visitations.\nIn 1484, during the reign of Richard III, the various heralds employed by the crown were incorporated into England's College of Arms, through which all new grants of arms would eventually be issued. The college currently consists of three Kings of Arms, assisted by six Heralds, and four Pursuivants, or junior officers of arms, all under the authority of the Earl Marshal; but all of the arms granted by the college are granted by the authority of the crown. In Scotland Court of the Lord Lyon King of Arms oversees the heraldry, and holds court sessions which are an official part of Scotland's court system.\nSimilar bodies regulate the granting of arms in other monarchies and several members of the Commonwealth of Nations, but in most other countries there is no heraldic authority, and no law preventing anyone from assuming whatever arms they please, provided that they do not infringe upon the arms of another.\nLater uses and developments.\nAlthough heraldry originated from military necessity, it soon found itself at home in the pageantry of the medieval tournament. The opportunity for knights and lords to display their heraldic bearings in a competitive medium led to further refinements, such as the development of elaborate tournament helms, and further popularised the art of heraldry throughout Europe. Prominent burghers and corporations, including many cities and towns, assumed or obtained grants of arms, with only nominal military associations. Heraldic devices were depicted in various contexts, such as religious and funerary art, and in using a wide variety of media, including stonework, carved wood, enamel, stained glass, and embroidery.\nAs the rise of firearms rendered the mounted knight increasingly irrelevant during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the tournament faded into history, the military character of heraldry gave way to its use as a decorative art. Freed from the limitations of actual shields and the need for arms to be easily distinguished in combat, heraldic artists designed increasingly elaborate achievements, culminating in the development of \"landscape heraldry\", incorporating realistic depictions of landscapes, during the latter part of the eighteenth and early part of the nineteenth century. These fell out of fashion during the mid-nineteenth century, when a renewed interest in the history of armory led to the re-evaluation of earlier designs, and a new appreciation for the medieval origins of the art. In particular, a late use of heraldic imagery has been in patriotic commemorations and nationalistic propaganda during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Since the late nineteenth century, heraldry has focused on the use of varied lines of partition and little-used ordinaries to produce new and unique designs.\nHeraldic achievement.\nElements of an achievement.\nA heraldic achievement consists of a shield of arms, the coat of arms, or simply coat, together with all of its accompanying elements, such as a crest, supporters, and other heraldic embellishments. The term \"coat of arms\" technically refers to the shield of arms itself, but the phrase is commonly used to refer to the entire achievement. The one indispensable element of a coat of arms is the shield; many ancient coats of arms consist of nothing else, but no achievement or armorial bearings exists without a coat of arms.\nFrom a very early date, illustrations of arms were frequently embellished with helmets placed above the shields. These in turn came to be decorated with fan-shaped or sculptural crests, often incorporating elements from the shield of arms; as well as a wreath or torse, or sometimes a coronet, from which depended the lambrequin or mantling. To these elements, modern heraldry often adds a motto displayed on a ribbon, typically below the shield. The helmet is borne of right, and forms no part of a grant of arms; it may be assumed without authority by anyone entitled to bear arms, together with mantling and whatever motto the armiger may desire. The crest, however, together with the torse or coronet from which it arises, must be granted or confirmed by the relevant heraldic authority.\nIf the bearer is entitled to the ribbon, collar, or badge of a knightly order, it may encircle or depend from the shield. Some arms, particularly those of the nobility, are further embellished with supporters, heraldic figures standing alongside or behind the shield; often these stand on a compartment, typically a mound of earth and grass, on which other badges, symbols, or heraldic banners may be displayed. The most elaborate achievements sometimes display the entire coat of arms beneath a pavilion, an embellished tent or canopy of the type associated with the medieval tournament, though this is only very rarely found in English or Scots achievements.\nShield.\nThe primary element of a heraldic achievement is the shield, or escutcheon, upon which the coat of arms is depicted. All of the other elements of an achievement are designed to decorate and complement these arms, but only the shield of arms is required. The shape of the shield, like many other details, is normally left to the discretion of the heraldic artist, and many different shapes have prevailed during different periods of heraldic design, and in different parts of Europe.\nOne shape alone is normally reserved for a specific purpose: the lozenge, a diamond-shaped escutcheon, was traditionally used to display the arms of women, on the grounds that shields, as implements of war, were inappropriate for this purpose. This distinction was not always strictly adhered to, and a general exception was usually made for sovereigns, whose arms represented an entire nation. Sometimes an oval shield, or cartouche, was substituted for the lozenge; this shape was also widely used for the arms of clerics in French, Spanish, and Italian heraldry, although it was never reserved for their use. In recent years, the use of the cartouche for women's arms has become general in Scottish heraldry, while both Scottish and Irish authorities have permitted a traditional shield under certain circumstances, and in Canadian heraldry the shield is now regularly granted.\nThe whole surface of the escutcheon is termed the field, which may be plain, consisting of a single tincture, or divided into multiple sections of differing tinctures by various lines of partition; and any part of the field may be \"sem\u00e9\", or powdered with small charges. The edges and adjacent parts of the escutcheon are used to identify the placement of various heraldic charges; the upper edge, and the corresponding upper third of the shield, are referred to as the chief; the lower part is the base. The sides of the shield are known as the dexter and sinister flanks, although these terms are based on the point of view of the bearer of the shield, who would be standing behind it; to the observer, and in all heraldic illustration, the dexter is on the left side, and the sinister on the right.\nThe placement of various charges may also refer to a number of specific points: nine in number according to some authorities, but eleven according to others. The three most important are \"fess point\", located in the visual center of the shield; the \"honour point\", located midway between fess point and the chief; and the \"nombril point\", located midway between fess point and the base. The other points include \"dexter chief\", \"center chief\", and \"sinister chief\", running along the upper part of the shield from left to right, above the honour point; \"dexter flank\" and \"sinister flank\", on the sides approximately level with fess point; and \"dexter base\", \"middle base\", and \"sinister base\" along the lower part of the shield, below the nombril point.\nTinctures.\nOne of the most distinctive qualities of heraldry is the use of a limited palette of colours and patterns, usually referred to as tinctures. These are divided into three categories, known as \"metals\", \"colours\", and \"furs\".\nThe metals are \"or\" and \"argent\", representing gold and silver, respectively, although in practice they are usually depicted as yellow and white. Five colours are universally recognized: \"gules\", or red; \"sable\", or black; \"azure\", or blue; \"vert\", or green; and \"purpure\", or purple; and most heraldic authorities also admit two additional colours, known as \"sanguine\" or \"murrey\", a dark red or mulberry colour between gules and purpure, and \"tenn\u00e9\", an orange or dark yellow to brown colour. These last two are quite rare, and are often referred to as \"stains\", from the belief that they were used to represent some dishonourable act, although in fact there is no evidence that this use existed outside of fanciful heraldic writers. Perhaps owing to the realization that there is really no such thing as a \"stain\" in genuine heraldry, as well as the desire to create new and unique designs, the use of these colours for general purposes has become accepted in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Occasionally one meets with other colours, particularly in continental heraldry, although they are not generally regarded among the standard heraldic colours. Among these are \"cendr\u00e9e\", or ash-colour; \"brun\u00e2tre\", or brown; \"bleu-c\u00e9leste\" or \"bleu de ciel\", sky blue; \"amaranth\" or \"columbine\", a bright violet-red or pink colour; and \"carnation\", commonly used to represent flesh in French heraldry. A more recent addition is the use of \"copper\" as a metal in one or two Canadian coats of arms.\nThere are two basic types of heraldic fur, known as ermine and vair, but over the course of centuries each has developed a number of variations. Ermine represents the fur of the stoat, a type of weasel, in its white winter coat, when it is called an ermine. It consists of a white, or occasionally silver field, powdered with black figures known as \"ermine spots\", representing the black tip of the animal's tail. Ermine was traditionally used to line the cloaks and caps of the nobility. The shape of the heraldic ermine spot has varied considerably over time, and nowadays is typically drawn as an arrowhead surmounted by three small dots, but older forms may be employed at the artist's discretion. When the field is sable and the ermine spots argent, the same pattern is termed \"ermines\"; when the field is \"or\" rather than argent, the fur is termed \"erminois\"; and when the field is sable and the ermine spots \"or\", it is termed \"pean\".\nVair represents the winter coat of the red squirrel, which is blue-grey on top and white underneath. To form the linings of cloaks, the pelts were sewn together, forming an undulating, bell-shaped pattern, with interlocking light and dark rows. The heraldic fur is depicted with interlocking rows of argent and azure, although the shape of the pelts, usually referred to as \"vair bells\", is usually left to the artist's discretion. In the modern form, the bells are depicted with straight lines and sharp angles, and meet only at points; in the older, undulating pattern, now known as \"vair ond\u00e9\" or \"vair ancien\", the bells of each tincture are curved and joined at the base. There is no fixed rule as to whether the argent bells should be at the top or the bottom of each row. At one time vair commonly came in three sizes, and this distinction is sometimes encountered in continental heraldry; if the field contains fewer than four rows, the fur is termed \"gros vair\" or \"beffroi\"; if of six or more, it is \"menu-vair\", or miniver.\nA common variation is \"counter-vair\", in which alternating rows are reversed, so that the bases of the vair bells of each tincture are joined to those of the same tincture in the row above or below. When the rows are arranged so that the bells of each tincture form vertical columns, it is termed \"vair in pale\"; in continental heraldry one may encounter \"vair in bend\", which is similar to vair in pale, but diagonal. When alternating rows are reversed as in counter-vair, and then displaced by half the width of one bell, it is termed \"vair in point\", or wave-vair. A form peculiar to German heraldry is \"alternate vair\", in which each vair bell is divided in half vertically, with half argent and half azure. All of these variations can also be depicted in the form known as \"potent\", in which the shape of the vair bell is replaced by a \"T\"-shaped figure, known as a potent from its resemblance to a crutch. Although it is really just a variation of vair, it is frequently treated as a separate fur.\nWhen the same patterns are composed of tinctures other than argent and azure, they are termed \"vair\u00e9\" or \"vairy\" of those tinctures, rather than \"vair\"; \"potent\u00e9\" of other colours may also be found. Usually vair\u00e9 will consist of one metal and one colour, but ermine or one of its variations may also be used, and vair\u00e9 of four tinctures, usually two metals and two colours, is sometimes found.\nThree additional furs are sometimes encountered in continental heraldry; in French and Italian heraldry one meets with \"plumet\u00e9\" or \"plumetty\", in which the field appears to be covered with feathers, and \"papelonn\u00e9\", in which it is decorated with scales. In German heraldry one may encounter \"kursch\", or vair bellies, depicted as brown and furry; all of these probably originated as variations of vair.\nConsiderable latitude is given to the heraldic artist in depicting the heraldic tinctures; there is no fixed shade or hue to any of them.\nWhenever an object is depicted as it appears in nature, rather than in one or more of the heraldic tinctures, it is termed \"proper\", or the colour of nature. This does not seem to have been done in the earliest heraldry, but examples are known from at least the seventeenth century. While there can be no objection to the occasional depiction of objects in this manner, the overuse of charges in their natural colours is often cited as indicative of bad heraldic practice. The practice of landscape heraldry, which flourished in the latter part of the eighteenth and early part of the nineteenth century, made extensive use of non-heraldic colours.\nOne of the most important conventions of heraldry is the so-called \"rule of tincture\". To provide for contrast and visibility, metals should never be placed on metals, and colours should never be placed on colours. This rule does not apply to charges which cross a division of the field, which is partly metal and partly colour; nor, strictly speaking, does it prevent a field from consisting of two metals or two colours, although this is unusual. Furs are considered amphibious, and neither metal nor colour; but in practice ermine and erminois are usually treated as metals, while ermines and pean are treated as colours. This rule is strictly adhered to in British armory, with only rare exceptions; although generally observed in continental heraldry, it is not adhered to quite as strictly. Arms which violate this rule are sometimes known as \"puzzle arms\", of which the most famous example is the arms of the Kingdom of Jerusalem, consisting of gold crosses on a silver field.\nVariations of the field.\nThe field of a shield, or less often a charge or crest, is sometimes made up of a pattern of colours, or \"variation\". A pattern of horizontal (barwise) stripes, for example, is called \"barry\", while a pattern of vertical (palewise) stripes is called \"paly\". A pattern of diagonal stripes may be called \"bendy\" or \"bendy sinister\", depending on the direction of the stripes. Other variations include \"chevrony\", \"gyronny\" and \"chequy\". Wave shaped stripes are termed \"undy\". For further variations, these are sometimes combined to produce patterns of \"barry-bendy\", \"paly-bendy\", \"lozengy\" and \"fusilly\". Sem\u00e9s, or patterns of repeated charges, are also considered variations of the field. The Rule of tincture applies to all sem\u00e9s and variations of the field.\nDivisions of the field.\nThe field of a shield in heraldry can be divided into more than one tincture, as can the various heraldic charges. Many coats of arms consist simply of a division of the field into two contrasting tinctures. These are considered divisions of a shield, so the rule of tincture can be ignored. For example, a shield divided azure and gules would be perfectly acceptable. A line of partition may be straight or it may be varied. The variations of partition lines can be wavy, indented, embattled, engrailed, nebuly, or made into myriad other forms; see Line (heraldry).\nOrdinaries.\nIn the early days of heraldry, very simple bold rectilinear shapes were painted on shields. These could be easily recognized at a long distance and could be easily remembered. They therefore served the main purpose of heraldry: identification. As more complicated shields came into use, these bold shapes were set apart in a separate class as the \"honourable ordinaries\". They act as charges and are always written first in blazon. Unless otherwise specified they extend to the edges of the field. Though ordinaries are not easily defined, they are generally described as including the cross, the fess, the pale, the bend, the chevron, the saltire, and the pall.\nThere is a separate class of charges called sub-ordinaries which are of a geometrical shape subordinate to the ordinary. According to Friar, they are distinguished by their order in blazon. The sub-ordinaries include the inescutcheon, the orle, the tressure, the double tressure, the bordure, the chief, the canton, the label, and flaunches.\nOrdinaries may appear in parallel series, in which case blazons in English give them different names such as pallets, bars, bendlets, and chevronels. French blazon makes no such distinction between these diminutives and the ordinaries when borne singly. Unless otherwise specified an ordinary is drawn with straight lines, but each may be indented, embattled, wavy, engrailed, or otherwise have their lines varied.\nCharges.\nA charge is any object or figure placed on a heraldic shield or on any other object of an armorial composition. Any object found in nature or technology may appear as a heraldic charge in armory. Charges can be animals, objects, or geometric shapes. Apart from the ordinaries, the most frequent charges are the cross \u2013 with its hundreds of variations \u2013 and the lion and eagle. Other common animals are bears, stags, wild boars, martlets, wolves and fish. Dragons, bats, unicorns, griffins, and other monsters appear as charges and as supporters.\nAnimals are found in various stereotyped positions or \"attitudes\". Quadrupeds can often be found rampant (standing on the left hind foot). Another frequent position is passant, or walking, like the lions of the coat of arms of England. Eagles are almost always shown with their wings spread, or displayed. A pair of wings conjoined is called a vol.\nIn English heraldry the crescent, mullet, martlet, annulet, fleur-de-lis, and rose may be added to a shield to distinguish cadet branches of a family from the senior line. These cadency marks are usually shown smaller than normal charges, but it still does not follow that a shield containing such a charge belongs to a cadet branch. All of these charges occur frequently in basic undifferenced coats of arms.\nMarshalling.\nTo \"marshal\" two or more coats of arms is to combine them in one shield, to express inheritance, claims to property, or the occupation of an office. This can be done in a number of ways, of which the simplest is impalement: dividing the field \"per pale\" and putting one whole coat in each half. Impalement replaced the earlier dimidiation \u2013 combining the dexter half of one coat with the sinister half of another \u2013 because dimidiation can create ambiguity between, for example, a bend and a chevron. \"Dexter\" (from Latin \"dextra\", \"right\") means to the right from the viewpoint of the bearer of the arms and \"sinister\" (from Latin \"sinistra\", \"left\") means to the bearer's left. The dexter side is considered the side of greatest honour (see also dexter and sinister).\nA more versatile method is quartering, division of the field by both vertical and horizontal lines. This practice originated in Spain (Castile and Le\u00f3n) after the 13th century. As the name implies, the usual number of divisions is four, but the principle has been extended to very large numbers of \"quarters\".\nQuarters are numbered from the dexter chief (the corner nearest to the right shoulder of a man standing behind the shield), proceeding across the top row, and then across the next row and so on. When three coats are quartered, the first is repeated as the fourth; when only two coats are quartered, the second is also repeated as the third. The quarters of a personal coat of arms correspond to the ancestors from whom the bearer has inherited arms, normally in the same sequence as if the pedigree were laid out with the father's father's ... father (to as many generations as necessary) on the extreme left and the mother's mother's...mother on the extreme right. A few lineages have accumulated hundreds of quarters, though such a number is usually displayed only in documentary contexts. The Scottish and Spanish traditions resist allowing more than four quarters, preferring to subdivide one or more \"grand quarters\" into sub-quarters as needed.\nThe third common mode of marshalling is with an inescutcheon, a small shield placed in front of the main shield. In Britain this is most often an \"escutcheon of pretence\" indicating, in the arms of a married couple, that the wife is an heraldic heiress (i.e., she inherits a coat of arms because she has no brothers). In continental Europe an inescutcheon (sometimes called a \"heart shield\") usually carries the ancestral arms of a monarch or noble whose domains are represented by the quarters of the main shield.\nIn German heraldry, animate charges in combined coats usually turn to face the centre of the composition.\nHelm and crest.\nIn English the word \"crest\" is commonly (but erroneously) used to refer to an entire heraldic achievement of armorial bearings. The technical use of the heraldic term crest refers to just one component of a complete achievement. The crest rests on top of a helmet which itself rests on the most important part of the achievement: the shield.\nThe modern crest has grown out of the three-dimensional figure placed on the top of the mounted knights' helms as a further means of identification. In most heraldic traditions, a woman does not display a crest, though this tradition is being relaxed in some heraldic jurisdictions, and the stall plate of Lady Marion Fraser in the Thistle Chapel in St Giles, Edinburgh, shows her coat on a lozenge but with helmet, crest, and motto.\nThe crest is usually found on a wreath of twisted cloth and sometimes within a coronet. Crest-coronets are generally simpler than coronets of rank, but several specialized forms exist; for example, in Canada, descendants of the United Empire Loyalists are entitled to use a Loyalist military coronet (for descendants of members of Loyalist regiments) or Loyalist civil coronet (for others).\nWhen the helm and crest are shown, they are usually accompanied by a mantling. This was originally a cloth worn over the back of the helmet as partial protection against heating by sunlight. Today it takes the form of a stylized cloak hanging from the helmet. Typically in British heraldry, the outer surface of the mantling is of the principal colour in the shield and the inner surface is of the principal metal, though peers in the United Kingdom use standard colourings (Gules doubled Argent - Red/White) regardless of rank or the colourings of their arms. The mantling is sometimes conventionally depicted with a ragged edge, as if damaged in combat, though the edges of most are simply decorated at the emblazoner's discretion.\nClergy often refrain from displaying a helm or crest in their heraldic achievements. Members of the clergy may display appropriate headwear. This often takes the form of a small crowned, wide brimmed hat called a galero with the colours and tassels denoting rank; or, in the case of Papal coats of arms until the inauguration of Pope Benedict XVI in 2005, an elaborate triple crown known as a tiara. Benedict broke with tradition to substitute a mitre in his arms. Orthodox and Presbyterian clergy do sometimes adopt other forms of headgear to ensign their shields. In the Anglican tradition, clergy members may pass crests on to their offspring, but rarely display them on their own shields.\nMottoes.\nAn armorial motto is a phrase or collection of words intended to describe the motivation or intention of the armigerous person or corporation. This can form a pun on the family name as in Thomas Nevile's motto \"Ne vile velis\". Mottoes are generally changed at will and do not make up an integral part of the armorial achievement. Mottoes can typically be found on a scroll under the shield. In Scottish heraldry, where the motto is granted as part of the blazon, it is usually shown on a scroll above the crest, and may not be changed at will. A motto may be in any language.\nSupporters and other insignia.\nSupporters are human or animal figures or, very rarely, inanimate objects, usually placed on either side of a coat of arms as though supporting it. In many traditions, these have acquired strict guidelines for use by certain social classes. On the European continent, there are often fewer restrictions on the use of supporters. In the United Kingdom, only peers of the realm, a few baronets, senior members of orders of knighthood, and some corporate bodies are granted supporters. Often, these can have local significance or a historical link to the armiger.\nIf the armiger has the title of baron, hereditary knight, or higher, he may display a coronet of rank above the shield. In the United Kingdom, this is shown between the shield and helmet, though it is often above the crest in Continental heraldry.\nAnother addition that can be made to a coat of arms is the insignia of a baronet or of an order of knighthood. This is usually represented by a collar or similar band surrounding the shield. When the arms of a knight and his wife are shown in one achievement, the insignia of knighthood surround the husband's arms only, and the wife's arms are customarily surrounded by an ornamental garland of leaves for visual balance.\nDifferencing and cadency.\nSince arms pass from parents to offspring, and there is frequently more than one child per couple, it is necessary to distinguish the arms of siblings and extended family members from the original arms as passed on from eldest son to eldest son. Over time several schemes have been used.\nBlazon.\nTo \"blazon\" arms means to describe them using the formal language of heraldry. This language has its own vocabulary and syntax, or rules governing word order, which becomes essential for comprehension when blazoning a complex coat of arms. The verb comes from the Middle English \"blasoun\", itself a derivative of the French \"blason\" meaning \"shield\". The system of blazoning arms used in English-speaking countries today was developed by heraldic officers in the Middle Ages. The blazon includes a description of the arms contained within the escutcheon or shield, the crest, supporters where present, motto and other insignia. Complex rules, such as the rule of tincture, apply to the physical and artistic form of newly created arms, and a thorough understanding of these rules is essential to the art of heraldry. Though heraldic forms initially were broadly similar across Europe, several national styles had developed by the end of the Middle Ages, and artistic and blazoning styles today range from the very simple to extraordinarily complex.\nNational styles.\nHeraldry emerged across western Europe almost simultaneously in the various countries. Originally, heraldic style was very similar from country to country. Over time, heraldic tradition diverged into four broad styles: German-Nordic, Gallo-British, Latin, and Eastern. In addition, it can be argued that newer national heraldic traditions, such as South African and Canadian heraldry, have emerged in the 20th century.\nGermanic heraldries.\nGerman-Nordic heraldry.\nCoats of arms in Germany, the Nordic countries, Estonia, Latvia, the Czech lands and northern Switzerland generally change very little over time. Marks of difference are very rare in this tradition, as are heraldic furs. One of the most striking characteristics of German-Nordic heraldry is the treatment of the crest. Often, the same design is repeated in the shield and the crest. The use of multiple crests is also common. The crest is rarely used separately as in British heraldry, but can sometimes serve as a mark of difference between different branches of a family. Torse is optional. Heraldic courtoisie is observed: that is, charges in a composite shield (or two shields displayed together) usually turn to face the centre.\nCoats consisting only of a divided field are somewhat more frequent in Germany than elsewhere.\nDutch heraldry.\nThe Low Countries were great centres of heraldry in medieval times. One of the famous armorials is the Gelre Armorial or \"Wapenboek\", written between 1370 and 1414. Coats of arms in the Netherlands were not controlled by an official heraldic system like the two in the United Kingdom, nor were they used solely by noble families. Any person could develop and use a coat of arms if they wished to do so, provided they did not usurp someone else's arms, and historically, this right was enshrined in Roman Dutch law. As a result, many merchant families had coats of arms even though they were not members of the nobility. These are sometimes referred to as \"burgher arms,\" and it is thought that most arms of this type were adopted while the Netherlands was a republic (1581\u20131806). This heraldic tradition was also exported to the erstwhile Dutch colonies. Dutch heraldry is characterised by its simple and rather sober style, and in this sense, is closer to its medieval origins than the elaborate styles which developed in other heraldic traditions.\nGallo-British heraldry.\nThe use of cadency marks to difference arms within the same family and the use of semy fields are distinctive features of Gallo-British heraldry (in Scotland the most significant mark of cadency being the bordure, the small brisures playing a very minor role). Marks of cadency are mandatory in Scotland, where no two persons can own identical arms at a time. It is common to see heraldic furs used. In the United Kingdom, the style is notably still controlled by royal officers of arms. French heraldry experienced a period of strict rules of construction under Napoleon. English and Scots heraldries make greater use of supporters than other European countries.\nLatin heraldry.\nThe heraldry of Latin countries, namely southern France, Andorra, Spain, and Italy, and except for northern France (using the Gallo-British style), Portugal (which does use crests), and Romania (using the Eastern European style), is characterized by a lack of crests, and uniquely shaped shields. Portuguese and Spanish heraldry, which together form a larger Iberian tradition of heraldry, occasionally introduce words to the shield of arms, a practice usually avoided in British heraldry. Latin heraldry is known for extensive use of quartering, because of armorial inheritance via the male and the female lines. Moreover, Italian heraldry is dominated by the Roman Catholic Church, featuring many shields and achievements, most bearing some reference to the Church.\nTrees are frequent charges in Latin arms. Charged bordures, including bordures inscribed with words, are seen often in Spain.\nEastern European heraldry.\nEastern European heraldry is in the traditions developed in Eastern Europe and the Balkans, which includes all Slavic countries (except for Czechia, which uses the German-Nordic style), Albania, Hungary, Lithuania and Romania, and excludes Greece, Cyprus and Turkey. Eastern coats of arms are characterized by a pronounced, territorial, clan system\u2014often, entire villages or military groups were granted the same coat of arms irrespective of family relationships. In Poland, nearly six hundred unrelated families are known to bear the same Jastrz\u0119biec coat of arms. Marks of cadency are almost unknown, and shields are generally very simple, with only one charge. Many heraldic shields derive from ancient house marks. At least fifteen per cent of all Hungarian personal arms bear a severed Turk's head, referring to their wars against the Ottoman Empire.\nQuasi-heraldic emblems.\nTrue heraldry, as now generally understood, has its roots in medieval Europe. However, there have been other historical cultures which have used symbols and emblems to represent families or individuals, and in some cases these symbols have been adopted into Western heraldry. For example, the coat of arms of the Ottoman Empire incorporated the royal tughra as part of its crest, along with such traditional Western heraldic elements as the escutcheon and the compartment.\nGreek symbols.\nAncient Greeks were among the first civilizations to use symbols consistently in order to identify a warrior, clan or a state. The first record of a shield blazon is illustrated in Aeschylus' tragedy \"Seven Against Thebes\".\nMon.\n, also , , and , are Japanese emblems used to decorate and identify an individual or family. While \"mon\" is an encompassing term that may refer to any such device, \"kamon\" and \"mondokoro\" refer specifically to emblems used to identify a family. An authoritative \"mon\" reference compiles Japan's 241 general categories of \"mon\" based on structural resemblance (a single \"mon\" may belong to multiple categories), with 5116 distinct individual \"mon\" (it is however well acknowledged that there exist lost or obscure \"mon\" that are not in this compilation).\nThe devices are similar to the badges and coats of arms in European heraldic tradition, which likewise are used to identify individuals and families. \"Mon\" are often referred to as crests in Western literature, another European heraldic device similar to the \"mon\" in function.\nJapanese helmets (\"kabuto\") also incorporated elements similar to crests, called \"datemono\", which helped identify the wearer while they were concealed by armour. These devices sometimes incorporated \"mon\", and some figures, like Date Masamune, were well known for their helmet designs.\nSocialist emblems.\nCommunist states often followed a unique style characterized by communist symbolism. Although commonly called \"coats of arms\", most such devices are not actually coats of arms in the traditional heraldic sense and should therefore, in a strict sense, not be called arms at all. Many communist governments purposely diverged from the traditional forms of European heraldry in order to distance themselves from the monarchies that they usually replaced, with actual coats of arms being seen as symbols of the monarchs.\nThe Soviet Union was the first state to use this type of emblem, beginning at its creation in 1922. The style became more widespread after World War II, when many other communist states were established. Even a few non-socialist states have adopted the style, for various reasons\u2014usually because communists had helped them to gain independence\u2014but also when no apparent connection to a Communist nation exists, such as the emblem of Italy. After the fall of the Soviet Union and the other communist states in Eastern Europe in 1989\u20131991, this style of heraldry was often abandoned for the old heraldic practices, with many new governments reinstating the traditional heraldry that was previously cast aside.\nTamgas.\nA tamga or tamgha \"stamp, seal\" (, Turkic: tamga) is an abstract seal or stamp used by Eurasian nomadic peoples and by cultures influenced by them. The tamga was normally the emblem of a particular tribe, clan or family. They were common among the Eurasian nomads throughout Classical Antiquity and the Middle Ages (including Alans, Mongols, Sarmatians, Scythians and Turkic peoples). Similar \"tamga-like\" symbols were sometimes also adopted by sedentary peoples adjacent to the Pontic-Caspian steppe both in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, such as the East Slavs, whose ancient royal symbols are sometimes referred to as \"tamgas\" and have similar appearance.\nUnlike European coats of arms, tamgas were not always inherited, and could stand for families or clans (for example, when denoting territory, livestock, or religious items) as well as for specific individuals (such as when used for weapons, or for royal seals). One could also adopt the tamga of one's master or ruler, therefore signifying said master's patronage. Outside of denoting ownership, tamgas also possessed religious significance, and were used as talismans to protect one from curses (it was believed that, as symbols of family, tamgas embodied the power of one's heritage). Tamgas depicted geometric shapes, images of animals, items, or glyphs. As they were usually inscribed using heavy and unwieldy instruments, such as knives or brands, and on different surfaces (meaning that their appearance could vary somewhat), tamgas were always simple and stylised, and needed to be laconic and easily recognisable.\nTughras.\nEvery sultan of the Ottoman Empire had his own monogram, called the tughra, which served as a royal symbol. A coat of arms in the European heraldic sense was created in the late 19th century. Hampton Court requested from Ottoman Empire the coat of arms to be included in their collection. As the coat of arms had not been previously used in Ottoman Empire, it was designed after this request and the final design was adopted by Sultan Abdul Hamid II on April 17, 1882. It included two flags: the flag of the Ottoman Dynasty, which had a crescent and a star on red base, and the flag of the Islamic Caliph, which had three crescents on a green base.\nAncient Iran.\nThe word of \"arms\" in the Pahlavi scripts is \ud802\udf65\ud802\udf62\ud802\udf71\ud802\udf60\ud802\udf65 which is read as ni\u0161\u0101n (Persian: \u0646\u0634\u0627\u0646). In Islamic sources there are some references to the existence of ni\u0161\u0101ns in ancient Iran. It is suggested that the words arms, mon, and ni\u0161\u0101n are oscillating on a same semantic context as they all satisfy a similar need: Heraldic identification. al-Masudi writes that ni\u0161\u0101ns (Arabic: \u0634\u0639\u0627\u0631) used by Parthians and Sasanians. When al-Masudi talks about Sasanians, he describes their arms as \"flags of Persians and their emblems\" (\u0631\u0627\u06cc\u0627\u062a \u0627\u0644\u0641\u0631\u0633 \u0648 \u0623\u0639\u0644\u0627\u0645\u0647\u0645). In the world of \"pahlavans\" (\u067e\u0647\u0644\u0648\u0627\u0646\u0627\u0646) of Iranian national narratives, as same as the world of European knights, each army under the command of a pahlavan from one of the noble families identified by a ni\u0161\u0101n on its flag. Usually, when the pahlavans were presented in the court of the king of Iran, they were distinguishing each troop from another with a flag which had their lords' ni\u0161\u0101ns on itself.\nModern heraldry.\nToday, institutions, companies, and private persons continue using coats of arms as their pictorial identification. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the English Kings of Arms, Scotland's Lord Lyon King of Arms, and the Chief Herald of Ireland continue making grants of arms. There are heraldic authorities in Canada (Canadian Heraldic Authority), South Africa, Spain, and Sweden that grant or register coats of arms. In South Africa, the right to armorial bearings is also determined by Roman Dutch law, due to its origins as a 17th-century colony of the Netherlands.\nHeraldic societies abound in Africa, Asia, Australasia, the Americas and Europe. Heraldry aficionados participate in the Society for Creative Anachronism, medieval revivals, micronations and other related projects. Modern armigers use heraldry to express ancestral and personal heritage as well as professional, academic, civic, and national pride. Little is left of class identification in modern heraldry, where the emphasis is more than ever on expression of identity.\nHeraldry continues to build on its rich tradition in academia, government, guilds and professional associations, religious institutions, and the military. Nations and their subdivisions \u2013 provinces, states, counties, cities, etc. \u2013 continue to build on the traditions of civic heraldry. The Roman Catholic Church, Anglican churches, and other religious institutions maintain the traditions of ecclesiastical heraldry for clergy, religious orders, and schools.\nMany of these institutions have begun to employ blazons representing modern objects. For example, some heraldic symbols issued by the United States Army Institute of Heraldry incorporate symbols such as guns, airplanes, or locomotives. Some scientific institutions incorporate symbols of modern science such as the atom or particular scientific instruments. The arms of the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority uses traditional heraldic symbols to depict the harnessing of atomic power. Locations with strong associations to particular industries may incorporate associated symbols. The coat of arms of Stenungsund Municipality in Sweden incorporates a hydrocarbon molecule, alluding to the historical significance of the petrochemical industry in the region.\nHeraldry in countries with heraldic authorities continues to be regulated generally by laws granting rights to arms and recognizing possession of arms as well as protecting against their misuse. Countries without heraldic authorities usually treat coats of arms as creative property in the manner of logos, offering protection under copyright laws. This is the case in Nigeria, where most of the components of its heraldic system are otherwise unregulated.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13611", "revid": "10379247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13611", "title": "Heretic (video game)", "text": "1994 video game\nHeretic is a 1994 first-person shooter video game developed by Raven Software and published by id Software. It was distributed by GT Interactive for DOS, Mac OS, and RISC OS computers.\nUsing a modified version of the \"Doom\" engine, \"Heretic\" was one of the first first-person games to feature inventory manipulation and the ability to look up and down. It also introduced multiple gib objects that spawned when a character suffered a death by extreme force or heat. Previously, the character would simply crumple into a heap. The game used randomised ambient sounds and noises, such as evil laughter, chains rattling, distantly ringing bells, and water dripping in addition to the background music to further enhance the atmosphere. The music in the game was composed by Kevin Schilder. An indirect sequel, \"\", was released the following year. \"Heretic II\" was released in 1998, which served as a direct sequel continuing the story.\nIn 2025, \"Heretic\" was rereleased by Bethesda Softworks alongside \"Hexen\" with a new expansion titled \"Faith Renewed\".\nPlot.\nThree brothers (D'Sparil, Korax, and Eidolon), known as the Serpent Riders, have used their powerful magic to possess seven kings of Parthoris, turning them into mindless puppets and corrupting their armies. The Sidhe elves resist the Serpent Riders' magic, thus prompting the Serpent Riders to declare the Sidhe to be heretics and wage war against them. The Sidhe are forced to take a drastic measure to sever the natural power of the kings, destroying them and their armies at the cost of weakening the elves' power and giving the Serpent Riders an advantage to slay the elders. While the Sidhe retreat, one elf (revealed to be named Corvus in \"Heretic II\") sets off on a quest of vengeance against the weakest of the three Serpent Riders, D'Sparil. He travels through the \"City of the Damned\", the ruined capital of the Sidhe (its real name is revealed to be Silverspring in \"Heretic II\"), then past the demonic breeding grounds of Hell's Maw and finally the secret Dome of D'Sparil.\nThe player is the elvish protagonist Corvus and must first fight through the undead hordes infesting the location where the elders performed their ritual. At its end is the gateway to Hell's Maw, guarded by the Iron Liches. After defeating them, the player must seal the portal and so prevent further infestation, but after he enters the portal guarded by the Maulotaurs, he finds himself inside D'Sparil's dome. After killing D'Sparil, Corvus ends up on a perilous journey with little hope of returning home. However, he eventually succeeds in his endeavor, only to find that Parthoris is in disarray once again.\nGameplay.\nThe gameplay of \"Heretic\" is heavily derived from \"Doom\", with a level-based structure, an armor system, triggers which open concealed chambers filled with enemies, and an emphasis on finding the proper keys to progress. Raven added a number of features to \"Heretic\" that differentiated it from \"Doom\", notably interactive environments, such as rushing water that pushes the player character along, and inventory items. In \"Heretic\", the player can pick up certain items to use at their discretion. These items range from health potions to the \"morph ovum\", which transforms enemies into chickens. The \"Tome of Power\" acts as a secondary firing mode for certain weapons, resulting in a much more powerful projectile from each weapon, some of which change the look of the projectile entirely. \"Heretic\" also features an improved version of the \"Doom\" engine, sporting the ability to look up and down within constraints, as well as fly. However, the rendering method for looking up and down merely uses a proportional pixel-shearing effect rather than any new rendering algorithm, which distorts the view considerably when looking at high-elevation angles.\nAs with \"Doom\", \"Heretic\" contains various cheat codes that allow the player to be invulnerable, obtain every weapon, be able to instantly kill every monster in a particular level, and several other abilities. If the player uses the \"all weapons and keys\" cheat (\"codice_1\") from \"Doom\", a message appears warning the player against cheating and takes away all of their weapons, leaving them with only a quarterstaff. If the player uses the \"god mode\" cheat (\"codice_2\") from \"Doom\", the game will display a message saying \"Trying to cheat, eh? Now you die!\" and kills the player character.\nThe original shareware release of \"Heretic\" came bundled with support for online multiplayer through the then new DWANGO service.\nDevelopment.\n\"Heretic\" was developed by Raven Software with assistance by publisher id Software, the latter of which had recently pioneered the first-person shooter genre with \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and \"Doom\". According to Brian Raffel, the game's director and vice-president of Raven at the time, the developer first came to id's attention with the release of its debut title \"Black Crypt\". Id had provided Raven with a modified \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine for its next project \"ShadowCaster\" and were impressed by the final result. John Romero first proposed \"Heretic\" as a medieval themed \"Doom\"-like title to the wider id team around November 1993, and Raven signed on shortly afterwards. Raffel considered himself and his colleagues as typical \"D&amp;D\" fans and initially drafted the game with role-playing elements, but id did not want the group to vary too much from the \"Doom\" format. They then took instruction from id programmer John Carmack to simply \"do it like \"Doom\", and add the fantasy flavor.\"\n\"Heretic\" began development in March 1994 with Ben Gokey as lead programmer and a rough storyline penned by Michael Raymond-Judy that was finalized by id. John Romero served as executive producer. He recalled visiting the team at Raven, bringing them several Intel-based Epson NeXT computers, and teaching them how to use id's tools and engine. Major additions to the engine for graphics and gameplay included an expendable inventory system; the ability to look up, look down, and fly; water and wind effects on the player character's movement; and improved audio for both ambient and localized sound. Assistant programmer Chris Rhinehart was responsible for adding the flight mechanic, which Raffel described as a \"happy accident\". The director explained, \"Chris came up with the idea of moving the horizon line just up and down. It wasn't a real calculation of flying, it was a hack... That was such a big event for us, and that gave us our unique flavor.\" Romero visited the studio in late 1994 for finaling and to set up the DWANGO client that would allow online play.\nThe cover art was illustrated by Gerald Brom, who had previously produced \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" material, as well as the box for the recently released \"Doom II\".\nRelease.\n\"Shadow of the Serpent Riders\".\nThe original version of \"Heretic\" was only available through shareware registration (i.e. mail order) and contained three episodes. The retail version, \"Heretic: Shadow of the Serpent Riders\", was distributed by GT Interactive in 1996, and featured the original three episodes and two additional episodes: \"The Ossuary\", which takes the player to the shattered remains of a world conquered by the Serpent Riders several centuries ago, and \"The Stagnant Demesne\", where the player enters D'Sparil's birthplace. This version was the first official release of \"Heretic\" in Europe. A free patch was also downloadable from Raven's website to update the original \"Heretic\" with the content found in \"Shadow of the Serpent Riders\".\nAlong with the two full additional episodes, \"Shadow of the Serpent Riders\" contains three additional levels in a third additional episode (unofficially known as \"Fate's Path\") which is inaccessible without the use of cheat codes. The first of these three levels can be accessed by typing the cheat (\"codice_3\"). The first two levels are fully playable, but the third level does not have an exit so the player is unable to progress further.\nSource release.\nOn January 11, 1999, the source code of the game engine used in \"Heretic\" was published by Raven Software under a license that granted rights to non-commercial use, and was re-released under the GNU GPL-2.0-only on September 4, 2008. This resulted in ports to Linux, Amiga, Atari, and other operating systems, and updates to the game engine to utilize 3D acceleration. The shareware version of a console port for the Dreamcast was also released.\nRe-release and \"Faith Renewed\".\nOn August 7, 2025, Bethesda Softworks re-released \"Heretic\" and \"Hexen\" in a bundle called \"Heretic + Hexen\", developed by Id Software and Nightdive Studios in association with Activision and Raven Software, for Windows, Xbox One, Xbox Series X and S, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, and Nintendo Switch. It includes a brand new\u00a0campaign titled \"Faith Renewed\" that has new enemies, maps, and weapons. A new remastered soundtrack was included titled \"Tome of Power,\" arranged by\u00a0Andrew Hulshult. The game was also made available to select Game Pass members of PC Game Pass and Game Pass Ultimate.\nReception.\n\"Heretic\" and \"Hexen\" shipped a combined total of roughly 1 million units by August 1997. Individually Heretic sold more than 500,000 copies.\n\"PC Zone\" remarked that \"Heretic\"'s weapons are stylistically unsatisfying, the ability to look up and down is useless, the level designs are poorly conceived and confusing, and the flying ability lacks depth and a sense of true flight, more closely resembling \"sitting on the front of a forklift truck\". While they regarded the inventory mechanic as genuinely innovative, they felt that overall \"Heretic\" failed to differentiate itself from \"Doom\" to the extent of contemporaries such as \"Descent\" and \"\", and concluded, \"Not as good as \"Doom 1\" or \"2\". Still fun, but I'd rather wait for \"Quake\", thanks.\"\n\"Next Generation\" stated that \"If you're only going to get one action game in the next couple of months, this is the one.\"\nWhile remarking that \"Heretic\" is a thinly veiled clone of \"Doom\", and that its being released in Europe after and with \"Quake\" due out shortly makes it somewhat outdated, \"Maximum\" nonetheless regarded it as an extremely polished and worthwhile purchase. They particularly highlighted the two additional episodes of the retail version, saying they offer a satisfying challenge even to first person shooter veterans and are largely what make the game worth buying.\nIn 1996, \"Computer Gaming World\" listed being turned into a chicken as #3 on its list of \"the 15 best ways to die in computer gaming\".\nLegacy.\n\"Heretic\" has received three sequels: \"\", \"Hexen II\", and \"Heretic II\". Following ZeniMax Media's acquisition of id Software in 2009, Activision owns the intellectual property of the game while Bethesda owns the publishing rights; this has been resolved by the 2025 release after both companies were acquired by Microsoft Gaming.\nThe game was re-released for Windows on Steam on August 3, 2007.\nFurther homages to the series have been made in other id Software titles; In 2009's \"Wolfenstein\", which Raven Software developed, \"Heretic\"'s Tomes of Power are collectible power-ups found throughout the game. The character Galena from \"Quake Champions\" wears armor bearing the icon of the Serpent Riders.\nIn 2014, Raven co-founder Brian Raffel had expressed interest in making a sequel to the \"Heretic\" series. Rather than licensing it to other developers, he wants Raven to do it themselves.\nSimilar to \"Freedoom\", a free content adaptation of \"Heretic\" exists called \"Blasphemer\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13613", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13613", "title": "Hexen II", "text": "1997 video game\nHexen II is a 1997 first-person shooter game developed by Raven Software and published by id Software for Windows. It is the third game in the \"\"/\"Heretic\" series, and the last in the \"Serpent Riders\" trilogy. Using a modified \"Quake\" engine, it features single-player and multiplayer game modes, as well as four character classes to choose from, each with different abilities. These include the \"offensive\" Paladin, the \"defensive\" Crusader, the spell-casting Necromancer, and the stealthy Assassin.\nImprovements from \"\" and \"Quake\" include destructible environments, mounted weapons, and unique level up abilities. Like its predecessor, \"Hexen II\" also uses a hub system. These hubs are a number of interconnected levels; changes made in one level have effects in another. Furthermore, the Tome of Power artifact makes a return from \"Heretic\".\nGameplay.\nThe gameplay of \"Hexen II\" is very similar to that of the original \"Hexen\". Instead of three classes, \"Hexen II\" features four: Paladin, Crusader, Assassin, and Necromancer, each with their own unique weapons and play style.\n\"Hexen II\" also adds certain role-playing video game elements to the mix. Each character has a series of statistics which increase as they gain experience. This then causes the player character to grow in power as his or her HP and mana increases.\nPlot.\nThyrion is a world that was enslaved by the Serpent Riders. The two previous games in the series documented the liberation of two other worlds, along with the death of their Serpent Rider overlords. Now, the oldest and most powerful of the three Serpent Rider brothers, Eidolon, must be defeated to free Thyrion. Eidolon is supported by his four generals, themselves a reference to the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. To confront each general, the player has to travel to four different continents, each possessing a distinct theme (Medieval European for Blackmarsh, Mesoamerican for Mazaera, Ancient Egyptian for Thysis, and Greco-Roman for Septimus). Then, finally, the player returns to Blackmarsh in order to confront Eidolon himself inside of his own dominion Cathedral.\nDevelopment.\nWhat was originally supposed to be the final game in a trilogy, the sequel to \"Hexen\" was originally titled \"Hecatomb\" but was abandoned after John Romero left id Software in 1996. Activision, the distributor at the time, pressured Raven Software to split development of Hecatomb into two different games, \"Hexen II\" and \"Heretic II\". Activision felt that the previous entries in the series, Heretic and Hexen, were different enough from one another that they should treat them as separate entities going forward, instead of just one final game to complete a trilogy. Only a select few ideas of Romero's from \"Hecatomb\" would ultimately make their way into what became \"Hexen II\" and \"Heretic II\".\n\"Hexen II\" was based on an enhanced version of the \"Quake\" engine. \"Hexen II\", by way of the \"Quake\" engine, uses OpenGL for 3D acceleration. However, due to the prevalence of 3dfx hardware at the time of release, the Windows version of the game installs an OpenGL ICD (opengl32.dll) designed specifically for 3dfx's hardware. This driver acts as a wrapper for the proprietary Glide API, and thus is only compatible with 3dfx hardware. Custom OpenGL drivers were also released by PowerVR and Rendition for running \"Hexen II\" with their respective (and also now defunct) products. Removal of the ICD allows the game to use the default OpenGL system library. Much of the music in this game is remixed versions of the soundtracks of \"\" and \"Heretic\" to match the hub themes.\nActivision acquired the rights to publish versions of the game for the PlayStation and Sega Saturn. Neither port was released.\n\"Hexen II\" was made available on Steam on August 3, 2007.\n\"Siege\".\nA modification titled \"Siege\" was created and released by Raven Software in 1998 using updated QuakeWorld architecture, aptly dubbed \"HexenWorld\". The production concept was to eliminate a normal deathmatch environment in favor of a teamplay castle siege. The basic premise was to divide the players into two teams\u2014attackers and defenders\u2014with each side either assaulting or protecting the castle respectively. At the end of the time limit, whichever team controlled the crown was declared victorious. The mod featured appropriate objects used in the single-player portion of the game, namely catapults and ballistae. The classes were drastically altered with new weapons and abilities, reflecting the departure from the normal deathmatch experience presented in \"HexenWorld\".\nSource release.\nFollowing the tradition from \"Heretic\" and \"Hexen\", Raven released the source code of the \"Hexen II\" engine on November 10, 2000. This time the source was released under the GNU GPL-2.0-only, allowing source ports to be made to different platforms like Linux and the Dreamcast.\n\"Portal of Praevus\".\nAn expansion pack called \"Hexen II Mission Pack: Portal of Praevus\" was released on April 1, 1998. It features new levels, new enemies and a new playable character class, The Demoness. It focuses on the attempted resurrection of the three Serpent Riders by the evil wizard Praevus, and takes place in a fifth continent, Tulku, featuring a Sino-Tibetan setting. Unlike the original game, the expansion was not published by id Software, and as such is not currently available via digital re-releases.\nThe expansion features new quest items, new enemies, and new weapons for the Demoness. She is the only player class to have a ranged starting weapon (similar to the Mage class in the original \"Hexen\"), whereas all other characters start with melee weapons. It also introduced minor enhancements to the game engine, mostly related to user interface, level scripts, particle effects (rain or snow), and 3D objects. \"Portal of Praevus\" also features a secret (easter egg) skill level, with respawning monsters. The only released patch for the expansion added respawning of certain items (such as health and ammo) in Nightmare mode, so that it would be slightly easier for playing.\nReception.\nUpon its release, \"Hexen II\" received generally positive reviews. \"Edge\" praised the game for being different from other \"Quake\" engine-based games, highlighting its inventive and interactive levels, enemy variety, and artificial intelligence. The magazine also credited the game's diversity of weapons and spells for offering different combat strategies. \"GameSpot\" summarized, \"\"Hexen II\" is a game with many strengths \u2013 its design is superior to the original \"Hexen\", it has a significant payoff for single players winding through its twisted corridors, and visually it is without equal in the action genre. But the game's attempt to break from the standard first-person shooter mold has some nasty side effects, and the end result is a confusing and often frustratingly difficult experience.\" The reviewer elaborated that while the lush, detailed environments and astoundingly animated bosses make \"Hexen II\" \"one of the most beautiful games ever made\", the actions needed to progress are so obscure that they are comparable to what is required to find optional secret areas in most games, forcing the player to undertake frustrating, exhaustive searches of the game's environments. \"GamePro\" praised the high speed of the multiplayer sessions, the selection of character classes, and the high detail present when graphical acceleration is used. They concluded, \"For replay value and sheer fun, \"Hexen II\" is going to be hard to beat; you could spend days playing through all four characters in single-player mode without even entering multiplayer battles.\"\nAccording to Erik Bethke, \"Hexen II\" was commercially unsuccessful, with sales slightly above 30,000 units.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13614", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13614", "title": "Heretic II", "text": "1998 video game\nHeretic II is a 1998 action-adventure game developed by Raven Software and published by Activision for Microsoft Windows. It is the fourth game in the \"\"/\"Heretic\" series and comes after the \"Serpent Rider\" trilogy, continuing the story of Corvus, the protagonist of the original \"Heretic\". Although Id Software owns the publishing rights to the previous titles, \"Heretic II\" is owned by Activision since they own Raven Software and its IPs.\nUsing a modified \"Quake II\" engine, the game features a mix of a third-person camera with a first-person shooter's action, making for a new gaming experience at the time. While progressive, this was a controversial design decision among fans of the original game, a well-known first-person shooter built on the \"Doom\" engine. The music was composed by Kevin Schilder. Gerald Brom contributed conceptual work to characters and creatures for the game. This is the only \"Heretic\"/\"Hexen\" video game that is unrelated to id Software, apart from its role as engine licenser.\n\"Heretic II\" was later ported to Linux by Loki Software, to the Amiga by Hyperion Entertainment, and Macintosh by MacPlay.\nPlot.\nAfter Corvus returns from his banishment, he finds that a mysterious plague has swept the land of Parthoris, taking the sanity of those it does not kill. Corvus, the protagonist of the first game, is forced to flee his hometown of Silverspring after the infected attack him, but not before he is infected himself. The effects of the disease are held at bay in Corvus\u2019 case because he holds one of the Tomes of Power, but he still must find a cure before he succumbs.\nHis quest leads him through the city and swamps to a jungle palace, then through a desert canyon and insect hive, followed by a dark network of mines and finally to a castle on a high mountain where he finds an ancient Seraph named Morcalavin. Morcalavin is trying to reach immortality using the seven Tomes of Power, but he uses a false tome, as Corvus has one of them. This has caused Morcalavin to go insane and create the plague. During a battle between Corvus and Morcalavin, Corvus switches the false tome for his real one, curing Morcalavin's insanity and ending the plague.\nGameplay.\nUnlike previous games in the \"Heretic/Hexen\" series, which were first-person shooters, players control Corvus from a camera fixed behind him in the third-person perspective. Players are able to use a combination of both melee and ranged attacks, similar to its predecessor. While there are still three weapons the player can collect that each use their own ammo, they also have the ability to use several offensive and defensive spells that draw from pools of green and blue mana, respectively. The Tome of Power is no longer an item scattered around the levels, but a defensive spell that still works in the same manner as the other games in the series by improving damage and granting weapons and offensive spells new abilities for a limited time. Melee combat is also more varied, with the ability to perform several attacks using Corvus' bladestaff and cut off the limbs of enemies, rendering them harmless. Players are also able to utilize magical shrines throughout the game that grant a variety of effects upon use, such as silver or gold armor, a temporary boost in health, a permanent enhancement to the bladestaff, etc.\nThe game consists of a wide variety of dark fantasy medieval backdrops to Corvus's adventure. The third-person perspective and three-dimensional game environment allowed developers to introduce a wide variety of gymnastic moves, like climbing up ledges, back-flipping off walls, and pole vaulting, in a much more dynamic environment than the original game's engine could produce. Both games invite comparison with their respective game engine namesake: the original \"Heretic\" was built on the \"Doom\" engine, and \"Heretic II\" was built using the \"Quake II\" engine, later known as id Tech 2. \"Heretic II\" was favorably received at release because it took a different approach to its design.\nDevelopment.\nThe game was in development since November 1997 by a team of 20 people. Inspired by the \"Tomb Raider\" series, Raven Software decided to make use of the \"Quake II\" engine to create a third-person action game. A major step in the early development was Gerald Brom's concept art. In a month, the company had programmed the game's camera system. After Activision's approval of the game's demo, Raven Software aimed to get the full game finished by Christmas (it would release just prior to that Thanksgiving). To add to complications, they needed a software renderer to make the game playable to 16-bit users (especially in Europe).\nFor the animation, the main character Corvus was provided with a backbone for realism and had a total of 1600 frames. Most of the animations were done using Softimage. The static world objects and simplified animations were done with 3D Studio Max. The engine was capable of showing up to 4,000 polygons on screen.\nFollowing ZeniMax Media's acquisition of id Software in 2009, the rights to the series have been split between id and Activision Software; Activision holds the development rights, while id holds the publishing rights.\nReception.\nDespite positive reception from critics, \"Heretic II\" was a commercial failure. According to PC Data, its sales in the United States totaled 28,994 units by April 1999. Activision's Steve Felsen blamed this performance on the game's design: he noted that \"fans of first-person shooters\u2014the target audience for this game\u2014stayed away due to the third-person perspective\".\n\"Next Generation\" reviewed the PC version of the game, rating it three stars out of five, and stated that \"\"Heretic II\" has a lot going for it. It easily earns it space on the shelf with the heavy hitters this season, but it also serves as a reminder to all that every aspect of game design needs to be pushed if you want your project to truly stand out\".\n\"Edge\" praised the game for its mixture of platform and shoot 'em up action, saying that \"Heretic II\" is different enough to stand out from both first-person and third-person games like id Software's first-person shooters or Core Design's \"Tomb Raider\" games. \"Heretic II\" was a finalist for \"Computer Gaming World\"'s 1998 \"Best Action\" award, which ultimately went to \"Battlezone\". The editors wrote that \"Heretic II\" \"proved that the \"Quake II\" engine could work in a third-person game \"and\" that a spell-casting, shirtless elf could actually kick ass\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13615", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13615", "title": "Household hardware", "text": "Equipment used for work in the home\nHousehold hardware (or simply, hardware) is equipment that can be touched or held by hand such as keys, locks, nuts, screws, washers, hinges, latches, handles, wire, chains, belts, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, tools, utensils, cutlery and machine parts. Household hardware is typically sold in hardware stores.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13616", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13616", "title": "Howard Carter", "text": "British archaeologist and Egyptologist (1874\u20131939)\nHoward Carter (9 May 1874\u00a0\u2013 2 March 1939) was a British archaeologist and Egyptologist who became known for discovering the intact tomb of the 18th Dynasty Pharaoh Tutankhamun in November 1922, the best-preserved pharaonic tomb ever found in the Valley of the Kings.\nEarly life.\nHoward Carter was born in Kensington on 9 May 1874, the youngest child (of eleven) of artist and illustrator Samuel John Carter and Martha Joyce Carter (n\u00e9e\u00a0Sands). His father helped train and develop his artistic talents.\nCarter spent much of his childhood with relatives in the Norfolk market town of Swaffham, the birthplace of both his parents. His father had previously relocated to London, but after three of the children had died young, Carter, who was a sickly child, was moved to Norfolk and raised for the most part by a nurse in Swaffham.\nReceiving only a limited formal education at Swaffham, he showed talent as an artist. The nearby mansion of the Amherst family, Didlington Hall, contained a sizable collection of Egyptian antiques, which sparked Carter's interest in that subject. Lady Amherst was impressed by his artistic skills, and in 1891 she prompted the Egypt Exploration Fund (EEF) to send Carter to assist an Amherst family friend, Percy Newberry, in the excavation and recording of Middle Kingdom tombs at Beni Hasan.\nAlthough only 17, Carter was innovative in improving the methods of copying tomb decoration. In 1892, he worked under the tutelage of Flinders Petrie for one season at Amarna, the capital founded by the pharaoh Akhenaten. From 1894 to 1899, he worked with \u00c9douard Naville at Deir el-Bahari, where he recorded the wall reliefs in the temple of Hatshepsut.\nIn 1899, Carter was appointed Inspector of Monuments for Upper Egypt in the Egyptian Antiquities Service (EAS) on the personal recommendation of Gaston Maspero. Based at Luxor, he oversaw several excavations and restorations at nearby Thebes, while in the Valley of the Kings he supervised the systematic exploration of the valley by the American archaeologist Theodore Davis. \nIn early 1902, Carter began searching the Valley of the Kings on his own. He initially aimed at the southeast rocky wall of the valley basin. Despite being an inaccessible area, within three days, he found what he was looking for: stone steps, a sepulchral entrance, a corridor, a sarcophagus chamber, in short, the last home of the fourth Thutmose, carefully stripped (except for a few furnishings and a cart). While digging to find Thutmose IV's final resting place, Carter unearthed an alabaster cup and a small blue scarab with Queen Hatshepsut's name on it.\nIn February 1903, north of the tomb of Thutmose IV, Carter found a stone bearing the ring with the name of Hatshepsut.\nIn 1904, after a dispute with local people over tomb thefts, he was transferred to the Inspectorate of Lower Egypt. Carter was praised for his improvements in the protection of, and accessibility to, existing excavation sites, and his development of a grid-block system for searching for tombs. The Antiquities Service also provided funding for Carter to head his own excavation projects.\nCarter resigned from the Antiquities Service in 1905 after a formal inquiry into what became known as the Saqqara Affair, a violent confrontation that took place on 8 January 1905 between Egyptian site guards and a group of French tourists. Carter sided with the Egyptian personnel, refusing to apologise when the French authorities made an official complaint. Moving back to Luxor, Carter was without formal employment for nearly three years. He made a living by painting and selling watercolours to tourists and, in 1906, acting as a freelance draughtsman for Theodore Davis.\nTutankhamun's tomb.\nIn 1907, Carter began work for Lord Carnarvon, who employed him to supervise the excavation of nobles' tombs in Deir el-Bahari, near Thebes. Gaston Maspero, head of the Egyptian Antiquities Service, had recommended Carter to Carnarvon as he knew he would apply modern archaeological methods and systems of recording. Carter soon developed a good working relationship with his patron, with Lady Burghclere, Carnarvon's sister, observing that \"for the next sixteen years the two men worked together with varying fortune, yet ever united not more by their common aim than by their mutual regard and affection\".\nIn 1914, Lord Carnarvon received the concession to dig in the Valley of the Kings. Carter led the work, undertaking a systematic search for any tombs missed by previous expeditions, in particular that of the Pharaoh Tutankhamun. However, excavations were soon interrupted by the First World War, Carter spending the war years working for the British Government as a diplomatic courier and translator. He enthusiastically resumed his excavation work towards the end of 1917.\nBy 1922, Lord Carnarvon had become dissatisfied with the lack of results after several years of finding little. After considering withdrawing his funding, Carnarvon agreed, after a discussion with Carter, that he would fund one more season of work in the Valley of the Kings.\nCarter returned to the Valley of Kings and investigated a line of huts that he had abandoned a few seasons earlier. The crew cleared the huts and rock debris beneath. On 4 November 1922, a worker uncovered a step in the rock. According to Carter's published account, the workmen discovered the step while digging beneath the remains of the huts; other accounts attribute the discovery to a boy digging outside the assigned work area. Carter had the steps partially dug out until the top of a mud-plastered doorway was found. The doorway was stamped with indistinct cartouches (oval seals with hieroglyphic writing). Carter ordered the staircase to be refilled, and sent a telegram to Carnarvon, who arrived from England two and a half weeks later on 23 November, accompanied by his daughter Lady Evelyn Herbert.\nOn 24 November 1922, the full extent of the stairway was cleared, and a seal containing Tutankhamun's cartouche was found on the outer doorway. This door was removed and the rubble-filled corridor behind cleared, revealing the door of the tomb itself. On 26 November, Carter, with Carnarvon, Lady Evelyn, and assistant Arthur Callender in attendance, made a \"tiny breach in the top left-hand corner\" of the doorway, using a chisel that his grandmother had given him for his 17th birthday. He was able to peer in by the light of a candle and see that many of the gold and ebony treasures were still in place. He did not yet know whether it was \"a tomb or merely an old cache\", but he did see a promising sealed doorway between two sentinel statues. \nCarnarvon asked, \"Can you see anything?\" Carter replied: \"Yes, wonderful things!\" Carter had, in fact, discovered Tutankhamun's tomb (subsequently designated KV62). The tomb was then secured, to be entered in the presence of an official of the Egyptian Department of Antiquities the next day. However, that night, Carter, Carnarvon, Lady Evelyn, and Callender allegedly made an unauthorised visit, becoming the first people in modern times to enter the tomb. Some sources suggest that the group also entered the inner burial chamber. In this account, a small hole was found in the chamber's sealed doorway, and Carter, Carnarvon, and Lady Evelyn crawled through.\nThe next morning, 27 November, saw an inspection of the tomb in the presence of an Egyptian official. Callender rigged up electric lighting, illuminating a vast haul of items, including gilded couches, chests, thrones, and shrines. They also saw evidence of two further chambers, including the sealed doorway to the inner burial chamber, guarded by two life-size statues of Tutankhamun. Despite evidence of break-ins in ancient times, the tomb was virtually intact, and would ultimately be found to contain over 5,000 items.\nOn 29 November, the tomb was officially opened in the presence of several invited dignitaries and Egyptian officials.\nRealising the size and scope of the task ahead, Carter sought help from Albert Lythgoe of the Metropolitan Museum's excavation team, working nearby, who readily agreed to lend a number of his staff, including Arthur Mace and archaeological photographer Harry Burton, while the Egyptian government loaned analytical chemist Alfred Lucas. The next several months were spent cataloguing and conserving the contents of the antechamber under the \"often stressful\" supervision of Pierre Lacau, director general of the Department of Antiquities. \nOn 16 February 1923, Carter opened the sealed doorway and confirmed it led to a burial chamber, containing the sarcophagus of Tutankhamun. The tomb was considered the best preserved and most intact pharaonic tomb ever found in the Valley of the Kings, and the discovery was eagerly covered by the world's press. However, much to the annoyance of other newspapers, Lord Carnarvon sold exclusive reporting rights to \"The Times\". Only Arthur Merton of that paper was allowed on the scene, and his vivid descriptions helped to establish Carter's reputation with the British public.\nTowards the end of February 1923, a rift between Lord Carnarvon and Carter, probably caused by a disagreement on how to manage the supervising Egyptian authorities, temporarily halted the excavation. Work recommenced in early March after Lord Carnarvon apologised to Carter. Later that month, Lord Carnarvon contracted blood poisoning while staying in Luxor near the tomb site. He died in Cairo on 5 April 1923. Lady Carnarvon retained her late husband's concession in the Valley of the Kings, allowing Carter to continue his work.\nCarter's meticulous assessing and cataloguing of the thousands of objects in the tomb took nearly ten years, most being moved to the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. There were several breaks in the work, including one lasting nearly a year in 1924\u201325, caused by a dispute over what Carter saw as excessive control of the excavation by the Egyptian Antiquities Service. The Egyptian authorities eventually agreed that Carter should complete the tomb's clearance. This continued until 1929, with some final work lasting until February 1932.\nDespite the significance of his archaeological find, Carter received no honour from the British government. However, in 1926, he received the Order of the Nile, third class, from King Fuad I of Egypt. He was also awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Science by Yale University and honorary membership in the Real Academia de la Historia of Madrid, Spain.\nCarter wrote several books on Egyptology during his career, including \"Five Years' Exploration at Thebes\", co-written with Lord Carnarvon in 1912, describing their early excavations, and a three-volume popular account of the discovery and excavation of Tutankhamun's tomb. He also delivered a series of illustrated lectures on the excavation, including a 1924 tour of Britain, France, Spain, and the United States. Those in New York and other US cities were attended by large and enthusiastic audiences, sparking American Egyptomania, with President Coolidge requesting a private lecture.\nPersonal life.\nCarter could be awkward in company, particularly with those of a higher social standing. Often abrasive, he admitted to having a hot temper, which often aggravated disputes, including the 1905 Saqqara Affair and the 1924\u201325 dispute with Egyptian authorities.\nThe suggestion that Carter had an affair with Lady Evelyn Herbert, the daughter of the 5th Earl of Carnarvon, was later rejected by Lady Evelyn herself, who told her daughter Patricia that \"at first I was in awe of him, later I was rather frightened of him\", resenting Carter's \"determination\" to come between her and her father. More recently, the 8th Earl dismissed the idea, describing Carter as a \"stoical loner\". Harold Plenderleith, a former associate of Carter's at the British Museum, was quoted as saying that he knew \"something about Carter that was not fit to disclose\", which some have interpreted as meaning that Plenderleith believed that Carter was homosexual. An Egyptian guide who knew Carter claimed that his tastes extended to \"both boys and the occasional 'dancing girl'\". There is, however, no evidence that Carter enjoyed any close relationships throughout his life, and he never married nor had children.\nLater life.\nAfter the clearance of the tomb had been completed in 1932, Carter retired from excavation work. He continued to live in his house near Luxor in winter and retained a flat in London, but, as interest in Tutankhamun declined, he lived a fairly isolated existence with few close friends.\nHe had acted as a part-time dealer for both collectors and museums for several years. He continued in this role, including acting for the Cleveland Museum of Art and the Detroit Institute of Arts.\nDeath.\nCarter died from Hodgkin's disease aged 64 at his London flat at 49 Albert Court, next to the Royal Albert Hall, on 2 March 1939. He was buried in Putney Vale Cemetery in London on 6 March, nine people attending his funeral.\nHis love for Egypt remained strong; the epitaph on his gravestone reads: \"May your spirit live, may you spend millions of years, you who love Thebes, sitting with your face to the north wind, your eyes beholding happiness\", a quotation taken from the Wishing Cup of Tutankhamun, and \"O night, spread thy wings over me as the imperishable stars\".\nProbate was granted on 5 July 1939 to Egyptologist Henry Burton and to publisher Bruce Sterling Ingram. Carter is described as Howard Carter of Luxor, Upper Egypt, Africa, and of 49 Albert Court, Kensington Grove, Kensington, London. His estate was valued at \u00a32,002 (). The second grant of Probate was issued in Cairo on 1 September 1939. In his role as executor, Burton identified at least 18 items in Carter's antiquities collection that had been taken from Tutankhamun's tomb without authorization. As this was a sensitive matter that could affect Anglo-Egyptian relations, Burton sought wider advice, finally recommending that the items be discreetly presented or sold to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, with most eventually going either there or to the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. The Metropolitan Museum items were later returned to Egypt.\nLegacy.\nCarter's discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb revived popular interest in Ancient Egypt \u2013 'Egyptomania' \u2013 and created \"Tutmania\", which influenced popular song and fashion. Carter used this heightened interest to promote his books on the discovery and his lecture tours in Britain, America, and Europe. While interest had waned by the mid-1930s, from the early 1970s touring exhibitions of the tomb's artefacts led to a sustained rise in popularity. This has been reflected in TV dramas, films, and books, with Carter's quest and discovery of the tomb portrayed with varying levels of accuracy.\nOne common element in popular representations of the excavation is the idea of a 'curse'. Carter consistently dismissed the suggestion as , commenting that \"the sentiment of the Egyptologist ... is not one of fear, but of respect and awe ... entirely opposed to foolish superstitions.\"\nIn 2022, a 1934 letter to Carter from Alan Gardiner came to light, accusing him of stealing from Tutankhamun's tomb. Carter had given Gardiner an amulet and assured him it had not come from the tomb, but Reginald Engelbach, director of the Egyptian Museum, later confirmed its match with other samples originating in the tomb. Egyptologist Bob Brier said the letter proved previous rumours, and the contemporary suspicions of Egyptian authorities, that Carter had been siphoning treasures for himself. In a 2025 article, Eleanor Dobson felt that Carter's treatment of Tutankhamun's remains \"challenge narratives of archaeological triumph and to look back on the past with a more critical view\".\nDramas.\nCarter has been portrayed or referred to in many films, television, and radio productions:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13617", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13617", "title": "History of Scotland", "text": "The recorded history of Scotland begins with the arrival of the Roman Empire in the 1st\u00a0century, when the province of Britannia reached as far north as the Antonine Wall. North of this was Caledonia, inhabited by the \"Picti\", whose uprisings forced Rome's legions back to Hadrian's Wall. As Rome finally withdrew from Britain, a Gaelic tribe from Ireland called the \"Scoti\" began colonising Western Scotland and Wales. Before Roman times, prehistoric Scotland entered the Neolithic Era about 4000\u00a0BC, the Bronze Age about 2000\u00a0BC, and the Iron Age around 700\u00a0BC.\nThe Gaelic kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata was founded on the west coast of Scotland in the 6th century. In the following century, Irish missionaries introduced the previously pagan Picts to Celtic Christianity. Following England's Gregorian mission, the Pictish king Nechtan chose to abolish most Celtic practices in favour of the Roman rite, restricting Gaelic influence on his kingdom and avoiding war with Anglian Northumbria. Towards the end of the 8th century, the Viking invasions began, forcing the Picts and Gaels to cease their historic hostility to each other and to unite in the 9th century, forming the Kingdom of Scotland.\nThe Kingdom of Scotland was united under the House of Alpin, whose members fought among each other during frequent disputed successions. The last Alpin king, Malcolm II, died without a male issue in the early 11th century and the kingdom passed through his daughter's son to the House of Dunkeld or Canmore. The last Dunkeld king, Alexander III, died in 1286. He left only his infant granddaughter, Margaret, as heir, who died herself four years later. England, under Edward I, would take advantage of this questioned succession to launch a series of conquests, resulting in the Wars of Scottish Independence, as Scotland passed back and forth between the House of Balliol and the House of Bruce through the late Middle Ages. Scotland's ultimate victory confirmed Scotland as a fully independent and sovereign kingdom.\nIn 1707, the Kingdom of Scotland united with the Kingdom of England to create the new state of the Kingdom of Great Britain under the terms of the Treaty of Union. The Parliament of Scotland was subsumed into the newly created Parliament of Great Britain which was located in London, with 45 Members of Parliament (MPs) representing Scottish affairs in the newly created parliament. \nIn 1999, a Scottish Parliament was reconvened and a Scottish Government re\u2013established under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998, with Donald Dewar leading the first Scottish Government since 1707, until his death in 2000. In 2007, the Scottish National Party (SNP) were elected to government following the 2007 election, with first minister Alex Salmond holding a referendum on Scotland regaining its independence from the United Kingdom. Held on 18 September 2014, 55% of the electorate voted to remain a country of the United Kingdom, with 45% voting for independence.\nDuring the Scottish Enlightenment and Industrial Revolution, Scotland became one of the commercial, intellectual and industrial powerhouses of Europe. Later, its industrial decline following the Second World War was particularly acute. Today, 5,490,100 people live in Scotland, the majority of which are located in the central belt of the country in towns and cities such as Ayr, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Paisley and Kilmarnock, and cities such as Aberdeen, Dundee and Inverness to the north of the country. The economy has shifted from a heavy industry driven economy to be become one which is services and skills based, with Scottish Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimated to be worth \u00a3218 billion in 2023, including offshore activity such as North Sea oil extraction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPre-history.\nAlthough there have been claims of Lower Paleolithic finds in Scotland, none stand up to close scrutiny. The earliest known human presence in Scotland are those of Upper Paleolithic hunter gathers, dating to the B\u00f8lling\u2013Aller\u00f8d Interstadial warm period at the end of the last ice age, around 14,670 to c. 12,900 years Before Present shortly following the retreat of the ice sheet that had previously covered Scotland. The earliest known site of human presence is the Howburn Farm encampment near Biggar, South Lanarkshire, which is dated to around 14,500 to 14,000 years ago, and is associated with the reindeer hunting Hamburgian culture. Several other waves of late Upper Paleolithic peoples are known to have inhabited Scotland, including the Federmesser and Ahrensburgian cultures. Other sites found around Scotland build up a picture of highly mobile boat-using people making tools from bone, stone and antlers. The oldest house for which there is evidence in Britain is the oval structure of wooden posts found at South Queensferry near the Firth of Forth, dating from the Mesolithic period, about 8240\u00a0BC. The earliest stone structures are probably the three hearths found at Jura, dated to about 6000\u00a0BC.\nNeolithic farming brought permanent settlements. Evidence of these includes the well-preserved stone house at Knap of Howar on Papa Westray, dating from around 3500\u00a0BC and the village of similar houses at Skara Brae on West Mainland, Orkney from about 500 years later. The settlers introduced chambered cairn tombs from around 3500\u00a0BC, as at Maeshowe, and from about 3000\u00a0BC the many standing stones and circles such as those at Stenness on the mainland of Orkney, which date from about 3100\u00a0BC, of four stones, the tallest of which is in height. These were part of a pattern that developed in many regions across Europe at about the same time.\nThe creation of cairns and Megalithic monuments continued into the Bronze Age, which began in Scotland about 2000\u00a0BC. As elsewhere in Europe, hill forts were first introduced in this period, including the occupation of Eildon Hill near Melrose in the Scottish Borders, from around 1000\u00a0BC, which accommodated several hundred houses on a fortified hilltop. From the Early and Middle Bronze Age there is evidence of cellular round houses of stone, as at Jarlshof and Sumburgh in Shetland. There is also evidence of the occupation of crannogs, roundhouses partially or entirely built on artificial islands, usually in lakes, rivers and estuarine waters.\nIn the early Iron Age, from the seventh century\u00a0BC, cellular houses began to be replaced on the northern isles by simple Atlantic roundhouses, substantial circular buildings with a dry stone construction. From about 400\u00a0BC, more complex Atlantic roundhouses began to be built, as at Howe, Orkney and Crosskirk, Caithness. The most massive constructions that date from this era are the circular broch towers, probably dating from about 200\u00a0BC. This period also saw the first wheelhouses, a roundhouse with a characteristic outer wall, within which was a circle of stone piers (bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel), but these would flourish most in the era of Roman occupation. There is evidence for about 1,000 Iron Age hill forts in Scotland, most located below the Clyde-Forth line, which have suggested to some archaeologists the emergence of a society of petty rulers and warrior elites recognisable from Roman accounts.\nRoman invasion.\nOf the surviving pre-Roman accounts of Scotland, the first written reference to Scotland was the Greek Pytheas of Massalia, who may have circumnavigated the British Isles of Albion (Britain) and Ierne (Ireland) sometime around 325\u00a0BC. The most northerly point of Britain was called \"Orcas\" (Orkney). By the time of Pliny the Elder, who died in AD\u00a079, Roman knowledge of the geography of Scotland had extended to the \"Hebudes\" (The Hebrides), \"Dumna\" (probably the Outer Hebrides), the Caledonian Forest and the people of the Caledonii, from whom the Romans named the region north of their control Caledonia. Ptolemy, possibly drawing on earlier sources of information as well as more contemporary accounts from the Agricolan invasion, identified 18 tribes in Scotland in his \"Geography\", but many of the names are obscure and the geography becomes less reliable in the north and west, suggesting early Roman knowledge of these areas was confined to observations from the sea.\nThe Roman invasion of Britain began in earnest in AD\u00a043, leading to the establishment of the Roman province of Britannia in the south. By the year 71, the Roman governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis had launched an invasion of what is now Scotland. In the year 78, Gnaeus Julius Agricola arrived in Britain to take up his appointment as the new governor and began a series of major incursions. He is said to have pushed his armies to the estuary of the \"River Taus\" (usually assumed to be the River Tay) and established forts there, including a legionary fortress at Inchtuthil. After his victory over the northern tribes at Mons Graupius in 84, a series of forts and towers were established along the Gask Ridge, which marked the boundary between the Lowland and Highland zones, probably forming the first Roman \"limes\" or frontier in Scotland. Agricola's successors were unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north. By the year 87, the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands and by the end of the first century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth. The Romans eventually withdrew to a line in what is now northern England, building the fortification known as Hadrian's Wall from coast to coast.\nAround 141, the Romans undertook a reoccupation of southern Scotland, moving up to construct a new \"limes\" between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde, which became the Antonine Wall. The largest Roman construction inside Scotland, it is a sward-covered wall made of turf around high, with nineteen forts. It extended for . Having taken twelve years to build, the wall was overrun and abandoned soon after 160. The Romans retreated to the line of Hadrian's Wall. Roman troops penetrated far into the north of modern Scotland several more times, with at least four major campaigns. The most notable invasion was in 209 when the emperor Septimius Severus led a major force north. After the death of Severus in 210 they withdrew south to Hadrian's Wall, which would be Roman frontier until it collapsed in the 5th century.\nThe Great Conspiracy constituted a seemingly coordinated invasion against Roman rule in Britain in the later 4th century, which included the participation of the Gaelic Scoti and the Caledonians, who were then known as Picts by the Romans. This was defeated by the \"comes\" Theodosius, however, Roman military government was withdrawn from the island altogether by the early 5th century, resulting in the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain and the immigration of the Saxons to southeastern Scotland and the rest of eastern Great Britain.\nBy the close of the Roman occupation of southern and central Britain in the 5th century, the Picts had emerged as the dominant force in northern Scotland, with the various Brythonic tribes the Romans had first encountered there occupying the southern half of the country. Roman influence on Scottish culture and history was not enduring.\nPost-Roman Scotland.\nIn the centuries after the departure of the Romans from Britain, there were four groups within the borders of what is now Scotland. In the east were the Picts, with kingdoms between the river Forth and Shetland. In the late 6th century the dominant force was the Kingdom of Fortriu, whose lands were centred on Strathearn and Menteith and who raided along the eastern coast into modern England. In the west were the Gaelic (Goidelic)-speaking people of D\u00e1l Riata with their royal fortress at Dunadd in Argyll, with close links with the island of Ireland, from whom comes the name Scots. In the south was the British (Brythonic) Kingdom of Strathclyde, descendants of the peoples of the Roman-influenced kingdoms of \"Hen Ogledd\" (Old north), often named Alt Clut, the Brythonic name for their capital at Dumbarton Rock. Finally, there were the English or \"Angles\", Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia, in the south-east. The first English king in the historical record is Ida, who is said to have obtained the throne and the kingdom about 547. Ida's grandson, \u00c6thelfrith, united his kingdom with Deira to the south to form Northumbria around the year 604. There were changes of dynasty, and the kingdom was divided, but it was re-united under \u00c6thelfrith's son Oswald (r. 634\u2013642).\nScotland was largely converted to Christianity by Irish-Scots missions associated with figures such as St Columba, from the fifth to the seventh centuries. These missions tended to found monastic institutions and collegiate churches that served large areas. Partly as a result of these factors, some scholars have identified a distinctive form of Celtic Christianity, in which abbots were more significant than bishops, attitudes to clerical celibacy were more relaxed and there were some significant differences in practice with Roman Christianity, particularly the form of tonsure and the method of calculating Easter, although most of these issues had been resolved by the mid-7th century.\nRise of the Kingdom of Alba.\nConversion to Christianity may have sped a long-term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms, which adopted Gaelic language and customs. There was also a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns, although historians debate whether it was a Pictish takeover of D\u00e1l Riata, or the other way around. This culminated in the rise of C\u00ednaed mac Ailp\u00edn (Kenneth MacAlpin) in the 840s, which brought to power the House of Alpin. In 867 AD the Vikings seized the southern half of Northumbria, forming the Kingdom of York; three years later they stormed the Britons' fortress of Dumbarton and subsequently conquered much of England except for a reduced Kingdom of Wessex, leaving the new combined Pictish and Gaelic kingdom almost encircled. When he died as king of the combined kingdom in 900, Domnall II (Donald II) was the first man to be called \"r\u00ed Alban\" (i.e. \"King of Alba\"). The term Scotia was increasingly used to describe the kingdom between North of the Forth and Clyde and eventually the entire area controlled by its kings was referred to as Scotland.\nThe long reign (900\u2013942/3) of Causant\u00edn (Constantine II) is often regarded as the key to formation of the Kingdom of Alba. He was later credited with bringing Scottish Christianity into conformity with the Catholic Church. After fighting many battles, his defeat at Brunanburh was followed by his retirement as a Culdee monk at St. Andrews. The period between the accession of his successor M\u00e1el Coluim I (Malcolm I) and M\u00e1el Coluim mac Cin\u00e1eda (Malcolm II) was marked by good relations with the Wessex rulers of England, intense internal dynastic disunity and relatively successful expansionary policies. In 945, M\u00e1el Coluim I annexed Strathclyde as part of a deal with King Edmund of England, where the kings of Alba had probably exercised some authority since the later 9th century, an event offset somewhat by loss of control in Moray. The reign of King Donnchad I (Duncan I) from 1034 was marred by failed military adventures, and he was defeated and killed by MacBeth, the mormaer of Moray, who became king in 1040. MacBeth ruled for seventeen years before he was overthrown by M\u00e1el Coluim, the son of Donnchad, who some months later defeated MacBeth's step-son and successor Lulach to become King M\u00e1el Coluim III (Malcolm III).\nIt was M\u00e1el Coluim III, who acquired the nickname \"Canmore\" (\"Cenn M\u00f3r\", \"Great Chief\"), which he passed to his successors and who did most to create the Dunkeld dynasty that ruled Scotland for the following two centuries. Particularly important was his second marriage to the Anglo-Hungarian princess Margaret. This marriage, and raids on northern England, prompted William the Conqueror to invade and M\u00e1el Coluim submitted to his authority, opening up Scotland to later claims of sovereignty by English kings. When Malcolm died in 1093, his brother Domnall III (Donald III) succeeded him. However, William II of England backed M\u00e1el Coluim's son by his first marriage, Donnchad, as a pretender to the throne and he seized power. His murder within a few months saw Domnall restored with one of M\u00e1el Coluim sons by his second marriage, Edmund, as his heir. The two ruled Scotland until two of Edmund's younger brothers returned from exile in England, again with English military backing. Victorious, Edgar, the oldest of the three, became king in 1097. Shortly afterwards Edgar and the King of Norway, Magnus Barefoot concluded a treaty recognising Norwegian authority over the Western Isles. In practice Norse control of the Isles was loose, with local chiefs enjoying a high degree of independence. He was succeeded by his brother Alexander, who reigned 1107\u20131124.\nWhen Alexander died in 1124, the crown passed to Margaret's fourth son David I, who had spent part of his life in England where he held a barony. His reign saw what has been characterised as a \"Davidian Revolution\", by which Anglo-Norman followers of King David were granted lands and titles and intermixed their institutions with those of Scots intermarrying with the existing aristocracy, underpinning the development of later Medieval Scotland. David's Anglo-Norman followers joined the Scottish aristocracy and he introduced a system of feudal land tenure, which produced knight service, castles and an available body of heavily armed cavalry. He created a style of court closer to that of the rest of Western Europe, introduced the office of justicar to oversee justice, and local offices of sheriffs to administer localities. He established the first royal burghs in Scotland, granting rights to particular villages and towns, which led to the development of the first true Scottish cities and helped facilitate economic development as did the introduction of the first recorded Scottish coinage. He continued a process begun by his mother and brothers helping to establish foundations that brought reform to Scottish monasticism based on those at Cluny and he played a part in organising diocese on lines closer to those in the rest of Western Europe.\nThese reforms were pursued under his successors and grandchildren Malcolm IV of Scotland and William I, with the crown now passing down the main line of descent through primogeniture, leading to the first of a series of minorities. The benefits of greater authority were reaped by William's son Alexander II and his son Alexander III, who pursued a policy of peace with England to expand their authority in the Highlands and Islands. By the reign of Alexander III, the Scots were in a position to annexe the remainder of the western seaboard, which they did following Haakon Haakonarson's ill-fated invasion and the stalemate of the Battle of Largs with the Treaty of Perth in 1266.\nWars of independence.\nThe death of King Alexander III in 1286, and the death of his granddaughter and heir, Margaret, Maid of Norway, in 1290, left 14 rivals for succession. To prevent civil war the Scottish magnates asked Edward I of England to arbitrate, for which he extracted legal recognition that the realm of Scotland was held as a feudal dependency to the throne of England before choosing John Balliol, the man with the strongest claim, who became king in 1292. Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale, the next strongest claimant, accepted this outcome with reluctance. Over the next few years Edward I used the concessions he had gained to systematically undermine both the authority of King John and the independence of Scotland. In 1295, John, on the urgings of his chief councillors, entered into an alliance with France, known as the Auld Alliance.\nIn 1296, Edward invaded Scotland, deposing King John. The following year William Wallace and Andrew de Moray raised forces to resist the occupation and under their joint leadership an English army was defeated at the Battle of Stirling Bridge. For a short time Wallace ruled Scotland in the name of John Balliol as Guardian of the realm. Edward came north in person and defeated Wallace at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298. Wallace escaped but probably resigned as Guardian of Scotland. In 1305, he fell into the hands of the English, who executed him for treason despite the fact that he owed no allegiance to England.\nRivals John Comyn and Robert the Bruce, grandson of the claimant, were appointed as joint guardians in his place. On 10 February 1306, Bruce participated in the murder of Comyn, at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries. Less than seven weeks later, on 25 March, Bruce was crowned as King. However, Edward's forces overran the country after defeating Bruce's small army at the Battle of Methven. Despite the excommunication of Bruce and his followers by Pope Clement V, his support slowly strengthened; and by 1314 with the help of leading nobles such as Sir James Douglas and Thomas Randolph only the castles at Bothwell and Stirling remained under English control. Edward I had died in 1307. His heir Edward II moved an army north to break the siege of Stirling Castle and reassert control. Robert defeated that army at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, securing \"de facto\" independence. In 1320, the Declaration of Arbroath, a remonstrance to the Pope from the nobles of Scotland, helped convince Pope John XXII to overturn the earlier excommunication and nullify the various acts of submission by Scottish kings to English ones so that Scotland's sovereignty could be recognised by the major European dynasties. The Declaration has also been seen as one of the most important documents in the development of a Scottish national identity.\nIn 1326, what may have been the first full Parliament of Scotland met. The parliament had evolved from an earlier council of nobility and clergy, the \"colloquium\", constituted around 1235, but perhaps in 1326 representatives of the burghs \u2013 the burgh commissioners \u2013 joined them to form the Three Estates. In 1328, Edward III signed the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton acknowledging Scottish independence under the rule of Robert the Bruce. However, four years after Robert's death in 1329, England once more invaded on the pretext of restoring Edward Balliol, son of John Balliol, to the Scottish throne, thus starting the Second War of Independence. Despite victories at Dupplin Moor and Halidon Hill, in the face of tough Scottish resistance led by Sir Andrew Murray, the son of Wallace's comrade in arms, successive attempts to secure Balliol on the throne failed. Edward III lost interest in the fate of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 after the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War with France. In 1341, David II, King Robert's son and heir, was able to return from temporary exile in France. Balliol finally resigned his claim to the throne to Edward in 1356, before retiring to Yorkshire, where he died in 1364.\nThe Stuarts.\nAfter David II's death, Robert II, the first of the Stewart kings, came to the throne in 1371. He was followed in 1390 by his ailing son John, who took the regnal name Robert III. During Robert III's reign (1390\u20131406), actual power rested largely in the hands of his brother, Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany. After the suspicious death (possibly on the orders of the Duke of Albany) of his elder son, David, Duke of Rothesay in 1402, Robert, fearful for the safety of his younger son, the future James I, sent him to France in 1406. However, the English captured him en route and he spent the next 18 years as a prisoner held for ransom. As a result, after the death of Robert III, regents ruled Scotland: first, the Duke of Albany; and later his son Murdoch. When Scotland finally paid the ransom in 1424, James, aged 32, returned with his English bride determined to assert his authority. Several of the Albany family were executed; but he succeeded in centralising control in the hands of the crown, at the cost of increasing unpopularity, and was assassinated in 1437. His son James II (reigned 1437\u20131460), when he came of age in 1449, continued his father's policy of weakening the great noble families, most notably taking on the powerful Black Douglas family that had come to prominence at the time of the Bruce.\nIn 1468, the last significant acquisition of Scottish territory occurred when James III was engaged to Margaret of Denmark, receiving the Orkney Islands and the Shetland Islands in payment of her dowry. Berwick upon Tweed was captured by England in 1482. With the death of James III in 1488 at the Battle of Sauchieburn, his successor James IV successfully ended the quasi-independent rule of the Lord of the Isles, bringing the Western Isles under effective Royal control for the first time. In 1503, he married Margaret Tudor, daughter of Henry VII of England, thus laying the foundation for the 17th-century Union of the Crowns.\nScotland advanced markedly in educational terms during the 15th century with the founding of the University of St Andrews in 1413, the University of Glasgow in 1450 and the University of Aberdeen in 1495, and with the passing of the Education Act 1496, which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools. James IV's reign is often considered to have seen a flowering of Scottish culture under the influence of the European Renaissance.\nIn 1512, the Auld Alliance was renewed and under its terms, when the French were attacked by the English under Henry VIII, James IV invaded England in support. The invasion was stopped decisively at the Battle of Flodden Field during which the King, many of his nobles, and a large number of ordinary troops were killed, commemorated by the song \"Flowers of the Forest\". Once again Scotland's government lay in the hands of regents in the name of the infant James V.\nJames V finally managed to escape from the custody of the regents in 1528. He continued his father's policy of subduing the rebellious Highlands, Western and Northern isles and the troublesome borders. He also continued the French alliance, marrying first the French noblewoman Madeleine of Valois and then after her death Marie of Guise. James V's domestic and foreign policy successes were overshadowed by another disastrous campaign against England that led to defeat at the Battle of Solway Moss (1542). James died a short time later, a demise blamed by contemporaries on \"a broken heart\". The day before his death, he was brought news of the birth of an heir: a daughter, who would become Mary, Queen of Scots.\nOnce again, Scotland was in the hands of a regent. Within two years, the Rough Wooing began, Henry VIII's military attempt to force a marriage between Mary and his son, Edward. This took the form of border skirmishing and several English campaigns into Scotland. In 1547, after the death of Henry VIII, forces under the English regent Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset were victorious at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh, the climax of the Rough Wooing, and followed up by the occupation of Haddington. Mary was then sent to France at the age of five, as the intended bride of the heir to the French throne. Her mother, Marie de Guise, stayed in Scotland to look after the interests of Mary \u2013 and of France \u2013 although the Earl of Arran acted officially as regent. Guise responded by calling on French troops, who helped stiffen resistance to the English occupation. By 1550, after a change of regent in England, the English withdrew from Scotland completely.\nFrom 1554 on, Marie de Guise took over the regency and continued to advance French interests in Scotland. French cultural influence resulted in a large influx of French vocabulary into Scots. But anti-French sentiment also grew, particularly among Protestants, who saw the English as their natural allies. This led to armed conflict at the siege of Leith. Marie de Guise died in June 1560, and soon after the Auld Alliance also ended, with the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh, which provided for the removal of French and English troops from Scotland. The Scottish Reformation took place only days later when the Scottish Parliament abolished the Roman Catholic religion and outlawed the Mass.\nMeanwhile, Queen Mary had been raised as a Catholic in France, and married to the Dauphin, who became king as Francis II in 1559, making her queen consort of France. When Francis died in 1560, Mary, now 19, returned to Scotland to take up the government. Despite her private religion, she did not attempt to re-impose Catholicism on her largely Protestant subjects, thus angering the chief Catholic nobles. Her six-year personal reign was marred by a series of crises, largely caused by the intrigues and rivalries of the leading nobles. The murder of her secretary, David Riccio, was followed by that of her unpopular second husband Lord Darnley, and her abduction by and marriage to the Earl of Bothwell, who was implicated in Darnley's murder. Mary and Bothwell confronted the lords at Carberry Hill and after their forces melted away, he fled and she was captured by Bothwell's rivals. Mary was imprisoned in Lochleven Castle, and in July 1567, was forced to abdicate in favour of her infant son James VI. Mary eventually escaped and attempted to regain the throne by force. After her defeat at the Battle of Langside in 1568, she took refuge in England, leaving her young son in the hands of regents. In Scotland the regents fought a civil war on behalf of James VI against his mother's supporters. In England, Mary became a focal point for Catholic conspirators and was eventually tried for treason and executed on the orders of her kinswoman Elizabeth I.\nProtestant Reformation.\nDuring the 16th century, Scotland underwent a Protestant Reformation that created a predominantly Calvinist national Kirk, which became Presbyterian in outlook and severely reduced the powers of bishops. In the earlier part of the century, the teachings of first Martin Luther and then John Calvin began to influence Scotland, particularly through Scottish scholars, often training for the priesthood, who had visited Continental universities. The Lutheran preacher Patrick Hamilton was executed for heresy in St. Andrews in 1528. The execution of others, especially the Zwingli-influenced George Wishart, who was burnt at the stake on the orders of Cardinal Beaton in 1546, angered Protestants. Wishart's supporters assassinated Beaton soon after and seized St. Andrews Castle, which they held for a year before they were defeated with the help of French forces. The survivors, including chaplain John Knox, were condemned to be galley slaves in France, stoking resentment of the French and creating martyrs for the Protestant cause.\nLimited toleration and the influence of exiled Scots and Protestants in other countries, led to the expansion of Protestantism, with a group of lairds declaring themselves Lords of the Congregation in 1557 and representing their interests politically. The collapse of the French alliance and English intervention in 1560 meant that a relatively small, but highly influential, group of Protestants were in a position to impose reform on the Scottish church. A confession of faith, rejecting papal jurisdiction and the mass, was adopted by Parliament in 1560, while the young Mary, Queen of Scots, was still in France.\nKnox, having escaped the galleys and spent time in Geneva as a follower of Calvin, emerged as the most significant figure of the period. The Calvinism of the reformers led by Knox resulted in a settlement that adopted a Presbyterian system and rejected most of the elaborate trappings of the medieval church. The reformed Kirk gave considerable power to local lairds, who often had control over the appointment of the clergy. There were widespread, but generally orderly outbreaks of iconoclasm. At this point the majority of the population was probably still Catholic in persuasion and the Kirk found it difficult to penetrate the Highlands and Islands, but began a gradual process of conversion and consolidation that, compared with reformations elsewhere, was conducted with relatively little persecution.\nWomen shared in the religiosity of the day. The egalitarian and emotional aspects of Calvinism appealed to men and women alike. Historian Alasdair Raffe finds that, \"Men and women were thought equally likely to be among the elect...Godly men valued the prayers and conversation of their female co-religionists, and this reciprocity made for loving marriages and close friendships between men and women.\" Furthermore, there was an increasingly intense relationship in the pious bonds between minister and his women parishioners. For the first time, laywomen gained numerous new religious roles and took a prominent place in prayer societies.\n17th century.\nIn 1603, James VI King of Scots inherited the throne of the Kingdom of England and became King James I of England, leaving Edinburgh for London and uniting England with Scotland under one monarch. The Union was a personal or dynastic union, with the Crowns remaining both distinct and separate\u2014despite James's best efforts to create a new \"imperial\" throne of \"Great Britain\". The acquisition of the Irish crown along with the English facilitated a process of settlement by Scots in what was historically the most troublesome area of the kingdom in Ulster, with perhaps 50,000 Scots settling in the province by the mid-17th century. James adopted a different approach to impose his authority in the western Highlands and Islands. The additional military resource that was now available, particularly the English navy, resulted in the enactment of the Statutes of Iona which compelled integration of Hebridean clan leaders with the rest of Scottish society. Attempts to found a Scottish colony in North America in Nova Scotia were largely unsuccessful without sufficient funds or willing colonists.\nWars of the Three Kingdoms and the Puritan Commonwealth.\nBishops' Wars.\nAlthough James had tried to get the Scottish Church to accept some of the High Church Anglicanism of his southern kingdom, he met with limited success. His son and successor, Charles I, took matters further, introducing an English-style Prayer Book into the Scottish church in 1637. This resulted in anger and widespread rioting. (The story goes that it was initiated by a certain Jenny Geddes who threw a stool in St Giles Cathedral.) Representatives of various sections of Scottish society drew up the National Covenant in 1638, objecting to the King's liturgical innovations. In November of the same year matters were taken even further, when at a meeting of the General Assembly in Glasgow the Scottish bishops were formally expelled from the Church, which was then established on a full Presbyterian basis. Charles gathered a military force; but as neither side wished to push the matter to a full military conflict, a temporary settlement was concluded at Pacification of Berwick. Matters remained unresolved until 1640 when, in a renewal of hostilities, Charles's northern forces were defeated by the Scots at the Battle of Newburn to the west of Newcastle. During the course of these Bishops' Wars Charles tried to raise an army of Irish Catholics, but was forced to back down after a storm of protest in Scotland and England. The backlash from this venture provoked a rebellion in Ireland and Charles was forced to appeal to the English Parliament for funds. Parliament's demands for reform in England eventually resulted in the English Civil War. This series of civil wars that engulfed England, Ireland and Scotland in the 1640s and 1650s is known to modern historians as the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The Covenanters meanwhile, were left governing Scotland, where they raised a large army of their own and tried to impose their religious settlement on Episcopalians and Roman Catholics in the north of the country. In England his religious policies caused similar resentment and he ruled without recourse to parliament from 1629.\nCivil war.\nAs the civil wars developed, the English Parliamentarians appealed to the Scots Covenanters for military aid against the King. A Solemn League and Covenant was entered into, guaranteeing the Scottish Church settlement and promising further reform in England. Scottish troops played a major part in the defeat of Charles I, notably at the battle of Marston Moor. An army under the Earl of Leven occupied the North of England for some time.\nHowever, not all Scots supported the Covenanter's taking arms against their King. In 1644, James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose attempted to raise the Highlands for the King. Few Scots would follow him, but, aided by 1,000 Irish, Highland and Islesmen troops sent by the Irish Confederates under Alasdair MacDonald (MacColla), and an instinctive genius for mobile warfare, he was stunningly successful. A Scottish Civil War began in September 1644 with his victory at battle of Tippermuir. After a series of victories over poorly trained Covenanter militias, the lowlands were at his mercy. However, at this high point, his army was reduced in size, as MacColla and the Highlanders preferred to continue the war in the north against the Campbells. Shortly after, what was left of his force was defeated at the Battle of Philiphaugh. Escaping to the north, Montrose attempted to continue the struggle with fresh troops; but in July 1646 his army was disbanded after the King surrendered to the Scots army at Newark, and the civil war came to an end.\nThe following year Charles, while he was being held captive in Carisbrooke Castle, entered into an agreement with moderate Scots Presbyterians. In this secret \"Engagement\", the Scots promised military aid in return for the King's agreement to implement Presbyterianism in England on a three-year trial basis. The Duke of Hamilton led an invasion of England to free the King, but he was defeated by Oliver Cromwell in August 1648 at the Battle of Preston.\nCromwellian occupation and Restoration.\nThe execution of Charles I in 1649 was carried out in the face of objections by the Covenanter government and his son was immediately proclaimed as King Charles II in Edinburgh. Oliver Cromwell led an invasion of Scotland in 1650, and defeated the Scottish army at Dunbar. One year later, a Scottish invasion of England was again defeated by Cromwell at Worcester. Cromwell emerged as the leading figure in the English government and Scotland was occupied by an English force under George Monck. The country was incorporated into the Puritan-governed Commonwealth and lost its independent church government, parliament and legal system, but gained access to English markets. Various attempts were made to legitimise the union, calling representatives from the Scottish burghs and shires to negotiations and to various English parliaments, where they were always under-represented and had little opportunity for dissent. However, final ratification was delayed by Cromwell's problems with his various parliaments and the union did not become the subject of an act until 1657 (see Tender of Union).\nFollowing the death of Cromwell and the regime's collapse, Charles II was restored in 1660 and Scotland again became an independent kingdom. Scotland regained its system of law, parliament and kirk, but also the Lords of the Articles (by which the crown managed parliament), bishops and a king who did not visit the country. He ruled largely without reference to Parliament, through a series of commissioners. These began with John, Earl of Middleton and ended with the king's brother and heir, James, Duke of York (known in Scotland as the Duke of Albany). The English Navigation Acts prevented the Scots engaging in what would have been lucrative trading with England's colonies. The restoration of episcopacy was a source of trouble, particularly in the south-west of the country, an area with strong Presbyterian sympathies. Abandoning the official church, many of the inhabitants began to attend illegal field assemblies, known as conventicles. Official attempts to suppress these led to a rising in 1679, defeated by James, Duke of Monmouth, the King's illegitimate son, at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge. In the early 1680s a more intense phase of persecution began, later to be called \"the Killing Time\". When Charles died in 1685 and his brother, a Roman Catholic, succeeded him as James VII of Scotland (and II of England), matters came to a head.\nThe deposition of James VII.\nJames put Catholics in key positions in the government and attendance at conventicles was made punishable by death. He disregarded parliament, purged the council and forced through religious toleration to Roman Catholics, alienating his Protestant subjects. It was believed that the king would be succeeded by his daughter Mary, a Protestant and the wife of William of Orange, Stadtholder of the Netherlands, but when in 1688, James produced a male heir, James Francis Edward Stuart, it was clear that his policies would outlive him. An invitation by seven leading Englishmen led William to land in England with 40,000 men, and James fled, leading to the almost bloodless \"Glorious Revolution\". The Estates issued a \"Claim of Right\" that suggested that James had forfeited the crown by his actions (in contrast to England, which relied on the legal fiction of an abdication) and offered it to William and Mary, which William accepted, along with limitations on royal power. The final settlement restored Presbyterianism and abolished the bishops who had generally supported James. However, William, who was more tolerant than the Kirk tended to be, passed acts restoring the Episcopalian clergy excluded after the Revolution.\nAlthough William's supporters dominated the government, there remained a significant following for James, particularly in the Highlands. His cause, which became known as Jacobitism\u00a0\u2013 from , the Latin rendering of \"James\"\u00a0\u2013 led to a series of risings. An initial Jacobite military attempt was led by John Graham, Viscount Dundee. His forces, almost all Highlanders, defeated William's forces at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689, but they took heavy losses and Dundee was slain in the fighting. Without his leadership the Jacobite army was soon defeated at the Battle of Dunkeld. In the aftermath of the Jacobite defeat on 13 February 1692, in an incident since known as the Massacre of Glencoe, 38 members of the Clan MacDonald of Glencoe were killed by members of the Earl of Argyll's Regiment of Foot, on the grounds that they had not been prompt in pledging allegiance to the new monarchs.\nEconomic crisis of the 1690s.\nThe closing decade of the 17th century saw the generally favourable economic conditions that had dominated since the Restoration come to an end. There was a slump in trade with the Baltic and France from 1689 to 1691, caused by French protectionism and changes in the Scottish cattle trade, followed by four years of failed harvests (1695, 1696 and 1698\u20131699), an era known as the \"seven ill years\". The result was severe famine and depopulation, particularly in the north. The Parliament of Scotland of 1695 enacted proposals to help the desperate economic situation, including setting up the Bank of Scotland. The \"Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies\" received a charter to raise capital through public subscription.\nWith the dream of building a lucrative overseas colony for Scotland, the Company of Scotland invested in the Darien scheme, an ambitious plan devised by William Paterson to establish a colony on the Isthmus of Panama in the hope of establishing trade with the Far East. The Dari\u00e9n scheme won widespread support in Scotland as the landed gentry and the merchant class were in agreement in seeing overseas trade and colonialism as routes to upgrade Scotland's economy. \nSince the capital resources of the Edinburgh merchants and landholder elite were insufficient, the company appealed to middling social ranks, who responded with patriotic fervour to the call for money; the lower classes volunteered as colonists. But the English government opposed the idea: involved in the War of the Grand Alliance from 1689 to 1697 against France, it did not want to offend Spain, which claimed the territory as part of New Granada. The English investors withdrew. Returning to Edinburgh, the Company raised 400,000 pounds in a few weeks. Three small fleets with a total of 3,000 men eventually set out for Panama in 1698. The exercise proved a disaster. Poorly equipped; beset by incessant rain; under attack by the Spanish from nearby Cartagena; and refused aid by the English in the West Indies, the colonists abandoned their project in 1700. Only 1,000 survived and only one ship managed to return to Scotland.\n18th century.\nScotland was a poor rural, agricultural society with a population of 1.3\u00a0million in 1755. Although Scotland lost home rule, the Union allowed it to break free of a stultifying system and opened the way for the Scottish Enlightenment as well as a great expansion of trade and increase in opportunity and wealth. Edinburgh economist Adam Smith concluded in 1776 that \"By the union with England, the middling and inferior ranks of people in Scotland gained a complete deliverance from the power of an aristocracy which had always before oppressed them.\" Historian Jonathan Israel holds that the Union \"proved a decisive catalyst politically and economically,\" by allowing ambitious Scots entry on an equal basis to a rich expanding empire and its increasing trade.\nScotland's transformation into a rich leader of modern industry came suddenly and unexpectedly in the next 150 years, following its union with England in 1707 and its integration with the advanced English and imperial economies. The transformation was led by two cities that grew rapidly after 1770. Glasgow, on the river Clyde, was the base for the tobacco and sugar trade with an emerging textile industry. Edinburgh was the administrative and intellectual centre where the Scottish Enlightenment was chiefly based.\nUnion with England.\nBy the start of the 18th century, a political union between Scotland and England became politically and economically attractive, promising to open up the much larger markets of England, as well as those of the growing English Empire. With economic stagnation since the late 17th century, which was particularly acute in 1704, the country depended more and more heavily on sales of cattle and linen to England, who used this to create pressure for a union. The Scottish parliament voted on 6 January 1707, by 110 to 69, to adopt the Treaty of Union. It was also a full economic union; indeed, most of its 25 articles dealt with economic arrangements for the new state known as \"Great Britain\". It added 45 Scots to the 513 members of the House of Commons and 16 Scots to the 190 members of the House of Lords, and ended the Scottish parliament. It also replaced the Scottish systems of currency, taxation and laws regulating trade with laws made in London. Scottish law remained separate from English law, and the religious system was not changed. England had about five times the population of Scotland at the time, and about 36 times as much wealth.\nJacobitism.\nJacobitism was revived by the unpopularity of the union. In 1708, James Francis Edward Stuart, the son of James VII, who became known as \"The Old Pretender\", attempted an invasion with a French fleet carrying 6,000 men, but the Royal Navy prevented it from landing troops. A more serious attempt occurred in 1715, soon after the death of Anne and the accession of the first Hanoverian king, the eldest son of Sophie, as George I of Great Britain. This rising (known as \"The 'Fifteen\") envisaged simultaneous uprisings in Wales, Devon, and Scotland. However, government arrests forestalled the southern ventures. In Scotland, John Erskine, Earl of Mar, nicknamed \"Bobbin' John\", raised the Jacobite clans but proved to be an indecisive leader and an incompetent soldier. \nMar captured Perth, but let a smaller government force under the Duke of Argyll hold the Stirling plain. Part of Mar's army joined up with risings in northern England and southern Scotland, and the Jacobites fought their way into England before being defeated at the Battle of Preston, surrendering on 14 November 1715. The day before, Mar had failed to defeat Argyll at the Battle of Sheriffmuir. At this point, James belatedly landed in Scotland, but was advised that the cause was hopeless. He fled back to France. An attempted Jacobite invasion with Spanish assistance in 1719 met with little support from the clans and ended in defeat at the Battle of Glen Shiel.\nIn 1745, the Jacobite rising known as \"The 'Forty-Five\" began. Charles Edward Stuart, son of the \"Old Pretender\", often referred to as \"Bonnie Prince Charlie\" or the \"Young Pretender\", landed on the island of Eriskay in the Outer Hebrides.\nPost-Jacobite politics.\nWith the advent of the Union and the demise of Jacobitism, access to London and the Empire opened up very attractive career opportunities for ambitious middle-class and upper-class Scots, who seized the chance to become entrepreneurs, intellectuals, and soldiers. Thousands of Scots, mainly Lowlanders, took up positions of power in politics, civil service, the army and navy, trade, economics, colonial enterprises and other areas across the nascent British Empire. Historian Neil Davidson notes that \"after 1746 there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life, particularly outside Scotland\". Davidson also states that \"far from being \u2018peripheral\u2019 to the British economy, Scotland \u2013 or more precisely, the Lowlands \u2013 lay at its core\". British officials especially appreciated Scottish soldiers. As the Secretary of War told Parliament in 1751, \"I am for having always in our army as many Scottish soldiers as possible...because they are generally more hardy and less mutinous\". The national policy of aggressively recruiting Scots for senior civilian positions stirred up resentment among Englishmen, ranging from violent diatribes by John Wilkes, to vulgar jokes and obscene cartoons in the popular press, and the haughty ridicule by intellectuals such as Samuel Johnson that was much resented by Scots. In his great \"Dictionary\" Johnson defined oats as, \"a grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.\" To which Lord Elibank retorted, \"Very true, and where will you find such men and such horses?\"\nScottish politics in the late 18th century was dominated by the Whigs, with the benign management of Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll (1682\u20131761), who was in effect the \"viceroy of Scotland\" from the 1720s until his death in 1761. Scotland generally supported the king with enthusiasm during the American Revolution. Henry Dundas (1742\u20131811) dominated political affairs in the latter part of the century. Dundas defeated advocates of intellectual and social change through his ruthless manipulation of patronage in alliance with Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, until he lost power in 1806.\nThe main unit of local government was the parish, and since it was also part of the church, the elders imposed public humiliation for what the locals considered immoral behaviour, including fornication, drunkenness, wife beating, cursing and Sabbath breaking. The main focus was on the poor and the landlords (\"lairds\") and gentry, and their servants, were not subject to the parish's control. The policing system weakened after 1800 and disappeared in most places by the 1850s.\nCollapse of the clan system.\nThe clan system of the Highlands and Islands had been seen as a challenge to the rulers of Scotland from before the 17th century. James VI's various measures to exert control included the Statutes of Iona, an attempt to force clan leaders to become integrated into the rest of Scottish society. This started a slow process of change which, by the second half of the 18th century, saw clan chiefs start to think of themselves as commercial landlords, rather than as patriarchs of their people. To their tenants, initially this meant that monetary rents replaced those paid in kind. Later, rent increases became common. In the 1710s the Dukes of Argyll started putting leases of some of their land up for auction; by 1737 this was done across the Argyll property. This commercial attitude replaced the principle of \"\", which included the obligation on clan chiefs to provide land for clan members. The shift of this attitude slowly spread through the Highland elite (but not among their tenants).41 \nAs clan chiefs became more integrated into Scottish and British society, many of them built up large debts. It became easier to borrow against the security of a Highland estate from the 1770s onwards. As the lenders became predominantly people and organisations outside the Highlands, there was a greater willingness to foreclose if the borrower defaulted. Combined with an astounding level of financial incompetence among the Highland elite, this ultimately forced the sale of the estates of many Highland landed families over the period 1770\u20131850. (The greatest number of sales of whole estates was toward the end of this period.)37-46, 65-73, 131-132\nThe Jacobite rebellion of 1745 gave a final period of importance to the ability of Highland clans to raise bodies of fighting men at short notice. With the defeat at Culloden, any enthusiasm for continued warfare disappeared and clan leaders returned to their transition to being commercial landlords. This was arguably accelerated by some of the punitive laws enacted after the rebellion. These included the Heritable Jurisdictions (Scotland) Act 1746 (20 Geo. 2. c. 43), which removed judicial roles from clan chiefs and gave them to the Scottish law courts. T. M. Devine warns against seeing a clear cause and effect relationship between the post-Culloden legislation and the collapse of clanship. He questions the basic effectiveness of the measures, quoting W. A. Speck who ascribes the pacification of the area more to \"a disinclination to rebel than to the government's repressive measures.\" Devine points out that social change in Gaeldom did not pick up until the 1760s and 1770s, as this coincided with the increased market pressures from the industrialising and urbanising Lowlands.30-31\nThe change of clan leaders from patriarchs of their people to commercial landowners gave rise to the first phase of the Highland clearances, with many tenant farmers being evicted and resettled in crofting communities.\nIn 1846 the Highland potato famine struck the crofting communities of the North and West Highlands. By 1850 the charitable relief effort was wound up, despite the continuing crop failure, and landlords, charities and the government resorted to encouraging emigration. The overall result was that almost 11,000 people were provided with \"assisted passages\" by their landlords between 1846 and 1856, with the greatest number travelling in 1851. A further 5,000 emigrated to Australia, through the Highland and Island Emigration Society. To this should be added an unknown, but significant number, who paid their own fares to emigrate, and a further unknown number assisted by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commission.320187-189 This was out of a famine-affected population of about 200,000 people. Many of those who remained became even more involved in temporary migration for work in the Lowlands, both out of necessity during the famine and having become accustomed to working away by the time the famine ceased. Much longer periods were spent out of the Highlands \u2013 often for much of the year or more. One illustration of this migrant working was the estimated 30,000 men and women from the far west of the Gaelic speaking area who travelled to the east coast fishing ports for the herring fishing season \u2013 providing labour in an industry that grew by 60% between 1854 and 1884.335-336\nThe clearances were followed by a period of even greater emigration from the Highlands, which continued (with a brief lull for the First World War) up to the start of the Great Depression.2\nEnlightenment.\nHistorian Jonathan Israel argues that by 1750 Scotland's major cities had created an intellectual infrastructure of mutually supporting institutions, such as universities, reading societies, libraries, periodicals, museums and masonic lodges. The Scottish network was \"predominantly liberal Calvinist, Newtonian, and 'design' oriented in character which played a major role in the further development of the transatlantic Enlightenment .\" In France Voltaire said \"we look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilization\", and the Scots in turn paid close attention to French ideas. Historian Bruce Lenman says their \"central achievement was a new capacity to recognize and interpret social patterns.\" \nThe first major philosopher of the Scottish Enlightenment was Francis Hutcheson, who held the Chair of Philosophy at the University of Glasgow from 1729 to 1746. A moral philosopher who produced alternatives to the ideas of Thomas Hobbes, one of his major contributions to world thought was the utilitarian and consequentialist principle that virtue is that which provides, in his words, \"the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers\". Much of what is incorporated in the scientific method (the nature of knowledge, evidence, experience, and causation) and some modern attitudes towards the relationship between science and religion were developed by his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s David Hume and Adam Smith. Hume became a major figure in the skeptical philosophical and empiricist traditions of philosophy. He and other Scottish Enlightenment thinkers developed what he called a 'science of man', which was expressed historically in works by authors including James Burnett, Adam Ferguson, John Millar and William Robertson, all of whom merged a scientific study of how humans behave in ancient and primitive cultures with a strong awareness of the determining forces of modernity. Modern sociology largely originated from this movement and Hume's philosophical concepts that directly influenced James Madison (and thus the United States Constitution) and when popularised by Dugald Stewart, would be the basis of classical liberalism. Adam Smith published \"The Wealth of Nations\", often considered the first work on modern economics. It had an immediate impact on British economic policy and in the 21st century still framed discussions on globalisation and tariffs. \nThe focus of the Scottish Enlightenment ranged from intellectual and economic matters to the specifically scientific as in the work of the physician and chemist William Cullen, the agriculturalist and economist James Anderson, chemist and physician Joseph Black, natural historian John Walker and James Hutton, the first modern geologist.\nBeginnings of industrialisation.\nWith tariffs with England now abolished, the potential for trade for Scottish merchants was considerable. However, Scotland in 1750 was still a poor rural, agricultural society with a population of 1.3\u00a0million. Some progress was visible: agriculture in the Lowlands was steadily upgraded after 1700 and standards remained high. There were the sales of linen and cattle to England, the cash flows from military service, and the tobacco trade that was dominated by Glasgow Tobacco Lords after 1740. Merchants who profited from the American trade began investing in leather, textiles, iron, coal, sugar, rope, sailcloth, glassworks, breweries, and soapworks, setting the foundations for the city's emergence as a leading industrial centre after 1815. The tobacco trade collapsed during the American Revolution (1776\u20131783), when its sources were cut off by the British blockade of American ports. However, trade with the West Indies began to make up for the loss of the tobacco business, reflecting the British demand for sugar and the demand in the West Indies for herring and linen goods.\nLinen was Scotland's premier industry in the 18th century and formed the basis for the later cotton, jute, and woollen industries. Scottish industrial policy was made by the board of trustees for Fisheries and Manufactures in Scotland, which sought to build an economy complementary, not competitive, with England. Since England had woollens, this meant linen. Encouraged and subsidised by the Board of Trustees so it could compete with German products, merchant entrepreneurs became dominant in all stages of linen manufacturing and built up the market share of Scottish linens, especially in the American colonial market. The British Linen Company, established in 1746, was the largest firm in the Scottish linen industry in the 18th century, exporting linen to England and America. As a joint-stock company, it had the right to raise funds through the issue of promissory notes or bonds. With its bonds functioning as bank notes, the company gradually moved into the business of lending and discounting to other linen manufacturers, and in the early 1770s banking became its main activity. It joined the established Scottish banks such as the Bank of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1695) and the Royal Bank of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1727). Glasgow would soon follow and Scotland had a flourishing financial system by the end of the century. There were over 400 branches, amounting to one office per 7,000 people, double the level in England, where banks were also more heavily regulated. Historians have emphasised that the flexibility and dynamism of the Scottish banking system contributed significantly to the rapid development of the economy in the 19th century.\nGerman sociologist Max Weber mentioned Scottish Presbyterianism in \"The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism\" (1905), and many scholars argued that \"this worldly asceticism\" of Calvinism was integral to Scotland's rapid economic modernisation. More recent scholarship however emphasises other factors. These include technology transfers from England and the appeal of a highly mobile, low-cost labour-force for English investors like Richard Arkwright. Scotland's natural resources in water power, black-band ironstone and coal were also important foundations for mechanised industry.\nReligious fragmentation.\nIn the 1690s the Presbyterian establishment purged the land of Episcopalians and heretics, and made blasphemy a capital crime. Thomas Aitkenhead, the son of an Edinburgh surgeon, aged 18, was indicted for blasphemy by order of the Privy Council for calling the New Testament \"The History of the Imposter Christ\"; he was hanged in 1696. Their extremism led to a reaction known as the \"Moderate\" cause that ultimately prevailed and opened the way for liberal thinking in the cities.\nThe early 18th century saw the beginnings of a fragmentation of the Church of Scotland. These fractures were prompted by issues of government and patronage, but reflected a wider division between the hard-line Evangelicals and the theologically more tolerant Moderate Party. The battle was over fears of fanaticism by the former and the promotion of Enlightenment ideas by the latter. The Patronage Act 1711 was a major blow to the evangelicals, for it meant that local landlords could choose the minister, not the members of the congregation. Schisms erupted as the evangelicals left the main body, starting in 1733 with the First Secession headed by figures including Ebenezer Erskine. The second schism in 1761 lead to the foundation of the independent Relief Church. These churches gained strength in the Evangelical Revival of the later 18th century. A key result was the main Presbyterian church was in the hands of the Moderate faction, which provided critical support for the Enlightenment in the cities.\nLong after the triumph of the Church of Scotland in the Lowlands, Highlanders and Islanders clung to an old-fashioned Christianity infused with animistic folk beliefs and practices. The remoteness of the region and the lack of a Gaelic-speaking clergy undermined the missionary efforts of the established church. The later 18th century saw some success, owing to the efforts of the SSPCK missionaries and to the disruption of traditional society. Catholicism had been reduced to the fringes of the country, particularly the Gaelic-speaking areas of the Highlands and Islands. Conditions also grew worse for Catholics after the Jacobite rebellions and Catholicism was reduced to little more than a poorly run mission. Also important was Episcopalianism, which had retained supporters through the civil wars and changes of regime in the 17th century. Since most Episcopalians had given their support to the Jacobite rebellions in the early 18th century, they also suffered a decline in fortunes.\nLiterature.\nAlthough Scotland increasingly adopted the English language and wider cultural norms, its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation. Allan Ramsay (1686\u20131758) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature, as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry, helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form. James Macpherson was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation, claiming to have found poetry written by Ossian, he published translations that acquired international popularity, being proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics. \"Fingal\" written in 1762 was speedily translated into many European languages, and its deep appreciation of natural beauty and the melancholy tenderness of its treatment of the ancient legend did more than any single work to bring about the Romantic movement in European, and especially in German, literature, influencing Herder and Goethe. Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from the Gaelic, but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience. Both the major literary figures of the following century, Robert Burns and Walter Scott, would be highly influenced by the Ossian cycle. Burns, an Ayrshire poet and lyricist, is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major figure in the Romantic movement. As well as making original compositions, Burns also collected folk songs from across Scotland, often revising or adapting them. His poem (and song) \"Auld Lang Syne\" is often sung at Hogmanay (the last day of the year), and \"Scots Wha Hae\" served for a long time as an unofficial national anthem of the country.\nEducation.\nA legacy of the Reformation in Scotland was the aim of having a school in every parish, which was underlined by an act of the Scottish parliament in 1696 (reinforced in 1801). In rural communities this obliged local landowners (heritors) to provide a schoolhouse and pay a schoolmaster, while ministers and local presbyteries oversaw the quality of the education. The headmaster or \"dominie\" was often university educated and enjoyed high local prestige. The kirk schools were active in the rural lowlands but played a minor role in the Highlands, the islands, and in the fast-growing industrial towns and cities. The schools taught in English, not in Gaelic, because that language was seen as a leftover of Catholicism and was not an expression of Scottish nationalism. In cities such as Glasgow the Catholics operated their own schools, which directed their youth into clerical and middle class occupations, as well as religious vocations.\nA \"democratic myth\" emerged in the 19th century to the effect that many a \"lad of pairts\" had been able to rise up through the system to take high office and that literacy was much more widespread in Scotland than in neighbouring states, particularly England. Historical research has largely undermined the myth. Kirk schools were not free, attendance was not compulsory and they generally imparted only basic literacy such as the ability to read the Bible. Poor children, starting at age 7, were done by age 8 or 9; the majority were finished by age 11 or 12. The result was widespread basic reading ability; since there was an extra fee for writing, half the people never learned to write. Scots were not significantly better educated than the English and other contemporary nations. A few talented poor boys did go to university, but usually they were helped by aristocratic or gentry sponsors. Most of them became poorly paid teachers or ministers, and none became important figures in the Scottish Enlightenment or the Industrial Revolution.\nBy the 18th century there were five universities in Scotland, at Edinburgh, Glasgow, St. Andrews and King's and Marischial Colleges in Aberdeen, compared with only two in England. Originally oriented to clerical and legal training, after the religious and political upheavals of the 17th century they recovered with a lecture-based curriculum that was able to embrace economics and science, offering a high quality liberal education to the sons of the nobility and gentry. It helped the universities to become major centres of medical education and to put Scotland at the forefront of Enlightenment thinking.\n19th century.\nScotland's transformation into a rich leader of modern industry came suddenly and unexpectedly. The population grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. The economy, long based on agriculture, began to industrialise after 1790. At first the leading industry, based in the west, was the spinning and weaving of cotton. In 1861, the American Civil War suddenly cut off the supplies of raw cotton and the industry never recovered. Thanks to its many entrepreneurs and engineers, and its large stock of easily mined coal, Scotland became a world centre for engineering, shipbuilding, and locomotive construction, with steel replacing iron after 1870.\nParty politics.\nThe Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and significantly widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes. From this point until the end of the century, the Whigs and (after 1859) their successors the Liberal Party, managed to gain a majority of the Westminster Parliamentary seats for Scotland, although these were often outnumbered by the much larger number of English and Welsh Conservatives. The English-educated Scottish peer Lord Aberdeen (1784\u20131860) led a coalition government from 1852 to 1855, but in general very few Scots held office in the government. From the mid-century there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and when the Conservative Lord Salisbury became prime minister in 1885 he responded to pressure by reviving the post of Secretary of State for Scotland, which had been in abeyance since 1746. He appointed the Duke of Richmond, a wealthy landowner who was both Chancellor of Aberdeen University and Lord Lieutenant of Banff. Towards the end of the century Prime Ministers of Scottish descent included the Tory, Peelite and Liberal William Gladstone, who held the office four times between 1868 and 1894. The first Scottish Liberal to become prime minister was the Earl of Rosebery, from 1894 to 1895, like Aberdeen before him a product of the English education system. In the later 19th century the issue of Irish Home Rule led to a split among the Liberals, with a minority breaking away to form the Liberal Unionists in 1886. The growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie's success in the 1888 Mid Lanarkshire by-election, leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party, which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895, with Hardie as its first leader.\nIndustrial expansion.\nFrom about 1790 textiles became the most important industry in the west of Scotland, especially the spinning and weaving of cotton, which flourished until in 1861 the American Civil War cut off the supplies of raw cotton. The industry never recovered, but by that time Scotland had developed heavy industries based on its coal and iron resources. The invention of the hot blast for smelting iron (1828) revolutionised the Scottish iron industry. As a result, Scotland became a centre for engineering, shipbuilding and the production of locomotives. Toward the end of the 19th century, steel production largely replaced iron production. Coal mining continued to grow into the 20th century, producing the fuel to heat homes, factories and drive steam engines locomotives and steamships. By 1914, there were 1,000,000 coal miners in Scotland. The stereotype emerged early on of Scottish colliers as brutish, non-religious and socially isolated serfs; that was an exaggeration, for their life style resembled the miners everywhere, with a strong emphasis on masculinity, equalitarianism, group solidarity, and support for radical labour movements.\nBritain was the world leader in the construction of railways, and their use to expand trade and coal supplies. The first successful locomotive-powered line in Scotland, between Monkland and Kirkintilloch, opened in 1831. Not only was good passenger service established by the late 1840s, but an excellent network of freight lines reduce the cost of shipping coal, and made products manufactured in Scotland competitive throughout Britain. For example, railways opened the London market to Scottish beef and milk. They enabled the Aberdeen Angus to become a cattle breed of worldwide reputation. By 1900, Scotland had 3500 miles of railway; their main economic contribution was moving supplies in and product out for heavy industry, especially coal-mining.\nScotland was already one of the most urbanised societies in Europe by 1800. The industrial belt ran across the country from southwest to northeast; by 1900 the four industrialised counties of Lanarkshire, Renfrewshire, Dunbartonshire, and Ayrshire contained 44 per cent of the population. Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world, and known as \"the Second City of the Empire\" after London. Shipbuilding on Clydeside (the river Clyde through Glasgow and other points) began when the first small yards were opened in 1712 at the Scott family's shipyard at Greenock. After 1860, the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron (after 1870, made of steel), which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world. It became the world's pre-eminent shipbuilding centre. \"Clydebuilt\" became an industry benchmark of quality, and the river's shipyards were given contracts for warships.\nPublic health and welfare.\nThe industrial developments, while they brought work and wealth, were so rapid that housing, town-planning, and provision for public health did not keep pace with them, and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad, with overcrowding, high infant mortality, and growing rates of tuberculosis. The companies attracted rural workers, as well as immigrants from Catholic Ireland, by inexpensive company housing that was a dramatic move upward from the inner-city slums. This paternalistic policy led many owners to endorse government sponsored housing programs as well as self-help projects among the respectable working class.\nIntellectual life.\nWhile the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded toward the end of the 18th century, disproportionately large Scottish contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or more, thanks to such figures as the mathematicians and physicists James Clerk Maxwell, Lord Kelvin, and the engineers and inventors James Watt and William Murdoch, whose work was critical to the technological developments of the Industrial Revolution throughout Britain.\nIn literature the most successful figure of the mid-nineteenth century was Walter Scott, who began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads. His first prose work, Waverley in 1814, is often called the first historical novel. It launched a highly successful career that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish cultural identity. In the late 19th century, a number of Scottish-born authors achieved international reputations. Robert Louis Stevenson's work included the urban Gothic novella \"Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde\" (1886), and played a major part in developing the historical adventure in books like \"Kidnapped\" and \"Treasure Island\". Arthur Conan Doyle's \"Sherlock Holmes\" stories helped found the tradition of detective fiction. The \"kailyard tradition\" at the end of the century, brought elements of fantasy and folklore back into fashion as can be seen in the work of figures like J. M. Barrie, most famous for his creation of Peter Pan, and George MacDonald, whose works, including \"Phantasies\", played a major part in the creation of the fantasy genre.\nScotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture. The Glasgow School, which developed in the late 19th century, and flourished in the early 20th century, produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the Arts and Crafts Movement, and Japonisme, which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style. Among the most prominent members were the loose collective of The Four: acclaimed architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh, his wife the painter and glass artist Margaret MacDonald, her sister the artist Frances, and her husband, the artist and teacher Herbert MacNair.\nDecline and romanticism of the Highlands.\nThis period saw a process of rehabilitation for highland culture. Tartan had already been adopted for highland regiments in the British army, which poor highlanders joined in large numbers until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, but by the 19th century it had largely been abandoned by the ordinary people. In the 1820s, as part of the Romantic revival, tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite, not just in Scotland, but across Europe, prompted by the popularity of Macpherson's Ossian cycle and then Walter Scott's Waverley novels. The world paid attention to their literary redefinition of Scottishness, as they forged an image largely based on characteristics in polar opposition to those associated with England and modernity. This new identity made it possible for Scottish culture to become integrated into a wider European and North American context, not to mention tourist sites, but it also locked in a sense of \"otherness\" which Scotland began to shed only in the late 20th century. Scott's \"staging\" of the royal Visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 and the king's wearing of tartan, resulted in a massive upsurge in demand for kilts and tartans that could not be met by the Scottish linen industry. The designation of individual clan tartans was largely defined in this period and became a major symbol of Scottish identity. The fashion for all things Scottish was maintained by Queen Victoria, who helped secure the identity of Scotland as a tourist resort, with Balmoral Castle in Aberdeenshire becoming a major royal residence from 1852.\nLand use and ownership.\nDespite these changes the highlands remained very poor and traditional, with few connections to the uplift of the Scottish Enlightenment and little role in the Industrial Revolution. A handful of powerful families, typified by the dukes of Argyll, Atholl, Buccleuch, and Sutherland, owned large amounts of land and controlled local political, legal and economic affairs. Particularly after the end of the boom created by the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1790\u20131815), these landlords needed cash to maintain their position in London society, and had less need of soldiers. They turned to money rents, displaced farmers to raise sheep, and downplayed the traditional patriarchal relationship that had historically sustained the clans. Potato blight reached the Highlands in 1846, where 150,000 people faced disaster because their food supply was largely potatoes (with a little herring, oatmeal and milk). They were rescued by an effective emergency relief system that stands in dramatic contrast to the failures of relief in Ireland. As the famine continued, landlords, charities and government agencies provided \"assisted passages\" for destitute tenants to emigrate to Canada and Australia; in excess of 16,000 people emigrated, with most travelling in 1851.201,207,268\nCaused by the advent of refrigeration and imports of lamb, mutton and wool from overseas, the 1870s brought with them a collapse of sheep prices and an abrupt halt in the previous sheep farming boom. Land prices subsequently plummeted, too, and accelerated the process of the so-called \"Balmoralisation\" of Scotland, an era in the second half of the 19th century that saw an increase in tourism and the establishment of large estates dedicated to field sports like deer stalking and grouse shooting, especially in the Scottish Highlands. The process was named after Balmoral estate, purchased by Queen Victoria in 1848, that fueled the romanticisation of upland Scotland and initiated an influx of the newly wealthy acquiring similar estates in the following decades. By the late 19th century just 118 people owned half of Scotland, with nearly 60 per cent of the whole country being part of shooting estates. While their relative importance has somewhat declined due to changing recreational interests throughout the 20th century, deer stalking and grouse shooting remain of prime importance on many private estates in Scotland.\nRural life.\nThe unequal concentration of land ownership remained an emotional subject and eventually became a cornerstone of liberal radicalism. The politically powerless poor crofters embraced the popularly oriented, fervently evangelical Presbyterian revival after 1800, and the breakaway \"Free Church\" after 1843. This evangelical movement was led by lay preachers who themselves came from the lower strata, and whose preaching was implicitly critical of the established order. This energised the crofters and separated them from the landlords, preparing them for their successful and violent challenge to the landlords in the 1880s through the Highland Land League. Violence began on the Isle of Skye when Highland landlords cleared their lands for sheep and deer parks. It was quieted when the government stepped in passing the Crofters' Holdings (Scotland) Act, 1886 to reduce rents, guarantee fixity of tenure, and break up large estates to provide crofts for the homeless. In 1885, three Independent Crofter candidates were elected to Parliament, leading to explicit security for the Scottish smallholders; the legal right to bequeath tenancies to descendants; and creating a Crofting Commission. The Crofters as a political movement faded away by 1892, and the Liberal Party gained most of their votes.\nEmigration.\nThe population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century, from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901. Even with the development of industry there were insufficient good jobs; as a result, during the period 1841\u20131931, about 2 million Scots emigrated to North America and Australia, and another 750,000 Scots relocated to England. Scotland lost a much higher proportion of its population than England and Wales, reaching perhaps as much as 30.2 per cent of its natural increase from the 1850s onwards. This not only limited Scotland's population increase, but meant that almost every family lost members due to emigration and, because more of them were young males, it skewed the sex and age ratios of the country.\nScots-born emigrants that played a leading role in the foundation and development of the United States included cleric and revolutionary John Witherspoon, sailor John Paul Jones, industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, and scientist and inventor Alexander Graham Bell. In Canada they included soldier and governor of Quebec James Murray, Prime Minister John A. Macdonald and politician and social reformer Tommy Douglas. For Australia they included soldier and governor Lachlan Macquarie, governor and scientist Thomas Brisbane and Prime Minister Andrew Fisher. For New Zealand they included politician Peter Fraser and outlaw James Mckenzie. By the 21st century, there would be about as many people who were Scottish Canadians and Scottish Americans as the 5 million remaining in Scotland.\nReligious schism and revival.\nAfter prolonged years of struggle, in 1834 the Evangelicals gained control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act, which allowed congregations to reject unwanted \"intrusive\" presentations to livings by patrons. The following \"Ten Years' Conflict\" of legal and political wrangling ended in defeat for the non-intrusionists in the civil courts. The result was a schism from the church by some of the non-intrusionists led by Dr Thomas Chalmers known as the Great Disruption of 1843. Roughly a third of the clergy, mainly from the North and Highlands, formed the separate Free Church of Scotland. The evangelical Free Churches, which were more accepting of Gaelic language and culture, grew rapidly in the Highlands and Islands, appealing much more strongly than did the established church. Chalmers's ideas shaped the breakaway group. He stressed a social vision that revived and preserved Scotland's communal traditions at a time of strain on the social fabric of the country. Chalmers's idealised small equalitarian, kirk-based, self-contained communities that recognised the individuality of their members and the need for co-operation. That vision also affected the mainstream Presbyterian churches, and by the 1870s it had been assimilated by the established Church of Scotland. Chalmers's ideals demonstrated that the church was concerned with the problems of urban society, and they represented a real attempt to overcome the social fragmentation that took place in industrial towns and cities.\nIn the late 19th century the major debates were between fundamentalist Calvinists and theological liberals, who rejected a literal interpretation of the Bible. This resulted in a further split in the Free Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church in 1893. There were, however, also moves towards reunion, beginning with the unification of some secessionist churches into the United Secession Church in 1820, which united with the Relief Church in 1847 to form the United Presbyterian Church, which in turn joined with the Free Church in 1900 to form the United Free Church of Scotland. The removal of legislation on lay patronage would allow the majority of the Free Church to rejoin Church of Scotland in 1929. The schisms left small denominations including the Free Presbyterians and a remnant that had not merged in 1900 as the Free Church.\nCatholic Emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish immigrants, particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s, principally to the growing lowland centres like Glasgow, led to a transformation in the fortunes of Catholicism. In 1878, despite opposition, a Roman Catholic ecclesiastical hierarchy was restored to the country, and Catholicism became a significant denomination within Scotland. Episcopalianism also revived in the 19th century as the issue of succession receded, becoming established as the Episcopal Church in Scotland in 1804, as an autonomous organisation in communion with the Church of England. Baptist, Congregationalist and Methodist churches had appeared in Scotland in the 18th century, but did not begin significant growth until the 19th century, partly because more radical and evangelical traditions already existed within the Church of Scotland and the free churches. From 1879 they were joined by the evangelical revivalism of the Salvation Army, which attempted to make major inroads in the growing urban centres.\nDevelopment of state education.\nIndustrialisation, urbanisation and the Disruption of 1843 all undermined the tradition of parish schools. From 1830 the state began to fund buildings with grants, then from 1846 it was funding schools by direct sponsorship, and in 1872 Scotland moved to a system like that in England of state-sponsored largely free schools, run by local school boards. Overall administration was in the hands of the Scotch (later Scottish) Education Department in London. Education was now compulsory from five to thirteen and many new board schools were built. Larger urban school boards established \"higher grade\" (secondary) schools as a cheaper alternative to the burgh schools. The Scottish Education Department introduced a Leaving Certificate Examination in 1888 to set national standards for secondary education and in 1890 school fees were abolished, creating a state-funded national system of free basic education and common examinations.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, Scottish universities had no entrance exam, students typically entered at ages of 15 or 16, attended for as little as two years, chose which lectures to attend and could leave without qualifications. After two commissions of enquiry in 1826 and 1876 and reforming acts of parliament in 1858 and 1889, the curriculum and system of graduation were reformed to meet the needs of the emerging middle classes and the professions. Entrance examinations equivalent to the School Leaving Certificate were introduced and average ages of entry rose to 17 or 18. Standard patterns of graduation in the arts curriculum offered 3-year ordinary and 4-year honours degrees and separate science faculties were able to move away from the compulsory Latin, Greek and philosophy of the old MA curriculum. The historic University of Glasgow became a leader in British higher education by providing the educational needs of youth from the urban and commercial classes, as well as the upper class. It prepared students for non-commercial careers in government, the law, medicine, education, and the ministry and a smaller group for careers in science and engineering. St Andrews pioneered the admission of women to Scottish universities, creating the Lady Licentiate in Arts (LLA), which proved highly popular. From 1892 Scottish universities could admit and graduate women and the numbers of women at Scottish universities steadily increased until the early 20th century.\nEarly 20th century.\nFishing.\nThe years before the First World War were the golden age of the inshore fisheries. Landings reached new heights, and Scottish catches dominated Europe's herring trade, accounting for a third of the British catch. High productivity came about thanks to the transition to more productive steam-powered boats, while the rest of Europe's fishing fleets were slower because they were still powered by sails.\nPolitical realignment.\nIn the Khaki Election of 1900, nationalist concern with the Boer War meant that the Conservatives and their Liberal Unionist allies gained a majority of Scottish seats for the first time, although the Liberals regained their ascendancy in the next election. The Unionists and Conservatives merged in 1912, usually known as the Conservatives in England and Wales, they adopted the name Unionist Party in Scotland. Scots played a major part in the leadership of UK political parties producing a Conservative Prime Minister in Arthur Balfour (1902\u20131905) and a Liberal one in Henry Campbell-Bannerman (1905\u20131908). Various organisations, including the Independent Labour Party, joined to make the British Labour Party in 1906, with Keir Hardie as its first chairman.\nFirst World War (1914\u20131918).\nScotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War. It especially provided manpower, ships, machinery, food (particularly fish) and money, engaging with the conflict with some enthusiasm. Scotland's industries were directed at the war effort. For example, the Singer Clydebank sewing machine factory received over 5000 government contracts, and made 303 million artillery shells, shell components, fuses, and aeroplane parts, as well as grenades, rifle parts, and 361,000 horseshoes. Its labour force of 14,000 was about 70 per cent female at war's end.\nWith a population of 4.8\u00a0million in 1911, Scotland sent 690,000 men to the war, of whom 74,000 died in combat or from disease, and 150,000 were seriously wounded. Scottish urban centres, with their poverty and unemployment, were favourite recruiting grounds of the regular British army, and Dundee, where the female-dominated jute industry limited male employment, had one of the highest proportion of reservists and serving soldiers than almost any other British city. Concern for their families' standard of living made men hesitate to enlist; voluntary enlistment rates went up after the government guaranteed a weekly stipend for life to the survivors of men who were killed or disabled. After the introduction of conscription from January 1916 every part of the country was affected. Occasionally Scottish troops made up large proportions of the active combatants, and suffered corresponding loses, as at the Battle of Loos, where there were three full Scots divisions and other Scottish units. Thus, although Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population, they made up 15 per cent of the national armed forces and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead. Some areas, like the thinly populated island of Lewis and Harris, suffered some of the highest proportional losses of any part of Britain. Clydeside shipyards and the nearby engineering shops were the major centres of war industry in Scotland. In Glasgow, radical agitation led to industrial and political unrest that continued after the war ended. After the end of the war in June 1919 the German fleet interned at Scapa Flow was scuttled by its German crews, to avoid its ships being taken over by the victorious allies.\nAt the start of the war, the main Scottish military airfield was RAF Montrose, established a year earlier by the Royal Flying Corps (RFC). The Royal Naval Air Service established flying-boat and seaplane stations on Shetland, at East Fortune and Inchinnan, the latter two also serving as the army's airship bases and protecting Edinburgh and Glasgow, the two largest cities. The world's first aircraft carriers were based at Rosyth Dockyard in Fife, where numerous trials were undertaken of aircraft landing on them. The Beardmore W.B.III aircraft was produced by the Glasgow\u2013based William Beardmore and Company, and was the first Royal Navy aircraft designed for flight operations on an aircraft carrier. Due to the scale and significance of Rosyth dockyard to war efforts, it was a prime target for Germany at the outbreak of World War I.\nEconomic boom and stagnation.\nA boom was created by the First World War, with the shipbuilding industry expanding by a third, but a serious depression hit the economy by 1922. The most skilled craftsmen were especially hard hit, because there were few alternative uses for their specialised skills. The main social indicators such as poor health, bad housing, and long-term mass unemployment, pointed to terminal social and economic stagnation at best, or even a downward spiral. The heavy dependence on obsolescent heavy industry and mining was a central problem, and no one offered workable solutions. The despair reflected what Finlay (1994) describes as a widespread sense of hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during the Second World War.\nA few industries did grow, such as chemicals and whisky, which developed a global market for premium \"Scotch\". However, in general the Scottish economy stagnated leading to growing unemployment and political agitation among industrial workers.\nInterwar politics.\nFollowing World War I the Liberal Party began to disintegrate and Labour emerged as the party of progressive politics in Scotland, gaining a solid following among working classes of the urban lowlands. As a result, the Unionists were able to gain most of the votes of the middle classes, who now feared Bolshevik revolution, setting the social and geographical electoral pattern in Scotland that would last until the late 20th century. The fear of the left had been fuelled by the emergence of a radical movement led by militant trades unionists. John MacLean emerged as a key political figure in what became known as Red Clydeside, and in January 1919, the Sheriff of Lanarkshire called for military aid for the understrength Glasgow Police in the middle of a riot during the strike for a Forty Hours working week. Formerly a Liberal stronghold, the industrial districts switched to Labour by 1922, with a base in the Irish Catholic working class districts. Women were especially active in building neighbourhood solidarity on housing and rent issues. However, the \"Reds\" operated within the Labour Party and had little influence in Parliament; in the face of heavy unemployment the workers' mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s. Scottish educated Bonar Law led a Conservative government from 1922 to 1923 and another Scot, Ramsay MacDonald, would be the Labour Party's first Prime Minister in 1924 and again from 1929 to 1935.\nWith all the main parties committed to the Union, new nationalist and independent political groupings began to emerge, including the National Party of Scotland in 1928 and Scottish Party in 1930. They joined to form the Scottish National Party (SNP) in 1934, with the goal of creating an independent Scotland, but it enjoyed little electoral success in the Westminster system.\nSecond World War (1939\u20131945).\nAs in World War I, Scapa Flow in Orkney served as an important Royal Navy base. Attacks on Scapa Flow and Rosyth gave RAF fighters their first successes downing bombers in the Firth of Forth and East Lothian. The shipyards and heavy engineering factories in Glasgow and Clydeside played a key part in the war effort, and suffered attacks from the Luftwaffe, enduring great destruction and loss of life. As transatlantic voyages involved negotiating north-west Britain, Scotland played a key part in the battle of the North Atlantic. Shetland's relative proximity to occupied Norway resulted in the Shetland Bus by which fishing boats helped Norwegians flee the Nazis, and expeditions across the North Sea to assist resistance. Significant individual contributions to the war effort by Scots included the invention of radar by Robert Watson-Watt, which was invaluable in the Battle of Britain, as was the leadership at RAF Fighter Command of Air Chief Marshal Hugh Dowding.\nScotland's airfields provided \"a complex network of training and operational needs\", with each airfield said to have had an \"essential role\" in war efforts. A number of squadrons located on the Ayrshire and Fife coasts were mainly used for anti-shipping patrols. Fighter squadrons on Scotland's east coat \u2013 Wick, Dyce, Peterhead, Montrose, Leuchars, Drem, East Fortune, Kinloss and Grangemouth \u2013 were Coastal Command bases, and used mainly to protect and defend the fleet of aircraft and equipment at both Rosyth Dockyard and Scapa Flow. East Fortune also served as a diversion airfield for Handley Page Halifax and Avro Lancaster bombers returning from bombing operations over Nazi Germany. A total of 94 military airfields were in operation across Scotland during World War II.\nIn World War II, despite extensive bombing by the Luftwaffe, Scottish industry came out of the depression slump by a dramatic expansion of its industrial activity, absorbing unemployed men and many women as well. The shipyards were the centre of more activity, but many smaller industries produced the machinery needed by the British bombers, tanks and warships. Agriculture prospered, as did all sectors except for coal mining, which was operating mines near exhaustion. Real wages, adjusted for inflation, rose 25 per cent, and unemployment temporarily vanished. Increased income, and the more equal distribution of food, obtained through a tight rationing system, dramatically improved the health and nutrition; the average height of 13-year-olds in Glasgow increased by .\nEnd of mass emigration.\nWhile emigration began to tail off in England and Wales after the First World War, it continued apace in Scotland, with 400,000 Scots, ten per cent of the population, estimated to have left the country between 1921 and 1931. The economic stagnation was only one factor; other push factors included a zest for travel and adventure, and the pull factors of better job opportunities abroad, personal networks to link into, and the basic cultural similarity of the United States, Canada, and Australia. Government subsidies for travel and relocation facilitated the decision to emigrate. Personal networks of family and friends who had gone ahead and wrote back, or sent money, prompted emigrants to retrace their paths. When the Great Depression hit in the 1930s there were no easily available jobs in the US and Canada and the numbers leaving fell to less than 50,000 a year, bringing to an end the period of mass emigrations that had opened in the mid-18th century.\nLiterary renaissance.\nIn the early 20th century there was a new surge of activity in Scottish literature, influenced by modernism and resurgent nationalism, known as the Scottish Renaissance. The leading figure in the movement was Hugh MacDiarmid (the pseudonym of Christopher Murray Grieve). MacDiarmid attempted to revive the Scots language as a medium for serious literature in poetic works including \"A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle\" (1936), developing a form of Synthetic Scots that combined different regional dialects and archaic terms. Other writers that emerged in this period, and are often treated as part of the movement, include the poets Edwin Muir and William Soutar, the novelists Neil Gunn, George Blake, Nan Shepherd, A. J. Cronin, Naomi Mitchison, Eric Linklater and Lewis Grassic Gibbon, and the playwright James Bridie. All were born within a fifteen-year period (1887 and 1901) and, although they cannot be described as members of a single school, they all pursued an exploration of identity, rejecting nostalgia and parochialism and engaging with social and political issues.\nEducational reorganisation and retrenchment.\nIn the 20th century, the centre of the education system became more focused on Scotland, with the ministry of education partly moving north in 1918 and then finally having its headquarters relocated to Edinburgh in 1939. The school leaving age was raised to 14 in 1901, but despite attempts to raise it to 15 this was only made law in 1939 and then postponed because of the outbreak of war. In 1918, Roman Catholic schools were brought into the state system, but retained their distinct religious character, access to schools by priests and the requirement that school staff be acceptable to the Church.\nThe first half of the 20th century saw Scottish universities fall behind those in England and Europe in terms of participation and investment. The decline of traditional industries between the wars undermined recruitment. English universities increased the numbers of students registered between 1924 and 1927 by 19 per cent, but in Scotland the numbers fell, particularly among women. In the same period, while expenditure in English universities rose by 90 per cent, in Scotland the increase was less than a third of that figure.\nNaval role.\nScotland's Scapa Flow was the main base for the Royal Navy in the 20th century. As the Cold War intensified in 1961, the United States deployed Polaris ballistic missiles, and submarines, in the Firth of Clyde's Holy Loch. Public protests from CND campaigners proved futile. The Royal Navy successfully convinced the government to allow the base because it wanted its own Polaris submarines, and it obtained them in 1963. The RN's nuclear submarine base opened with four Polaris submarines at the expanded Faslane Naval Base on the Gare Loch. The first patrol of a Trident-armed submarine occurred in 1994, although the US base was closed at the end of the Cold War.\nDuring the outbreak of the Cold War, Scotland's secret bunker at Anstruther were largely kept a closed and guarded secret. Initially used by the Royal Air Force (RAF) after World War II as one of a number of radar stations, it became a secret bunker to be used in the event of a nuclear attack. The bunker was 40 metres in depth and was constructed using a shell encased in three-metre solid concrete in order to deflect a nuclear attack. The facility remained in use until 1992, and was later redeveloped into a museum in 1994. The nuclear facility at Dounreay in the Highland area of Scotland was one of the 52 known nuclear targets of the Soviet Union until at least 1990.\nPostwar.\nOverview.\nFollowing World War II, Scotland's economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. This only began to change in the 1970s, partly due to the discovery and development of North Sea oil and gas and partly as Scotland moved towards a more service-based economy, with the services sector contributing 75% to the overall Scottish economy in 2020.\nThis period saw the emergence of the Scottish National Party and movements for both Scottish independence and more popularly devolution. A referendum on devolution in 1979 was unsuccessful as it did not achieve the support of 40 per cent of the electorate. However, in 1997 Scottish voters voted in favour of establishing a Scottish Parliament which was established in 1998 and thus Scottish devolution was reformed. In 2014, the independence referendum saw vote against independence by 55% to 45% choosing to remain in the United Kingdom.\nPolitics and devolution.\nIn the second half of the 20th century the Labour Party usually won most Scottish seats in the Westminster parliament, losing this dominance briefly to the Unionists in the 1950s. Support in Scotland was critical to Labour's overall electoral fortunes as without Scottish MPs it would have gained only two UK electoral victories in the 20th century (1945 and 1966). The number of Scottish seats represented by Unionists (known as Conservatives from 1965 onwards) went into steady decline from 1959 onwards, until it fell to zero in 1997. Politicians with Scottish connections continued to play a prominent part in UK political life, with Prime Ministers including the Conservatives Harold Macmillan (whose father was Scottish) from 1957 to 1963 and Alec Douglas-Home from 1963 to 1964.\nThe Scottish National Party gained its first seat at Westminster in 1945 and became a party of national prominence during the 1970s, achieving 11 MPs in 1974. However, a referendum on devolution in 1979 was unsuccessful as it did not achieve the necessary support of 40 per cent of the electorate (despite a small majority of those who voted supporting the proposal) and the SNP went into electoral decline during the 1980s. The introduction in 1989 by the Thatcher-led Conservative government of the Community Charge (widely known as the Poll Tax), one year before the rest of the United Kingdom, contributed to a growing movement for a return to direct Scottish control over domestic affairs. On 11 September 1997, the 700th anniversary of Battle of Stirling Bridge, the Blair led Labour government again held a referendum on the issue of devolution which led to the establishment of a devolved Scottish Parliament in 1999. A coalition government, which would last until 2007, was formed between Labour and the Liberal Democrats, with Donald Dewar as First Minister until his death in 2000. \nThe new Scottish Parliament Building, adjacent to Holyrood House in Edinburgh, opened in 2004. Although not initially reaching its 1970s peak in Westminster elections, the SNP had more success in the Scottish Parliamentary elections with their system of mixed member proportional representation. It became the official opposition in 1999, a minority government in 2007 and a majority government in 2011. A national referendum to decide on Scottish independence was held on 18 September 2014. Voters were asked to answer either \"Yes\" or \"No\" to the question: \"Should Scotland be an independent country?\" 55.3% of voters answered \"No\" and 44.7% answered \"Yes\", with a voter turnout of 84.5%. In the 2015 Westminster election, the SNP won 56 out of 59 Scottish seats, making them the third largest party in Westminster.\nEconomic reorientation.\nFollowing World War II, Scotland's economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition, inefficient industry, and industrial disputes. This only began to change in the 1970s, partly due to the discovery and development of North Sea oil and gas and partly as Scotland moved towards a more service-based economy. The discovery of the giant Forties oilfield in October 1970 signalled that Scotland was about to become a major oil producing nation, a view confirmed when Shell Expro discovered the giant Brent oilfield in the northern North Sea east of Shetland in 1971. Oil production started from the Argyll field (now Ardmore) in June 1975, followed by Forties in November of that year. Deindustrialisation took place rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s, as most of the traditional industries drastically shrank or were completely closed down. A new service-oriented economy emerged to replace traditional heavy industries. This included a resurgent financial services industry and the electronics manufacturing of Silicon Glen.\nReligious diversity and decline.\nIn the 20th century existing Christian denominations were joined by other organisations, including the Brethren and Pentecostal churches. Although some denominations thrived, after World War II there was a steady overall decline in church attendance and resulting church closures for most denominations. Talks began in the 1950s aiming at a grand merger of the main Presbyterian, Episcopal and Methodist bodies in Scotland. The talks were ended in 2003, when the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland rejected the proposals. In the 2011 census, 53.8% of the Scottish population identified as Christian (declining from 65.1% in 2001). The Church of Scotland is the largest religious grouping in Scotland, with 32.4% of the population. The Roman Catholic Church accounted for 15.9% of the population and is especially important in West Central Scotland and the Highlands. In recent years other religions have established a presence in Scotland, mainly through immigration and higher birth rates among ethnic minorities, with a small number of converts. Those with the most adherents in the 2011 census are Islam (1.4%, mainly among immigrants from South Asia), Hinduism (0.3%), Buddhism (0.2%) and Sikhism (0.2%). Other minority faiths include the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith and small Neopagan groups. There are also various organisations which actively promote humanism and secularism, included within the 43.6% who either indicated no religion or did not state a religion in the 2011 census.\nEducational reforms.\nAlthough plans to raise the school leaving age to 15 in the 1940s were never ratified, increasing numbers stayed on beyond elementary education and it was eventually raised to 16 in 1973. As a result, secondary education was the major area of growth in the second half of the 20th century. New qualifications were developed to cope with changing aspirations and economics, with the Leaving Certificate being replaced by the Scottish Certificate of Education Ordinary Grade ('O-Grade') and Higher Grade ('Higher') qualifications in 1962, which became the basic entry qualification for university study. The higher education sector expanded in the second half of the 20th century, with four institutions being given university status in the 1960s (Dundee, Heriot-Watt, Stirling and Strathclyde) and five in the 1990s (Abertay, Glasgow Caledonian, Napier, Paisley and Robert Gordon). After devolution, in 1999 the new Scottish Executive set up an Education Department and an Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department. One of the major diversions from practice in England, possible because of devolution, was the abolition of student tuition fees in 1999, instead retaining a system of means-tested student grants.\nNew literature.\nSome writers that emerged after the Second World War followed Hugh MacDiarmid by writing in Scots, including Robert Garioch and Sydney Goodsir Smith. Others demonstrated a greater interest in English language poetry, among them Norman MacCaig, George Bruce and Maurice Lindsay. George Mackay Brown from Orkney, and Iain Crichton Smith from Lewis, wrote both poetry and prose fiction shaped by their distinctive island backgrounds. The Glaswegian poet Edwin Morgan became known for translations of works from a wide range of European languages. He was also the first Scots Makar (the official national poet), appointed by the inaugural Scottish government in 2004. Many major Scottish post-war novelists, such as Muriel Spark, with \"The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie\" (1961) spent much or most of their lives outside Scotland, but often dealt with Scottish themes. Successful mass-market works included the action novels of Alistair MacLean, and the historical fiction of Dorothy Dunnett. A younger generation of novelists that emerged in the 1960s and 1970s included Shena Mackay, Alan Spence, Allan Massie and the work of William McIlvanney. From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival, this time led by a group of Glasgow writers associated with critic, poet and teacher Philip Hobsbaum and editor Peter Kravitz. In the 1990s major, prize winning, Scottish novels, often overtly political, that emerged from this movement included Irvine Welsh's \"Trainspotting\" (1993), Warner's \"Morvern Callar\" (1995), Gray's \"Poor Things\" (1992) and Kelman's \"How Late It Was, How Late\" (1994). Scottish crime fiction has been a major area of growth, particularly the success of Edinburgh's Ian Rankin and his Inspector Rebus novels. This period also saw the emergence of a new generation of Scottish poets that became leading figures on the UK stage, including Carol Ann Duffy, who was named as Poet Laureate in May 2009, the first woman, the first Scot and the first openly gay poet to take the post.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nSurveys and reference books.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSpecialized studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCulture and religion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrehistory and archaeology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedieval.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly modern.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnlightenment, 18th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnion and Jacobites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWomen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13618", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13618", "title": "Hi-fi", "text": ""}
{"id": "13620", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13620", "title": "High Definition TV", "text": ""}
{"id": "13621", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13621", "title": "Hadrian", "text": "Roman emperor from 117 to 138\nHadrian ( ; born Publius Aelius Hadrianus, 24 January 76 \u2013 10 July 138) was Roman emperor from 117 to 138. Hadrian was born in Italica, in the present-day Andalusian province of Seville in southern Spain, an Italic settlement in Hispania Baetica; his gens Aelia came from the town of Hadria in eastern Italy. He was a member of the Nerva\u2013Antonine dynasty.\nEarly in his political career, Hadrian married Vibia Sabina, grandniece of the ruling emperor, Trajan, and his second cousin once removed. The marriage and Hadrian's later succession as emperor were probably promoted by Trajan's wife Pompeia Plotina. Soon after his own succession, Hadrian had four leading senators unlawfully put to death, probably because they seemed to threaten the security of his reign; this earned him the senate's lifelong enmity. He earned further disapproval by abandoning Trajan's expansionist policies and territorial gains in Mesopotamia, Assyria, Armenia, and parts of Dacia. Hadrian preferred to invest in the development of stable, defensible borders and the unification of the Roman empire's disparate peoples and subjects. He was a promoter of philhellenism.\nHadrian energetically pursued his own Imperial ideals and personal interests. He visited almost every province of the Empire, and indulged a preference for direct intervention in imperial and provincial affairs, especially building projects. He is particularly known for building Hadrian's Wall, which marked the northern limit of Britannia. In Rome itself, he rebuilt the Pantheon and constructed the vast Temple of Venus and Roma. In Egypt, he may have rebuilt the Serapeum of Alexandria. As an ardent admirer of Greek culture, he promoted Athens as the cultural capital of the Empire. His intense relationship with Greek youth Antinous and the latter's untimely death led Hadrian to establish a widespread, popular cult. Late in Hadrian's reign, he suppressed the Bar Kokhba revolt, which he saw as a failure of his universal project and philhellenic ideal.\nHadrian's last years were marred by chronic illness. His marriage had been both unhappy and childless. In 138, he adopted Antoninus Pius and nominated him as a successor, on condition that Antoninus adopt Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus as his own heirs. Hadrian died the same year at Baiae, and Antoninus had him deified, despite opposition from the Senate. Later historians counted him as one of Rome's so-called \"Five Good Emperors\", and as a benevolent autocrat. His own Senate found him remote and authoritarian. He has been described as enigmatic and contradictory, with a capacity for both great personal generosity and extreme cruelty and driven by insatiable curiosity, conceit, and ambition.\nEarly life.\nPublius Aelius Hadrianus was born on 24 January 76, in Italica (modern Santiponce, near Seville), a Roman town founded by Italic settlers in the province of Hispania Baetica during the Second Punic War at the initiative of Scipio Africanus; Hadrian's branch of the Aelia gens came from Hadria (modern Atri), an ancient town in the Picenum region of Italia, the source of the name \"Hadrianus\". One Roman biographer claims instead that Hadrian was born in Rome, but this view is held by a minority of scholars.\nHadrian's father was Publius Aelius Hadrianus Afer, a senator of praetorian rank, born and raised in Italica. Hadrian's mother was Domitia Paulina, daughter of a distinguished Roman senatorial family based in Gades (C\u00e1diz). His only sibling was an elder sister, Aelia Domitia Paulina. His wet nurse was the slave Germana, probably of Germanic origin, to whom he was devoted throughout his life. He later freed her, and she ultimately outlived him, as shown by her funerary inscription, which was found at Hadrian's Villa at Tivoli. Hadrian's great-nephew, Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator, from Barcino (Barcelona) would become Hadrian's colleague as co-consul in 118. As a senator, Hadrian's father would have spent much of his time in Rome. In terms of his later career, Hadrian's most significant family connection was to Trajan, his father's first cousin, who was also of senatorial stock and a native of Italica. Although they were considered to be, in the words of Aurelius Victor, \"advenae\" (\"aliens\", people \"from the outside\"), both Trajan and Hadrian were of Italic lineage and belonged to the upper class of Roman society. One author has proposed to consider them part of the \"Ulpio-Aelian dynasty\".\nHadrian's parents died in 86 when he was ten years old. He and his sister became wards of Trajan and Publius Acilius Attianus (who later became Trajan's Praetorian prefect). Hadrian was physically active and enjoyed hunting; when he was 14, Trajan called him to Rome and arranged his further education in subjects appropriate to a young Roman aristocrat. Hadrian's enthusiasm for Greek literature and culture earned him the nickname \"Graeculus\" (\"Greekling\"), intended as a form of \"mild mockery\".\nPublic service.\nHadrian's first official post in Rome was as a member of the \"decemviri stlitibus judicandis\", one among many vigintivirate offices at the lowest level of the \"cursus honorum\" (\"course of honours\") that could lead to higher office and a senatorial career. He then served as a military tribune, first with the LegioII \"Adiutrix\" in 95, then with the Legio V Macedonica. During Hadrian's second stint as tribune, the frail and aged reigning emperor Nerva adopted Trajan as his heir; Hadrian was dispatched to give Trajan the news \u2013 or most probably was one of many emissaries charged with this same commission. Then Hadrian was transferred to Legio XXII Primigenia and a third tribunate. Hadrian's three tribunates gave him some career advantage. Most scions of the older senatorial families might serve one, or at most two, military tribunates as a prerequisite to higher office. When Nerva died in 98, Hadrian is said to have hastened to Trajan, to inform him ahead of the official envoy sent by the governor, Hadrian's brother-in-law and rival Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus.\nIn 101, Hadrian was back in Rome; he was elected quaestor, then \"quaestor imperatoris Traiani\", liaison officer between Emperor and the assembled Senate, to whom he read the Emperor's communiqu\u00e9s and speeches\u00a0\u2013 which he possibly composed on the emperor's behalf. In his role as imperial ghostwriter, Hadrian took the place of the recently deceased Licinius Sura, Trajan's all-powerful friend and kingmaker. His next post was as \"ab actis senatus\", keeping the Senate's records. During the First Dacian War, Hadrian took the field as a member of Trajan's personal entourage, but was excused from his military post to take office in Rome as tribune of the plebs, in 105. After the war, he was probably elected praetor. During the Second Dacian War, Hadrian was in Trajan's personal service again. He was released to serve as legate of Legio I Minervia, then as governor of Lower Pannonia in 107, tasked with \"holding back the Sarmatians\". Between 107 and 108, Hadrian defeated an invasion of Roman-controlled Banat and Oltenia by the Iazyges. The exact terms of the peace treaty are not known. It is believed the Romans kept Oltenia in exchange for some form of concession, likely involving a one-time tribute payment. The Iazyges also took possession of Banat around this time, which may have been part of the treaty.\nNow in his mid-thirties, Hadrian travelled to Greece; he was granted Athenian citizenship and was appointed eponymous archon of Athens for a brief time (in 112). The Athenians awarded him a statue with an inscription in the Theatre of Dionysus (IG II2 3286) offering a detailed account of his \"cursus honorum\" thus far. Thereafter, no more is heard of him until Trajan's Parthian campaign. It is possible that he remained in Greece until his recall to the imperial retinue, when he joined Trajan's expedition against Parthia as a legate. When the governor of Syria was sent to deal with renewed troubles in Dacia, Hadrian was appointed his replacement, with independent command. Trajan became seriously ill, and took ship for Rome, while Hadrian remained in Syria, \"de facto\" general commander of the Eastern Roman army. Trajan got as far as the coastal city of Selinus, in Cilicia, and died there on 8 August 117; he would be regarded as one of Rome's most admired, popular and best emperors.\nRelationship with Trajan and his family.\nAround the time of his quaestorship, in 100 or 101, Hadrian had married Trajan's seventeen- or eighteen-year-old grandniece, Vibia Sabina, his second cousin once removed. Trajan himself seems to have been less than enthusiastic about the marriage, and with good reason, as the couple's relationship would prove to be scandalously poor. The marriage might have been arranged by Trajan's empress, Plotina. This highly cultured, influential woman shared many of Hadrian's values and interests, including the idea of the Roman Empire as a commonwealth with an underlying Hellenic culture. If Hadrian were to be appointed Trajan's successor, Plotina and her extended family could retain their social profile and political influence after Trajan's death. Hadrian could also count on the support of his mother-in-law, Salonia Matidia, who was the daughter of Trajan's beloved sister Ulpia Marciana. When Ulpia Marciana died in 112, Trajan had her deified, and made Salonia Matidia an \"Augusta\".\nHadrian's personal relationship with Trajan was complex and may have been difficult. Hadrian seems to have sought influence over Trajan, or Trajan's decisions, through cultivation of the latter's boy favourites; this gave rise to some unexplained quarrel, around the time of Hadrian's marriage to Sabina. Late in Trajan's reign, Hadrian failed to achieve a senior consulship, being only suffect consul for 108; this gave him parity of status with other members of the senatorial nobility, but no particular distinction befitting an heir designate. Had Trajan wished it, he could have promoted his protege to patrician rank and its privileges, which included opportunities for a fast track to consulship without prior experience as tribune; he chose not to. While Hadrian seems to have been granted the office of tribune of the plebs a year or so younger than was customary, he had to leave Dacia, and Trajan, to take up the appointment; Trajan might simply have wanted him out of the way. The \"Historia Augusta\" describes Trajan's gift to Hadrian of a diamond ring that Trajan himself had received from Nerva, which \"encouraged [Hadrian's] hopes of succeeding to the throne\". While Trajan actively promoted Hadrian's advancement, he did so with caution.\nSuccession.\nFailure to nominate an heir could invite chaotic, destructive wresting of power by a succession of competing claimants \u2013 a civil war. Too early a nomination could be seen as an abdication and reduce the chance for an orderly transmission of power. As Trajan lay dying, nursed by his wife, Plotina, and closely watched by Prefect Attianus, he could have lawfully adopted Hadrian as heir by means of a simple deathbed wish, expressed before witnesses; but when an adoption document was eventually presented, it was signed not by Trajan but by Plotina. That Hadrian was still in Syria was a further irregularity, as Roman adoption law required the presence of both parties at the adoption ceremony. Rumours, doubts, and speculation attended Hadrian's adoption and succession. It has been suggested that Trajan's young manservant Phaedimus, who died very soon after Trajan, was killed (or killed himself) rather than face awkward questions. Ancient sources are divided on the legitimacy of Hadrian's adoption: Cassius Dio saw it as bogus and the \"Historia Augusta\" writer as genuine. An aureus minted early in Hadrian's reign represents the official position; it presents Hadrian as Trajan's \"Caesar\" (Trajan's heir designate).\nEmperor (117).\nSecuring power.\nAccording to the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian informed the Senate of his accession in a letter as a \"fait accompli\", explaining that \"the unseemly haste of the troops in acclaiming him emperor was due to the belief that the state could not be without an emperor\". The new emperor rewarded the legions' loyalty with the customary bonus, and the Senate endorsed the acclamation. Various public ceremonies were organised on Hadrian's behalf, celebrating his \"divine election\" by all the gods, whose community now included Trajan, deified at Hadrian's request.\nHadrian remained in the east for a while, suppressing the Jewish revolt that had broken out under Trajan. He relieved Judea's governor, the outstanding Moorish general Lusius Quietus, of his personal guard of Moorish auxiliaries; \nthen he moved on to quell disturbances along the Danube frontier. In Rome, Hadrian's former guardian and current praetorian prefect, Attianus, claimed to have uncovered a conspiracy involving Lusius Quietus and three other leading senators, Lucius Publilius Celsus, Aulus Cornelius Palma Frontonianus and Gaius Avidius Nigrinus. There was no public trial for the four\u00a0\u2013 they were tried \"in absentia\", hunted down and killed. Hadrian claimed that Attianus had acted on his own initiative, and rewarded him with senatorial status and consular rank; then pensioned him off, no later than 120. Hadrian assured the senate that henceforth their ancient right to prosecute and judge their own would be respected.\nThe reasons for these four executions remain obscure. Official recognition of Hadrian as a legitimate heir may have come too late to dissuade other potential claimants. Hadrian's greatest rivals were Trajan's closest friends, the most experienced and senior members of the imperial council; any of them might have been a legitimate competitor for the imperial office (\"capaces imperii\"); and any of them might have supported Trajan's expansionist policies, which Hadrian intended to change. One of their number was Aulus Cornelius Palma who as a former conqueror of Arabia Nabatea would have retained a stake in the East. The \"Historia Augusta\" describes Palma and a third executed senator, Lucius Publilius Celsus (consul for the second time in 113), as Hadrian's personal enemies, who had spoken in public against him. The fourth was Gaius Avidius Nigrinus, an ex-consul, intellectual, friend of Pliny the Younger and (briefly) Governor of Dacia at the start of Hadrian's reign. He was probably Hadrian's chief rival for the throne; a senator of the highest rank, breeding, and connections; according to the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian had considered making Nigrinus his heir apparent before deciding to get rid of him.\nSoon after, in 125, Hadrian appointed Quintus Marcius Turbo as his Praetorian Prefect. Turbo was his close friend, a leading figure of the equestrian order, a senior court judge and a procurator. As Hadrian also forbade equestrians to try cases against senators, the Senate retained full legal authority over its members; it also remained the highest court of appeal, and formal appeals to the emperor regarding its decisions were forbidden. If this was an attempt to repair the damage done by Attianus, with or without Hadrian's full knowledge, it was not enough; Hadrian's reputation and relationship with his Senate were irredeemably soured, for the rest of his reign. Some sources describe Hadrian's occasional recourse to a network of informers, the \"frumentarii\", to discreetly investigate persons of high social standing, including senators and his close friends.\nTravels.\nHadrian was to spend more than half his reign outside Italy. Whereas previous emperors had, for the most part, relied on the reports of their imperial representatives around the Empire, Hadrian wished to see things for himself. Previous emperors had often left Rome for long periods, but mostly to go to war, returning once the conflict was settled. Hadrian's near-incessant travels may represent a calculated break with traditions and attitudes in which the empire was a purely Roman hegemony. Hadrian sought to include provincials in a commonwealth of civilised peoples and a common Hellenic culture under Roman supervision. He supported the creation of provincial towns (municipia), semi-autonomous urban communities with their own customs and laws, rather than the imposition of new Roman colonies with Roman constitutions.\nA cosmopolitan, ecumenical intent is evident in coin issues of Hadrian's later reign, showing the emperor \"raising up\" the personifications of various provinces. Aelius Aristides would later write that Hadrian \"extended over his subjects a protecting hand, raising them as one helps fallen men on their feet\". All this did not go well with Roman traditionalists. The self-indulgent emperor Nero had enjoyed a prolonged and peaceful tour of Greece and had been criticised by the Roman elite for abandoning his fundamental responsibilities as emperor. In the eastern provinces, and to some extent in the west, Nero had enjoyed popular support; claims of his imminent return or rebirth emerged almost immediately after his death. Hadrian may have consciously exploited these positive, popular connections during his own travels. In the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian is described as \"a little too much Greek\", too cosmopolitan for a Roman emperor.\nBritannia and the West (122).\nPrior to Hadrian's arrival in Britannia, the province had suffered a major rebellion from 118 to 119. Inscriptions tell of an \"expeditio Britannica\" that involved major troop movements, including the dispatch of a detachment (vexillatio), comprising some 3,000 soldiers. Fronto writes about military losses in Britannia at the time. Coin legends of 119\u2013120 attest that Quintus Pompeius Falco was sent to restore order. In 122 Hadrian initiated the construction of a wall \"to separate Romans from barbarians\". The idea that the wall was built in order to deal with an actual threat or its resurgence, however, is probable but nevertheless conjectural. A general desire to cease the Empire's extension may have been the determining motive. Reduction of defence costs may also have played a role, as the Wall deterred attacks on Roman territory at a lower cost than a massed border army, and controlled cross-border trade and immigration. A shrine was erected in York to Britannia as the divine personification of Britain; coins were struck, bearing her image, identified as Britannia. By the end of 122, Hadrian had concluded his visit to Britannia. He never saw the finished wall that bears his name.\nHadrian appears to have continued through southern Gaul. At Nemausus, he may have overseen the building of a basilica dedicated to his patroness Plotina, who had recently died in Rome and had been deified at Hadrian's request. At around this time, Hadrian dismissed his secretary \"ab epistulis\", the biographer Suetonius, for \"excessive familiarity\" towards the empress. Marcius Turbo's colleague as praetorian prefect, Gaius Septicius Clarus, was dismissed for the same alleged reason, perhaps a pretext to remove him from office. Hadrian spent the winter of 122/123 at Tarraco, in Spain, where he restored the Temple of Augustus.\nAfrica, Parthia (123).\nIn 123, Hadrian crossed the Mediterranean to Mauretania, where he personally led a minor campaign against local rebels. The visit was cut short by reports of war preparations by Parthia; Hadrian quickly headed eastwards. At some point, he visited Cyrene, where he personally funded the training of young men from well-bred families for the Roman military. Cyrene had benefited earlier in Hadrian's reign (in 119) from his restoration of public buildings destroyed during the earlier, Trajanic Jewish revolt. Birley describes this kind of investment as \"characteristic of Hadrian\".\nAnatolia; Antinous (123\u2013124).\nWhen Hadrian arrived on the Euphrates, he personally negotiated a settlement with the Parthian King Osroes I, inspected the Roman defences, then set off westwards, along the Black Sea coast. He probably wintered in Nicomedia, the main city of Bithynia. Nicomedia had been hit by an earthquake only shortly before his stay; Hadrian provided funds for its rebuilding and was acclaimed as restorer of the province.\nIt is possible that Hadrian visited Claudiopolis and saw the beautiful Antinous, a young man of humble birth who became Hadrian's lover. Literary and epigraphic sources say nothing of when or where they met; depictions of Antinous show him aged 20 or so, shortly before his death in 130. In 123, he would most likely have been a youth of 13 or 14. It is also possible that Antinous was sent to Rome to be trained as a page to serve the emperor and only gradually rose to the status of imperial favourite. The actual historical detail of their relationship is mostly unknown.\nWith or without Antinous, Hadrian travelled through Anatolia. Various traditions suggest his presence at particular locations and allege his foundation of a city within Mysia, Hadrianutherae, after a successful boar hunt. At about this time, plans to complete the Temple of Zeus in Cyzicus, begun by the kings of Pergamon, were put into practice. The temple received a colossal statue of Hadrian. Cyzicus, Pergamon, Smyrna, Ephesus and Sardes were promoted as regional centres for the imperial cult (\"neocoros\").\nGreece (124\u2013125).\nHadrian arrived in Greece during the autumn of 124 and participated in the Eleusinian Mysteries. He had a particular commitment to Athens, which had previously granted him citizenship and an ; at the Athenians' request, he revised their constitution\u00a0\u2013 among other things, he added a new phyle (tribe), which was named after him. Hadrian combined active, hands-on interventions with cautious restraint. He refused to intervene in a local dispute between producers of olive oil and the Athenian Assembly and Council, who had imposed production quotas on oil producers; yet he granted an imperial subsidy for the Athenian grain supply. Hadrian created two foundations to fund Athens' public games, festivals and competitions if no citizen proved wealthy or willing enough to sponsor them as a Gymnasiarch or Agonothetes. Generally Hadrian preferred that Greek notables, including priests of the imperial cult, focus on more essential and durable provisions, especially \"munera\" such as aqueducts and public fountains (\"nymphaea\"). Athens was given two \"nymphaea\"; one brought water from Mount Parnes to the Athenia Agora via a complex, challenging and ambitious system of aqueduct tunnels and reservoirs, to be constructed over several years. Several were given to Argos, to remedy a water-shortage so severe and so long-standing that \"thirsty Argos\" featured in Homeric epic.\nDuring that winter, Hadrian toured the Peloponnese. His exact route is uncertain, but it took in Epidaurus; Pausanias describes temples built there by Hadrian, and his statue\u00a0\u2013 in heroic nudity\u00a0\u2013 erected by its citizens in thanks to their \"restorer\". Antinous and Hadrian may have already been lovers at this time; Hadrian showed particular generosity to Mantinea, which shared ancient, mythic, politically useful links with Antinous' home at Bithynia. He restored Mantinea's Temple of Poseidon Hippios, and according to Pausanias, restored the city's original, classical name. It had been renamed Antigoneia since Hellenistic times, after the Macedonian King Antigonus III Doson. Hadrian also rebuilt the ancient shrines of Abae and Megara, and the Heraion of Argos.\nDuring his tour of the Peloponnese, Hadrian persuaded the Spartan grandee Eurycles Herculanus\u00a0\u2013 leader of the Euryclid family that had ruled Sparta since Augustus' day\u00a0\u2013 to enter the Senate, alongside the Athenian grandee Herodes Atticus the Elder. The two aristocrats would be the first from \"Old Greece\" to enter the Roman Senate, as representatives of Sparta and Athens, traditional rivals and \"great powers\" of the Classical Age. This was an important step in overcoming Greek notables' reluctance to take part in Roman political life. In March 125, Hadrian presided at the Athenian festival of Dionysia, wearing Athenian dress. The Temple of Olympian Zeus had been under construction for more than five centuries; Hadrian committed the vast resources at his command to ensure that the job would be finished.\nReturn to Italy and trip to Africa (126\u2013128).\nOn his return to Italy, Hadrian made a detour to Sicily. Coins celebrate him as the restorer of the island. Back in Rome, he saw the rebuilt Pantheon and his completed villa at nearby Tibur, among the Sabine Hills. In early March 127 Hadrian set off on a tour of Italy; his route has been reconstructed through the evidence of his gifts and donations. He restored the shrine of Cupra in Cupra Maritima and improved the drainage of the Fucine lake. Less welcome than such largesse was his decision in 127 to divide Italy into four regions under imperial legates with consular rank, acting as governors. They were given jurisdiction over all of Italy, excluding Rome itself, therefore shifting Italian cases from the courts of Rome. Having Italy effectively reduced to the status of a group of mere provinces did not go down well with the Roman Senate, and the innovation did not long outlive Hadrian's reign.\nHadrian fell ill around this time; whatever the nature of his illness, it did not stop him from setting off in the spring of 128 to visit Africa. His arrival coincided with the good omen of rain, which ended a drought. Along with his usual role as benefactor and restorer, he found time to inspect the troops; his speech to them survives. Hadrian returned to Italy in the summer of 128, but his stay was brief, as he set off on another tour that would last three years.\nGreece, Asia, and Egypt (128\u2013130); Antinous's death.\nIn September 128, Hadrian attended the Eleusinian Mysteries again. This time his visit to Greece seems to have concentrated on Athens and Sparta \u2013 the two ancient rivals for dominance of Greece. Hadrian had played with the idea of focusing his Greek revival around the Amphictyonic League based in Delphi, but by now he had decided on something far grander. His new Panhellenion was going to be a council that would bring Greek cities together. Having set in motion the preparations\u00a0\u2013 deciding whose claim to be a Greek city was genuine would take time\u00a0\u2013 Hadrian set off for Ephesus. From Greece, Hadrian proceeded by way of Asia to Egypt, probably conveyed across the Aegean with his entourage by an Ephesian merchant, Lucius Erastus. Hadrian later sent a letter to the Council of Ephesus, supporting Erastus as a worthy candidate for town councillor and offering to pay the requisite fee.\nHadrian arrived in Egypt before the Egyptian New Year on 29 August 130. He opened his stay in Egypt by restoring Pompey the Great's tomb at Pelusium, offering sacrifice to him as a hero and composing an epigraph for the tomb. As Pompey was universally acknowledged as responsible for establishing Rome's power in the east, this restoration was probably linked to a need to reaffirm Roman Eastern hegemony following social unrest there during Trajan's late reign. Hadrian and Antinous held a lion hunt in the Libyan desert; a poem on the subject by the Greek Pankrates is the earliest evidence that they travelled together.\nWhile Hadrian and his entourage were sailing on the Nile, Antinous drowned. The exact circumstances surrounding his death are unknown, and accident, suicide, murder and religious sacrifice have all been postulated. \"Historia Augusta\" offers the following account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During a journey on the Nile he lost Antinous, his favourite, and for this youth he wept like a woman. Concerning this incident there are varying rumours; for some claim that he had devoted himself to death for Hadrian, and others\u00a0\u2013 what both his beauty and Hadrian's sensuality suggest. But however this may be, the Greeks deified him at Hadrian's request, and declared that oracles were given through his agency, but these, it is commonly asserted, were composed by Hadrian himself.\nHadrian founded the city of Antino\u00f6polis in Antinous' honour on 30 October 130. He then continued down the Nile to Thebes, where his visit to the Colossi of Memnon on 20 and 21 November was commemorated by four epigrams inscribed by Julia Balbilla. After that, he headed north, reaching the Fayyum at the beginning of December.\nGreece and the East (130\u2013132).\nHadrian's movements after his journey down the Nile are uncertain. Whether or not he returned to Rome, he travelled in the East during 130\u2013131, to organise and inaugurate his new Panhellenion, which was to be focused on the Athenian Temple to Olympian Zeus. As local conflicts had led to the failure of the previous scheme for a Hellenic association centered on Delphi, Hadrian decided instead for a grand league of all Greek cities. Successful applications for membership involved mythologised or fabricated claims to Greek origins, and affirmations of loyalty to imperial Rome, to satisfy Hadrian's personal, idealised notions of Hellenism. Hadrian saw himself as protector of Greek culture and the \"liberties\" of Greece\u00a0\u2013 in this case, urban self-government. It allowed Hadrian to appear as the fictive heir to Pericles, who supposedly had convened a previous Panhellenic Congress\u00a0\u2013 such a Congress is mentioned only in Pericles' biography by Plutarch, who respected Rome's imperial order.\nEpigraphical evidence suggests that the prospect of applying to the Panhellenion held little attraction to the wealthier, Hellenised cities of Asia Minor, which were jealous of Athenian and European Greek preeminence within Hadrian's scheme. Hadrian's notion of Hellenism was narrow and deliberately archaising; he defined \"Greekness\" in terms of classical roots, rather than a broader, Hellenistic culture. Some cities with a dubious claim to Greekness, however \u2013 such as Side \u2013 were acknowledged as fully Hellenic. The German sociologist Georg Simmel remarked that the Panhellenion was based on \"games, commemorations, preservation of an ideal, an entirely non-political Hellenism\".\nHadrian bestowed honorific titles on many regional centres. Palmyra received a state visit and was given the civic name Hadriana Palmyra. Hadrian also bestowed honours on various Palmyrene magnates, among them one Soados, who had done much to protect Palmyrene trade between the Roman Empire and Parthia.\nHadrian had spent the winter of 131\u201332 in Athens, where he dedicated the now-completed Temple of Olympian Zeus, At some time in 132, he headed East, to Judaea.\nThird Roman\u2013Jewish War (132\u2013136).\nBackground, causes.\nIn Roman Judaea, Hadrian visited Jerusalem, which was still in ruins after the First Jewish\u2013Roman War of 66\u201373. He may have planned to rebuild Jerusalem as a colonia as Vespasian had done with Caesarea Maritima\u00a0\u2013 with various honorific and fiscal privileges. The non-Roman population had no obligation to participate in Roman religious rituals but was expected to support the Roman imperial order; this is attested in Caesarea, where some Jews served in the Roman army during both the 66 and 132 rebellions. It has been speculated that Hadrian intended to assimilate the Temple in Jerusalem to the traditional civic-religious Roman imperial cult; such assimilations had long been commonplace practice in Greece and in other provinces, and on the whole, had been successful.\nThe Samaritans had already integrated their religious rites with Hellenistic ones. Strict Jewish monotheism proved more resistant to imperial cajoling, and then to imperial demands.\nA tradition based on the \"Historia Augusta\" suggests that the revolt was spurred by Hadrian's abolition of circumcision (\"brit milah\"); which as a Hellenist he viewed as mutilation. The scholar Peter Sch\u00e4fer maintains that there is no evidence for this claim, given the notoriously problematical nature of the \"Historia Augusta\" as a source, the \"tomfoolery\" shown by the writer in the relevant passage, and the fact that contemporary Roman legislation on \"genital mutilation\" seems to address the general issue of castration of slaves by their masters. Other issues could have contributed to the outbreak: a heavy-handed, culturally insensitive Roman administration; tensions between the landless poor and incoming Roman colonists privileged with land-grants; and a strong undercurrent of messianism, predicated on Jeremiah's prophecy that the Temple would be rebuilt seventy years after its destruction, as the First Temple had been after the Babylonian exile.\nRevolt.\nA massive anti-Hellenistic and anti-Roman Jewish uprising broke out, led by Simon bar Kokhba. Given the fragmentary nature of the existing evidence, it is impossible to ascertain an exact date for the beginning of the uprising. It probably began between summer and fall of 132.\nThe Roman governor Tineius (Tynius) Rufus asked for an army to crush the resistance; bar Kokhba punished any Jew who refused to join his ranks. According to Justin Martyr and Eusebius, that had to do mostly with Christian converts, who opposed bar Kokhba's messianic claims.\nThe Romans were overwhelmed by the organised ferocity of the uprising. Hadrian called his general Sextus Julius Severus from Britain and brought troops in from as far as the Danube. Roman losses were heavy; an entire legion or its numeric equivalent of around 4,000. Hadrian's report on the war to the Roman Senate omitted the customary salutation, \"If you and your children are in health, it is well; I and the legions are in health.\"\nThe rebellion was quashed by 135. According to Cassius Dio. Beitar, a fortified city southwest of Jerusalem, fell after a three-and-a-half-year siege.\nAftermath; persecutions.\nRoman war operations in Judea left some 580,000 Jews dead and 50 fortified towns and 985 villages razed.\nAn unknown proportion of the population was enslaved. The extent of punitive measures against the Jewish population remains a matter of debate.\nHadrian renamed Judea province Syria Palaestina. He renamed Jerusalem Aelia Capitolina after himself and Jupiter Capitolinus and had the city rebuilt in Greek style. According to Epiphanius, Hadrian appointed Aquila from Sinope in Pontus as \"overseer of the work of building the city\", since he was related to him by marriage. Hadrian is said to have placed the city's main Forum at the junction of the main Cardo and Decumanus Maximus, now the location for the (smaller) Muristan. After the suppression of the Jewish revolt, Hadrian provided the Samaritans with a temple dedicated to Zeus Hypsistos (\"Highest Zeus\") on Mount Gerizim. The bloody repression of the revolt ended Jewish political independence from the Roman imperial order.\nHadrian's itinerary.\nInscriptions make it clear that in 133, Hadrian took to the field with his armies against the rebels. He then returned to Rome, probably in that year and almost certainly\u00a0\u2013 judging from inscriptions\u00a0\u2013 via Illyricum.\nFinal years.\nHadrian spent the final years of his life in Rome. In 134, he took an imperial salutation for the end of the Third Jewish War (which was not actually concluded until the following year). Commemorations and achievement awards were kept to a minimum, as Hadrian came to see the war \"as a cruel and sudden disappointment to his aspirations\" towards a cosmopolitan empire.\nEmpress Sabina died, probably in 136, after an unhappy marriage with which Hadrian had coped as a political necessity. The \"Historia Augusta\" biography states that Hadrian himself declared that his wife's \"ill-temper and irritability\" would be reason enough for a divorce, were he a private citizen. That gave credence, after Sabina's death, to the common belief that Hadrian had her poisoned. In keeping with well-established imperial propriety, Sabina \u2013 who had been made an \"Augusta\" sometime around 128 \u2013 was deified not long after her death.\nArranging the succession.\nHadrian's marriage to Sabina had been childless. Suffering from poor health, Hadrian turned to the issue of succession. In 136, he adopted one of the ordinary consuls of that year, Lucius Ceionius Commodus, who, as an emperor-in-waiting, took the name Lucius Aelius Caesar. He was the son-in-law of Gaius Avidius Nigrinus, one of the \"four consulars\" executed in 118. His health was delicate, and his reputation apparently more that \"of a voluptuous, well-educated great lord than that of a leader\". Various modern attempts have been made to explain Hadrian's choice: Jerome Carcopino proposes that Aelius was Hadrian's natural son. It has also been speculated that his adoption was Hadrian's belated attempt to reconcile with one of the most important of the four senatorial families whose leading members had been executed soon after Hadrian's succession. Aelius acquitted himself honourably as joint governor of Pannonia Superior and Pannonia Inferior; he held a further consulship in 137 but died on 1 January 138.\nHadrian next adopted Titus Aurelius Fulvus Boionius Arrius Antoninus (the future emperor Antoninus Pius), who had served Hadrian as one of the five imperial legates of Italy, and as proconsul of Asia. In the interests of dynastic stability, Hadrian required that Antoninus adopt both Lucius Ceionius Commodus (son of the deceased Aelius Caesar) and Marcus Annius Verus (grandson of an influential senator of the same name who had been Hadrian's close friend); Annius was already betrothed to Aelius Caesar's daughter Ceionia Fabia. It may not have been Hadrian, but rather Antoninus Pius\u00a0\u2013 Annius Verus's uncle\u00a0\u2013 who supported Annius Verus' advancement; the latter's divorce of Ceionia Fabia and subsequent marriage to Antoninus' daughter Annia Faustina points in the same direction. When he eventually became Emperor, Marcus Aurelius would co-opt Ceionius Commodus as his co-Emperor, under the name of Lucius Verus, on his own initiative.\nHadrian's last few years were marked by conflict and unhappiness. His adoption of Aelius Caesar proved unpopular, not least with Hadrian's brother-in-law Lucius Julius Ursus Servianus and Servianus's grandson Gnaeus Pedanius Fuscus Salinator. Servianus, though now far too old, had stood in the line of succession at the beginning of Hadrian's reign; Fuscus is said to have had designs on the imperial power for himself. In 137, he may have attempted a coup in which his grandfather was implicated; Hadrian ordered that both be put to death. Servianus is reported to have prayed before his execution that Hadrian would \"long for death but be unable to die\". During his final, protracted illness, Hadrian was prevented from suicide on several occasions.\nDeath.\nHadrian died in the year 138 on 10 July, in his villa at Baiae at the age of 62, having reigned for 21 years. Dio Cassius and the \"Historia Augusta\" record details of his failing health; some modern sources interpret the ear-creases on later portrayals (such as the Townley Hadrian) as signs of coronary artery disease.\nHe was buried at Puteoli, near Baiae, on an estate that had once belonged to Cicero. Soon after, his remains were transferred to Rome and buried in the Gardens of Domitia, close to the almost-complete mausoleum. Upon completion of the Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome in 139 by his successor Antoninus Pius, his body was cremated. His ashes were placed there together with those of his wife Vibia Sabina and his first adopted son, Lucius Aelius Caesar, who also died in 138. The Senate had been reluctant to grant Hadrian divine honours; but Antoninus persuaded them by threatening to refuse the position of Emperor. Hadrian was given a temple on the Campus Martius, ornamented with reliefs representing the provinces. The Senate awarded Antoninus the title of \"Pius\", in recognition of his filial piety in pressing for the deification of Hadrian, his adoptive father. At the same time, perhaps in reflection of the senate's ill will towards Hadrian, commemorative coinage honouring his deification was kept to a minimum.\nMilitary activities.\nMost of Hadrian's military activities were consistent with his ideology of empire as a community of mutual interest and support. He focused on protection from external and internal threats; on \"raising\" existing provinces rather than the aggressive acquisition of wealth and territory through subjugation of \"foreign\" peoples that had characterised the early empire. Hadrian's policy shift was part of a trend towards the slowing down of the empire's expansion, such expansion being not closed after him, but a significant step in that direction, given the empire's overstretching. While the empire as a whole benefited from this, military careerists resented the loss of opportunities.\nThe 4th-century historian Aurelius Victor saw Hadrian's withdrawal from Trajan's territorial gains in Mesopotamia as a jealous belittlement of Trajan's achievements (\"Traiani gloriae invidens\"). More likely, an expansionist policy was no longer sustainable; the empire had lost two legions, the Legio XXII Deiotariana and the \"lost legion\" IX Hispania, possibly destroyed in a late Trajanic uprising by the Brigantes in Britain. Trajan himself may have thought his gains in Mesopotamia indefensible and abandoned them shortly before his death. Hadrian granted parts of Dacia to the Roxolani Sarmatians; their king, Rasparaganus, received Roman citizenship, client king status, and possibly an increased subsidy. Hadrian's presence on the Dacian front is mere conjecture, but Dacia was included in his coin series with allegories of the provinces. A controlled partial withdrawal of troops from the Dacian plains would have been less costly than maintaining several Roman cavalry units and a supporting network of fortifications.\nHadrian retained control over Osroene through the client king Parthamaspates, who had once served as Trajan's client king of Parthia; and around 123, Hadrian negotiated a peace treaty with the now-independent Parthia (according to the \"Historia Augusta\", disputed). Late in his reign (135), the Alani attacked Roman Cappadocia with the covert support of Pharasmanes, the king of Caucasian Iberia. The attack was repulsed by Hadrian's governor, the historian Arrian, who subsequently installed a Roman \"adviser\" in Iberia. Arrian kept Hadrian well-informed on matters related to the Black Sea and the Caucasus. Between 131 and 132, he sent Hadrian a lengthy letter (\"Periplus of the Euxine\") on a maritime trip around the Black Sea that was intended to offer relevant information in case a Roman intervention was needed.\nHadrian also developed permanent fortifications and military posts along the empire's borders (\"limites\", sl. \"limes\") to support his policy of stability, peace and preparedness. That helped keep the military usefully occupied in times of peace; his wall across Britannia was built by ordinary troops. A series of mostly wooden fortifications, forts, outposts and watchtowers strengthened the Danube and Rhine borders. Troops practised intensive, regular drill routines. Although his coins showed military images almost as often as peaceful ones, Hadrian's policy was peace through strength, even threat, with an emphasis on \"disciplina\" (discipline), which was the subject of two monetary series. Cassius Dio praised Hadrian's emphasis on \"spit and polish\" as cause for the generally peaceful character of his reign. Fronto, by contrast, claimed that Hadrian preferred war games to actual war and enjoyed \"giving eloquent speeches to the armies\"\u00a0\u2013 like the inscribed series of addresses he made while on an inspection tour, during 128, at the new headquarters of Legio III Augusta in Lambaesis.\nFaced with a shortage of legionary recruits from Italy and other Romanised provinces, Hadrian systematised the use of less costly \"numeri\"\u00a0\u2013 ethnic non-citizen troops with special weapons, such as Eastern mounted archers, in low-intensity, mobile defensive tasks such as dealing with border infiltrators and skirmishers. Hadrian is also credited with introducing units of heavy cavalry (cataphracts) into the Roman army. Fronto later blamed Hadrian for declining standards in the Roman army of his own time.\nLegal and social reforms.\nHadrian enacted, through the jurist Salvius Julianus, the first attempt to codify Roman law. This was the Perpetual Edict, according to which the legal actions of praetors became fixed statutes and, as such, could no longer be subjected to personal interpretation or change by any magistrate other than the Emperor. At the same time, following a procedure initiated by Domitian, Hadrian made the Emperor's legal advisory board, the \"consilia principis\" (\"council of the princeps\") into a permanent body, staffed by salaried legal aides. Its members were mostly drawn from the equestrian class, replacing the earlier freedmen of the imperial household. This innovation marked the superseding of surviving Republican institutions by an openly autocratic political system. The reformed bureaucracy was supposed to exercise administrative functions independently of traditional magistracies; objectively it did not detract from the Senate's position. The new civil servants were free men and as such supposed to act on behalf of the interests of the \"Crown\", not of the Emperor as an individual. However, the Senate never accepted the loss of its prestige caused by the emergence of a new aristocracy alongside it, placing more strain on the already troubled relationship between the Senate and the Emperor.\nHadrian codified the customary legal privileges of the wealthiest, most influential, highest-status citizens (described as \"splendidiores personae\" or \"honestiores\"), who held a traditional right to pay fines when found guilty of relatively minor, non-treasonous offences. Low-ranking persons \u2013 \"alii\" (\"the others\"), including low-ranking citizens \u2013 were \"humiliores\" who for the same offences could be subject to extreme physical punishments, including forced labour in the mines or in public works, as a form of fixed-term servitude. While Republican citizenship had carried at least notional equality under law, and the right to justice, offences in imperial courts were judged and punished according to the relative prestige, rank, reputation and moral worth of both parties; senatorial courts were apt to be lenient when trying one of their peers, and to deal very harshly with offences committed against one of their number by low-ranking citizens or non-citizens. For treason (maiestas), beheading was the worst punishment that the law could inflict on \"honestiores\"; the \"humiliores\" might suffer crucifixion, burning, or condemnation to the beasts in the arena.\nA great number of Roman citizens maintained a precarious social and economic advantage at the lower end of the hierarchy. Hadrian found it necessary to clarify that decurions, the usually middle-class, elected local officials responsible for running the ordinary, everyday official business of the provinces, counted as \"honestiores\"; so did soldiers, veterans and their families, as far as civil law was concerned; by implication, almost all citizens below those ranks \u2013 the vast majority of the Empire's population \u2013 counted as \"humiliores\", with low citizen status, high tax obligations and limited rights. Like most Romans, Hadrian seems to have accepted slavery as morally correct, an expression of the same natural order that rewarded \"the best men\" with wealth, power and respect. When confronted by a crowd demanding the freeing of a popular slave charioteer, Hadrian replied that he could not free a slave belonging to another person. However, he limited the punishments that slaves could suffer; they could be lawfully tortured to provide evidence, but they could not be lawfully killed unless guilty of a capital offence. Masters were forbidden to sell slaves to a gladiator trainer (lanista) or to a procurer, except as legally justified punishment. Hadrian also forbade torture of free defendants and witnesses. He abolished ergastula, private prisons for slaves in which kidnapped free men had sometimes been illegally detained.\nHadrian issued a general rescript, imposing a ban on castration, performed on freedman or slave, voluntarily or not, on pain of death for both the performer and the patient. Under the \"Lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis\", castration was placed on a par with conspiracy to murder and punished accordingly. Notwithstanding his philhellenism, Hadrian was also a traditionalist. He enforced dress-standards among the \"honestiores\"; senators and knights were expected to wear the toga when in public. He imposed strict separation between the sexes in theatres and public baths; to discourage idleness, the latter were not allowed to open until 2:00 in the afternoon, \"except for medical reasons.\"\nReligious activities.\nOne of Hadrian's immediate duties on accession was to seek senatorial consent for the deification of his predecessor, Trajan, and any members of Trajan's family to whom he owed a debt of gratitude. Matidia Augusta, Hadrian's mother-in-law, died in December 119 and was duly deified. Hadrian may have stopped at Nemausus during his return from Britannia to oversee the completion or foundation of a basilica dedicated to his patroness Plotina. She had recently died in Rome and had been deified at Hadrian's request.\nAs Emperor, Hadrian was also Rome's \"pontifex maximus\", responsible for all religious affairs and the proper functioning of official religious institutions throughout the empire. His Hispano-Roman origins and marked pro-Hellenism shifted the focus of the official imperial cult from Rome to the Provinces. While his standard coin issues identified him with the traditional \"genius populi Romani\", other issues stressed his personal identification with \"Hercules Gaditanus\" (Hercules of Gades), and Rome's imperial protection of Greek civilisation. He promoted Sagalassos in Greek Pisidia as the Empire's leading imperial cult centre; his exclusively Greek \"Panhellenion\" extolled Athens as the spiritual centre of Greek culture.\nHadrian added several imperial cult centres to the existing roster, particularly in Greece, where traditional intercity rivalries were commonplace. Cities promoted as imperial cult centres drew imperial sponsorship of festivals and sacred games, and attracted tourism, trade and private investment. Local worthies and sponsors were encouraged to seek self-publicity as cult officials under the aegis of Roman rule and to foster reverence for imperial authority. Hadrian's rebuilding of long-established religious centres would have further underlined his respect for the glories of classical Greece\u00a0\u2013 something well in line with contemporary antiquarian tastes. During Hadrian's third and last trip to the Greek East, there seems to have been an upwelling of religious fervour, focused on Hadrian himself. He was given personal cult as a deity, monuments and civic homage, according to the religious syncretism of the time. He may have had the great Serapeum of Alexandria rebuilt, following damage sustained in 116, during the Diaspora revolt.\nIn 136, just two years before his death, Hadrian dedicated his Temple of Venus and Roma. It was built on land he had set aside for the purpose in 121, formerly the site of Nero's Golden House. The temple was the largest in Rome and was built in a Hellenising style, more Greek than Roman. Its dedication and statuary associated the \"cultus\" of the traditional Roman goddess Venus, divine ancestress and protector of the Roman people, with the \"cultus\" of the goddess Roma \u2013 herself a Greek invention, hitherto worshipped only in the provinces \u2013 to emphasise the universal nature of the empire.\nAntinous.\nHadrian had Antinous deified as Osiris-Antinous by an Egyptian priest at the ancient Temple of Ramesses II, very near the place of his death. Hadrian dedicated a new temple-city complex there, built in a Graeco-Roman style, and named it Antino\u00f6polis. It was a proper Greek polis; it was granted an imperially subsidised alimentary scheme similar to Trajan's alimenta, and its citizens were allowed intermarriage with members of the native population without loss of citizen status. Hadrian thus identified an existing native cult (to Osiris) with Roman rule. The cult of Antinous was to become very popular in the Greek-speaking world and also found support in the West. In Hadrian's villa, statues of the Tyrannicides, with a bearded Aristogeiton and a clean-shaven Harmodios, linked his favourite to the classical tradition of Greek love. In the west, Antinous was identified with the Celtic sun god Belenos.\nHadrian was criticised for the open intensity of his grief at Antinous's death, particularly as he had delayed the apotheosis of his own sister Paulina after her death. Nevertheless, his recreation of the deceased youth as a cult figure found little opposition. Though not a subject of the state-sponsored, official Roman imperial cult, Antinous offered a common focus for the emperor and his subjects, emphasising their sense of community. Medals were struck with his effigy, and statues were erected to him in all parts of the empire, in all kinds of garb, including Egyptian dress. Temples were built for his worship in Bithynia and Mantineia in Arcadia. In Athens, festivals were celebrated in his honour and oracles delivered in his name. As an \"international\" cult figure, Antinous had enduring fame, far outlasting Hadrian's reign. Local coins with his effigy were still being struck during Caracalla's reign, and he was invoked in a poem to celebrate the accession of Diocletian.\nChristians.\nHadrian continued Trajan's policy on Christians; they should not be sought out and should only be prosecuted for specific offences, such as refusal to swear oaths. In a rescript addressed to the proconsul of Asia, Gaius Minicius Fundanus, and preserved by Justin Martyr, Hadrian laid down that accusers of Christians had to bear the burden of proof for their denunciations or be punished for \"calumnia\" (defamation).\nPersonal and cultural interests.\nHadrian had an abiding and enthusiastic interest in art, architecture and public works. As part of his imperial restoration program, he founded, re-founded or rebuilt many towns and cities throughout the Empire, supplying them with temples, stadiums and other public buildings. Examples in the Roman Province of Thrace include monumental developments to the Stadium and Odeon of Philippopolis (present-day Plovdiv), the provincial capital, and his rebuilding and enlargement of the city of Orestias, which he renamed Hadrianopolis (modern Edirne). Several other towns and cities \u2013 including Roman Carthage \u2013 were named or renamed \"Hadrianopolis\". Rome's Pantheon (temple \"to all the gods\"), originally built by Agrippa and destroyed by fire in 80, was partly restored under Trajan and completed under Hadrian in its familiar domed form. Hadrian's Villa at Tibur (Tivoli) provides the greatest Roman equivalent of an Alexandrian garden, complete with domed Serapeum, recreating a sacred landscape.\nAn anecdote from Cassius Dio's history suggests Hadrian had a high opinion of his own architectural tastes and talents and took their rejection as a personal offence: at some time before his reign, his predecessor Trajan was discussing an architectural problem with Apollodorus of Damascus \u2013 architect and designer of Trajan's Forum, the Column commemorating his Dacian conquest, and his bridge across the Danube \u2013 when Hadrian interrupted to offer his advice. Apollodorus gave him a scathing response: \"Be off, and draw your gourds [a sarcastic reference to the domes which Hadrian apparently liked to draw]. You don't understand any of these matters.\" Dio claims that once Hadrian became emperor, he showed Apollodorus drawings of the gigantic Temple of Venus and Roma, implying that great buildings could be created without his help. When Apollodorus pointed out the building's various insoluble problems and faults, Hadrian was enraged, sent him into exile and later put him to death on trumped-up charges.\nHadrian was a passionate hunter from a young age. In northwest Asia, he founded and dedicated a city to commemorate a she-bear he killed. In Egypt he and his beloved Antinous killed a lion. In Rome, eight reliefs featuring Hadrian in different stages of hunting decorate a building that began as a monument celebrating a kill.\nHadrian's philhellenism may have been one reason for his adoption, like Nero before him, of the beard as suited to Roman imperial dignity; Dio of Prusa had equated the growth of the beard with the Hellenic ethos. Hadrian's beard may also have served to conceal his natural facial blemishes. Before Hadrian, all emperors except Nero (who occasionally wore sideburns) had been clean-shaven, according to the fashion introduced among the Romans by Scipio Africanus (236\u2013183 BCE). After Hadrian until the reign of Constantine the Great (r. 306\u2013337) all adult emperors were bearded. The wearing of the beard as an imperial fashion was subsequently revived by Phocas (r. 602\u2013610) at the beginning of the 7th century and this fashion lasted until the end of the Byzantine Empire.\nHadrian was familiar with the rival philosophers Epictetus and Favorinus, and with their works, and held an interest in Roman philosophy. During his first stay in Greece, before he became emperor, he attended lectures by Epictetus at Nicopolis. Shortly before the death of Plotina, Hadrian had granted her wish that the leadership of the Epicurean School in Athens be open to a non-Roman candidate.During Hadrian's time as tribune of the plebs, omens and portents supposedly announced his future imperial condition. According to the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian had a great interest in astrology and divination and had been told of his future accession to the Empire by a granduncle who was himself a skilled astrologer.\nHadrian wrote poetry in both Latin and Greek; one of the few surviving examples is a Latin poem he reportedly composed on his deathbed (see below). Some of his Greek productions found their way into the \"Palatine Anthology\". He also wrote an autobiography, which \"Historia Augusta\" says was published under the name of Hadrian's freedman Phlegon of Tralles. It was not a work of great length or revelation but designed to scotch various rumours or explain Hadrian's most controversial actions. It is possible that this autobiography had the form of a series of open letters to Antoninus Pius.\nPoem by Hadrian.\nAccording to the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian composed the following poem shortly before his death:\n\n\nP. Aelius Hadrianus Imp.\n\"Roving amiable little soul,\"\n\"Body's companion and guest,\"\n\"That now will leave to places\"\n\"Colourless, unbending, and bare\"\n\"Your usual distractions no more shall be there...\"\nPublius Aelius Hadrian Imperator\nThe poem has enjoyed remarkable popularity, but uneven critical acclaim. According to Aelius Spartianus, the alleged author of Hadrian's biography in the \"Historia Augusta\", Hadrian \"wrote also similar poems in Greek, not much better than this one\". T. S. Eliot's poem \"Animula\" may have been inspired by Hadrian's, though the relationship is not unambiguous.\nAppraisals.\nHadrian has been described as the most versatile of all Roman emperors, who \"adroitly concealed a mind envious, melancholy, hedonistic, and excessive with respect to his own ostentation; he simulated restraint, affability, clemency, and conversely disguised the ardor for fame with which he burned.\" His successor Marcus Aurelius, in his \"Meditations\", lists those to whom he owes a debt of gratitude; Hadrian is conspicuously absent. Hadrian's tense, authoritarian relationship with his Senate was acknowledged a generation after his death by Fronto, himself a senator, who wrote in one of his letters to Marcus Aurelius that \"I praised the deified Hadrian, your grandfather, in the senate on a number of occasions with great enthusiasm, and I did this willingly, too [...] But, if it can be said\u00a0\u2013 respectfully acknowledging your devotion towards your grandfather\u00a0\u2013 I wanted to appease and assuage Hadrian as I would Mars Gradivus or Dis Pater, rather than to love him.\" Fronto adds, in another letter, that he kept some friendships, during Hadrian's reign, \"under the risk of my life\" (\"cum periculo capitis\"). Hadrian underscored the autocratic character of his reign by counting his \"dies imperii\" from the day of his acclamation by the armies rather than the senate and legislating by frequent use of imperial decrees to bypass the need for the Senate's approval. The veiled antagonism between Hadrian and the Senate never grew to overt confrontation as had happened during the reigns of overtly \"bad\" emperors because Hadrian knew how to remain aloof and avoid an open clash. That Hadrian spent half of his reign away from Rome in constant travel probably helped to mitigate the worst of this permanently strained relationship.\nIn 1503, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, though an avowed republican, esteemed Hadrian as an ideal \"princeps\", one of Rome's Five Good Emperors. Friedrich Schiller called Hadrian \"the Empire's first servant\". Edward Gibbon admired his \"vast and active genius\" and his \"equity and moderation\", and considered Hadrian's era as part of the \"happiest era of human history\". In Ronald Syme's view, Hadrian \"was a F\u00fchrer, a Duce, a Caudillo\". According to Syme, Tacitus' description of the rise and accession of Tiberius is a disguised account of Hadrian's authoritarian Principate. According, again, to Syme, Tacitus' Annals would be a work of contemporary history, written \"during Hadrian's reign and hating it\".\nWhile the balance of ancient literary opinion almost invariably compares Hadrian unfavourably to his predecessor, modern historians have sought to examine his motives, purposes and the consequences of his actions and policies. For M.A. Levi, a summing-up of Hadrian's policies should stress the ecumenical character of the Empire, his development of an alternate bureaucracy disconnected from the Senate and adapted to the needs of an \"enlightened\" autocracy, and his overall defensive strategy; this would qualify him as a grand Roman political reformer, creator of an openly absolute monarchy to replace a sham senatorial republic. Robin Lane Fox credits Hadrian as creator of a unified Greco-Roman cultural tradition, and as the end of this same tradition; Hadrian's attempted \"restoration\" of Classical culture within a non-democratic Empire drained it of substantive meaning, or, in Fox's words, \"kill[ed] it with kindness\".\nPortraits.\nHadrian's portraiture shows him as the first Roman emperor with a beard. Most emperors after him followed his lead. 10 different portrait types are known of Hadrian. A juvenile type with curly hair, broad side burns and a light moustache (but a free chin) was shown on coins later in his life on rare aurei, but likely reflects an early portrait before he became emperor. His first portrait type as Caesar and Augustus used on coins in Mid 117AD shows again broad sideburns merging into a strong moustache and still a free chin. The beard thus resembles beard styles popular in the 19th century like emperor Franz Josef of Austria.\nSources and historiography.\nIn Hadrian's time, there was already a well-established convention that one could not write a contemporary Roman imperial history for fear of contradicting what the emperors wanted to say, read or hear about themselves. As an earlier Latin source, Fronto's correspondence and works attest to Hadrian's character and the internal politics of his rule. Greek authors such as Philostratus and Pausanias wrote shortly after Hadrian's reign, but confined their scope to the general historical framework that shaped Hadrian's decisions, especially those relating the Greek-speaking world, Greek cities and notables. Pausanias especially wrote a lot in praise of Hadrian's benefactions to Greece in general and Athens in particular. Political histories of Hadrian's reign come mostly from later sources, some of them written centuries after the reign itself. The early 3rd-century \"Roman History\" by Cassius Dio, written in Greek, gave a general account of Hadrian's reign, but the original is lost, and what survives, aside from some fragments, is a brief, Byzantine-era abridgment by the 11th-century monk Xiphilinius, who focused on Hadrian's religious interests, the Bar Kokhba war, and little else\u00a0\u2013 mostly on Hadrian's moral qualities and his fraught relationship with the Senate. There are various other sources referred to by later commentators, such as the encomium of Aspasius of Byblos, that are now completely lost. The principal source for Hadrian's life and reign is, therefore, in Latin: one of several late 4th-century imperial biographies, collectively known as the \"Historia Augusta\". The collection as a whole is notorious for its unreliability (\"a mish mash of actual fact, cloak and dagger, sword and sandal, with a sprinkling of \"Ubu Roi\"\"), but most modern historians consider its account of Hadrian to be relatively free of outright fictions, and probably based on sound historical sources, principally one of a lost series of imperial biographies by the prominent 3rd-century senator Marius Maximus, who covered the reigns of Nerva through to Elagabalus.\nThe first modern historian to produce a chronological account of Hadrian's life, supplementing the written sources with other epigraphical, numismatic, and archaeological evidence, was the German 19th-century medievalist Ferdinand Gregorovius. A 1907 biography by Wilhelm Weber, a German nationalist and later Nazi Party supporter, incorporates the same archaeological evidence to produce an account of Hadrian, and especially his Bar Kokhba war, that has been described as ideologically loaded. Epigraphical studies in the post-war period help support alternate views of Hadrian. Anthony Birley's 1997 biography of Hadrian sums up and reflects these developments in Hadrian historiography. The French novelist Marguerite Yourcenar wrote a historical novel entitled \"Memoirs of Hadrian\" first published in French in 1951.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nPrimary sources.\nInscriptions:"}
{"id": "13623", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13623", "title": "Herman Melville", "text": "American writer and poet (1819\u20131891)\nHerman Melville (born Melvill; August 1, 1819\u00a0\u2013 September 28, 1891) was an American writer of the American Renaissance period. Among his best-known works are \"Moby-Dick\" (1851); \"Typee\" (1846), a romanticized account of his experiences in Polynesia; and \"Billy Budd, Sailor\", a posthumously published novella. At the time of his death Melville was not well known to the public, but 1919, the centennial of his birth, was the starting point of a Melville revival. \"Moby-Dick\" would eventually be considered one of the Great American Novels.\nMelville was born in New York City, the third child of a prosperous merchant whose death in 1832 left the family in dire financial straits. He took to sea in 1839 as a common sailor on the merchant ship \"St. Lawrence\" and then, in 1841, on the whaler \"Acushnet\", but he jumped ship in the Marquesas Islands. \"Typee\", his first book, and its sequel, \"Omoo\" (1847), were travel-adventures based on his encounters with the peoples of the islands. Their success gave him the financial security to marry Elizabeth Shaw, the daughter of the Boston jurist Lemuel Shaw. \"Mardi\" (1849), a romance-adventure and his first book not based on his own experience, was not well received. \"Redburn\" (1849) and \"White-Jacket\" (1850), both tales based on his experience as a well-born young man at sea, were given respectable reviews, but did not sell well enough to support his expanding family.\nMelville's growing literary ambition showed in \"Moby-Dick\" (1851), which took nearly a year and a half to write, but it did not find an audience, and critics scorned his psychological novel \"\" (1852). From 1853 to 1856, Melville published short fiction in magazines, including \"Benito Cereno\" and \"Bartleby, the Scrivener\". In 1857, he traveled to England, toured the Near East, and published his last work of prose, \"The Confidence-Man\" (1857). He moved to New York in 1863, eventually taking a position as a United States customs inspector.\nFrom that point, Melville focused his creative powers on poetry. \"Battle-Pieces and Aspects of the War\" (1866) was his poetic reflection on the moral questions of the American Civil War. In 1867, his eldest child Malcolm died at home from a self-inflicted gunshot. Melville's metaphysical epic \"Clarel: A Poem and Pilgrimage in the Holy Land\" was published in 1876. In 1886, his other son Stanwix died of apparent tuberculosis, and Melville retired. During his last years, he privately published two volumes of poetry, and left one volume unpublished. The novella \"Billy Budd\" was left unfinished at the time of his death, but was published posthumously in 1924. Melville died from cardiovascular disease in 1891.\nEarly life and education.\nHerman Melville was born in New York City, on August 1, 1819, the third of eight children to Allan Melvill and Maria (Gansevoort) Melvill. His seven siblings, who played important roles in his career and emotional life, were Gansevoort, Helen Maria, Augusta, Allan, Catherine, Frances Priscilla, and Thomas, who eventually became a governor of Sailors' Snug Harbor. Part of a well-established and colorful Boston family, Allan Melvill spent considerable time away from New York City, travelling regularly to Europe as a commission merchant and an importer of French dry goods.\nBoth of Melville's grandfathers played significant roles in the American Revolutionary War, and Melville later expressed satisfaction in his \"double revolutionary descent\". Major Thomas Melvill participated in the Boston Tea Party, and Melville's maternal grandfather, General Peter Gansevoort, commanded the defense of Fort Stanwix in New York in 1777.\nAt the turn of the 19th century, Major Melvill did not send his son Allan (Herman's father) to college, but instead sent him to France, where he spent two years in Paris and learned to speak French fluently. In 1814, Allan, who subscribed to his father's Unitarianism, married Maria Gansevoort, who was committed to her family's more strict and biblically oriented Dutch Reformed version of the Calvinist creed. The Gansevoorts' severe Protestantism ensured that Maria was well versed in the Bible, in English as well as in Dutch, the language that the Gansevoorts spoke at home.\nOn August 19, almost three weeks after his birth, Melville was baptized at home by a minister of the South Reformed Dutch Church. During the 1820s, Melville lived a privileged and opulent life in a household supported by three or more servants at a time. Every four years, the family moved to more spacious and elegant quarters, finally settling on Broadway in 1828. Allan Melvill lived beyond his means, on large sums that he borrowed from his father and from his wife's widowed mother. Although his wife's opinion of his financial conduct is unknown, biographer Hershel Parker says that Maria \"thought her mother's money was infinite and that she was entitled to much of her portion\" while her children were young. How well the parents managed to hide the truth from their children is \"impossible to know\", according to biographer Andrew Delbanco.\nIn 1830, the Gansevoorts ended their financial support of the Melvilles, at which point Allan's lack of financial responsibility had left him in debt to both the Melvill and Gansevoort families for a sum exceeding $20,000 (). But Melville biographer Newton Arvin writes that the relative happiness and comfort of Melville's early childhood depended less on Allan's wealth and profligate spending than on the \"exceptionally tender and affectionate spirit in all the family relationships, especially in the immediate circle\". Arvin describes Allan as \"a man of real sensibility and a particularly warm and loving father,\" while Maria was \"warmly maternal, simple, robust, and affectionately devoted to her husband and her brood\".\nMelville's education began when he was six. In 1824, the Melvilles moved to a newly built house at 33 Bleecker Street in Manhattan. In 1825, Herman and his brother Gansevoort enrolled in New York Male High School. In 1826, the year that Herman contracted scarlet fever, Allan Melvill described him as \"very backwards in speech &amp; somewhat slow in comprehension\" at first, but his development increased its pace and Allan was surprised \"that Herman proved the best Speaker in the introductory Department\". In 1829, both Gansevoort and Herman transferred to Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, and Herman enrolled in the English Department on September 28. \"Herman I think is making more progress than formerly,\" Allan wrote in May 1830 to Major Melvill, \"and without being a bright Scholar, he maintains a respectable standing, and would proceed further, if he could only be induced to study more\u2014being a most amiable and innocent child, I cannot find it in my heart to coerce him\".\nEmotionally unstable and behind on paying the rent for the house on Broadway, Herman's father tried to recover by moving his family to Albany, New York, in 1830 and going into the fur business. Herman attended The Albany Academy from October 1830 to October 1831, where he took the standard preparatory course, including reading and spelling, penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, geography, natural history, universal, Greek, Roman, and English history, classical biography, and Jewish antiquities. In early August 1831, Herman marched in the Albany city government procession of the year's \"finest scholars\" and was presented with a copy of \"The London Carcanet\", a collection of poems and prose, inscribed to him as \"first best in ciphering books\". As Melville scholar Merton Sealts observed,\nIn October 1831, Melville left the Academy. While the precise reason is not known definitively, Parker speculates it was for financial reasons, since \"even the tiny tuition fee seemed too much to pay\".\nIn December 1831, Allan Melville returned from New York City by steamboat, but he had to travel the last 70 miles in an open carriage for two days and two nights in subfreezing temperatures. In early January, he began to show \"signs of delirium\", and he grew worse until his wife felt that his suffering deprived him of his intellect. On January 28, 1832, he died, two months prior to reaching his 50th birthday. Since Herman was no longer attending school, he likely witnessed his father's medical and mental deterioration. Twenty years later, Melville described a similar death in \"Pierre\".\nWork as a clerk.\nThe death of Allan caused many major shifts in the family's material and spiritual circumstances. One result was the greater influence of his mother's religious beliefs. Maria sought consolation in her faith and in April was admitted as a member of the First Reformed Dutch Church. Herman's saturation in orthodox Calvinism was surely the most decisive intellectual and spiritual influence of his early life. \nTwo months after his father's death, Gansevoort entered the cap and fur business. Uncle Peter Gansevoort, a director of the New York State Bank, got Herman a job as clerk for $150 a year (). Biographers cite a passage from \"Redburn\" when trying to answer what Herman must have felt then: \"I had learned to think much and bitterly before my time,\" the narrator remarks, adding, \"I must not think of those delightful days, before my father became a bankrupt\u00a0... and we removed from the city; for when I think of those days, something rises up in my throat and almost strangles me\". With Melville, Arvin argues, one has to reckon with \"psychology, the tormented psychology, of the decayed patrician\".\nWhen Melville's paternal grandfather died on September 16, 1832, Maria and her children discovered Allan, somewhat unscrupulously, had borrowed more than his share of his inheritance, meaning Maria received only $20 (). His paternal grandmother died almost exactly seven months later. Melville did his job well at the bank; although he was only 14 in 1834, the bank considered him competent enough to be sent to Schenectady, New York, on an errand. Not much else is known from this period except that he was very fond of drawing. The visual arts became a lifelong interest. Around May 1834, the Melvilles moved to another house in Albany, a three-story brick house. That same month a fire destroyed Gansevoort's skin-preparing factory, which left him with personnel he could neither employ nor afford. Instead he pulled Melville out of the bank to man the cap and fur store.\nIntermittent work and studies.\nIn 1835, while still working in the store, Melville enrolled in Albany Classical School, perhaps using Maria's part of the proceeds from the sale of the estate of his maternal grandmother in March 1835. In September of the following year, Herman was back at The Albany Academy, participating in the school's Latin course. He also participated in debating societies, in an apparent effort to make up as much as he could for his missed years of schooling. During this time, he read Shakespeare, including \"Macbeth\", whose witch scenes gave him the chance to teasingly scare his sisters. By March 1837, however, he again withdrew from The Albany Academy.\nGansevoort served as a role model and support for Melville throughout his life, particularly during this time trying to cobble together an education. In early 1834, Gansevoort became a member of Albany's Young Men's Association for Mutual Improvement, and in January 1835 Melville joined him there. Gansevoort also had copies of John Todd's \"Index Rerum\", a blank register for indexing remarkable passages from books one had read for easy retrieval. Among the sample entries that Gansevoort made showing his academic scrupulousness was \"Pequot, beautiful description of the war with,\" with a short title reference to the place in Benjamin Trumbull's \"A Complete History of Connecticut\" (Volume I in 1797, and Volume II in 1818) in which the description could be found. The two surviving volumes of Gansevoort's are the best evidence for Melville's reading in this period. Gansevoort's entries include books Melville used for \"Moby-Dick\" and \"Clarel\", including \"Parsees\u2014of India\u2014an excellent description of their character, and religion and an account of their descent\u2014East India Sketch Book p. 21\". Other entries are on Panther, the pirate's cabin, and storm at sea from James Fenimore Cooper's \"The Red Rover\".\nWork as a school teacher.\nThe Panic of 1837 forced Gansevoort to file for bankruptcy in April. In June, Maria told the younger children they needed to leave Albany for somewhere cheaper. Gansevoort began studying law in New York City while Herman managed the farm before getting a teaching position at Sikes District School near Lenox, Massachusetts. He taught about 30 students of various ages, including some his own age.\nThe semester over, he returned to his mother in 1838. In February he was elected president of the Philo Logos Society, which Peter Gansevoort invited to move into Stanwix Hall for no rent. In the \"Albany Microscope\" in March, Melville published two polemical letters about issues in vogue in the debating societies. Historians Leon Howard and Hershel Parker suggest the motive behind the letters was a youthful desire to have his rhetorical skills publicly recognized. In May, the Melvilles moved to a rented house in Lansingburgh, almost 12 miles north of Albany. Nothing is known about what Melville did or where he went for several months after he finished teaching at Sikes. On November 12, five days after arriving in Lansingburgh, Melville paid for a term at Lansingburgh Academy to study surveying and engineering. In an April 1839 letter recommending Herman for a job in the Engineer Department of the Erie Canal, Peter Gansevoort says his nephew \"possesses the ambition to make himself useful in a business which he desires to make his profession,\" but no job resulted.\nJust weeks after this failure, Melville's first known published essay appeared. Using the initials \"L.A.V.\", Herman contributed \"Fragments from a Writing Desk\" to the weekly newspaper \"Democratic Press and Lansingburgh Advertiser\", which printed it in two installments, the first on May 4. According to Merton Sealts, his use of heavy-handed allusions reveals familiarity with the work of William Shakespeare, John Milton, Walter Scott, Richard Brinsley Sheridan, Edmund Burke, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, and Thomas Moore. Parker calls the piece \"characteristic Melvillean mood-stuff\" and considers its style \"excessive enough [...] to indulge his extravagances and just enough overdone to allow him to deny that he was taking his style seriously\". For Delbanco, the style is \"overheated in the manner of Poe, with sexually charged echoes of Byron and \"The Arabian Nights\"\".\n1839\u20131844: Years at sea.\nOn May 31, 1839, Gansevoort, then living in New York City, wrote that he was sure Herman could get a job on a whaler or merchant vessel. The next day, he signed aboard the merchant ship \"St. Lawrence\" as a \"boy\" (a green hand), which cruised from New York to Liverpool. \"Redburn: His First Voyage\" (1849) draws on his experiences in this journey; at least two of the nine guide-books listed in chapter 30 of the book had been part of Allan Melvill's library. He arrived back in New York October 1, 1839 and resumed teaching, now at Greenbush, New York, but left after one term because he had not been paid. In the summer of 1840 he and his friend James Murdock Fly went to Galena, Illinois, to see if his Uncle Thomas could help them find work. Unsuccessful, he and his friend returned home in autumn, likely by way of St. Louis and up the Ohio River.\nInspired by seafaring stories, including Richard Henry Dana Jr.'s new book \"Two Years Before the Mast\" and Jeremiah N. Reynolds's account in the May 1839 issue of \"The Knickerbocker\" magazine of the hunt for a great white sperm whale named Mocha Dick, Herman and Gansevoort traveled to New Bedford, where Herman signed up for a whaling voyage aboard a new ship, the \"Acushnet\". Built in 1840, the ship measured some 104 feet in length, almost in breadth, and almost 14 feet in depth. She measured slightly less than 360 tons and had two decks and three masts, but no quarter galleries. The \"Acushnet\" was owned by Melvin O. Bradford and Philemon Fuller of Fairhaven, Massachusetts, and was berthed near their office at the foot of Center Street in that town. Herman signed a contract on Christmas Day with the ship's agent as a \"green hand\" for 1/175th of whatever profits the voyage would yield. On Sunday the 27th, the brothers heard Reverend Enoch Mudge preach at the Seamen's Bethel on Johnnycake Hill, where white marble cenotaphs on the walls memorialized local sailors who had died at sea, often in battle with whales. When he signed the crew list the next day, Herman was advanced $84.\nOn January 3, 1841, the \"Acushnet\" set sail. Melville slept with some twenty others in the forecastle; Captain Valentine Pease, the mates, and the skilled men slept aft. Whales were found near The Bahamas, and in March 150 barrels of oil were sent home from Rio de Janeiro. Cutting in and trying-out (boiling) a single whale took about three days, and a whale yielded approximately one barrel of oil per foot of length and per ton of weight (the average whale weighed 40 to 60 tons). The oil was kept on deck for a day to cool off, and was then stowed down; scrubbing the deck completed the labor. An average voyage meant that some forty whales were killed to yield some 1600 barrels of oil.\nOn April 15, the \"Acushnet\" sailed around Cape Horn and traveled to the South Pacific, where the crew sighted whales without catching any. She then went up the coast of Chile to the region of Selkirk Island, and on May 7, near Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands, she had 160 barrels. On June 23, the ship anchored for the first time since Rio, in Santa Harbor. The cruising grounds the \"Acushnet\" was sailing attracted much traffic, and Captain Pease not only paused to visit other whalers, but at times hunted in company with them. From July 23 into August, the \"Acushnet\" regularly gammed with the \"Lima\" from Nantucket, and Melville met William Henry Chase, the son of Owen Chase, who gave him a copy of his father's account of his adventures aboard the \"Essex\". Ten years later, Melville wrote in his other copy of the book: \"The reading of this wondrous story upon the landless sea, &amp; close to the very latitude of the shipwreck had a surprising effect upon me\".\nOn September 25, the ship reported having 600 barrels of oil to another whaler, and in October 700 barrels. On October 24, the \"Acushnet\" crossed the equator to the north, and six or seven days later arrived at the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands. This short visit would be the basis for \"The Encantadas\". On November 2, the \"Acushnet\" and three other American whalers were hunting together near the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands; Melville later exaggerated that number in Sketch Fourth of \"The Encantadas\". From November 19 to 25, the ship anchored at Chatham's Isle, and on December 2 reached the coast of Peru and anchored at Tombez near Paita, with 570 barrels of oil on board. On December 27, the \"Acushnet\" sighted Cape Blanco, off Ecuador. Point St. Elena was sighted the next day, and on January 6, 1842, the ship approached the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands from the southeast. From February 13 to May 7, seven sightings of sperm whales were recorded, but none were killed. From early May to early June, the \"Acushnet\" cooperatively set about its whaling endeavors several times with the \"Columbus\" of New Bedford, which also took letters from Melville's ship; the two ships were in the same area just south of the Equator. On June 16, the \"Acushnet\" carried 750 barrels of oil and sent home 200 on the \"Herald the Second\", and, on June 23, she reached the Marquesas Islands and anchored at Nuku Hiva.\nIn the summer of 1842, Melville and his shipmate Richard Tobias Greene (\"Toby\") jumped ship at Nuku Hiva Bay. Melville's first book, \"Typee\" (1846), is based on his stay in or near the Taipi Valley. By around mid-August, Melville had left the island aboard the Australian whaler \"Lucy Ann\", bound for Tahiti, where he took part in a mutiny and was briefly jailed in the native \"Calabooza Beretanee\". In October, he and crew mate John B. Troy escaped Tahiti for Eimeo. He then spent a month as beachcomber and island rover (\"omoo\" in Tahitian), eventually crossing over to Moorea. He drew on these experiences for \"Omoo\", the sequel to \"Typee\". In November, he contracted to be a seaman on the Nantucket whaler \"Charles &amp; Henry\" for a six-month cruise (November 1842 \u2013 April 1843), and was discharged at Lahaina, Maui, in the Hawaiian Islands, in May 1843.\nAfter four months of working several jobs in Hawaii, including as a clerk, Melville joined the U.S. Navy on August 20, as an ordinary seaman on the frigate . During the next year, the homeward bound ship visited the Marquesas Islands, Tahiti, and Valparaiso, and then, from summer to fall 1844, Mazatlan, Lima, and Rio de Janeiro, before reaching Boston on October 3. Melville was discharged on October 14. This Navy experience is used in \"White-Jacket\" (1850), Melville's fifth book.\nMelville's wander-years created what biographer Arvin calls \"a settled hatred of external authority, a lust for personal freedom\", and a \"growing and intensifying sense of his own exceptionalism as a person\", along with \"the resentful sense that circumstance and mankind together had already imposed their will upon him in a series of injurious ways\". Scholar Robert Milder believes the encounter with the wide ocean, where he was seemingly abandoned by God, led Melville to experience a \"metaphysical estrangement\" and influenced his social views in two ways: first, that he belonged to the genteel classes, but sympathized with the \"disinherited commons\" he had been placed among and, second, that experiencing the cultures of Polynesia let him view the West from an outsider's perspective.\n1845\u20131850: Successful writer.\nUpon his return, Melville regaled his family and friends with his adventurous tales and romantic experiences, and they urged him to put them into writing. Melville completed \"Typee\", his first book, in the summer of 1845 while living in Troy, New York. His brother Gansevoort found a publisher for it in London, where it was published in February 1846 by John Murray in his travel adventure series. It became an overnight bestseller in England, then in New York, when it was published on March 17 by Wiley &amp; Putnam.\nIn the narrative, Melville likely extended the period of time he had spent on the island and also incorporated material from source books he had assembled. Milder calls \"Typee\" \"an appealing mixture of adventure, anecdote, ethnography, and social criticism presented with a genial latitudinarianism that gave novelty to a South Sea idyll at once erotically suggestive and romantically chaste\".\nAn unsigned review in the \"Salem Advertiser\" written by Nathaniel Hawthorne called the book a \"skilfully managed\" narrative by an author with \"that freedom of view\u00a0... which renders him tolerant of codes of morals that may be little in accordance with our own\". Hawthorne continued: This book is lightly but vigorously written; and we are acquainted with no work that gives a freer and more effective picture of barbarian life, in that unadulterated state of which there are now so few specimens remaining. The gentleness of disposition that seems akin to the delicious climate, is shown in contrast with the traits of savage fierceness...He has that freedom of view\u2014it would be too harsh to call it laxity of principle\u2014which renders him tolerant of codes of morals that may be little in accordance with our own, a spirit proper enough to a young and adventurous sailor, and which makes his book the more wholesome to our staid landsmen.\nPleased but not overwhelmed by the adulation of his new public, Melville later expressed concern that he would \"go down to posterity ... as a 'man who lived among the cannibals'!\" The writing of \"Typee\" brought Melville back into contact with his friend Greene\u2014Toby in the book\u2014who wrote confirming Melville's account in newspapers. The two corresponded until 1863, and in his final years Melville \"traced and successfully located his old friend\" for a further meeting of the two. In March 1847, \"Omoo\", a sequel to \"Typee\", was published by Murray in London, and in May by Harper in New York. \"Omoo\" is \"a slighter but more professional book,\" according to Milder. \"Typee\" and \"Omoo\" gave Melville overnight renown as a writer and adventurer, and he often entertained by telling stories to his admirers. As the writer and editor Nathaniel Parker Willis wrote, \"With his cigar and his Spanish eyes, he \"talks\" Typee and Omoo, just as you find the flow of his delightful mind on paper\".\nIn 1847, Melville tried unsuccessfully to find a \"government job\" in Washington.\nIn June 1847, Melville and Elizabeth \"Lizzie\" Knapp Shaw were engaged, after knowing each other for approximately three months. Melville had first asked her father, Lemuel Shaw, for her hand in March, but was at first turned down at the time. Shaw, Chief Justice of Massachusetts, had been a close friend of Melville's father, and Shaw's marriage with Melville's aunt Nancy was prevented only by her death. His warmth and financial support for the family continued after Allan's death. Melville dedicated his first book, \"Typee\", to him. Lizzie was raised by her grandmother and an Irish nurse. Arvin suggests that Melville's interest in Lizzie may have been stimulated by \"his need of Judge Shaw's paternal presence\". They were married on August 4, 1847. Lizzie described their marriage as \"very unexpected, and scarcely thought of until about two months before it actually took place\". She wanted to be married in church, but they had a private wedding ceremony at home to avoid possible crowds hoping to see the celebrity. The couple honeymooned in the then-British Province of Canada, and traveled to Montreal. They settled in a house on Fourth Avenue in New York City (now called Park Avenue).\nAccording to scholars Joyce Deveau Kennedy and Frederick James Kennedy, Lizzie brought to their marriage a sense of religious obligation, an intent to make a home with Melville regardless of place, a willingness to please her husband by performing such \"tasks of drudgery\" as mending stockings, an ability to hide her agitation, and a desire \"to shield Melville from unpleasantness\". The Kennedys conclude that \"If the ensuing years did bring regrets to Melville's life, it is impossible to believe he would have regretted marrying Elizabeth. In fact, he must have realized that he could not have borne the weight of those years unaided\u2014that without her loyalty, intelligence, and affection, his own wild imagination would have had no \"port or haven\".\nBiographer Robertson-Lorant cites \"Lizzie's adventurous spirit and abundant energy,\" and she suggests that \"her pluck and good humor might have been what attracted Melville to her, and vice versa\". An example of such good humor appears in a letter about her not yet used to being married: \"It seems sometimes exactly as if I were here for a \"visit\". The illusion is quite dispelled however when Herman stalks into my room without even the ceremony of knocking, bringing me perhaps a button to sew on, or some equally romantic occupation\". On February 16, 1849, the Melvilles' first child, Malcolm, was born.\nIn March 1848, \"Mardi\" was published by Richard Bentley in London, and in April by Harper in New York. Nathaniel Hawthorne thought it a rich book \"with depths here and there that compel a man to swim for his life\". According to Milder, the book began as another South Sea story but, as he wrote, Melville left that genre behind, first in favor of \"a romance of the narrator Taji and the lost maiden Yillah,\" and then \"to an allegorical voyage of the philosopher Babbalanja and his companions through the imaginary archipelago of Mardi\".\nIn October 1849, \"Redburn\" was published by Bentley in London, and in November by Harper in New York. The bankruptcy and death of Allan Melvill, and Melville's own youthful humiliations, surface in this \"story of outward adaptation and inner impairment\". Biographer Robertson-Lorant regards the work as a deliberate attempt for popular appeal: \"Melville modeled each episode almost systematically on every genre that was popular with some group of antebellum readers,\" combining elements of \"the picaresque novel, the travelogue, the nautical adventure, the sentimental novel, the sensational French romance, the gothic thriller, temperance tracts, urban reform literature, and the English pastoral\". His next novel, \"White-Jacket\", was published by Bentley in London in January 1850, and in March by Harper in New York.\n1850\u20131851: Hawthorne and \"Moby-Dick\".\nThe earliest surviving mention of \"Moby-Dick\" is from a May 1, 1850, letter in which Melville told fellow sea author Richard Henry Dana Jr. \"I am half way in the work.\" In June, he described the book to his English publisher as \"a romance of adventure, founded upon certain wild legends in the Southern Sperm Whale Fisheries,\" and promised it would be done by the fall. The original manuscript has not survived. That summer, Melville read Thomas Carlyle, borrowing copies of \"Sartor Resartus\" (1833\u201334) and \"On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History\" (1841) from the library of his friend Evert Duyckinck. These readings proved significant, occurring as Melville radically transformed his initial plan for the novel over the next several months, conceiving what Delbanco described in 2005 as \"the most ambitious book ever conceived by an American writer\".\nFrom August 4 to 12, 1850, the Melvilles, Sarah Morewood, Duyckinck, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and other literary figures from New York City and Boston came to Pittsfield, Massachusetts, to enjoy a period of parties, picnics, and dinners. Nathaniel Hawthorne and his publisher James T. Fields joined the group while Hawthorne's wife stayed at home to look after the children. On one picnic outing organized by Duyckinck, Hawthorne and Melville sought shelter from the rain together and had a deep, private conversation. Melville had been given a copy of Hawthorne's short story collection \"Mosses from an Old Manse\", though he had not yet read it. Melville then avidly read it and wrote a review, \"Hawthorne and His Mosses\", which appeared in two installments, on August 17 and 24, in \"The Literary World\". Melville wrote that these stories revealed a dark side to Hawthorne, \"shrouded in blackness, ten times black\". He repeatedly compared Hawthorne to Shakespeare, and urged that \"men not very much inferior to Shakespeare are this day being born on the banks of the Ohio.\" The critic Walter Bezanson finds the essay \"so deeply related to Melville's imaginative and intellectual world while writing \"Moby-Dick\"\" that it could be regarded as a virtual preface and should be \"everybody's prime piece of contextual reading\". Later that summer, Duyckinck sent Hawthorne copies of Melville's three most recent books. Hawthorne read them, as he wrote to Duyckinck on August 29 that Melville in \"Redburn\" and \"White-Jacket\" put the reality \"more unflinchingly\" before his reader than any writer, and he thought \"Mardi\" was \"a rich book, with depths here and there that compel a man to swim for his life\". But he cautioned, \"It is so good that one scarcely pardons the writer for not having brooded long over it, so as to make it a great deal better\".\nIn September 1850, Melville borrowed three thousand dollars from his father-in-law Lemuel Shaw to buy a 160-acre farm in Pittsfield. Melville called his new home Arrowhead because of the arrowheads that were dug up around the property during planting season. That winter, Melville paid Hawthorne an unexpected visit, only to discover he was working and \"not in the mood for company\". Hawthorne's wife Sophia gave him copies of \"Twice-Told Tales\" and, for Malcolm, \"The Grandfather's Chair\". Melville invited them to visit Arrowhead soon, hoping to \"[discuss] the Universe with a bottle of brandy &amp; cigars\" with Hawthorne, but Hawthorne would not stop working on his new book for more than one day and they did not come. After a second visit from Melville, Hawthorne surprised him by arriving at Arrowhead with his daughter Una. According to Robertson-Lorant, \"The handsome Hawthorne made quite an impression on the Melville women, especially Augusta, who was a great fan of his books\". They spent the day mostly \"smoking and talking metaphysics\".\nRobertson-Lorant writes that Melville was \"infatuated with Hawthorne's intellect, captivated by his artistry, and charmed by his elusive personality,\" but \"the friendship meant something different to each of them,\" with Hawthorne offering Melville \"the kind of intellectual stimulation he needed\". They may have been \"natural allies and friends,\" yet they were also \"fifteen years apart in age and temperamentally quite different\" and Hawthorne \"found Melville's manic intensity exhausting at times\". Bezanson identifies \"sexual excitement\" in all the ten letters Melville wrote to the older man. In the essay on Hawthorne's \"Mosses\", Melville wrote: \"I feel that this Hawthorne has dropped germinous seeds into my soul. He expands and deepens down, the more I contemplate him; and further, and further, shoots his strong New-England roots into the hot soil of my Southern soul.\" Melville dedicated his book to Hawthorne: \"In token of my admiration for his genius, this book is inscribed to Nathaniel Hawthorne\".\nOn October 18, 1851, \"The Whale\" was published in Britain in three volumes, and on November 14 \"Moby-Dick\" appeared in the United States as a single volume. In between these dates, on October 22, 1851, the Melvilles' second child, Stanwix, was born. In December, Hawthorne told Duyckinck, \"What a book Melville has written! It gives me an idea of much greater power than his preceding ones.\" Unlike other contemporaneous reviewers of Melville, Hawthorne had seen the uniqueness of Melville's new novel and acknowledged it. In early December 1852, Melville visited the Hawthornes in Concord and discussed the idea of the \"Agatha\" story he had talked of with Hawthorne. This was the last contact between the two writers before Melville visited Hawthorne in Liverpool four years later when Hawthorne had relocated to England.\n1852\u20131857: Unsuccessful writer.\nAfter having borrowed three thousand dollars from his father-in-law in September 1850 to buy a 160-acre farm in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, Melville had high hopes that his next book would please the public and restore his finances. In April 1851 he told his British publisher, Richard Bentley, that his new book had \"unquestionable novelty\" and was calculated to have wide appeal with elements of romance and mystery. In fact, \"\" was heavily psychological, though drawing on the conventions of the romance, and difficult in style. It was not well received. The New York \"Day Book\" published a venomous attack on September 8, 1852, headlined \"HERMAN MELVILLE CRAZY\". The item, offered as a news story, reported, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A critical friend, who read Melville's last book, \"Ambiguities\", between two steamboat accidents, told us that it appeared to be composed of the ravings and reveries of a madman. We were somewhat startled at the remark, but still more at learning, a few days after, that Melville was really supposed to be deranged, and that his friends were taking measures to place him under treatment. We hope one of the earliest precautions will be to keep him stringently secluded from pen and ink.\nOn May 22, 1853, Melville's third child and first daughter Elizabeth (Bessie) was born, and on or about that day Herman finished work on the Agatha story, \"Isle of the Cross\". Melville traveled to New York to discuss a book, presumably \"Isle of the Cross\", with his publisher, but later wrote that Harper &amp; Brothers was \"prevented\" from publishing his manuscript because it was lost.\nAfter the commercial and critical failure of \"Pierre\", Melville had difficulty finding a publisher for his follow-up novel \"Israel Potter\". Instead, this narrative of a Revolutionary War veteran was serialized in \"Putnam's Monthly Magazine\" in 1853. From November 1853 to 1856, Melville published fourteen tales and sketches in \"Putnam's\" and \"Harper's\" magazines. In December 1855 he proposed to Dix &amp; Edwards, the new owners of \"Putnam's\", that they publish a selective collection of the short fiction. The collection, titled \"The Piazza Tales\", was named after a new introductory story Melville wrote for it, \"The Piazza\". It also contained five previously published stories, including \"Bartleby, the Scrivener\" and \"Benito Cereno\". On March 2, 1855, the Melvilles' fourth child, Frances (Fanny), was born. In this period, his book \"Israel Potter\" was published.\nThe writing of \"The Confidence-Man\" put great strain on Melville, leading Sam Shaw, a nephew of Lizzie, to write to his uncle Lemuel Shaw: \"Herman I hope has had no more of those ugly attacks\"\u2014a reference to what Robertson-Lorant calls \"the bouts of rheumatism and sciatica that plagued Melville\". Melville's father-in-law apparently shared his daughter's \"great anxiety about him\" when he wrote a letter to a cousin, in which he described Melville's working habits: \"When he is deeply engaged in one of his literary works, he confines him[self] to hard study many hours in the day, with little or no exercise, and this specially in winter for a great many days together. He probably thus overworks himself and brings on severe nervous affections\". Shaw advanced Melville $1,500 from Lizzie's inheritance to travel four or five months in Europe and the Holy Land.\nFrom October 11, 1856, to May 20, 1857, Melville made a six-month Grand Tour of Europe and the Mediterranean. While in England, in November 1856, he briefly reunited for three days with Hawthorne, who had taken the position of United States Consul at Liverpool, at that time the hub of Britain's Atlantic trade. At the nearby coast resort of Southport, amid the sand dunes where they had stopped to smoke cigars, they had a conversation that Hawthorne later described in his journal: Melville, as he always does, began to reason of Providence and futurity, and of everything that lies beyond human ken, and informed me that he 'pretty much made up his mind to be annihilated' [...] If he were a religious man, he would be one of the most truly religious and reverential; he has a very high and noble nature, and better worth immortality than most of us.\nThe Mediterranean part of the tour took in the Holy Land, which inspired his epic poem \"Clarel.\" During the tour he visited Mount Hope, a Christian farm near Jaffa. On April 1, 1857, Melville published his last full-length novel, \"The Confidence-Man\". This novel, subtitled \"His Masquerade\", has won general acclaim in modern times as a complex and mysterious exploration of issues of fraud and honesty, identity and masquerade. However, when it was published, it received reviews ranging from the bewildered to the denunciatory.\n1857\u20131876: Poet.\nTo repair his faltering finances, Melville took up public lecturing from late 1857 to 1860. He embarked upon three lecture tours and spoke at lyceums, chiefly on Roman statuary and sightseeing in Rome. Melville's lectures, which mocked the pseudo-intellectualism of lyceum culture, were panned by contemporary audiences. On May 30, 1860, Melville boarded the clipper \"Meteor\" for California, with his brother Thomas at the helm. After a shaky trip around Cape Horn, Melville returned to New York alone via Panama in November. Later that year, he submitted a poetry collection to a publisher but it was not accepted, and is now lost. In 1863, he bought his brother's house at 104 East 26th Street in New York City and moved there.\nIn 1864, Melville visited the Virginia battlefields of the American Civil War. After the war, he published \"Battle Pieces and Aspects of the War\" (1866), a collection of 72 poems that has been described as \"a polyphonic verse journal of the conflict\". The work did not do well commercially\u2014of the print run of 1,260 copies, 300 were sent as review copies, and 551 copies were sold\u2014and reviewers did not realize that Melville had purposely avoided the ostentatious diction and fine writing that were in fashion, choosing to be concise and spare.\nIn 1866, Melville became a customs inspector for New York City. He held the post for 19 years and had a reputation for honesty in a notoriously corrupt institution. (Unbeknownst to Melville, his position was sometimes protected by future American president Chester A. Arthur, then a customs official who admired Melville's writing but never spoke to him.) During these years, Melville suffered from nervous exhaustion, physical pain, and frustration, and would sometimes, in the words of Robertson-Lorant, behave like the \"tyrannical captains he had portrayed in his novels\", perhaps even beating his wife Lizzie when he came home after drinking. In 1867 Malcolm, the Melvilles' older son, died in his bedroom at home at the age of 18 from a self-inflicted gun shot, perhaps intentional, perhaps accidental. In May 1867, Lizzie's brother Sam, who shared his family's fear for Melville's sanity, tried to arrange for her to leave Melville. Lizzie was to visit her family in Boston and assert to a court that her husband was insane. But Lizzie, whether to avoid the social shame divorce carried at the time or because she still loved her husband, refused to go along with the plan.\nThough Melville's professional writing career had ended, he remained dedicated to his writing. He spent years on what Milder called \"his autumnal masterpiece\" \"Clarel: A Poem and a Pilgrimage\" (1876), an 18,000-line epic poem inspired by his 1856 trip to the Holy Land. It is among the longest single poems in American literature. The title character is a young American student of divinity who travels to Jerusalem to renew his faith. One of the central characters, Rolfe, is similar to Melville in his younger days, a seeker and adventurer, while the reclusive Vine is loosely based on Hawthorne, who had died twelve years before. Publication of 350 copies was funded with a bequest from his uncle in 1876, but sales failed miserably and the unsold copies were burned when Melville was unable to buy them at cost. Critic Lewis Mumford found an unread copy in the New York Public Library in 1925 \"with its pages uncut\".\n1877\u20131891: Final years.\nMelville's own income remained limited. But in 1884, Lizzie received a legacy that enabled him to buy a steady stream of books and prints each month. Melville retired on December 31, 1885, after several of his wife's relatives further supported the couple with supplementary legacies and inheritances. On February 22, 1886, Stanwix, their younger son, died in San Francisco at age 36, from tuberculosis. In 1889, Melville became a member of the New York Society Library.\nMelville had a modest revival of popularity in England when readers rediscovered his novels. He published two collections of poems inspired by his early experiences at sea, with prose head notes. Intended for his relatives and friends, each had a print run of 25 copies. The first, \"John Marr and Other Sailors\", was published in 1888, followed by \"Timoleon\" in 1891.\nMelville died on the morning of September 28, 1891. His death certificate shows \"cardiac dilation\" as the cause. He was interred at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx, New York City.\n\"The New York Times\"' initial death notice called his masterpiece \"Mobie Dick\", the misspelling of which was later erroneously taken to mean that he was unappreciated at his time of death. But there were some appreciations. The \"Times\", for instance, published a substantial article of appreciation on October 2. The author said that thinking back to Melville's books that were so much read forty years earlier, there is \"no difficulty determining why they were then read and talked about,\" but the difficulty is \"to discover why they are read and talked about no longer.\"\nMelville left a volume of poetry, \"Weeds and Wildings\", and a sketch, \"Daniel Orme\", unpublished at the time of his death. His wife also found pages for an unfinished novella, titled \"Billy Budd\". Melville had revised and rearranged the manuscript in several stages, leaving the pages in disarray. Lizzie could not decide her husband's intentions (or even read his handwriting in some places) and abandoned attempts to edit the manuscript for publication. The pages were stored in a family breadbox until 1919 when Melville's granddaughter gave them to Raymond Weaver. Weaver, who initially dismissed the work's importance, published a quick transcription in 1924. This version, however, contained many misreadings, some of which affected interpretation. It was an immediate critical success in England, then in the United States. It was adapted as a stage play on Broadway in 1951, then an opera, and in 1961 as a film. In 1962, the Melville scholars Harrison Hayford and Merton M. Sealts published a critical reading text that was widely accepted.\nWriting style.\nGeneral narrative style.\nMelville's writing style shows both consistencies and enormous changes throughout the years. His development \"had been abnormally postponed, and when it came, it came with a rush and a force that had the menace of quick exhaustion in it\". As early as \"Fragments from a Writing Desk\", written when Melville was 20, scholar Sealts sees \"a number of elements that anticipate Melville's later writing, especially his characteristic habit of abundant literary allusion\". \"Typee\" and \"Omoo\" were documentary adventures that called for a division of the narrative in short chapters. Such compact organization bears the risk of fragmentation when applied to a lengthy work such as \"Mardi\", but with \"Redburn\" and \"White Jacket,\" Melville turned the short chapter into a concentrated narrative.\nSome chapters of \"Moby-Dick\" are no more than two pages in standard editions, and an extreme example is Chapter 122, consisting of a single paragraph of 36 words. The skillful handling of chapters in \"Moby-Dick\" is one of the most fully developed Melvillean signatures, and is a measure of his masterly writing style (something that would lend lasting significance to the opening lines \"Call me Ishmael\"). Individual chapters have become \"a touchstone for appreciation of Melville's art and for explanation\" of his themes. In contrast, the chapters in \"Pierre\", called Books, are divided into short-numbered sections, seemingly an \"odd formal compromise\" between Melville's natural length and his purpose to write a regular romance that called for longer chapters. As satirical elements were introduced, the chapter arrangement restores \"some degree of organization and pace from the chaos\". The usual chapter unit then reappears for \"Israel Potter\", \"The Confidence-Man\" and even \"Clarel\", but only becomes \"a vital part in the whole creative achievement\" again in the juxtaposition of accents and of topics in \"Billy Budd\".\nNewton Arvin points out that only superficially the books after \"Mardi\" seem as if Melville's writing went back to the vein of his first two books. In reality, his movement \"was not a retrograde but a spiral one\", and while \"Redburn\" and \"White Jacket\" may lack the spontaneous, youthful charm of his first two books, they are \"denser in substance, richer in feeling, tauter, more complex, more connotative in texture and imagery\". The rhythm of the prose in \"Omoo\" \"achieves little more than easiness; the language is almost neutral and without idiosyncrasy\", while \"Redburn\" shows an improved ability in narrative, which fuses imagery and emotion.\nMelville's early works were \"increasingly baroque\" in style, and with \"Moby-Dick\" Melville's vocabulary had grown superabundant. Walter Bezanson calls it an \"immensely varied style\". According to critic Warner Berthoff, three characteristic uses of language can be recognized. First, the exaggerated repetition of words, as in the series \"pitiable\", \"pity\", \"pitied\", and \"piteous\". A second typical device is the use of unusual adjective-noun combinations, as in \"concentrating brow\" and \"immaculate manliness\". A third characteristic is the presence of a participial modifier to emphasize and to reinforce the already established expectations of the reader, as the words \"preluding\" and \"foreshadowing\" (\"so still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene\u00a0...\" \"In this foreshadowing interval\u00a0...\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI tell you it will be more tolerable for the Feegee that salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that provident Feegee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy pat\u00e9-de-foie-gras.\n\u2014 Melville paraphrases the Bible in \"The Whale as a Dish\", \"Moby-Dick\" Chapter 65\nAfter his use of hyphenated compounds in \"Pierre\", Melville's writing gives Berthoff the impression of becoming less exploratory and less provocative in his choices of words and phrases. Instead of providing a lead \"into possible meanings and openings-out of the material in hand,\" the vocabulary now served \"to crystallize governing impressions,\" the diction no longer attracted attention to itself, except as an effort at exact definition. The language, Berthoff continues, reflects a \"controlling intelligence, of right judgment and completed understanding\". The sense of free inquiry and exploration that infused his earlier writing and accounted for its \"rare force and expansiveness,\" tended to give way to \"static enumeration\". By comparison to the verbal music and kinetic energy of \"Moby-Dick\", Melville's subsequent writings seem \"relatively muted, even withheld\" in his later works.\nMelville's paragraphing in his best work Berthoff considers to be the virtuous result of \"compactness of form and free assembling of unanticipated further data\", such as when the mysterious sperm whale is compared with Exodus's invisibility of God's face in the final paragraph of Chapter 86 (\"The Tail\"). Over time Melville's paragraphs became shorter as his sentences grew longer, until he arrived at the \"one-sentence paragraphing characteristic of his later prose\". Berthoff points to the opening chapter of \"The Confidence-Man\" for an example, as it counts fifteen paragraphs, seven of which consist of only one elaborate sentence, and four that have only two sentences. The use of similar technique in \"Billy Budd\" contributes in large part, Berthoff says, to its \"remarkable narrative economy\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVerily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.\n\u2014Matthew 10:15\nStyle and literary allusion.\nIn Nathalia Wright's view, Melville's sentences generally have a looseness of structure, easy to use for devices as catalogue and allusion, parallel and refrain, proverb and allegory. The length of his clauses may vary greatly, but the narrative style of writing in \"Pierre\" and \"The Confidence-Man\" is there to convey feeling, not thought. Unlike Henry James, who was an innovator of sentence ordering to render the subtlest nuances in thought, Melville made few such innovations. His domain is the mainstream of English prose, with its rhythm and simplicity influenced by the King James Bible. Another important characteristic of Melville's writing style is in its echoes and overtones. Melville's imitation of certain distinct styles is responsible for this. His three most important sources, in order, are the Bible, Shakespeare, and Milton. Direct quotation from any of the sources is slight; only one sixth of his Biblical allusions can be qualified as such because Melville adapts Biblical usage to his own narrated textual requirements.\nThe Biblical elements in Melville's style can be divided into three categories. In the first, allusion is more within the narrative rather than formal quotation. Several preferred Biblical allusions appear repeatedly throughout his body of work, taking on the nature of refrains. Examples are the injunctions to be 'as wise as serpents and as harmless as doves,' 'death on a pale horse,' 'the man of sorrows', the 'many mansions of heaven;' proverbs 'as the hairs on our heads are numbered,' 'pride goes before a fall,' 'the wages of sin is death;' adverbs and pronouns as 'verily, whoso, forasmuch as; phrases as come to pass, children's children, the fat of the land, vanity of vanities, outer darkness, the apple of his eye, Ancient of Days, the rose of Sharon.' Second, there are paraphrases of individual and combined verses. Redburn's \"Thou shalt not lay stripes upon these Roman citizens\" makes use of language of the Ten Commandments in Ex.20 and Pierre's inquiry of Lucy: \"Loveth she me with the love past all understanding?\" combines John 21:15\u201317, and Philippians 4:7. Third, certain Hebraisms are used, such as a succession of genitives (\"all the waves of the billows of the seas of the boisterous mob\"), the cognate accusative (\"I dreamed a dream\", \"Liverpool was created with the Creation\"), and the parallel (\"Closer home does it go than a rammer; and fighting with steel is a play without ever an interlude\"). This passage from \"Redburn\" shows how these ways of alluding interlock and result in a texture of Biblical language though there is very little direct quotation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The other world beyond this, which was longed for by the devout before Columbus' time, was found in the New; and the deep-sea land, that first struck these soundings, brought up the soil of Earth's Paradise. Not a Paradise then, or now; but to be made so at God's good pleasure, and in the fulness and mellowness of time. The seed is sown, and the harvest must come; and our children's children, on the world's jubilee morning, shall all go with their sickles to the reaping. Then shall the curse of Babel be revoked, a new Pentecost come, and the language they shall speak shall be the language of Britain. Frenchmen, and Danes, and Scots; and the dwellers on the shores of the Mediterranean, and in the regions round about; Italians, and Indians, and Moors; there shall appear unto them cloven tongues as of fire.\u2014\u200a\nIn addition to this, Melville successfully imitates three Biblical strains: the apocalyptic, the prophetic and the sermonic narrative tone of writing. Melville sustains the apocalyptic tone of anxiety and foreboding for a whole chapter of \"Mardi.\" The prophetic strain is expressed by Melville in \"Moby-Dick\", most notably in Father Mapple's sermon. The tradition of the Psalms is imitated at length by Melville in \"The Confidence-Man\".\nIn 1849, Melville acquired an edition of Shakespeare's works printed in a font large enough for his tired eyes, which led to a deeper study of Shakespeare that greatly influenced the style of his next book, \"Moby-Dick\" (1851). The critic F.\u00a0O. Matthiessen found that the language of Shakespeare far surpasses other influences upon the book, in that it inspired Melville to discover his own full strength. On almost every page, debts to Shakespeare can be discovered. The \"mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing\" at the end of \"Cetology\" (Ch. 32) echo the famous phrase in \"Macbeth:\" \"Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury/ Signifying nothing\". Ahab's first extended speech to the crew, in the \"Quarter-Deck\" (Ch. 36) is practically blank verse and so is Ahab's soliloquy at the beginning of \"Sunset\" (Ch. 37):'I leave a white and turbid wake;/ Pale waters, paler cheeks, where'er I sail./ The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm/ My track; let them; but first I pass.' Through Shakespeare, Melville infused \"Moby-Dick\" with a power of expression he had not previously expressed. Reading Shakespeare had been \"a catalytic agent\" for Melville, one that transformed his writing from merely reporting to \"the expression of profound natural forces\". The extent to which Melville assimilated Shakespeare is evident in the description of Ahab, Matthiessen continues, which ends in language that seems Shakespearean yet is no imitation: 'Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee, it must needs be plucked from the skies and dived for in the deep, and featured in the unbodied air!' The imaginative richness of the final phrase seems particularly Shakespearean, \"but its two key words appear only once each in the plays...and to neither of these usages is Melville indebted for his fresh combination\". Melville's diction depended upon no source, and his prose is not based on anybody else's verse but on an awareness of \"speech rhythm\".\nMelville's mastering of Shakespeare, Matthiessen finds, supplied him with verbal resources that enabled him to create dramatic language through three essential techniques. First, the use of verbs of action creates a sense of movement and meaning. The effective tension caused by the contrast of \"thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds\" and \"there's that in here that still remains indifferent\" in \"The Candles\" (Ch. 119) makes the last clause lead to a \"compulsion to strike the breast,\" which suggests \"how thoroughly the drama has come to inhere in the words;\" Second, Melville took advantage of the Shakespearean energy of verbal compounds, as in \"full-freighted\". Third, Melville employed the device of making one part of speech act as another, for example, 'earthquake' as an adjective, or turning an adjective into a noun, as in \"placeless\".\nMelville's style, in Nathalia Wright's analysis, seamlessly flows over into theme, because all these borrowings have an artistic purpose, which is to suggest an appearance \"larger and more significant than life\" for characters and themes that are in fact unremarkable. The allusions suggest that beyond the world of appearances another world exists, one that influences this world, and where ultimate truth can be found. Moreover, the ancient background thus suggested for Melville's narratives\u00a0\u2013\u00a0ancient allusions being next in number to the Biblical ones\u00a0\u2013\u00a0invests them with a sense of timelessness.\nIn addition to the classical references and stylistic elements, Melville openly referred to a multitude of contemporary scientific and maritime works. He read and referenced works by whalers, sailors, and naturalists in his novel \"Moby-Dick\". A large number of volumes he actually owned and annotated have been scanned and made available for online viewing, complete with his notes in the margins.\nCritical reception.\nMelville's financial success as a writer during his lifetime was not great, relative to his posthumous success; over his entire lifetime Melville's writings earned him just over $10,000 (). Melville's travelogues based on voyages to the South Seas and stories based on his time in the merchant marine and navy led to some initial success, but his popularity declined dramatically afterwards. By 1876, all of his books were out of print. He was viewed as a minor figure in American literature in the later years of his life and during the years immediately after his death.\nPoetry.\nMelville did not publish poetry until his late forties, with \"Battle-Pieces\" (1866), and did not receive recognition as a poet until well into the 20th century. But he wrote predominantly poetry for about 25 years, twice as long as his prose career. The three novels of the 1850s that Melville worked on most seriously to present his philosophical explorations, \"Moby-Dick\", \"Pierre\", and \"The Confidence Man\", seem to make the step to philosophical poetry a natural one rather than simply a consequence of commercial failure. Since he turned to poetry as a meditative practice, his poetic style, even more than most Victorian poets, was not marked by linguistic play or melodic considerations.\nEarly critics were not sympathetic. Henry Chapin, in his introduction to \"John Marr and Other Poems\" (1922), one of the earlier selections of Melville's poetry, said Melville's verse is \"of an amateurish and uneven quality\" but in it \"that loveable freshness of personality, which his philosophical dejection never quenched, is everywhere in evidence,\" in \"the voice of a true poet\". The poet and novelist Robert Penn Warren became a champion of Melville as a great American poet and issued a selection of Melville's poetry in 1971 prefaced by an admiring critical essay. In the 1990s critic Lawrence Buell argued that Melville \"is justly said to be nineteenth-century America's leading poet after Whitman and Dickinson\" and Helen Vendler remarked of \"Clarel\": \"What it cost Melville to write this poem makes us pause, reading it. Alone, it is enough to win him, as a poet, what he called 'the belated funeral flower of fame'.\" Some critics now place him as the first modernist poet in the United States while others assert that his work more strongly suggests what today would be a postmodern view.\nMelville revival and Melville studies.\nThe centennial of Melville's birth in 1919 coincided with a renewed interest in his writings known as the \"Melville revival\", during which his work experienced a significant critical reassessment. The renewed appreciation began in 1917 with Carl Van Doren's article on Melville in a standard history of American literature. Van Doren also encouraged Raymond Weaver, who wrote the author's first full-length biography, \"Herman Melville: Mariner and Mystic\" (1921). Discovering the unfinished manuscript of \"Billy Budd\", among papers shown to him by Melville's granddaughter, Weaver edited it and published it in a new collected edition of Melville's works. Other works that helped fan the flames for Melville were Carl Van Doren's \"The American Novel\" (1921), D. H. Lawrence's \"Studies in Classic American Literature\" (1923), Carl Van Vechten's essay in \"The Double Dealer\" (1922), and Lewis Mumford's biography \"Herman Melville\" (1929).\nStarting in the mid-1930s, the Yale University scholar Stanley Thomas Williams supervised more than a dozen dissertations on Melville that were eventually published as books. Where the first wave of Melville scholars focused on psychology, Williams' students were prominent in establishing Melville Studies as an academic field concerned with texts and manuscripts, tracing Melville's influences and borrowings (even plagiarism), and exploring archives and local publications. To provide historical evidence, the independent scholar Jay Leyda searched libraries, family papers, local archives and newspapers across New England and New York to document Melville's life day by day for his two-volume \"The Melville Log\" (1951). Sparked by Leyda and post-war scholars, the second phase of the Melville Revival emphasized research into the biography of Melville rather than accepting Melville's early books as reliable accounts.\nIn 1945, The Melville Society was founded, a non-profit organization dedicated to the study of Melville's life and works. Between 1969 and 2003, the society published 125 issues of \"Melville Society Extracts\", which are now freely available on the society's website. Since 1999 it has published \"\", currently three issues a year, published by Johns Hopkins University Press.\nThe postwar scholars tended to think that Weaver, Harvard psychologist Henry Murray, and Mumford favored Freudian interpretations that read Melville's fiction as autobiography; exaggerated his suffering in the family; and inferred a homosexual attachment to Hawthorne. They saw a different arc to Melville's writing career. The first biographers saw a tragic withdrawal after the cold critical reception for his prose works and largely dismissed his poetry. A new view emerged of Melville's turn to poetry as a conscious choice that placed him among the most important American poets. Other post-war studies, however, continued the broad imaginative and interpretive style; Charles Olson's \"Call Me Ishmael\" (1947) presented Ahab as a Shakespearean tragic hero, and Newton Arvin's critical biography, \"Herman Melville\" (1950), won the National Book Award for non-fiction in 1951.\nIn the 1960s, Harrison Hayford organized an alliance between Northwestern University Press and the Newberry Library, with backing from the Modern Language Association and funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, to edit and publish reliable critical texts of Melville's complete works, including unpublished poems, journals, and correspondence. The first volume of the Northwestern-Newberry Edition of \"The Writings of Herman Melville\" was published in 1968 and the last in the fall of 2017. The aim of the editors was to present a text \"as close as possible to the author's intention as surviving evidence permits\". The volumes have extensive appendices, including textual variants from each of the editions published in Melville's lifetime, an historical note on the publishing history and critical reception, and related documents. Because the texts were prepared with financial support from the United States Department of Education, no royalties are charged, and they have been widely reprinted. Hershel Parker published his two-volume \"Herman Melville: A Biography\", in 1996 and 2002, based on extensive original research and his involvement as editor of the Northwestern-Newberry Melville edition.\nToday Melville's works feature in programs such as the collaboration between Williams College and the Mystic Seaport maritime museum, which together have created an interdisciplinary ocean and coastal studies program. Williams-Mystic integrates marine science, maritime history, environmental policy, and literature of the sea. Melville scholars Mary Bercaw Edwards and Richard J. King feature among the program's professors.\nGender studies.\nMelville only gradually attracted the pioneering scholars of women's studies, gender, and sexuality in the 1970s and 1980s. Though some held that he hardly portrayed women at all, others saw the few women in his works as traditional figures representing, or even attacking, nineteenth-century gentility, sentimentality, and conventional morality. Melville's preference for sea-going tales that involved almost only males has been of interest to scholars in men's studies and especially gay and queer studies. Melville was remarkably open in his exploration of sexuality of all sorts. Alvin Sandberg said that the short story \"The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids\" offers \"an exploration of impotency, a portrayal of a man retreating to an all-male childhood to avoid confrontation with sexual manhood,\" from which the narrator engages in \"congenial\" digressions in heterogeneity. In line with this view, Warren Rosenberg argues the homosocial \"Paradise of Bachelors\" is \"blind to what is real and painful in the world, and thus are [sic] superficial and sterile\".\nDavid Harley Serlin observes in the second half of Melville's diptych, \"The Tartarus of Maids\", the narrator gives voice to the oppressed women he observes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As other scholars have noted, the \"slave\" image here has two clear connotations. One describes the exploitation of the women's physical labor, and the other describes the exploitation of the women's reproductive organs. Of course, as models of women's oppression, the two are clearly intertwined.\nIn the end Serlin says that the narrator is never fully able to come to terms with the contrasting masculine and feminine modalities.\nIssues of sexuality have been observed in other works as well. Rosenberg notes Taji, in \"Mardi\", and the protagonist in \"Pierre\" \"think they are saving young 'maidens in distress' (Yillah and Isabel) out of the purest of reasons but both are also conscious of a lurking sexual motive\". When Taji kills the old priest holding Yillah captive, he says,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[R]emorse smote me hard; and like lightning I asked myself whether the death deed I had done was sprung of virtuous motive, the rescuing of a captive from thrall, or whether beneath the pretense I had engaged in this fatal affray for some other selfish purpose, the companionship of a beautiful maid.\nIn \"Pierre\", the motive of the protagonist's sacrifice for Isabel is admitted: \"womanly beauty and not womanly ugliness invited him to champion the right\". Rosenberg argues,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This awareness of a double motive haunts both books and ultimately destroys their protagonists who would not fully acknowledge the dark underside of their idealism. The epistemological quest and the transcendental quest for love and belief are consequently sullied by the erotic.\nRosenberg says that Melville fully explores the theme of sexuality in his major epic poem, \"Clarel\". When the narrator is separated from Ruth, with whom he has fallen in love, he is free to explore other sexual (and religious) possibilities before deciding at the end of the poem to participate in the ritualistic order represented by marriage. In the course of the poem, \"he considers every form of sexual orientation \u2013 celibacy, homosexuality, hedonism, and heterosexuality \u2013 raising the same kinds of questions as when he considers Islam or Democracy\".\nSome passages and sections of Melville's works demonstrate his willingness to address all forms of sexuality, including the homoerotic, in his works. Commonly noted examples from \"Moby-Dick\" are the \"marriage bed\" episode involving Ishmael and Queequeg, who sleep with their arms wrapped around each other (Chapter 4, \"The Counterpane\" and Chapter 10, \"A Bosom Friend\"); and the \"Squeeze of the Hand\" (Chapter 94) describing the camaraderie of sailors' extracting spermaceti from a dead whale. \"Clarel\" recognizes the homoerotic potential of its eponymous protagonist, including, in a fairly explicit passage, an erection provoked by the figure of a male interlocutor, Lyonesse. In addition, Rosenberg notes that Billy Budd's physical attractiveness is described in quasi-feminine terms: \"As the Handsome Sailor, Billy Budd's position aboard the seventy-four was something analogous to that of a rustic beauty transplanted from the provinces and brought into competition with the highborn dames of the court\".\nLaw and literature.\nMelville has been useful in the field of law and literature. The chapter \"Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish\" in \"Moby-Dick\", for instance, challenges concepts of property rights. In \"Billy Budd\", a handsome and popular young sailor strikes and inadvertently kills the ship's master-at-arms. The ship's captain immediately convenes a court-martial at which he urges the court to convict and sentence Billy to death. Critics debate Melville's intention. Some see the contradiction between unbending legalism and malleable moral principles. Other critics have argued that the captain manipulated and misrepresented the applicable laws.\nThemes.\nMelville's work often touched on themes of communicative expression and the pursuit of the absolute among illusions. As early as 1839, in the juvenile sketch \"Fragments from a Writing Desk\", Melville explores a problem that would reappear in the short stories \"Bartleby\" (1853) and \"Benito Cereno\" (1855): the impossibility to find common ground for mutual communication. The sketch centers on the protagonist and a mute lady, leading scholar Sealts to observe: \"Melville's deep concern with expression and communication evidently began early in his career\".\nAccording to scholar Nathalia Wright, Melville's characters are all preoccupied by the same intense, superhuman and eternal quest for \"the absolute amidst its relative manifestations,\" an enterprise central to the Melville canon: \"All Melville's plots describe this pursuit, and all his themes represent the delicate and shifting relationship between its truth and its illusion\". It is not clear, however, what the moral and metaphysical implications of this quest are, because Melville did not distinguish between these two aspects. Throughout his life Melville struggled with and gave shape to the same set of epistemological doubts and the metaphysical issues these doubts engendered. An obsession for the limits of knowledge led to the question of God's existence and nature, the indifference of the universe, and the problem of evil.\nLegacy and honors.\nIn 1854, three years following publication of \"Moby-Dick\", Melville, New York, on Long Island, was named in Melville's honor.\nIn 1982, the Library of America (LOA) began publishing works in honor of Melville's central place in American culture; the first volume contained \"Typee\", \"Omoo\", and \"Mardi\". Subsequent volumes included Melville's \"Redburn\", \"White-Jacket\", and \"Moby-Dick\", published in 1983, and \"Pierre\", \"Israel Potter\", \"The Confidence-Man\", \"Tales\", and \"Billy Budd\", published in 1985. LOA did not publish his complete poetry until 2019.\nOn August 1, 1984, as part of the Literary Arts Series of stamps, the U.S. Postal Service issued a 20-cent commemorative stamp to honor Melville. The setting for the first day of issue was the Whaling Museum in New Bedford, Massachusetts.\nIn 1985, the New York City Herman Melville Society gathered at 104 East 26th Street to dedicate the intersection of Park Avenue South and 26th Street as Herman Melville Square, where Melville lived from 1863 to 1891 and where he authored \"Billy Budd\" and other works. Melville's house in Lansingburgh, New York, houses the Lansingburgh Historical Society.\nIn 2010, a species of extinct sperm whale, \"Livyatan melvillei\", was named in honor of Melville. The paleontologists who discovered the fossil were fans of \"Moby-Dick\", and dedicated their discovery to the author.\nMelville himself did not live to see the ultimate success of his masterpiece. At the time of his death in 1891, the slow burn of interest in \"Moby-Dick\" had not yet caught fire. Melville died not knowing that his novel would become a lasting cultural phenomenon, and that the term \"white whale\" would still be understood, two centuries hence, even by people who had never read his work.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13624", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13624", "title": "High fidelity", "text": "High-quality reproduction of sound\nHigh fidelity (hi-fi or, rarely, HiFi) is the high-quality reproduction of sound. It is popular with audiophiles and home audio enthusiasts. Ideally, high-fidelity equipment has inaudible noise and distortion, and a flat (neutral, uncolored) frequency response within the human hearing range.\nHigh fidelity contrasts with the lower-quality \"lo-fi\" sound produced by inexpensive audio equipment, AM radio, or the inferior quality of sound reproduction that can be heard in recordings made until the late 1940s.\nHistory.\nBell Laboratories began experimenting with various recording techniques in the early 1930s. Performances by Leopold Stokowski and the Philadelphia Orchestra were recorded in 1931 and 1932 using telephone lines between the Academy of Music in Philadelphia and the Bell labs in New Jersey. Some multitrack recordings were made on optical sound film, which led to new advances used primarily by MGM (as early as 1937) and Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation (as early as 1941). RCA Victor began recording performances by several orchestras using optical sound around 1941, resulting in higher-fidelity masters for 78-rpm discs. During the 1930s, Avery Fisher, an amateur violinist, began experimenting with audio design and acoustics. He wanted to make a radio that would sound like he was listening to a live orchestra and achieve high fidelity to the original sound. After World War II, Harry F. Olson conducted an experiment whereby test subjects listened to a live orchestra through a hidden variable acoustic filter. The results proved that listeners preferred high-fidelity reproduction, once the noise and distortion introduced by early sound equipment was removed.\nBeginning in 1948, several innovations created the conditions that made major improvements in home audio quality possible:\nIn the 1950s, audio manufacturers employed the phrase \"high fidelity\" as a marketing term to describe records and equipment intended to provide faithful sound reproduction. Many consumers found the difference in quality compared to the then-standard AM radios and 78-rpm records readily apparent and bought high-fidelity phonographs and 33\u2153 LPs such as RCA's New Orthophonics and London's FFRR (Full Frequency Range Recording, a UK Decca system). Audiophiles focused on technical characteristics and bought individual components, such as separate turntables, radio tuners, phono stages, preamplifiers, power amplifiers and loudspeakers. Some enthusiasts even assembled their loudspeaker systems. With the advent of integrated multi-speaker console systems in the 1950s, \"hi-fi\" became a generic term for home sound equipment, to some extent displacing \"phonograph\" and \"record player\".\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, the development of stereophonic equipment and recordings led to the next wave of home-audio improvement, and in common parlance \"stereo\" displaced \"hi-fi\". Records were now played on \"a stereo\" (stereophonic phonograph). In the world of the audiophile, however, the concept of \"high fidelity\" continued to refer to the goal of highly accurate sound reproduction and to the technological resources available for approaching that goal. This period is regarded as the \"Golden Age of Hi-Fi\", when vacuum tube equipment manufacturers of the time produced many models considered superior by modern audiophiles, and just before solid state (transistorized) equipment was introduced to the market, subsequently replacing tube equipment as the mainstream technology.\n \nIn the 1960s, the FTC with the help of the audio manufacturers came up with a definition to identify high-fidelity equipment so that the manufacturers could clearly state if they meet the requirements and reduce misleading advertisements.\nA popular type of system for reproducing music beginning in the 1970s was the integrated music centre\u2014which combined a phonograph turntable, AM-FM radio tuner, tape player, preamplifier, and power amplifier in one package, often sold with its own separate, detachable or integrated speakers. These systems advertised their simplicity. The consumer did not have to select and assemble individual components or be familiar with impedance and power ratings. Purists generally avoid referring to these systems as high fidelity, though some are capable of very good quality sound reproduction.\nAudiophiles in the 1970s and 1980s preferred to buy each component separately. That way, they could choose models of each component with the specifications that they desired. In the 1980s, several audiophile magazines became available, offering reviews of components and articles on how to choose and test speakers, amplifiers, and other components.\nListening tests.\nListening tests are used by hi-fi manufacturers, audiophile magazines, and audio engineering researchers and scientists. If a listening test is done in such a way that the listener who is assessing the sound quality of a component or recording can see the components that are being used for the test (e.g., the same musical piece listened to through a tube power amplifier and a solid-state amplifier), then it is possible that the listener's pre-existing biases towards or against certain components or brands could affect their judgment. To respond to this issue, researchers began to use blind tests, in which listeners cannot see the components being tested. A commonly used variant of this test is the ABX test. A subject is presented with two known samples (sample \"A\", the reference, and sample \"B\", an alternative), and one unknown sample \"X,\" for three samples total. \"X\" is randomly selected from \"A\" and \"B\", and the subject identifies \"X\" as being either \"A\" or \"B\". Although there is no way to prove that a certain methodology is transparent, a properly conducted double-blind test can prove that a method is \"not\" transparent.\nBlind tests are sometimes used as part of attempts to ascertain whether certain audio components (such as expensive, exotic cables) have any subjectively perceivable effect on sound quality. Data gleaned from these blind tests is not accepted by some audiophile magazines such as \"Stereophile\" and \"The Absolute Sound\" in their evaluations of audio equipment. John Atkinson, current editor of \"Stereophile\", stated that he once purchased a solid-state amplifier, the Quad 405, in 1978 after seeing the results from blind tests, but came to realize months later that \"the magic was gone\" until he replaced it with a tube amp. Robert Harley of \"The Absolute Sound\" wrote, in 2008, that: \"...blind listening tests fundamentally distort the listening process and are worthless in determining the audibility of a certain phenomenon.\"\nDoug Schneider, editor of the online Soundstage network, argued the opposite in 2009. He stated: \"Blind tests are at the core of the decades' worth of research into loudspeaker design done at Canada's National Research Council (NRC). The NRC researchers knew that for their result to be credible within the scientific community and to have the most meaningful results, they had to eliminate bias, and blind testing was the only way to do so.\" Many Canadian companies such as Axiom, Energy, Mirage, Paradigm, PSB, and Revel use blind testing extensively in designing their loudspeakers. Audio professional Dr. Sean Olive of Harman International shares this view.\nSemblance of realism.\nStereophonic sound provided a partial solution to the problem of reproducing the sound of live orchestral performers by creating separation among instruments, the illusion of space, and a phantom central channel. An attempt to enhance reverberation was tried in the 1970s through quadraphonic sound. Consumers did not want to pay the additional costs and space required for the marginal improvements in realism. With the rise in popularity of home theater, however, multi-channel playback systems became popular, and many consumers were willing to tolerate the six to eight channels required in a home theater.\nIn addition to spatial realism, the playback of music must be subjectively free from noise, such as hiss or hum, to achieve realism. The compact disc (CD) provides about 90 decibels of dynamic range, which exceeds the 80\u00a0dB dynamic range of music as normally perceived in a concert hall. Audio equipment must be able to reproduce frequencies high enough and low enough to be realistic. The human hearing range, for healthy young persons, is 20\u00a0Hz to 20,000\u00a0Hz. Most adults can't hear higher than 15,000\u00a0Hz. CDs are capable of reproducing frequencies as low as 0\u00a0Hz and as high as 22,050\u00a0Hz, making them adequate for reproducing the frequency range that most humans can hear. The equipment must also provide no noticeable distortion of the signal or emphasis or de-emphasis of any frequency in this frequency range.\nModularity.\n\"Integrated\", \"mini\", or \"lifestyle\" systems (also known by the older terms \"music centre\" or \"midi system\") contain one or more sources such as a CD player, a tuner, or a cassette tape deck together with a preamplifier and a power amplifier in one box. A limitation of an \"integrated\" system is that failure of any one component can possibly lead to the need to replace the entire unit, as components are not readily swapped in or out of a system merely by plugging and unplugging cables, and may not even have been made available by the manufacturer to allow piecemeal repairs.\nAlthough some high-end audio manufacturers do produce integrated systems, such products are generally disparaged by audiophiles, who prefer to build a system from \"separates\" (or \"components\"), often with each item from a different manufacturer specialising in a particular component. This provides the most flexibility for piece-by-piece upgrades and repairs.\nA preamplifier and a power amplifier in one box is called an \"integrated amplifier\"; with a tuner added, it is a \"receiver\". A monophonic power amplifier is called a \"monoblock\" and is often used for powering a subwoofer. Other modules in the system may include components like cartridges, tonearms, hi-fi turntables, digital media players, DVD players that play a wide variety of discs including CDs, CD recorders, MiniDisc recorders, hi-fi videocassette recorders (VCRs) and reel-to-reel tape recorders. Signal modification equipment can include equalizers and noise-reduction systems.\nThis modularity allows the enthusiast to spend as little or as much as they want on a component to suit their specific needs, achieve a desired sound, and add components as desired. Also, failure of any component of an integrated system can render it unusable, while the unaffected components of a modular system may continue to function. A modular system introduces the complexity of cabling multiple components and often having different remote controls for each unit.\nModern equipment.\nSome modern hi-fi equipment can be digitally connected using fiber optic TOSLINK cables, USB ports (including one to play digital audio files), or Wi-Fi support.\nAnother modern component is the \"music server\" consisting of one or more computer hard drives that hold music in the form of computer files. When the music is stored in an audio file format that is lossless such as FLAC, Monkey's Audio or WMA Lossless, the computer playback of recorded audio can serve as an audiophile-quality source for a hi-fi system. There is now a push from certain streaming services to offer hi-fi services.\nStreaming services typically have a modified dynamic range and possibly bit rates lower than audiophile standards. Tidal and others have launched a hi-fi tier that includes access to FLAC and Master Quality Authenticated studio masters for many tracks through the desktop version of the player. This integration is also available for high-end audio systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13625", "revid": "1319747142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13625", "title": "Holden", "text": "Defunct Australian automobile manufacturer\nHolden, formerly known as General Motors-Holden, was an Australian subsidiary company of General Motors. Founded in Adelaide, it was an automobile manufacturer, importer, and exporter that sold cars under its own marque in Australia. It was headquartered in Port Melbourne, with major industrial operations in the states of South Australia and Victoria. The 164-year-old company ceased trading at the end of 2020, having switched to solely importing vehicles in its final three years.\nHolden's primary products were its own models developed in-house, such as the Holden Commodore, Holden Caprice, and the Holden Ute. However, Holden had also offered badge-engineered models under sharing arrangements with Nissan, Suzuki, Toyota, Isuzu, and then GM subsidiaries Opel, Vauxhall and Chevrolet. The vehicle lineup had included models from GM Korea, GM Thailand, and GM North America. Holden had also distributed GM's German Opel marque in Australia briefly from 2012 to 2013.\nHolden was founded in 1856 as a saddlery manufacturer in South Australia before moving into the automotive field in 1898. It became a subsidiary of the United States\u2013based General Motors (GM) in 1931, when the company was renamed General Motors-Holden's Ltd. It was renamed Holden Ltd in 1998 and adopted the name GM Holden Ltd in 2005.\nHolden briefly owned assembly plants in New Zealand during the early 1990s. The plants had belonged to General Motors from 1926 until 1990 in an earlier and quite separate operation from GM's Holden operations in Australia. Holden's production became increasingly concentrated in South Australia and Victoria after World War II. However, Holden had factories in all five mainland states of Australia when GM took over in 1931, due to the combining of Holden and GM factories around the country under Holden management. In the postwar period, this decentralisation was slowly reduced and, by 1989, the consolidation of final assembly at Elizabeth in South Australia was largely completed, except for some operations that continued at Dandenong until 1994. Engine manufacturing was consolidated at Fishermans Bend, which was expanded to supply markets overseas.\nAlthough Holden's involvement in exports had fluctuated from the 1950s, the declining sales of large sedan cars in Australia led the company to look to international markets to increase profitability. In 2013, Holden revealed it received A$2.17 billion in federal government assistance in the past 12 years, the amount was much larger than expected. Holden blamed a strong Australian currency, high manufacturing costs and a small domestic market among the reasons for exit of local manufacturing. The Australian population also blamed GM's consistent mishandling of rebadging Holden's lineup leading to a lack of Australian identity and internal company competition, decreasing the brand recognition and desirability of Holden in its domestic market. This led to the announcement, on 11 December 2013, that Holden would cease vehicle and engine production by the end of 2017.\nOn 29 November 2016, engine production at the Fishermans Bend plant was shut down. On 20 October 2017, production of the last Holden designed Commodore ceased and the Elizabeth plant was shut down. Holden produced nearly 7.7 million vehicles. On 17 February 2020, General Motors announced that the Holden marque would be retired by 2021. On 30 October 2020, the GM Australia Design Studio at Fishermans Bend was shut down. Holden has been replaced by GM Specialty Vehicles (GMSV), which imports the Chevrolet Silverado and the Chevrolet Corvette.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn 1852, James Alexander Holden emigrated to South Australia from Walsall, Staffordshire, U.K, and, in 1856, established J. A. Holden &amp; Co., a saddlery business in Adelaide. In 1879, J. A. Holden's eldest son Henry James Holden, became a partner and effectively managed the company. In 1885, German-born Henry Adolph Frost joined the business as a junior partner and J. A. Holden &amp; Co became Holden &amp; Frost Ltd. Edward Holden, James' grandson, joined the firm in 1905 with an interest in automobiles. From there, the firm evolved through various partnerships, and in 1908, Holden &amp; Frost moved into the business of minor repairs to car upholstery. The company began to re-body older chassis using motor bodies produced by F. T. Hack and Co from 1914. Holden &amp; Frost mounted the body, and painted and trimmed it. The company began to produce complete motorcycle sidecar bodies after 1913. After 1917, wartime trade restrictions led the company to start full-scale production of vehicle body shells. H. J. Holden founded a new company in late 1917, and registered Holden's Motor Body Builders Ltd (HMBB) on 25 February 1919, specialising in car bodies and using the former F. T. Hack &amp; Co facility at 400 King William Street in Adelaide before erecting a large four-storey factory on the site.\nBy 1923, HMBB were producing 12,000\u00a0units per year. During this time, HMBB assembled bodies for Ford Motor Company of Australia until its Geelong plant was completed. From 1924, HMBB became the exclusive supplier of car bodies for GM in Australia, with manufacturing taking place at the new Holden Woodville Plant (which was actually in the adjacent suburb of Cheltenham). These bodies were made to suit a number of chassis imported from manufacturers including Austin, Buick, Chevrolet, Cleveland, Dodge, Essex, Fiat, Hudson, Oakland, Oldsmobile, Overland, Reo, Studebaker and Willys-Knight.\nIn 1926, General Motors (Australia) Limited was established with assembly plants at Newstead, Queensland; Marrickville, New South Wales; City Road, Melbourne, Victoria; Birkenhead, South Australia; and Cottesloe, Western Australia using bodies produced by HMBB and imported complete knock down chassis. In 1930 alone, the still independent Woodville plant built bodies for Austin, Chrysler, DeSoto, Morris, Hillman, Humber, Hupmobile and Willys-Overland, as well as GM cars. The last of this line of business was the assembly of Hillman Minx sedans in 1948. The Great Depression led to a substantial downturn in production by Holden, from 34,000\u00a0units annually in 1930 to just 1,651\u00a0units one year later. In 1931, GM purchased HMBB and merged it with General Motors (Australia) Pty Ltd to form General Motors-Holden's Ltd (GM-H). Its acquisition of Holden allowed General Motors to inherit an Australian identity, which it used to cultivate nationalist appeal for the firm, largely through the use of public relations, a then novel form of business communication which was imported to Australia through the formation of General Motors (Australia) Limited. Throughout the 1920s, Holden also supplied 60 W-class tramcar bodies to the Melbourne &amp; Metropolitan Tramways Board, of which several examples have been preserved in both Australia and New Zealand.\n1940s.\nHolden's second full-scale car factory, located in Fishermans Bend (Port Melbourne), was opened on 5 November 1936 by Prime Minister Joseph Lyons, with construction beginning in 1939 on a new plant in Pagewood, New South Wales. However, World War II delayed car production with efforts shifted to the construction of vehicle bodies, field guns, aircraft, and engines. Before the war ended, the Australian government took steps to encourage an Australian automotive industry. Both GM and Ford provided studies to the Australian government outlining the production of the first Australian-designed car. Ford's proposal was the government's first choice, but required substantial financial assistance. GM's study was ultimately chosen because of its low level of government intervention. After the war, Holden returned to producing vehicle bodies, this time for Buick, Chevrolet, Pontiac, and Vauxhall. The Oldsmobile Ace was also produced from 1946 to 1948.\nFrom here, Holden continued to pursue the goal of producing an Australian car. This involved compromise with GM, as Holden's managing director, Laurence Hartnett, favoured development of a local design, while GM preferred to see an American design as the basis for \"Australia's Own Car\". In the end, the design was based on a previously rejected postwar Chevrolet proposal. The Holden was launched in 1948, creating long waiting lists extending through 1949 and beyond. The name \"Holden\" was chosen in honour of Sir Edward Holden, the company's first chairman and grandson of J. A. Holden. Other names considered were \"GeM\", \"Austral\", \"Melba\", \"Woomerah\", \"Boomerang\", \"Emu\", and \"Canbra\", a phonetic spelling of Canberra. Although officially designated \"48-215\", the car was marketed simply as the \"Holden\". The unofficial usage of the name \"FX\" originated within Holden, referring to the updated suspension on the 48\u2013215 of 1953.\n1950s.\nDuring the 1950s, Holden dominated the Australian car market. GM invested heavily in production capacity, which allowed the company to meet increased postwar demand for motor cars. Less expensive, four-cylinder cars did not offer Holdens the ability to deal with rugged rural areas. Holden 48\u2013215 sedans were produced in parallel with the 50-2106 coup\u00e9 utility from 1951; the latter was known colloquially as the \"ute\" and became ubiquitous in Australian rural areas as the workhorse of choice. Production of both the utility and sedan continued with minor changes until 1953, when they were replaced by the facelifted FJ model, introducing a third panel van body style. The FJ was the first major change to the Holden since its 1948 introduction. Over time, it gained iconic status and remains one of Australia's most recognisable automotive symbols. A new horizontally slatted grille dominated the front end of the FJ, which received various other trim and minor mechanical revisions. In 1954, Holden began exporting the FJ to New Zealand. Although little changed from the 48\u2013215, marketing campaigns and price cuts kept FJ sales steady until a completely redesigned model was launched. At the 2005 Australian International Motor Show in Sydney, Holden paid homage to the FJ with the Efijy concept car. Commercial success underpinned the rise of Holden as a cultural icon, as the Holden car became synonymous with the 'Australian way of life', coming to symbolise the stability of post-war Australian capitalism.\nHolden's next model, the FE, launched in 1956, offered in a new station wagon body style dubbed \"Station Sedan\" in the company's sales literature. In the same year, Holden commenced exports to Malaya, Thailand, and North Borneo. Strong sales continued in Australia, and Holden achieved a market share of more than 50% in 1958 with the revised FC model. This was the first Holden to be tested on the new Lang Lang Proving Ground in Lang Lang, Victoria. In 1957, Holden's export markets grew to 17 countries, with new additions including Indonesia, Hong Kong, Singapore, Fiji, Sudan, the East Africa region, and South Africa. Indonesian market cars were assembled locally by P.T. Udatin. The opening of the Dandenong, Melbourne, production facility in 1956 brought further jobs; by 1959, Holden employed 19,000 workers country-wide. In 1959, complete knock-down assembly began in South Africa and Indonesia.\n1960s.\nIn 1960, Holden introduced its third major new model, the FB. The car's style was inspired by 1950s Chevrolets, with tailfins and a wrap-around windscreen with \"dog leg\" A-pillars. By the time it was introduced, many considered the appearance dated. Much of the motoring industry at the time noted that the adopted style did not translate well to the more compact Holden. The FB became the first Holden that was adapted for left-hand drive markets, enhancing its export potential, and as such was exported to New Caledonia, New Hebrides, the Philippines, and Hawaii.\nIn 1960, Ford unveiled the new Falcon in Australia, only months after its introduction in the United States. To Holden's advantage, the Falcon was not durable, particularly in the front suspension, making it ill-suited for Australian conditions. In response to the Falcon, Holden introduced the facelifted EK series in 1961; the new model featured two-tone paintwork and optional Hydramatic automatic transmission. A restyled EJ series came in 1962, debuting the new luxury oriented Premier model. The EH update came a year later, bringing the new Red motor, providing better performance than the previous Grey motor. The HD series of 1965 had the introduction of the Powerglide automatic transmission. At the same time, an \"X2\" performance option with a more powerful version of the six-cylinder engine was made available. In 1966, the HR was introduced, including changes in the form of new front and rear styling and higher-capacity engines. More significantly, the HR fitted standard front seat belts; Holden thus became the first Australian automaker to provide the safety device as standard equipment across all models. This coincided with the completion of the production plant in Acacia Ridge, Queensland. By 1963, Holden was exporting cars to Africa, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, the Pacific Islands, and the Caribbean.\nHolden began assembling the compact HA series Vauxhall Viva in 1964. This was superseded by the Holden Torana in 1967, a development of the Viva ending Vauxhall production in Australia. Holden offered the LC, a Torana with new styling, in 1969 with the availability of Holden's six-cylinder engine. In the development days, the six-cylinder Torana was reserved for motor racing, but research had shown a business case existed for such a model. The LC Torana was the first application of Holden's new three-speed Tri-Matic automatic transmission. This was the result of Holden's A$16.5\u00a0million transformation of the Woodville, South Australia, factory for its production.\nHolden's association with the manufacture of Chevrolets and Pontiacs ended in 1968, coinciding with the year of Holden's next major new model, the HK. This included Holden's first V8 engine, a Chevrolet engine imported from Canada. Models based on the HK series included an extended-length prestige model, the Brougham; and a two-door coup\u00e9, the Monaro. The mainstream Holden Special was rebranded the Kingswood, and the basic fleet model, the Standard, became the Belmont. On 3 March 1969, Alexander Rhea, managing director of General Motors-Holden's at the time, was joined by press photographers and the Federal Minister of Shipping and Transport, Ian Sinclair as the two men drove the two-millionth Holden, an HK Brougham, off the production line. This came just over half a decade since the one-millionth car, an EJ Premier sedan, rolled off the Dandenong line on 25 October 1962. Following the Chevrolet V8 fitted to the HK, the first Australian-designed and mass-produced V8, the Holden V8 engine debuted in the Hurricane concept of 1969 before fitment to facelifted HT model. This was available in two capacities: . Late in HT production, use of the new Tri-Matic automatic transmission, first seen in the LC Torana was phased in as Powerglide stock was exhausted, but Holden's official line was that the HG of 1971 was the first full-sized Holden to receive it.\nDespite the arrival of serious competitors\u2014namely, the Ford Falcon, Chrysler Valiant, and Japanese cars\u2014in the 1960s, Holden's locally produced large six- and eight-cylinder cars remained Australia's top-selling vehicles. Sales were boosted by exporting the Kingswood sedan, station wagon, and utility body styles to Indonesia, Trinidad and Tobago, Pakistan, the Philippines, and South Africa in complete knock-down form.\n1970s.\nHolden launched the new HQ series in 1971. At this time, the company was producing all of its passenger cars in Australia, and every model was of Australian design; however, by the end of the decade, Holden was producing cars based on overseas designs. The HQ was thoroughly re-engineered, featuring a perimeter frame and semi-monocoque (unibody) construction. Other firsts included an all-coil suspension and an extended wheelbase for station wagons, while the utilities and panel vans retained the traditional coil/leaf suspension configuration. The series included the new prestige Statesman brand, which also had a longer wheelbase, replacing the Brougham. The Statesman remains noteworthy because it was not marketed as a \"Holden\", but rather a \"Statesman\".\nThe HQ framework led to a new generation of two-door Monaros, and despite the introduction of the similar-sized competitors, the HQ range became the top-selling Holden of all time, with 485,650\u00a0units sold in three years; 14,558\u00a0units were exported and 72,290\u00a0CKD kits were constructed. The HQ series was facelifted in 1974 with the introduction of the HJ, heralding new front-panel styling and a revised rear fascia. This new bodywork was to remain, albeit with minor upgrades, through the HX and HZ series. Detuned engines adhering to government emission standards were brought in with the HX series, whilst the HZ brought considerably improved road handling and comfort with the introduction of radial-tuned suspension. As a result of GM's toying with the Wankel rotary engine, as used by Mazda of Japan, an export agreement was initiated in 1975. This involved Holden exporting with powertrains, HJ, and later, HX series Premiers as the Mazda Roadpacer AP. Mazda then fitted these cars with the 13B rotary engine and three-speed automatic transmission. Production ended in 1977, after just 840 units sold.\nDevelopment of the Torana continued in with the larger mid-sized LH series released in 1974, offered only as a four-door sedan. The LH Torana was one of the few cars worldwide engineered to accommodate four-, six-, and eight-cylinder engines. This trend continued until Holden introduced the Sunbird in 1976, essentially the four-cylinder Torana with a new name. Designated LX, both the Sunbird and Torana introduced a three-door hatchback variant. A final UC update appeared in 1978. During its production run, the Torana achieved legendary racing success in Australia, achieving victories at the Mount Panorama Circuit in Bathurst, New South Wales.\nIn 1975, Holden introduced the compact Gemini, the Australian version of the \"T-car\", based on the Opel Kadett C. The Gemini was an overseas design developed jointly with Isuzu, GM's Japanese affiliate; and was powered by a 1.6-litre four-cylinder engine. Fast becoming a popular car, the Gemini rapidly attained sales leadership in its class, and the nameplate lived on until 1987.\nHolden's most popular car to date, the Commodore, was introduced in 1978 as the VB. The new family car was loosely based on the Opel Rekord E body shell, but with the front from the Opel Senator grafted to accommodate the larger Holden six-cylinder and V8 engines. Initially, the Commodore maintained Holden's sales leadership in Australia. However, some of the compromises resulting from the adoption of a design intended for another market hampered the car's acceptance. In particular, it was narrower than its predecessor and its Falcon rival, making it less comfortable for three rear-seat passengers. With the abandonment of left-hand drive markets, Holden exported almost 100,000 Commodores to markets such as New Zealand, Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia, Malta and Singapore.\nDuring the 1970s, Holden ran an advertising jingle \"Football, Meat Pies, Kangaroos, and Holden cars\", a localised version of the \"Baseball, Hot Dogs, Apple Pies, and Chevrolet\" jingle used by GM's Chevrolet division in the United States.\nHolden discontinued the Torana in 1979 and the Sunbird in 1980. After the 1978 introduction of the Commodore, the Torana became the \"in-between\" car, surrounded by the smaller and more economical Gemini and the larger, more sophisticated Commodore. The closest successor to the Torana was the Camira, released in 1982 as Australia's version of GM's medium-sized \"J-car\".\n1980s.\nThe 1980s were challenging for Holden and the Australian automotive industry. The Australian Government tried to revive the industry with the Button car plan, which encouraged car makers to focus on producing fewer models at higher, more economical volumes, and to export cars. The decade opened with the shut-down of the Pagewood, New South Wales production plant and introduction of the light commercial Rodeo, sourced from Isuzu in Japan. The Rodeo was available in both two- and four-wheel drive chassis cab models with a choice of petrol and diesel powerplants. The range was updated in 1988 with the TF series, based on the Isuzu TF. Other cars sourced from Isuzu during the 1980s were the four-wheel drive Jackaroo (1981), the Shuttle (1982) van and the Piazza (1986) three-door sports hatchback. The second generation Holden Gemini from 1985 was also based on an Isuzu design, although, its manufacture was undertaken in Australia.\nIn 1981, the Fishermans Bend engine plant began production of the Family II - part of a global engine programme for GM's compact vehicles. The plant supplied the engine locally for the Camira model, and to export markets - primarily to GM's plants in Europe for installation in Opel/Vauxhall vehicles.\nWhile GM Australia's commercial vehicle range had originally been mostly based on Bedford products, these had gradually been replaced by Isuzu products as the Bedford brand was being retired in Britain. This process began in the 1970s and by 1982 Holden's commercial vehicle arm no longer offered any Bedford products.\nThe new Holden WB commercial vehicles and the Statesman WB limousines were introduced in 1980. However, the designs, based on the HQ and updated HJ, HX and HZ models from the 1970s were less competitive than similar models in Ford's lineup. Thus, Holden abandoned those vehicle classes altogether in 1984. Sales of the Commodore also fell, with the effects of the 1979 energy crisis lessening, and for the first time the Commodore lost ground to the Ford Falcon. Sales in other segments also suffered when competition from Ford intensified, and other Australian manufacturers: Mitsubishi, Nissan and Toyota gained market share. When released in 1982, the Camira initially generated good sales, which later declined because buyers considered the 1.6-litre engine underpowered, and the car's build and ride quality below-average. The Camira lasted just seven years, and contributed to Holden's accumulated losses of over A$500\u00a0million by the mid-1980s.\nIn 1984, Holden introduced the VK Commodore, with significant styling changes from the previous VH. The Commodore was next updated in 1986 as the VL, which had new front and rear styling. Controversially, the VL was powered by the 3.0-litre Nissan RB30 six-cylinder engine and had a Nissan-built, electronically controlled four-speed automatic transmission. Holden even went to court in 1984 to stop local motoring magazine \"Wheels\" from reporting on the matter. The engine change was necessitated by the legal requirement that all new cars sold in Australia after 1986 had to consume unleaded petrol. Because it was unfeasible to convert the existing six-cylinder engine to run on unleaded fuel, the Nissan engine was chosen as the best engine available. However, changing currency exchange rates doubled the cost of the engine and transmission over the life of the VL. The decision to opt for a Japanese-made transmission led to the closure of the Woodville, South Australia assembly plant. Emboldened by the apparent sign of turnaround, GM paid off Holden's mounted losses of A$780\u00a0million on 19 December 1986. At GM headquarters' request, Holden was then reorganised and recapitalised, separating the engine and car manufacturing divisions in the process. This involved the splitting of Holden into \"Holden's Motor Company\" (HMC) and \"Holden's Engine Company\" (HEC). For the most part, car bodies were now manufactured at Elizabeth, with engines as before, confined to the Fishermans Bend plant in Port Melbourne, Victoria. The engine manufacturing business was successful, building four-cylinder \"Family II\" engines for use in cars built overseas. The final phase of the Commodore's recovery strategy involved the 1988 VN, a significantly wider model powered by the American-designed, Australian-assembled 3.8-litre Buick V6 engine.\nHolden began to sell the subcompact Suzuki Swift-based Barina in 1985. The Barina was launched concurrently with the Suzuki-sourced Holden Drover, followed by the Scurry later on in 1985. In the previous year, Nissan Pulsar hatchbacks were rebadged as the Holden Astra, as a result of a deal with Nissan. This arrangement ceased in 1989 when Holden entered a new alliance with Toyota, forming a new company: United Australian Automobile Industries (UAAI). UAAI resulted in Holden selling rebadged versions of Toyota's Corolla and Camry, as the Holden Nova and Apollo respectively, with Toyota re-branding the Commodore as the Lexcen.\n1990s.\nThe company changed throughout the 1990s, increasing its Australian market share from 21\u00a0percent in 1991 to 28.2\u00a0percent in 1999. Besides manufacturing Australia's best selling car, which was exported in significant numbers, Holden continued to export many locally produced engines to power cars made elsewhere. In this decade, Holden adopted a strategy of importing cars it needed to offer a full range of competitive vehicles. During 1998, General Motors-Holden's Ltd name was shortened to \"Holden Ltd\".\nOn 26 April 1990, GM's New Zealand subsidiary Holden New Zealand announced that production at the assembly plant based in Trentham would be phased out and vehicles would be imported duty-free\u2014this came after the 1984 closure of the Petone assembly line due to low output volumes. During the 1990s, Holden, other Australian automakers and trade unions pressured the Australian Government to halt the lowering of car import tariffs. By 1997, the federal government had already cut tariffs to 22.5\u00a0percent, from 57.5\u00a0percent ten years earlier; by 2000, a plan was formulated to reduce the tariffs to 15\u00a0percent. Holden was critical, saying that Australia's population was not large enough, and that the changes could tarnish the local industry.\nHolden reintroduced its defunct Statesman title in 1990\u2014this time under the Holden marque, as the Statesman and Caprice. For 1991, Holden updated the Statesman and Caprice with a range of improvements, including the introduction of four-wheel anti-lock brakes (ABS); although, a rear-wheel system had been standard on the Statesman Caprice from March 1976. ABS was added to the short-wheelbase Commodore range in 1992. Another returning variant was the full-size utility, and on this occasion it was based on the Commodore. The VN Commodore received a major facelift in 1993 with the VR\u2014compared to the VN, approximately 80\u00a0percent of the car model was new. Exterior changes resulted in a smoother overall body and a \"twin-kidney\" grille\u2014a Commodore styling trait that remained until the 2002 VY model and, as of 2013, remains a permanent staple on HSV variants.\nHolden introduced the all-new VT Commodore in 1997, the outcome of a A$600\u00a0million development programme that spanned more than five years. The new model featured a rounded exterior body shell, improved handling and many firsts for an Australian-built car. Also, a stronger body structure increased crash safety. The locally produced Buick-sourced V6 engine powered the Commodore range, as did the 5.0-litre Holden V8 engine, and was replaced in 1999 by the 5.7-litre \"LS\" unit.\nThe UAAI badge-engineered cars first introduced in 1989 sold in far fewer numbers than anticipated, but the Holden Commodore, Toyota Camry, and Corolla were all successful when sold under their original nameplates. The first generation Nova and the donor Corolla were produced at Holden's Dandenong, Victoria facility until 1994. UAAI was dissolved in 1996, and Holden returned to selling only GM products. The Holden Astra and Vectra, both designed by Opel in Germany, replaced the Toyota-sourced Holden Nova and Apollo. This came after the 1994 introduction of the Opel Corsa replacing the already available Suzuki Swift as the source for the Holden Barina. Sales of the full-size Holden Suburban SUV sourced from Chevrolet commenced in 1998\u2014lasting until 2001. Also in 1998, local assembly of the Vectra began at Elizabeth, South Australia. These cars were exported to Japan and Southeast Asia with Opel badges. However, the Vectra did not achieve sufficient sales in Australia to justify local assembly, and reverted to being fully imported in 2000.\n2000s.\nIn the 1990s, Holden's share of the Australian market surged and peaked at 27.5\u00a0percent in 2000 before declining to 15.2\u00a0percent in 2006. From March 2003, Holden no longer held the number one sales position in Australia, losing ground to Toyota. Commodore sales had peaked in 1998 at 94,642 vehicles and were relatively stable up to 2004 before going into a steady decline. Total Holden sales peaked in 2002 at 178,392 vehicles and were stable up to 2005 before declining for the rest of the decade and the next.\nThis downturn affected Holden's profits; the company recorded a combined gain of A$842.9\u00a0million from 2002 to 2004, and a combined loss of A$290\u00a0million from 2005 to 2006. Factors contributing to the loss included the development of an all-new model, the strong Australian dollar and the cost of reducing the workforce at the Elizabeth plant, including the loss of 1,400\u00a0jobs after the closure of the third-shift assembly line in 2005, after two years in operation. Holden fared better in 2007, posting an A$6\u00a0million loss. This was followed by an A$70.2\u00a0million loss in the 2008, an A$210.6\u00a0million loss in 2009, and a profit of A$112\u00a0million in 2010. On 18 May 2005, \"Holden Ltd\" became \"GM Holden Ltd\", coinciding with the resettling to the new Holden headquarters on 191 Salmon Street, Port Melbourne, Victoria.\nHolden caused controversy in 2005 with their Holden Employee Pricing television advertisement, which ran from October to December 2005. The campaign publicised, \"for the first time ever, all Australians can enjoy the financial benefit of Holden Employee Pricing\". However, this did not include a discounted dealer delivery fee and savings on factory fitted options and accessories that employees received. At the same time, employees were given a further discount of 25 to 29\u00a0percent on selected models.\nHolden revived the Monaro coupe in 2001. Based on the Commodore VX architecture, the coupe attracted worldwide attention after being shown as a concept car at Australian auto shows. The VX Commodore received its first major update in 2002 with the VY series. A mildly facelifted VZ model launched in 2004, introducing the \"High Feature\" engine. This was built at the Fishermans Bend facility completed in 2003, with a maximum output of 900 engines per day. This has reportedly added A$5.2\u00a0billion to the Australian economy; exports account for about A$450\u00a0million alone. After the VZ, the \"High Feature\" engine powered the all-new Holden Commodore (VE). In contrast to previous models, the VE no longer used an Opel-sourced platform adapted both mechanically and in size, but was based on the Holden developed GM Zeta platform, that was earmarked to become a \"Global RWD Architecture\", until plans were cancelled due to the 2008 financial crisis.\nThroughout the 1990s, Opel had also been the source of many Holden models. To increase profitability, Holden looked to the South Korean Daewoo brand for replacements after acquiring a 44.6\u00a0percent stake\u2014worth US$251\u00a0million\u2014in the company in 2002 as a representative of GM. This was increased to 50.9\u00a0percent in 2005, but when GM further increased its stake to 70.1\u00a0percent around the time of its 2009 Chapter 11 reorganisation, Holden's interest was relinquished and transferred to another (undisclosed) part of GM.\nThe commencement of the Holden-branded Daewoo models began with the 2005 Holden Barina, which based on the Daewoo Kalos, replaced the Opel Corsa as the source of the Barina. In the same year, the Viva, based on the Daewoo Lacetti, replaced the entry-level Holden Astra Classic, although the new-generation Astra introduced in 2004 continued on. The Captiva crossover SUV came next in 2006. After discontinuing the Frontera and Jackaroo models in 2003, Holden was only left with one all-wheel drive model: the Adventra, a Commodore-based station wagon. The fourth model to be replaced with a South Korean alternative was the Vectra by the mid-size Epica in 2007. As a result of the split between GM and Isuzu, Holden lost the rights to use the \"Rodeo\" nameplate. Consequently, the Holden Rodeo was facelifted and relaunched as the Colorado in 2008.\nFollowing Holden's successful application for a A$149\u00a0million government grant to build a localised version of the Chevrolet Cruze in Australia from 2011, Holden in 2009 announced that it would initially import the small car unchanged from South Korea as the Holden Cruze. Following the government grant announcement, Kevin Rudd, Australia's Prime Minister at the time, stated that production would support 600 new jobs at the Elizabeth facility; however, this failed to take into account Holden's previous announcement, whereby 600 jobs would be shed when production of the \"Family II\" engine ceased in late 2009.\n2010s.\nIn March 2012, Holden was given a $270\u00a0million lifeline by the Australian Federal Government (Labor Party of Australia) along with the South Australian and Victorian state governments. In return, Holden planned to inject over $1\u00a0billion into car manufacturing in Australia. They estimated the new investment package would return around $4\u00a0billion to the Australian economy and see GM Holden continue making cars in Australia until at least 2022.\nIn mid-2013, Holden sought a further A$265\u00a0million, in addition to the A$275\u00a0million that was already committed by the Federal, South Australian and Victorian governments to remain viable as a car manufacturer in Australia. A source close to Holden informed the \"Australian\" news publication that the car company is losing money on every vehicle that it produces and consequently initiated negotiations to reduce employee wages by up to A$200 per week to cut costs, following the announcement of 400 job cuts and an assembly line reduction of 65 (400 to 335) cars per day. From 2001 to 2012, Holden received over A$150\u00a0million a year in subsidy from Australian government. The subsidy from 2007 was more than Holden's capital investment of the same period. From 2004, Holden was only able to make a profit in 2010 and 2011.\nIndustry Minister Kim Carr confirmed on 10 July 2013 that talks had been scheduled between the Australian government and Holden. On 13 August 2013, 1,700 employees at the Elizabeth plant in South Australia voted to accept a three-year wage freeze to decrease the chances of the production line's closure in 2016. Holden's ultimate survival, though, depended on continued negotiations with the Federal Government\u2014to secure funding for the period from 2016 to 2022\u2014and the final decision of the global headquarters in Detroit, US.\nFollowing an unsuccessful attempt to secure the extra funding required from the new Liberal/National coalition government, on 11 December 2013, General Motors announced that Holden would cease engine and vehicle manufacturing operations in Australia by the end of 2017. As a result, 2,900 jobs would be lost over four years. Beyond 2017 Holden's Australian presence would consist of a national sales company, a parts distribution centre and a global design studio.\nIn May 2014, GM reversed their decision to abandon the Lang Lang Proving Ground and decided to keep it as part of its engineering capability in Australia.\nIn 2015, Holden again began selling a range of Opel-derived cars comprising the Astra VXR and Insignia VXR (both based on the OPC models sold by Vauxhall) and Cascada. Later that year, Holden also announced plans to sell the European Astra and the South Korean Cruze alongside each other from 2017.\nIn December 2015, Belgian entrepreneur Guido Dumarey commenced negotiations to buy the Commodore manufacturing plant in Elizabeth, with a view to continue producing a rebadged Zeta-based premium range of rear and all-wheel drive vehicles for local and export sales. The proposal was met with doubt in South Australia, and it later came to nothing. On 20 October 2017, Holden ceased manufacturing vehicles in Australia with the closure of the Elizabeth plant. Afterwards, Holden became an importer of rebadged cars from various GM subsidiaries located in the United States, Canada, Germany, Thailand, and South Korea.\n2020s.\nOn 17 February 2020, General Motors announced that the Holden brand would be retired by 2021, after GM stated it would no longer make right-hand drive vehicles globally, leaving the Australia and New Zealand market altogether. Holden produced nearly 7.7 million vehicles.\nCorporate affairs and identity.\nHolden's logo, of a lion holding a stone, was introduced in 1928. Holden's Motor Body Builders appointed Rayner Hoff to design the emblem, which refers to a fable in which observations of lions rolling stones led to the invention of the wheel. With the 1948 launch of the 48\u2013215, Holden revised its logo. It commissioned another redesign in 1972 to better represent the company. The emblem was reworked once more in 1995.\nIn 1987, Holden established Holden Special Vehicles (HSV) in partnership with Tom Walkinshaw, who primarily manufactured modified, high-performance Commodore variants. To further reinforce the brand, HSV introduced the HSV Dealer Team into the V8 Supercar fold in 2005 under the naming rights of Toll HSV Dealer Team.\nIn 2010, Holden sold vehicles across Australia through the Holden Dealer Network (310 authorised stores and 12 service centres), which employed more than 13,500\u00a0people. On 8 May 2015, Jeff Rolfs, Holden's CFO, became interim chairman and managing director. Holden announced on 6 February 2015 that Mark Bernhard would return to Holden as chairman and managing director, the first Australian to hold the post in 25 years.\nExports.\nHolden began to export vehicles in 1954, sending the FJ to New Zealand. Exports to New Zealand continued, but to broaden their export potential, Holden began to cater their Commodore, Monaro and Statesman/Caprice models for both right- and left-hand drive markets. The Middle East was Holden's largest export market, with the Commodore sold as the Chevrolet Lumina from 1998, and the Statesman from 1999 as the Chevrolet Caprice. Commodores were also sold as the Chevrolet Lumina in Brunei, Fiji and South Africa, and as the Chevrolet Omega in Brazil. Pontiac in North America also imported Commodore sedans from 2008 through to 2009 as the G8. The G8's cessation was a consequence of GM's Chapter 11 bankruptcy resulting in the demise of the Pontiac brand.\nSales of the Monaro began in 2003 to the Middle East as the Chevrolet Lumina Coupe. Later that year a modified version of the Monaro began selling in the United States (but not in Canada) as the Pontiac GTO, and under the Monaro name through Vauxhall dealerships in the United Kingdom. This arrangement continued through to 2006 when the car was discontinued. The long-wheelbase Statesman sales in the Chinese market as the Buick Royaum began in 2005, before being replaced in 2007 by the Statesman-based Buick Park Avenue. Statesman/Caprice exports to South Korea also began in 2005. These Korean models were sold as the Daewoo Statesman, and later as the Daewoo Veritas from 2008. Holden's move into international markets proved profitable; export revenue increased from A$973\u00a0million in 1999 to just under $1.3\u00a0billion in 2006.\nFrom 2011, the WM Caprice was exported to North America as the Chevrolet Caprice PPV, a version of the Caprice built exclusively for law enforcement in North America and sold only to police. From 2007, the HSV-based Commodore was exported to the United Kingdom as the Vauxhall VXR8.\nIn 2013, Chevrolet announced that exports of the Commodore would resume to North America in the form of the VF Commodore as the Chevrolet SS sedan for the 2014 model year. The Chevrolet SS Sedan was also imported to the United States (but again, not to Canada) for 2015 with only minor changes, notably the addition of Magnetic Ride Control suspension and a Tremec TR-6060 manual transmission. For the 2016 model year the SS sedan received a facelift based on the VF Series II Commodore unveiled in September 2015. In 2017, production of Holden's last two American exports, the SS and the Caprice PPV was discontinued.\nSales.\nWhilst previously holding the number one position in Australian vehicle sales, Holden has sold progressively fewer cars during most of the 21st century, in part due to a large drop in Commodore sales.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nMotorsport.\nHolden has been involved with factory backed teams in Australian touring car racing since 1968. The main factory-backed teams have been the Holden Dealer Team (1969\u20131987), the Holden Racing Team (1990\u20132016) and Triple Eight Race Engineering (2017\u20132020). As of 2015[ [update]], Holden won the Bathurst 1000 30 times, more than any other manufacturer, and won the Australian Touring Car and Supercars Championship title 21 times. Brad Jones Racing, Erebus Motorsport, Matt Stone Racing, Tekno Autosports, Team 18 and Walkinshaw Andretti United also ran Holden Commodores in the 2021 Supercars Championship.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* https://, https://, https:// (PDF)."}
{"id": "13627", "revid": "45733435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13627", "title": "Hank Greenberg", "text": "American baseball player (1911\u20131986)\nHenry Benjamin Greenberg (January 1, 1911 \u2013 September 4, 1986), nicknamed \"Hammerin' Hank\", \"Hankus Pankus\", and \"the Hebrew Hammer\", was an American professional baseball player and team executive. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB), primarily for the Detroit Tigers as a first baseman in the 1930s and 1940s. A member of the Baseball Hall of Fame and a two-time Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award winner, he was one of the premier power hitters of his generation and is widely considered one of the greatest sluggers in baseball history.\nGreenberg played the first twelve of his 13 major league seasons for Detroit; with the Tigers, he was an All-Star for four seasons and was named the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player in 1935 and 1940. He had a batting average over .300 in eight seasons, and won two World Series championships with the Tigers (1935 and 1945). He was the AL home run leader four times and his 58 home runs for the Tigers in 1938 equaled Jimmie Foxx's 1932 mark for the most in one season by anyone other than Babe Ruth, and tied Foxx for the most home runs between Ruth's record 60 in 1927 and Roger Maris' record 61 in 1961. Greenberg was the first major league player to hit 25 or more home runs in a season in each league, and remains the AL record-holder for most runs batted in in a single season by a right-handed batter.\nWhen the United States joined World War II, Greenberg was the first major leaguer to join the armed forces; he spent 47 months in military service, more than any other major league player, all of which took place during what would have been prime years in his major league career. Like many players who served in WWII, his career statistics suffered because of the war and would have certainly been higher had he not served in the armed services during wartime. In 1947, Greenberg signed a contract for a record $85,000 salary before being sold to the Pittsburgh Pirates, where he played his final MLB season that year. After retiring from playing, Greenberg continued to work in baseball as a team executive for the Cleveland Indians and Chicago White Sox.\nGreenberg was the first Jewish superstar in American team sports. He attracted national attention in 1934 in the middle of a pennant race when he grappled with the decision of whether or not to play baseball on the Jewish High Holy Days; after consultation with his rabbi, he decided to play on Rosh Hashanah, but refused to play on Yom Kippur, instead spending the day at the synagogue. Having endured his share of antisemitic abuse in his career, Greenberg was one of the few opposing players to publicly welcome African-American player Jackie Robinson to the major leagues in 1947.\nEarly life.\nGreenberg was born on January 1, 1911, in Greenwich Village, New York City, to Romanian Jewish immigrant parents from Bucharest, Sarah (n\u00e9e Schwartz) (1881\u20131951) and David Greenberg (1883\u20131969). He was the third of four children and had two brothers, Ben (1906\u20131994) and Joe (1915\u20132001), and a sister, Lillian (1907\u20131989). His parents had originally wanted to name him \"Hyman\"; however, the name on his birth certificate was erroneously listed as \"Henry\".\nThe family owned a successful cloth-shrinking plant in New York. Eventually, they moved from Greenwich Village to the Bronx where Greenberg attended James Monroe High School. There, Greenberg was an outstanding all-around athlete and was bestowed with the long-standing nickname of \"Bruggy\" by his basketball coach. His preferred sport was baseball, and his preferred position was first base. However, his best sport was basketball and he helped the high school basketball team win the city championship. Greenberg also excelled at soccer and track and field.\nIn 1929, the 18-year-old Greenberg was recruited by the New York Yankees, who already had Lou Gehrig at first base. As first base was already taken on the Yankee team, Greenberg turned down the Yankees' offer and instead attended New York University on an athletic scholarship; there, he was a member of Sigma Alpha Mu. During this time, he also had a tryout with the New York Giants; Giants manager John McGraw, however, was not impressed by the first baseman. Hence, after his freshman year ended, Greenberg signed with the Detroit Tigers for $9,000 ($ today).\nProfessional career.\nMinor leagues.\nGreenberg played minor league baseball for three years. He played 17 games in 1930 for the Hartford Senators of the Eastern League before playing the remainder of the year with the Raleigh Capitals of the Piedmont League, hitting .314 with 19 home runs. In 1931, he played for the Evansville Hubs in the Illinois\u2013Indiana\u2013Iowa League, hitting .318 with 15 home runs and 85 runs batted in. In 1932, the Beaumont Exporters in the Texas League, he hit 39 homers with 131 RBIs, winning the league's Most Valuable Player award, and leading Beaumont to the Texas League title.\nMajor leagues.\nEarly years.\nOn September 14, 1930, Greenberg made his major league debut as a pinch hitter against the New York Yankees. It was the only game he appeared in that year but, as a result, made him the youngest player (19) to appear in the major leagues in 1930. It was another three years before he rejoined the majors. In 1933, for the Tigers, Greenberg hit .301 with 87 runs batted in. At the same time, he was third in the league in strikeouts (78).\nIn 1934, his second season in the majors, Greenberg hit .339 and helped the Tigers reach their first World Series in 25 years. He led the league in doubles, with 63 (the fourth-highest all-time in a single season), and extra-base hits (96). Additionally, he was third in the AL in slugging percentage (.600) \u2013 behind Jimmie Foxx and Lou Gehrig, but ahead of Babe Ruth \u2013 and in RBIs (139), sixth in batting average (.339), seventh in home runs (26), and ninth in on-base percentage (.404).\nLate in the 1934 season, he announced that he would not play on September 10, which was Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year, or on September 19, the Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur. Detroit fans grumbled at the decision, however, with one reportedly saying, \"Rosh Hashanah comes every year but the Tigers haven't won the pennant since 1909.\" As a result, Greenberg did considerable soul-searching, and discussed the matter with his rabbi and his father; finally he relented and agreed to play on Rosh Hashanah, but stuck with his decision not to play on Yom Kippur. Dramatically, Greenberg hit two home runs in a 2\u20131 Tigers victory over the Red Sox on Rosh Hashanah. The next day, the \"Detroit Free Press\" ran the Hebrew lettering for \"Happy New Year\" across its front page.\nColumnist and poet Edgar A. Guest expressed the general opinion in a poem titled \"Came Yom Kippur: Speaking of Greenberg\", in which he used the Irish (and thus Catholic) names Murphy and Mulroney. The poem, published in the \"Detroit Free Press\", ends with the lines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Detroit press was not so kind regarding the Yom Kippur decision, nor were many fans, but Greenberg in his autobiography recalled that he received a standing ovation from congregants at Congregation Shaarey Zedek when he arrived. With Greenberg absent from the lineup, the Tigers lost to the New York Yankees 5\u20132. They went on to face the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1934 World Series, losing in seven games against the \"Gashouse Gang\".\nIn 1935, Greenberg led the league in RBIs (168), total bases (389), and extra base hits (98), tied Foxx for the AL title in home runs (36), was 2nd in the league in doubles (46), slugging percentage (.628), was 3rd in the league in triples (16), and in runs scored (121), 6th in on-base percentage (.411) and walks (87), and was 7th in batting average (.328). He was unanimously voted as the Most Valuable Player in the American League. By the All-Star break that season, Greenberg had hit 25 home runs and set an MLB record (still standing) of 103 RBIs, but was not selected to the AL All-Star roster; one reason was that AL manager Mickey Cochrane had put himself on the All-Star roster despite eventually not playing in the game.\nThat season, Greenberg led the Tigers to another pennant. However, during Game 2, he sprained his wrist and was sidelined for the remainder of the series as the Tigers won their first World Series title.\nIn April 1936, Greenberg re-injured his wrist in a collision with Jake Powell of the Washington Senators and did not play the remainder of the season. He finished the season with 16 hits, 1 home run, and 15 RBIs in 12 games.\nIn 1937, Greenberg recovered from his injury and was voted to the AL All-Star roster, but did not play. On September 19, 1937, he hit the first home run into the center-field bleachers at Yankee Stadium. He led the AL by driving in 184 runs (third all-time, behind Hack Wilson in 1930 and Lou Gehrig in 1931), and in extra-base hits (103), while batting .337 with 200 hits. He was second in the league in home runs (40), doubles (49), total bases (397), slugging percentage (.668), and walks (102), third in on-base percentage (.436), and seventh in batting average (.337). Greenberg came in third in the vote for MVP, behind teammate Charlie Gehringer and Joe DiMaggio.\nA prodigious home run hitter, Greenberg narrowly missed breaking Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in 1938, when he hit 58 home runs, leading the league for the second time. That year, he had 11 games with multiple home runs, a new major league record. Greenberg matched what was then the single-season home run record by a right-handed batter, (Jimmie Foxx, 1932); the mark stood for 66 years until it was broken by Sammy Sosa and Mark McGwire in 1998. It remained the AL single season record by a right handed hitter until Aaron Judge surpassed it in 2022. Greenberg also had a 59th home run washed away in a rainout. It has been long speculated that Greenberg was intentionally walked late in the season to prevent him from breaking Ruth's record, but Greenberg dismissed this speculation, calling it \"crazy stories\". Howard Megdal has calculated that in September 1938, Greenberg was walked in over 20% of his plate appearances, above his average for the season. Baseball historian Ron Kaplan, while not dismissing antisemitism's role in Greenberg's decreased home run rate, states that there was nothing different in the way Greenberg was pitched to in the final days of the 1938 season.\nGreenberg was again voted to the AL All-Star roster in 1938, but because he was not named to the 1935 AL All-Star roster and was benched in the 1937 game, he declined to accept a starting position on the 1938 AL team and did not play (the NL won 4\u20131). He led the league in runs scored (144) and at-bats per home run (9.6), tied for the AL lead in walks (119), was second in RBIs (146), slugging percentage (.683), and total bases (380), and third in OBP (.438) and set a still-standing major league record of 39 homers in his home park, the newly re-configured Briggs Stadium. He also set a major-league record with 11 multiple-home run games and came in third in the vote for MVP, behind Jimmie Foxx and Bill Dickey.\nIn 1939, Greenberg was voted to the AL All-Star roster for the third year in a row and was a starter at first base, and singled and walked in four at-bats (AL won 3\u20131). He finished second in the AL in home runs (33) and strikeouts (95), third in doubles (42) and slugging percentage (.622), fourth in RBIs (112), sixth in walks (91), and ninth in on-base percentage (.420).\nAfter the 1939 season ended, Greenberg was asked by general manager Jack Zeller to take a salary cut of $5,000 ($ today) as a result of his off-year in power and run production. He was asked to move from first base to left field to accommodate Rudy York, who was one of the best young hitters of his generation; York was tried at catcher, third baseman, and outfielder and proved to be a defensive liability at each position. Greenberg in turn, demanded a $10,000 bonus if he mastered left field, insisting \"he\" was the one taking the risk in learning a new position. Greenberg received his bonus at the end of spring training.\nIn 1940, Greenberg switched from playing the first base position to the left field position. For the fourth consecutive time, he was voted by the season's American All-Star team manager Joe McCarthy to the AL All-Star team. In the bottom of the sixth inning, Greenberg and Lou Finney were sent into the game to replace right fielder Charlie Keller and left fielder Ted Williams, with Greenberg playing in left field and Finney in right field. Greenberg batted twice in the game and fouled out to the catcher twice. The NL won the game 4\u20130, the first All-Star Game shutout.\nThat season, Greenberg led the AL in home runs for the third time in six years with 41; in RBIs (150), doubles (50), total bases (384), extra-base hits (99), at-bats per home run (14.0), and slugging percentage (.670; 44 points ahead of Joe DiMaggio). Greenberg finished second in the league to Williams in runs scored (129) and OBP (.433), all while batting .340 (fifth-best in the AL). He also led the Tigers to the AL pennant, and won his second AL MVP award, becoming the first player in major-league history to win an MVP award at two different playing positions. However, the Tigers subsequently lost the 1940 World Series against the Cincinnati Reds in seven games.\nGreenberg admitted in his autobiography after his career ended that he had taken part in sign stealing in September 1940 season, which was inspired by teammates Tommy Bridges and Pinky Higgins, who noticed that the new rifle they used for their hunt had a telescopic lens that could read signs when in the stands in the outfield. He also said that sign stealing was going on in the 1948 Cleveland Indians and the 1959 Chicago White Sox teams.\nWorld War II service.\nOn October 16, 1940, Greenberg became the first American League player to register for the nation's first peacetime draft. In the spring of 1941, the Detroit draft board initially classified Greenberg as 4F for \"flat feet\" after his first physical for military service, and he was recommended for light duty. The rumors that he had bribed the board, and concern that he would be likened to Jack Dempsey (who had received negative publicity for failure to serve in World War I), led Greenberg to request to be reexamined. On April 18, he was found fit for regular military service and was reclassified.\nOn May 7, 1941, he was inducted into the U.S. Army after playing left field in 19 games, and reported to Fort Custer at Battle Creek, Michigan. His salary was cut from $55,000 ($ today) a year to $21 ($ today) a month. In November, while serving as an anti-tank gunner, he was promoted to sergeant, but was honorably discharged on December 5 (the United States Congress released men aged 28 years and older from service), two days before Japan bombed Pearl Harbor.\nAfter the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the United States officially joining the war effort, Greenberg re-enlisted as a sergeant on February 1, 1942, and volunteered for service in the Army Air Forces, becoming the first major league player to do so. He graduated from Officer Candidate School and was commissioned as a first lieutenant in the Air Corps (the new \"Air Force\" service retained the old name for its own logistics and training elements) and was assigned to the Physical Education Program.\nIn February 1944, he was sent to the U.S. Army Special Services school. Promoted to captain, he requested overseas duty later that year and served in the China-Burma-India Theater for over six months, scouting locations for B-29 bomber bases and was a physical training officer with the 58th Bomber Wing. He was a Special Services officer of the 20th Bomber Command, 20th Air Force in China when it began bombing Japan on June 15. He was ordered to New York, and in late 1944, to Richmond, Virginia. Greenberg served 47 months, the longest of any major league player.\nReturn to baseball.\nGreenberg remained in military uniform until he was placed on the military inactive list and discharged from the U.S. Army on June 14, 1945. He was the first major league player to return to the majors after the war. In his first game back on July 1, he hit a home run. The 1945 All-Star Game, scheduled for July 10, had been officially cancelled on April 24 and Major League Baseball did not name All-Stars that season due to strict travel restrictions in place during the last days of the war. In place of the All-Star Game, seven interleague games were played on July 9 and 10 to benefit the American Red Cross and the War Relief fund. An Associated Press All-Star roster was named for the AL and NL by a group of their sportswriters that included Greenberg as one of the All-Stars.\nGreenberg, who played left field in 72 games and batted .311 in 1945, helped lead the Tigers to a come-from-behind American League pennant, clinching it with a dramatic grand slam home run in the ninth inning on the final day of the season against the St. Louis Browns, avoiding a one-game playoff against the now-second-place Washington Senators. The Tigers went on to beat the Cubs in the 1945 World Series in seven games. Greenberg hit two of the only three home runs hit in that World Series, with Phil Cavarretta hitting one for the Cubs in Game 1. Greenberg homered in Game 2, where he batted in three runs in a 4\u20131 Tigers win, and hit a two-run homer in in the eighth inning of Game 6 that tied the score 8\u20138; the Cubs went on to win that game with a run in the bottom of the 12th.\nIn 1946, he returned to peak form and playing at first base. He led the AL in home runs (44) and RBIs (127), both for the fourth time. He was second in slugging percentage (.604) and total bases (316) behind Ted Williams.\nIn 1947, Greenberg and the Tigers had a lengthy salary dispute. When Greenberg decided to retire rather than play for less, Detroit sold his contract to the Pittsburgh Pirates. To persuade him not to retire, Pittsburgh made Greenberg the first baseball player to make $100,000 in a season as pure salary. Team co-owner Bing Crosby recorded a song, \"Goodbye, Mr. Ball, Goodbye\" with Groucho Marx and Greenberg to celebrate Greenberg's arrival. The Pirates also reduced the size of Forbes Field's cavernous left field, renaming the section \"Greenberg Gardens\" to accommodate Greenberg's pull-hitting style.\nGreenberg played first base for the Pirates in 1947 and his time there coincided with the arrival of Jackie Robinson in the Major Leagues. He was one of the few opposing players to publicly welcome Robinson to the majors at a time when most opposing players were openly hostile. Greenberg himself had faced hostilities from opposing players and spectators who often shouted antisemitic slurs at him during games and, hence, knew what Robinson was going through. During a game against the Brooklyn Dodgers, he collided with Robinson while covering first base. Afterwards, Greenberg asked if Robinson was alright and encouraged him to \"Stick in there. You\u2019re doing fine. Keep your chin up.\" Robinson later praised Greenberg, saying, \"Class tells. It sticks out all over Mr. Greenberg.\"\nThat year he also had a chance to mentor a young future Hall-of-Famer, the 24-year-old Ralph Kiner. Greenberg was impressed by the rookie, later saying of him, \"Ralph had a natural home run swing. All he needed was somebody to teach him the value of hard work and self-discipline. Early in the morning on off-days, every chance we got, we worked on hitting.\" Kiner hit 51 home runs that year to lead the National League and ended his career with 369 home runs, eventually being elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame.\nIn his final season of 1947, Greenberg tied for the league lead in walks with 104, with a .408 on-base percentage and finished eighth in the league in home runs and tenth in slugging percentage. Greenberg became the first major league player to hit 25 or more home runs in a season in each league. Despite still being productive, Greenberg decided to retire as a player to take a front-office post with the Cleveland Indians. No player had ever retired after a final season in which they hit so many home runs. Since then, only Ted Williams (1960; 29), Dave Kingman (1986; 35), Mark McGwire (2001; 29), Barry Bonds (2007; 28) and David Ortiz (2016; 38) have hit as many or more homers in their final season.\nPlayer profile.\nCareer overall.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe was one of the truly great hitters, and when I first saw him at bat, he made my eyes pop out.\n \u2014 Joe DiMaggio.\nIt is speculated that, had it not been for his service in World War II, Greenberg would have approached 500 home runs and 1,800 RBIs; he missed all but 19 games of the 1941 season, the three full seasons that followed, and most of 1945 to World War II military service.\nStarring as a first baseman and left fielder with the Tigers (1930, 1933\u201346) and doing duty only briefly with the Pirates (1947), Greenberg played nine full seasons. He compiled 331 home runs, 1,046 runs and 1,276 RBIs in 1,394 games. Greenberg was also an excellent contact hitter, earning a lifetime batting average of .313. During his career, he was named to the All-Star Team four times, and won the AL Most Valuable Player Award twice, in 1935 and 1940.\nAs a fielder, the Greenberg was awkward and unsure of himself early in his career, but mastered first base through countless hours of practice. Over the course of his career he demonstrated a higher-than-average fielding percentage and range at first base. When asked by the Tigers' front office to move to left field in 1940 to make room for Rudy York, he worked tirelessly to master that position as well, reducing his errors in the outfield from 15 in 1940 to 0 in 1945.\nAntisemitism.\nDuring his career, Greenberg faced a number of antisemitic incidents, racial slurs from both spectators and opposing players. Other players sometimes stared because they had never before seen a Jew. According to sportswriter Ross Newhan, Greenberg may have encountered more bigotry over his career than any player other than Jackie Robinson. Greenberg sometimes retaliated against the racial attacks, once going into the Chicago White Sox clubhouse and challenging manager Jimmy Dykes to a fight. On another occasion he called out the entire Yankees team, daring the perpetrator to reveal himself.\nIn the 1935 World Series, umpire George Moriarty warned three Chicago Cubs players to stop yelling antisemitic slurs at Greenberg and eventually cleared the players from the Cubs bench. Moriarty was disciplined for this action by then-commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis.\nGreenberg initially resented being singled out as a Jewish ballplayer and, unlike his parents, was not a particularly observant Jew. However, he later accepted his place in baseball, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I was playing, I used to resent being singled out as a Jewish ballplayer. I wanted to be known as a great ballplayer, period. I'm not sure why or when I changed, because I'm still not a particularly religious person. Lately, though, I find myself wanting to be remembered not only as a great ballplayer, but even more as a great Jewish ballplayer.\nIn his autobiography, Greenberg wrote that he used the antisemitism that he faced as a source of motivation. At and towering above his contemporaries, he disproved the commonly held stereotype that Jews were not athletic and did not belong in sports. His decision to not play on Yom Kippur at a time of rampant antisemitism in the United States, and around the world, was significant and made him a hero in the American Jewish community. Sandy Koufax, who did not play in Game 1 of the 1965 World Series because it fell on Yom Kippur, has often pointed out that his decision to not play was not unprecedented: \"Hank Greenberg did it first.\"\nPost-playing career.\nManagement and ownership.\nAfter the 1947 season, Greenberg retired as a player, and Cleveland Indians owner Bill Veeck hired him as the Indians' farm director. When Veeck was forced to sell the Indians due to a divorce settlement, new owner Ellis Ryan retained Greenberg, promoting him to general manager.\nDuring his tenure, he sponsored more African American players than any other major league executive. Greenberg's contributions to the Cleveland farm system led to the team's successes throughout the 1950s, although Bill James once wrote that the Indians' late 1950s collapse should also be attributed to him. In 1949, Larry Doby also recommended Greenberg scout three players Doby used to play with in the Negro leagues: Hank Aaron, Ernie Banks, and Willie Mays. The next offseason Doby asked what Indians' scouts said about his recommendations. Greenberg replied: \"Our guys checked 'em out and their reports were not good. They said that Aaron has a hitch in his swing and will never hit good pitching. Banks is too slow and didn't have enough range [at shortstop], and Mays can't hit a curveball.\"\nWhile Ryan had initially been content to leave baseball matters to Greenberg, he tried to seize greater control after the 1952 season, when the Indians suffered a drop in attendance despite coming within two games of the pennant. The Indians board sided with Greenberg, prompting Ryan to sell out to a group headed by Myron H. Wilson, who voiced full confidence in Greenberg. Under Wilson, Greenberg's role as operating head of the franchise was cemented to the point that he represented the Indians at owners meetings alongside vice president and board member George Medinger. During this time, he and Pirates owner John W. Galbreath helped negotiate an amended player pension plan in which the players got 60% of television revenues from the All-Star Game and World Series.\nIn 1953, he was partly responsible for an important change to baseball's waivers rule. In previous seasons, once a player passed through waivers in his team's league (AL or NL), any team from the other league could acquire him, a detail the Yankees used to often outbid other AL teams for NL players. Greenberg successfully campaigned for a new rule that, after June 15, required players to pass through waivers in both leagues before teams in the other league could attempt to obtain them.\nGreenberg's influence grew even more in 1956 when he joined a syndicate headed by Bill Daley that bought the Indians from Wilson. Although Greenberg had been operating head of the franchise since 1950, this was the first time that he had been a part-owner. However, in 1957, he was forced to resign as general manager, as he put it, \"in order to satisfy a hostile press.\" He remained a part-owner, however, and in 1958 tried to buy out Daley and become principal owner. He intended to serve as his own general manager if successful. However, Daley and several other directors bought him out.\nIn 1959, Greenberg and Veeck teamed up for a second time when they led a syndicate that purchased the Chicago White Sox; Veeck served as team president with Greenberg as vice president and general manager. During Veeck and Greenberg's first season, the White Sox won their first AL pennant since 1919. Veeck would sell his shares in the White Sox in 1961, and Greenberg stepped down as general manager on August 26 of that season.\nAfter the 1960 season, the American League announced plans to put a team in Los Angeles. Greenberg immediately became the favorite to become the new team's first owner and persuaded Veeck to join him as his partner. However, when Los Angeles Dodgers owner Walter O'Malley got wind of these developments, he threatened to scuttle the whole deal by invoking his exclusive rights to operate a major league team in southern California. In truth, O'Malley wanted no part of competing against an expansion team owned by a master promoter such as Veeck, even if he was only a minority partner. Greenberg wouldn't budge and pulled out of the running for what became the Los Angeles Angels. Greenberg later became a successful investment banker, briefly returning to baseball as a minority partner with Veeck when the latter repurchased the White Sox in 1975. For instance, in 1965, he participated with a group of investors in returning bankrupt Overseas National Airways to operation.\nIn 1970, when St. Louis Cardinals outfielder Curt Flood challenged Major League Baseball's reserve clause, Greenberg was amongst the few baseball players to openly support him, and testified on his behalf.\nPersonal life.\nWhile he grew up in an Orthodox Jewish household, Greenberg himself was not an observant Jew and later raised his children in a secular household.\nIn 1946, Greenberg married Caral Gimbel, daughter of Bernard Gimbel of the Gimbels department store family. The marriage was not a happy one, however, and they eventually divorced in 1958. In 1966, Greenberg married actress Mary Jo Tarola, who appeared on-screen under the stage name \"Linda Douglas\", and remained with her until his death.\nGreenberg had three children, all from his first marriage: sons Glenn and Stephen, and daughter Alva. Stephen played baseball at Yale University and spent five years in the Washington Senators/Texas Rangers organization; he later became a baseball executive and sports agent. Alva became a newspaper editor for the \"Old Lyme Gazette\" in Old Lyme, Connecticut.\nLater in life, Greenberg became an avid tennis player and often took part in amateur tournaments.\nGreenberg died after a 13-month battle with metastatic kidney cancer at his home Beverly Hills, California, on September 4, 1986. His remains were entombed at Hillside Memorial Park Cemetery, in Culver City, California.\nHonors.\nGreenberg was elected to National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1956 on his ninth ballot, garnering 85% of the votes. He was the first Jewish player elected to the Hall of Fame.\nOn June 12, 1983, the Detroit Tigers retired Greenberg's number 5 during \"Greenberg-Gehringer Day\" at Tiger Stadium, along with former teammate Charlie Gehringer's number 2. Both Greenberg and Gehringer attended the ceremony. In 1999, he was ranked No. 37 by \"The Sporting News\" on its list of \"Baseball's 100 Greatest Players\", and was a nominee for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team the same year. In 2020, Greenberg was ranked by \"The Athletic\" at No. 67 on its \"Baseball 100\" list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.\nGreenberg was elected to the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame in 1958. Additionally, he was elected to the International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in 1979, and to the National Jewish Sports Hall of Fame in 1995.\nIn 2013, the Bob Feller Act of Valor Award honored Greenberg as one of 37 Baseball Hall of Fame members for his service in the United States Army Air Force during World War II.\nIn 2006, Greenberg was featured on a United States postage stamp. The stamp is one of a block of four honoring \"baseball sluggers\", the others being Mickey Mantle, Mel Ott, and Roy Campanella.\nIn 1998, Greenberg was the subject of a documentary which was directed and written by Aviva Kempner entitled \"The Life and Times of Hank Greenberg\". In 2010, he was again one of the main subjects of the film \"\", alongside Hall of Famer Sandy Koufax of the Los Angeles Dodgers. The film was directed by Peter Miller and written by Ira Berkow.\nIn May 2024, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a house resolution which recognized the contributions of Jewish Americans in wake of rising antisemitism in the country. Greenberg, along with Koufax, were one of a handful of people who was singled out in the resolution by name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13628", "revid": "1319094629", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13628", "title": "Heinrich Schliemann", "text": "German businessman and archaeologist (1822\u20131890)\nJohann Ludwig Heinrich Julius Schliemann (; 6 January 1822 \u2013 26 December 1890) was a German businessman and an influential archaeologist. He was an advocate of the historicity of places mentioned in the works of Homer and an archaeological excavator of Hisarl\u0131k, now presumed to be the site of Troy, along with the Mycenaean sites Mycenae and Tiryns. His work lent weight to the idea that Homer's \"Iliad\" reflects historical events. Schliemann's excavation of nine layers of archaeological remains has been criticized as destructive of significant historical artefacts, including the layer that is believed to be the Homeric Troy.\nEarly life and education.\nSchliemann was born 6 January 1822, in Neubukow, Mecklenburg-Schwerin (part of the German Confederation) to Luise Therese Sophie Schliemann and Ernst Schliemann, a Lutheran minister. He was the fifth of nine children. The family moved to Ankershagen in summer 1823. Their second home houses the Heinrich Schliemann Museum today.\nHeinrich's father was a poor pastor. His mother died in 1831, when Heinrich was nine years old, and his father sent Heinrich to live with his uncle Friedrich Schliemann, also a pastor. When he was eleven years old, his father paid for his enrollment in the Gymnasium (grammar school) at Neustrelitz, but he had to leave it after three months. Heinrich's interest in history was initially encouraged by his father, who had schooled him in the tales of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" and had given him a copy of Ludwig Jerrer's \"Illustrated History of the World\" for Christmas in 1829. Schliemann claimed that at the age of 7 he had declared he would one day excavate the city of Troy.\nHeinrich had to transfer to the Realschule (vocational school) after his father was accused of embezzling church funds and made his exams in 1836. His family's poverty made a university education impossible. In his archaeological career, there was often a division between Schliemann and the educated professionals.\nAt age 14, after leaving Realschule, Heinrich became an apprentice at Herr Holtz's grocery in F\u00fcrstenberg. He later said that his passion for Homer was born when he heard a drunken miller reciting it at the grocer's. He laboured for five years until he was forced to leave because he hurt his chest, lifting a heavy barrel and coughing up blood. In 1841, Schliemann moved to Hamburg and became a cabin boy on the \"Dorothea,\" a brig bound for Venezuela. After twelve days at sea, the ship foundered in a gale. The survivors washed up on the shores of the Netherlands. Schliemann became a messenger, office attendant, and later, a bookkeeper in Amsterdam.\nCareer.\nOn 1 March 1844, 22-year-old Schliemann took a position with B. H. Schr\u00f6der &amp; Co., an import/export firm. In 1846, the firm sent him as a General Agent to St. Petersburg.\nIn time, Schliemann represented a number of companies. He learned Russian and Greek, employing a system that he used his entire life to learn languages; Schliemann claimed that it took him six weeks to learn a language and wrote his diary in the language of whatever country he happened to be in. By the end of his life, he could converse in English, French, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Russian, Swedish, Polish, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, besides his native German.\nSchliemann's ability with languages was an important part of his career as a businessman in the importing trade. In 1850, he learned of the death of his brother, Ludwig, who had become wealthy as a speculator in the California gold fields.\nSchliemann went to California in early 1851 and started a bank in Sacramento buying and reselling over a million dollars' worth of gold dust in just six months. When the local Rothschild agent complained about short-weight consignments, he left California, pretending it was because of illness. While he was there, California became the 31st state in September 1850, and Schliemann acquired United States citizenship. Schliemann propounded this story in his autobiography of 1881, though he clearly was in St Petersburg that day, and \"in actual fact, ...obtained his American citizenship only in 1869.\"\nAccording to his memoirs, before arriving in California he dined in Washington, D.C., with President Millard Fillmore and his family, but W. Calder III says that Schliemann didn't attend but simply read about a similar gathering in the papers.\nSchliemann also published what he said was an eyewitness account of the San Francisco Fire of 1851, which he said was in June although it took place in May. At the time he was in Sacramento and used the report of the fire in the \"Sacramento Daily Journal\" to write his report.\nOn 7 April 1852, he sold his business and returned to Russia. There he attempted to live the life of a gentleman, which brought him into contact with Ekaterina Petrovna Lyschin (1826\u20131896), the niece of one of his wealthy friends, whom he married on 12 October 1852. Schliemann next made a good profit trading in indigo dye.\nBy 1858, Schliemann was 36 years old and wealthy enough to retire. In his memoirs, he claimed that he wished to dedicate himself to the pursuit of Troy.\nAmateur archaeologist.\nHeinrich Schliemann was an amateur archaeologist. He was obsessed with the stories of Homer and ancient Mediterranean civilizations. He dedicated the second part of his life to unveiling the actual physical remains of the cities of Homer's epic tales. Many refer to him as the \"father of pre-Hellenistic archaeology\".\nIn 1868, Schliemann visited sites in the Greek world, and published his second book \"Ithaka, der Peloponnesus und Troja\" in which he described ancient sites in Greece and the Ottoman Empire and asserted that Hissarlik was the site of Troy. He submitted this book as a dissertation to the University of Rostock. In 1869, he was awarded a PhD \"in absentia\" from the university for that submission. David Traill claims that the examiners gave him his PhD on the basis of his topographical analyses of Ithaca, which were in part simply translations of another author's work or drawn from poetic descriptions by the same author. Other researchers who worked with documents from the university archives clearly contradict Traill's statements.\nSchliemann was an honorary member of the Society of Antiquaries of London and elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1880.\nTroy and Mycenae.\nSchliemann's first interest of a classical nature seems to have been the location of Troy. At the time he began excavating in Turkey, the site commonly believed to be Troy was at P\u0131narba\u015f\u0131, a hilltop at the south end of the Trojan Plain. The site had been previously excavated by English amateur archaeologist and local expert Frank Calvert. Schliemann performed soundings at P\u0131narba\u015f\u0131 but was disappointed by his findings. It was Calvert who identified Hissarlik as Troy and suggested Schliemann dig there on land owned by Calvert's family.\nSchliemann was at first sceptical about the identification of Hissarlik with Troy but was persuaded by Calvert. In 1870, Schliemann began digging a trench at Hissarlik, and by 1873 had discovered nine buried cities.\nSchliemann found pure copper and metal molds as well as a lot of other metal tools, cutlery, shields, and vases which were found at around 28 to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;29+1\u20442 feet deep at the site.\nThe day before digging was to stop on 15 June 1873, which was the day he discovered gold, which he took to be Priam's Treasure trove. Recent research has confirmed several settlements on the site spanning 3,600 years. The layer that Schliemann referred to as \"the Burnt City\" and believed to be Troy is now thought to be from 3,000 to 2,000 BCE, too early to be the location of the Trojan War as Homer describes it.\nHe later wrote that he had seen the gold glinting in the dirt and dismissed the workmen so that he and Sophia could excavate it themselves; they removed it in her shawl. However, Schliemann's oft-repeated story of the treasure being carried by Sophia in her shawl was untrue. Schliemann later admitted fabricating it; at the time of the discovery, Sophia was in fact with her family in Athens, following the death of her father.\nSchliemann smuggled the treasure out of the Ottoman Empire into Greece. The Ottoman Empire sued Schliemann in a Greek court, and Schliemann was forced to pay a 10,000 gold franc indemnity. Schliemann ended up sending 50,000 gold francs to the Constantinople Imperial Museum, and got permission for further excavations at Hissarlik. In 1874 Schliemann published \"Troy and Its Remains\". Schliemann at first offered his collections, which included Priam's Gold, to the Greek government, then the French, and finally the Russians. In 1881, his collections ended up in Berlin, housed first in the Ethnographic Museum, and then the Museum for Pre- and Early History, until the start of WWII. In 1939, all exhibits were packed and stored in the museum basement, then moved to the Prussian State Bank vault in January 1941. In 1941, the treasure was moved to the Flakturm located at the Berlin Zoological Garden, called the Zoo Tower. Dr. Wilhelm Unverzagt protected the three crates containing the Trojan gold when the Battle of Berlin commenced, right up until SMERSH forces took control of the tower on 1 May. On 26 May 1945, Soviet forces, led by Lt. Gen. Nikolai Antipenko, Andre Konstantinov, deputy head of the Arts Committee, Viktor Lazarev, and Serafim Druzhinin, took the three crates away on trucks. The crates were then flown to Moscow on 30 June 1945, and taken to the Pushkin Museum ten days later. In 1994, the museum admitted the collection was in their possession.\nIn 1876, he began digging at Mycenae, under the supervision of Panagiotis Stamatakis, a Greek archaeologist attached to the excavation as a condition of Schliemann's permit. There, he discovered the Shaft Graves, with their skeletons and more regal gold, including the so-called Mask of Agamemnon. These findings were published in \"Mycenae\" in 1878.\nAlthough he had received permission in 1876 to continue excavation, Schliemann did not reopen the dig site at Troy until 1878\u20131879, after another excavation in Ithaca designed to locate a site mentioned in the \"Odyssey\". Emile Burnouf and Rudolf Virchow joined him there in 1879.\nIn 1880 Schliemann began excavation of the Treasury of Minyas at Orchomenus (Boeotia).\nFrom 1882 to 1883 Schliemann made a sixth excavation at Troy, in 1884 an excavation of Tiryns with Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld, and from 1889 to 1890 a seventh and eighth excavation at Troy, also with D\u00f6rpfeld.\nPersonal life.\nAfter learning that his childhood sweetheart Minna had married, Schliemann married Ekaterina Petrovna Lyschin (1826\u20131896) on 12 October 1852. She was the niece of one of his wealthy friends in St Petersburg and they had three children; a son, Sergey (1855\u20131941), and two daughters, Natalya (1859\u20131869) and Nadezhda (1861\u20131935). As a consequence of his many travels, Schliemann was often separated from his wife and children. He spent a month studying at the Sorbonne in 1866 while moving his assets from St. Petersburg to Paris to invest in real estate. He asked his wife to join him, but she refused.\nSchliemann threatened to divorce Ekaterina twice before doing so. In 1869, he bought property and settled in Indianapolis for about three months to take advantage of Indiana's liberal divorce laws, although he obtained the divorce by lying about his residency in the U.S. and his intention to remain in the state. He moved to Athens as soon as an Indiana court granted him the divorce and married again two months later.\nA former teacher and Athenian friend, Theokletos Vimpos, the Archbishop of Mantineia and Kynouria, helped Schliemann find someone \"enthusiastic about Homer and about a rebirth of my beloved Greece...with a Greek name and a soul impassioned for learning.\" The archbishop suggested the 17-year-old Sophia Engastromenos, daughter of his cousin. They were married by the archbishop on 23 September 1869. They later had two children, Andromache and Agamemnon Schliemann.\nDeath.\nOn 1 August 1890, Schliemann returned reluctantly to Athens, and in November travelled to Halle, where his chronic ear infection was operated upon, on 13 November. The doctors deemed the operation a success, but his inner ear became painfully inflamed. Ignoring his doctors' advice, he left the hospital and travelled to Leipzig, Berlin and Paris. From the last, he planned to return to Athens in time for Christmas, but his ear condition became even worse. Too sick to make the boat ride from Naples to Greece, Schliemann remained in Naples but managed to make a journey to the ruins of Pompeii. On Christmas Day 1890, he collapsed into a coma; he died in a Naples hotel room the following day; the cause of death was cholesteatoma.\nHis corpse was then transported by friends to the First Cemetery in Athens. It was interred in a mausoleum shaped like a temple erected in ancient Greek style, designed by Ernst Ziller in the form of an amphiprostyle temple on top of a tall base. The frieze circling the outside of the mausoleum shows Schliemann conducting the excavations at Mycenae and other sites.\nLegacy and criticism.\nSchliemann's magnificent residence in the city centre of Athens, the \"Iliou Melathron\" (\u0399\u03bb\u03af\u03bf\u03c5 \u039c\u03ad\u03bb\u03b1\u03b8\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd, \"Palace of Ilium\"), today houses the Numismatic Museum of Athens.\nAlong with Sir Arthur Evans, Schliemann was a pioneer in the study of the Aegean civilization in the Bronze Age. The two men knew of each other, Evans having visited Schliemann's sites. Schliemann had planned to excavate at Knossos but died before fulfilling that dream. Evans bought the site, started excavations in 1900 and stepped in to take charge of the project, which was then still in its infancy.\nFurther excavation of the Troy site by others indicated that the level Schliemann named the Troy of the \"Iliad\" was inaccurate, although they retain the names given by Schliemann. In a 1998 article for \"The Classical World,\" D.F. Easton wrote that Schliemann \"was not very good at separating fact from interpretation\" and claimed that, \"Even in 1872 Frank Calvert could see from the pottery that Troy II had to be hundreds of years too early to be the Troy of the Trojan War, a point finally proven by the discovery of Mycenaean pottery in Troy VI in 1890.\" \"King Priam's Treasure\" was found in the Troy II level, that of the Early Bronze Age, long before Priam's city of Troy VI or Troy VIIa in the prosperous and elaborate Mycenaean Age. Moreover, the finds were unique. The elaborate gold artefacts do not appear to belong to the Early Bronze Age.\nHis excavations were condemned by later archaeologists as having destroyed the main layers of the real Troy. Kenneth W. Harl, in the Teaching Company's \"Great Ancient Civilizations of Asia Minor\" lecture series, sarcastically claimed that Schliemann's excavations were carried out with such rough methods that he did to Troy what the Greeks could not do in their times, destroying and levelling down the entire city walls to the ground.\nIn 1972, Professor William Calder of the University of Colorado, speaking at a commemoration of Schliemann's birthday, claimed that he had uncovered several possible problems in Schliemann's work. Other investigators followed, such as Professor David Traill of the University of California.\nA 2004 article of the National Geographic Society called into question Schliemann's qualifications, his motives, and his methods:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In northwestern Turkey, Heinrich Schliemann excavated the site believed to be Troy in 1870. Schliemann was a German adventurer and con-man who took sole credit for the discovery, even though he was digging at the site, called Hisarl\u0131k, at the behest of British archaeologist Frank Calvert. [...] Eager to find the legendary treasures of Troy, Schliemann blasted his way down to the second city, where he found what he believed were the jewels that once belonged to Helen. As it turns out, the jewels were a thousand years older than the time described in Homer's epic.\nA 2005 article presented similar criticisms when reporting on a speech by University of Pennsylvania scholar C. Brian Rose:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann was the first to explore the Mound of Troy in the 1870s. Unfortunately, he had had no formal education in archaeology, and dug an enormous trench \"which we still call the Schliemann Trench,\" according to Rose, because in the process Schliemann \"destroyed a phenomenal amount of material.\" [...] Only much later in his career would he accept the fact that the treasure had been found at a layer one thousand years removed from the battle between the Greeks and Trojans, and thus that it could not have been the treasure of King Priam. Schliemann may not have discovered the truth, but the publicity stunt worked, making Schliemann and the site famous and igniting the field of Homeric studies in the late 19th century. During this period he was criticized and ridiculed of claims to fathering an offspring with a local Assyrian Girl sparking infidelity and adultery which Schliemann did not confirm or deny. '\nSchliemann's methods have been described as \"savage and brutal. He ploughed through layers of soil and everything in them without proper record keeping\u2014no mapping of finds, few descriptions of discoveries.\" His rough excavation, conclusory interpretation and appropriation of artifacts were criticised by contemporary antiquarians, among them Spyridon Comnos and Stephen Salisbury III. The fame of his discoveries overshadowed such criticism through most of the twentieth century, such that Carl Blegen excused his recklessness: \"Although there were some regrettable blunders, those criticisms are largely colored by a comparison with modern techniques of digging; but it is only fair to remember that before 1876 very few persons, if anyone, yet really knew how excavations should properly be conducted. There was no science of archaeological investigation, and there was probably no other digger who was better than Schliemann in actual field work.\"\nIn 1874, Schliemann also initiated and sponsored the removal of medieval edifices from the Acropolis of Athens, including the great Frankish Tower. Despite considerable opposition, including from King George I of the Hellenes, Schliemann saw the project through. The eminent historian of Frankish Greece, William Miller, later denounced this as \"an act of vandalism unworthy of any people imbued with a sense of the continuity of history\", and \"pedantic barbarism\".\nIn his excavations at Troy, Schliemann found many swastikas adorned on pottery and consulted with Aryan nationalist \u00c9mile-Louis Burnouf to identify the symbol. Claiming that the symbol was connected with the Aryans, Burnouf adopted and popularised the swastika as a symbol of Aryan nationalism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13629", "revid": "25080539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13629", "title": "Hypnos", "text": "Personification of sleep in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, Hypnos (; Ancient Greek: , 'sleep'), also spelled Hypnus, is the personification of sleep. The Roman equivalent is Somnus. His name is the origin of the word hypnosis. Pausanias wrote that Hypnos was the dearest friend of the Muses.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the Dutch linguist Robert S. P. Beekes, the god's name derives from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*sup-no-\" 'sleep'.\nDescription.\nHypnos is usually the fatherless son of Nyx (\"The Night\"), although sometimes Nyx's consort Erebus (\"The Darkness\") is named as his father. His twin brother is Thanatos (\"Death\"). Both siblings live in the underworld (Hades). According to rumors, Hypnos lived in a big cave, which the river Lethe (\"Forgetfulness\") comes from and where night and day meet. They call this area the Land of Dreams. His bed is made of ebony, and on the entrance of the cave grow several poppies and other soporific plants. No light and no sound would ever enter his grotto. According to Homer, he lives on the island Lemnos, which later on has been claimed to be his very own dream island. He is said to be a calm and gentle god, as he helps humans in need and, due to their sleep, owns half of their lives.\nFamily.\nHypnos lived next to his twin brother, Thanatos (, 'death'), in the underworld, where the rays of the sun never reached them.\nIn Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Hypnos is one of the offspring of Nyx (, 'Night'), the goddess of Night, without a father. In genealogies from works by Roman authors, he is the son of Erebus (Darkness) and Nox (Night, the Roman name for Nyx). In the \"Iliad\", Nyx is a dreadful and powerful goddess, and even Zeus fears to enter her realm.\nHis wife, Pasithea, is one of the youngest of the Charites and is promised to him by Hera, who is the goddess of marriage and birth.\nMythology.\nHypnos in the \"Iliad\".\nHypnos was able to trick Zeus and help the Danaans win the Trojan War. During the war, Hera loathed her brother and husband, Zeus, so she devised a plot to trick him. She decided that to trick him she needed to make him so enamored with her that he would fall for the trick. So she washed herself with ambrosia and anointed herself with oil, made especially for her to make herself impossible for Zeus to resist. She wove flowers through her hair, put on three brilliant pendants for earrings, and donned a wondrous robe. She then called for Aphrodite, the goddess of love, and asked her for a charm that would ensure that her trick would not fail. To procure the charm, however, she lied to Aphrodite because they sided on opposite sides of the war. She told Aphrodite that she wanted the charm to help herself and Zeus stop fighting. Aphrodite willingly agreed. Hera was almost ready to trick Zeus, but she needed the help of Hypnos, who had tricked Zeus once before.\nHera called on Hypnos and asked him to help her by putting Zeus to sleep. Hypnos was reluctant because the last time he had put the god to sleep, he was furious when he awoke. It was Hera who had asked him to trick Zeus the first time as well. She was furious that Heracles, Zeus' son, sacked the city of the Trojans. So she had Hypnos put Zeus to sleep, and set blasts of angry winds upon the sea while Heracles was still sailing home. When Zeus awoke he was furious and went on a rampage looking for Hypnos. Hypnos managed to avoid Zeus by hiding with his mother, Nyx. This made Hypnos reluctant to accept Hera's proposal and help her trick Zeus again. Hera first offered him a beautiful golden seat that can never fall apart and a footstool to go with it. He refused this first offer, remembering the last time he tricked Zeus. Hera finally got him to agree by promising that he would be married to Pasithea, one of the youngest Graces, whom he had always wanted to marry. Hypnos made her swear by the river Styx and call on the gods of the underworld to be witnesses so that he would be ensured that he would marry Pasithea.\nHera went to see Zeus on Gargarus, the topmost peak of Mount Ida. Zeus was extremely taken by her and suspected nothing as Hypnos was shrouded in a thick mist and hidden upon a pine tree that was close to where Hera and Zeus were talking. Zeus asked Hera what she was doing there and why she had come from Olympus, and she told him the same lie she told Aphrodite. She told him that she wanted to go help her parent stop quarreling and she stopped there to consult him because she didn't want to go without his knowledge and have him be angry with her when he found out. Zeus said that she could go any time and that she should postpone her visit and stay there with him so they could enjoy each other's company. He told her that he was never in love with anyone as much as he loved her at that moment. He took her in his embrace and Hypnos went to work putting him to sleep, with Hera in his arms. While this went on, Hypnos traveled to the ships of the Achaeans to tell Poseidon, God of the Sea, that he could now help the Danaans and give them a victory while Zeus was sleeping. This is where Hypnos leaves the story, leaving Poseidon eager to help the Danaans. Thanks to Hypnos helping to trick Zeus, the war changed its course in Hera's favor, and Zeus never found out that Hypnos had tricked him one more time.\nHypnos and Endymion.\nAccording to a passage in \"Deipnosophistae\", the sophist and dithyrambic poet Licymnius of Chios tells a different tale about the Endymion myth, in which Hypnos loves Endymion and does not close the eyes of his beloved even while he is asleep, but lulls him to rest with eyes wide open so that he may without interruption enjoy the pleasure of gazing at them.\nHypnos in art.\nHypnos appears in numerous works of art, most of which are vases. An example of one vase that Hypnos is featured on is called \"Ariadne Abandoned by Theseus,\" which is part of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston's collection. In this vase, Hypnos is shown as a winged god dripping Lethean water upon the head of Ariadne as she sleeps.\nThere are only three bronze statues featuring Hypnos known to be found in the Roman world. The first one was found in mid-19th century in Civitella d'Arno (Italy), kept in the British Museum in London since 1868. This bronze head has wings sprouting from his temples and the hair is elaborately arranged, some tying in knots and some hanging freely from his head. The second one, a torsus, was found in Jumilla (Spain) in 1893 and is now exhibited at the Berlin antiquities collection. The most recent discovery took place in 1988 in Almedinilla (also in Spain), where bronze statue almost intact of Hypnos was found in a Roman villa dated in the 2nd century A.D. It is kept in the local History &amp; Archaeology Museum.\nThe National Roman Museum of the Italian capital keeps an Hypnos marble head found in Hadrian's Villa, built around 120 AD by Emperor Hadrian in Tivoli as a retreat not far from Rome.\nWords derived from Hypnos.\nThe English word \"hypnosis\" is derived from his name, referring to the fact that when hypnotized, a person is put into a sleep-like state (hypnosis \"sleep\" + -osis \"condition\"). The class of medicines known as \"hypnotics\" which induce sleep also take their name from Hypnos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13631", "revid": "27658600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13631", "title": "Holy orders", "text": "Sacraments in some Christian churches\nIn certain Christian denominations, holy orders are the ordained ministries of bishop, priest (presbyter), and deacon, and the sacrament or rite by which candidates are ordained to those orders. Churches recognizing these orders include the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox (\u03b9\u03b5\u03c1\u03c9\u03c3\u03cd\u03bd\u03b7 [\"hier\u014dsyn\u0113\"], \u03b9\u03b5\u03c1\u03ac\u03c4\u03b5\u03c5\u03bc\u03b1 [\"hierateuma\"], \u0421\u0432\u044f\u0449\u0435\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0432\u043e [\"Svyashchenstvo\"]), Oriental Orthodox, Anglican, Assyrian, Old Catholic, Independent Catholic and some Lutheran churches. Except for some Lutherans and some Anglicans, these churches regard ordination as a sacrament (the \"sacramentum ordinis\").\nDenominations have varied conceptions of holy orders. In some Lutheran and Anglican churches the traditional orders of bishop, priest and deacon are bestowed using ordination rites contained within ordinals. The extent to which ordination is considered sacramental in these traditions has, however, been a matter of some internal dispute. Baptists are among the denominations that do not consider ministry as being sacramental in nature and would not think of it in terms of \"holy orders\" as such. Historically, the word \"order\" (Latin \"ordo\") designated an established civil body or corporation with a hierarchy, and \"ordinatio\" meant legal incorporation into an \"ordo\". The word \"holy\" refers to the church. In context, therefore, a holy order is set apart for ministry in the church. Other positions, such as pope, patriarch, cardinal, monsignor, archbishop, archimandrite, archpriest, protopresbyter, hieromonk, protodeacon and archdeacon, are not sacramental orders but specialized ministries.\nAnglicanism.\nThe Anglican churches hold their bishops to be in apostolic succession, although there is some difference of opinion with regard to whether ordination is to be regarded as a sacrament. The Anglican Articles of Religion hold that only baptism and the Lord's Supper are to be counted as sacraments of the gospel, and assert that other rites 'commonly called sacraments' by other denominations (e.g. Catholicism), were not ordained by Christ in the Gospel. They do not have the nature of a sacrament of the Gospel in the absence of any physical matter such as the water in baptism and the bread and wine in the Eucharist. Various editions of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" and other Anglican liturgical texts provide rites for ordination of bishops, priests and deacons. Only bishops may ordain people. Within Anglicanism, three bishops are normally required for ordination to the episcopate, while one bishop is sufficient for performing ordinations to the priesthood and diaconate.\nCatholicism.\nThe ministerial orders of the Catholic Church include the orders of bishops, deacons and presbyters, which in Latin is \"sacerdos\". The ordained priesthood and common priesthood (or priesthood of all the baptized) are different in function and essence.\nA distinction is made between priest and presbyter. In the 1983 Code of Canon Law, \"The Latin words \"sacerdos\" and \"sacerdotium\" are used to refer in general to the ministerial priesthood shared by bishops and presbyters. The words \"presbyter, presbyterium and presbyteratus\" refer to priests [in the English use of the word] and presbyters\".\nWhile the consecrated life is neither clerical nor lay by definition, clerics can also be incardinated in an institute of consecrated life or society endowed with this faculty from the Apostolic see.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers ordination (known as \"cheirotonia\", \"laying on of hands\") to be a sacred mystery (\u03bc\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03ae\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf, what in the West is called a sacrament). Although all other mysteries may be performed by a presbyter, ordination may only be conferred by a bishop, and the ordination of a bishop may only be performed by several bishops together. \"Cheirotonia\" always takes place during the divine liturgy.\nThe Eastern Orthodox teach that it was the mission of the apostles to go forth into all the world and preach the Gospel, baptizing those who believed in the name of the Holy Trinity. In the early Church those who presided over congregations were referred to variously as \"episcopos\" (bishop) or \"presbyteros\" (priest). These successors of the apostles were ordained to their office by the laying on of hands, and according to Eastern Orthodox theology formed a living, organic link with the apostles, and through them with Jesus Christ himself.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church also has ordination to minor orders (known as \"cheirothesia\", \"imposition of hands\") which is performed outside of the Divine Liturgy, typically by a bishop, although certain archimandrites of stavropegial monasteries may bestow cheirothesia on members of their communities.\nIn Eastern Orthodoxy, a bishop is the collector of the money of the diocese and the living Vessel of Grace through whom the \"energeia\" (divine grace) of the Holy Spirit flows into the rest of the church. A bishop is consecrated through the laying on of hands by several bishops; although, with the consent of several other bishops, a single bishop has performed the ordination of another bishop in emergency situations, such as times of persecution.\nThe consecration of a bishop takes place near the beginning of the liturgy, since a bishop can, in addition to performing the mystery of the Eucharist, also ordain priests and deacons. Before the commencement of the liturgy, the bishop-elect professes, in the middle of the church before the seated bishops who will consecrate him, in detail the doctrines of the Eastern Orthodox faith and pledges to observe the canons of the apostles and councils, the Typikon and customs of the Eastern Orthodox Church and to obey ecclesiastical authority. After the Little Entrance, the archpriest and archdeacon conduct the bishop-elect before the church's royal gates where he is met by the bishops and kneels before the altar on both knees. The Gospel Book is laid over his head and the consecrating bishops lay their hands upon the Gospel Book, while the prayers of ordination are read by the eldest bishop. After this, the newly consecrated bishop ascends the \"synthranon\" (bishop's throne in the sanctuary) for the first time. Customarily, the newly consecrated bishop ordains a priest and a deacon at the liturgy during which he is consecrated.\nA priest may serve only at the pleasure of his bishop. A bishop bestows faculties (permission to minister within his diocese) giving a priest chrism and an antimins; he may withdraw faculties and demand the return of these items. The ordination of a priest occurs before the Anaphora (Eucharistic Prayer) in order that he may on the same day take part in the celebration of the Eucharist: during the Great Entrance, the candidate for ordination carries the A\u00ebr (chalice veil) over his head (rather than on his shoulder, as a deacon otherwise carries it then) as a symbol of giving up his diaconate, and comes last in the procession and stands at the end of the pair of lines of the priests. After the A\u00ebr is taken from the candidate to cover the chalice and diskos, a chair is brought for the bishop to sit on by the northeast corner of the holy table (altar). Two deacons go to priest-elect who, at that point, had been standing alone in the middle of the church, and bow him down to the west (to the people) and to the east (to the clergy), asking their consent by saying \"Command ye!\" and then lead him through the holy doors of the altar where the archdeacon asks the bishop's consent, saying, \"Command, most sacred master!\" after which a priest escorts the candidate three times around the altar, during which he kisses each corner of the altar or holy table as well as the bishop's epigonation and right hand and prostrates himself before the holy table at each circuit. The candidate is then taken to the southeast corner of the holy table and kneels on both knees, resting his forehead on the edge of the Holy Table. The ordaining bishop then places his omophor and right hand over the ordinand's head and recites aloud the first \"Prayer of Cheirotonia\" and then prays silently the other two prayers of cheirotonia while a deacon quietly recites a litany and the clergy, then the congregation, chant \"Lord, have mercy\". Afterwards, the bishop brings the newly ordained priest to stand in the holy doors and presents him to the faithful. He then clothes the priest in each of his sacerdotal vestments, at each of which the people sing, \"Worthy!\". Later, after the epiklesis of the liturgy, the bishop hands him a portion of the Lamb (Host) saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Receive thou this pledge, and preserve it whole and unharmed until thy last breath, because thou shalt be held to an accounting therefore in the second and terrible Coming of our great Lord, God, and Saviour, Jesus Christ.\nA deacon may not perform any sacrament and performs no liturgical services on his own but serves only as an assistant to a priest and may not even vest without the blessing of a priest. The ordination of a deacon occurs after the anaphora (eucharistic prayer) since his role is not in performing the mystery or sacrament but consists only in serving; the ceremony is much the same as at the ordination of a priest, but the deacon-elect is presented to the people and escorted to the holy doors by two sub-deacons (his peers, analogous to the two deacons who so present a priest-elect), is escorted three times around the altar by a deacon, and he kneels on only one knee during the \"Prayer of Cheirotonia\". After being vested as a deacon and given a liturgical fan \"(ripidion or hexapterygion)\", he is led to the side of the altar where he uses the ripidion to gently fan the holy gifts (the consecrated Body and Blood of Christ).\nLutheranism.\nOrdination to holy orders is considered to be either a sacrament or rite in the Lutheran churches, depending on the churchmanship. According to the \"Book of Concord\", an explication of the doctrine of the Lutheran churches: \"But if ordination be understood as applying to the ministry of the Word, we are not unwilling to call ordination a sacrament. For the ministry of the Word has God's command and glorious promises, Rom. 1:16: The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. Likewise, Isa. 55:11: So shall My Word be that goeth forth out of My mouth; it shall not return unto Me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please. ...If ordination be understood in this way, neither will we refuse to call the imposition of hands a sacrament. For the Church has the command to appoint ministers, which should be most pleasing to us, because we know that God approves this ministry, and is present in the ministry [that God will preach and work through men and those who have been chosen by men].\"\nThe Lutheran reforms are considered to be the most conservative of those that emerged in the Reformation. As such, much of Lutheranism follows the threefold office of deacon, priest, and bishop. The Lutheran archbishops of Finland, Sweden, etc. and Baltic countries are the historic national primates and some ancient cathedrals and parishes in the Lutheran church were constructed many centuries before the Reformation. \nLutherans universally believe that \"no one should publicly teach in the Church or administer the Sacraments unless he be regularly called\". The Lutheran churches in Scandinavia, and those established in other parts of the world as a result of Scandinavian Lutheran missionary activity (such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya), practice episcopal succession in which the bishop whose holy orders can be traced back to the Apostles, performs ordinations. \nAdditionally, Martin Luther taught that each individual was expected to fulfill his God-appointed task in everyday life. The modern usage of the term vocation as a life-task was first employed by Martin Luther. Therefore \"Luther's Small Catechism\" provides passages of Scripture to encourage those in holy orders, including bishops, pastors, preachers, as well as those in governmental offices, citizens, husbands, wives, children, employees, employers, young people, and widows.\nProcess and sequence.\nThe sequence in which holy orders are received are: minor orders, deacon, priest, bishop.\nFor Catholics, it is typical in the years of seminary training that a man will be ordained to the diaconate, which Catholics since the Second Vatican Council sometimes call the \"transitional diaconate\" to distinguish men bound for priesthood from permanent deacons. They are licensed to preach sermons (under certain circumstances a permanent deacon may not receive faculties to preach), to perform baptisms, and to witness Catholic marriages, but to perform no other sacraments. They assist at the eucharist or the Mass, but are not able to consecrate the bread and wine. Normally, after six months or more as a transitional deacon, a man will be ordained to the priesthood. Priests are able to preach, perform baptisms, confirm (with special dispensation from their ordinary), witness marriages, hear confessions and give absolutions, anoint the sick, and celebrate the Mass.\nEastern Orthodox seminarians are typically tonsured as readers before entering the seminary, and may later be made subdeacons or deacons; customs vary between seminaries and between Eastern Orthodox jurisdictions. Some deacons remain permanently in the diaconate while most subsequently are ordained as priests. Orthodox clergy are typically either married or monastic. Monastic deacons are called hierodeacons, monastic priests are called hieromonks. Eastern Orthodox clergy who marry must do so prior to ordination to the subdiaconate (or diaconate, according to local custom) and typically one is either tonsured a monk or married before ordination. A deacon or priest may not marry, or remarry if widowed, without abandoning his clerical office. Often, widowed priests take monastic vows. Eastern Orthodox bishops are always monks; a single or widowed man may be elected a bishop but he must be tonsured a monk before consecration as a bishop.\nFor Anglicans, a person is usually ordained a deacon once he (or she) has completed training at a theological college. The historic practice of a bishop tutoring a candidate himself (\"reading for orders\") is still to be found. The candidate then typically serves as an assistant curate and may later be ordained as a priest at the discretion of the bishop. Other deacons may choose to remain in this order. Anglican deacons can preach sermons, perform baptisms and conduct funerals, but, unlike priests, cannot celebrate the eucharistic liturgy. In most branches of the Anglican church, women can be ordained as priests, and in some of them, can also be ordained bishops.\nBishops are chosen from among priests in churches that adhere to Catholic usage. In the Catholic Church, bishops, like priests, are celibate and thus unmarried; further, a bishop is said to possess the fullness of the sacrament of holy orders, empowering him to ordain deacons, priests, and\u2014with papal consent\u2014other bishops. If a bishop, especially one acting as an ordinary\u2014a head of a diocese or archdiocese\u2014is to be ordained, three bishops must usually co-consecrate him with one bishop, usually an archbishop or the bishop of the place, being the chief consecrating prelate.\nAmong Eastern Rite Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches, which permit married priests, bishops must either be unmarried or agree to abstain from contact with their wives. It is a common misconception that all such bishops come from religious orders; while this is generally true, it is not an absolute rule. In the case of both Catholics\u2014(Western and) Eastern Catholic, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox, they are usually leaders of territorial units called dioceses (or its equivalent in the east, an eparchy). Only bishops can validly administer the sacrament of holy orders.\nRecognition of other churches' orders.\nThe Catholic Church unconditionally recognizes the validity of ordinations in the Eastern churches. Some Eastern Orthodox churches reordain Catholic priests who convert while others accept their Catholic ordination using the concept of economia (church economy). In 1988, the Ordination Joint Committee of Orthodox and Catholic Bishops stated the following:\nAnglican churches claim to have maintained apostolic succession. The succession of Anglican bishops is not universally recognized, however. The Catholic Church judged Anglican orders invalid when Pope Leo XIII in 1896 wrote in \"Apostolicae curae\" that Anglican orders lack validity because the rite by which priests were ordained was not correctly worded from 1547 to 1553 and from 1559 to the time of Archbishop William Laud (Archbishop of Canterbury 1633\u20131645). The papacy claimed the form and matter was inadequate to make a Catholic bishop. The actual \"mechanical\" succession, prayer and laying on hands, was not disputed. Two of the four consecrators of Matthew Parker in 1559 had been consecrated using the Edwardine Ordinals and two using the Roman Pontifical. Nonetheless, they believed that this caused a break of continuity in apostolic succession, making all further ordinations null and void.\nEastern Orthodox bishops have, on occasion, granted \"economy\" when Anglican priests convert to Eastern Orthodoxy. Various Eastern Orthodox churches have also declared Anglican orders valid subject to a finding that the bishops in question did indeed maintain the true faith, the Orthodox concept of apostolic succession being one in which the faith must be properly adhered to and transmitted, not simply that the ceremony by which a man is made a bishop is conducted correctly. Some Eastern Orthodox have also considered holy orders from canonically unrecognized or disputed, or independent Eastern Orthodox churches as valid.\nSeveral Eastern Orthodox patriarchs and synods have recognized the validity of Anglican orders. In 1922, the Ecumenical Patriarch Meletios IV issued a statement recognizing that Anglican ordinations were \"of the same validity as those of the Roman, Old Catholic, and Armenian Churches.\" The 1923 Synod of Constantinople reaffirmed this position. Following this statement from Constantinople, the Eastern Orthodox churches of Alexandria, Cyprus, Greece, Jerusalem, and Romania conditionally recognized Anglican orders as valid. The Holy Synod of the Church of Cyprus recognized the validity of Anglican orders in 1923, as did the patriarch of the Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem, Damian I, and the synod of his church, in the same year. The Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria officially recognized the validity of Anglican orders in 1930. In 1936, the Holy Synod of the Romanian Orthodox Church formally recognized the validity of Anglican orders. In 1939, the Synod of the Church of Greece agreed to recognize Anglican Orders as valid \"by economy\" or \"as an indulgence, not a right.\" As of 2022, these recognitions had \"not been rescinded.\" Ecumenical dialogues between the Eastern Orthodox and Anglican churches on the recognition of orders are ongoing.\nChanges in the Anglican ordinals since King Edward VI, and a fuller appreciation of the pre-Reformation ordinals, suggest that the correctness of the enduring dismissal of Anglican orders is questionable. To reduce doubt concerning Anglican apostolic succession, especially since the 1931 Bonn agreement between the Anglican and Old Catholic churches, some Anglican bishops have included among their consecrators bishops of the Old Catholic Church, whose holy orders are recognised as valid and regular by the Catholic Church.\nNeither Catholics nor Anglicans recognize the validity of ordinations of ministers in Protestant churches that do not maintain apostolic succession; but some Anglicans, especially Low Church or Evangelical ones, commonly treat Protestant ministers and their sacraments as valid. Rome also does not recognize the apostolic succession of those Lutheran bodies which retained apostolic succession.\nOfficially, the Anglican Communion accepts the ordinations of those denominations which are in full communion with their own churches, such as the Lutheran state churches of Scandinavia. Those clergy may preside at services requiring a priest if one is not otherwise available.\nThe Oriental Orthodox Churches recognizes the ordinations of both Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.\nMarriage and holy orders.\nMarried men may be ordained to the diaconate as permanent deacons, but in the Latin Church of the Catholic Church generally may not be ordained to the priesthood. In the Eastern Catholic Churches and in the Eastern Orthodox Church, married deacons may be ordained priests but may not become bishops. Bishops in the Eastern Rites and the Eastern Orthodox churches are almost always drawn from among monks, who have taken a vow of celibacy. They may be widowers, though; it is not required of them never to have been married.\nIn some cases, widowed permanent deacons have been ordained to the priesthood. There have been some situations in which men previously married and ordained to the priesthood in an Anglican church or in a Lutheran church have been ordained to the Catholic priesthood and allowed to function much as an Eastern Rite priest but in a Latin Church setting. This is never \"sub conditione\" (conditionally), as there is in Catholic canon law no true priesthood in Protestant denominations. Such ordination may only happen with the approval of the priest's Bishop and a special permission by the Pope.\nAnglican clergy may be married or may marry after ordination. In the Old Catholic Church and the Independent Catholic Churches there are no ordination restrictions related to marriage.\nOther concepts of ordination.\nOrdination ritual and procedures vary by denomination. Different churches and denominations specify more or less rigorous requirements for entering into office, and the process of ordination is likewise given more or less ceremonial pomp depending on the group. Many Protestants still communicate authority and ordain to office by having the existing overseers physically lay hands on the candidates for office.\nMethodist churches.\nThe American Methodist model is an episcopal system loosely based on the Anglican model, as the Methodist Church arose from the Anglican Church. It was first devised under the leadership of Bishops Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the late 18th century. In this approach, an elder (or 'presbyter') is ordained to word (preaching and teaching), sacrament (administering Baptism and the Lord's Supper), order (administering the life of the church and, in the case of bishops, ordaining others for mission and ministry), and service. A deacon is a person ordained only to word and service.\nIn the United Methodist Church, for instance, seminary graduates are examined and approved by the Conference Board of Ordained Ministry and then the Clergy Session. They are accepted as \"probationary (provisional) members of the conference.\" The resident bishop may commission them to full-time ministry as \"provisional\" ministers. (Before 1996, the graduate was ordained as a transitional deacon at this point, a provisional role since eliminated. The order of deacon is now a separate and distinct clergy order in the United Methodist Church.) After serving the probationary period, of a minimum of two years, the probationer is then examined again and either continued on probation, discontinued altogether, or approved for ordination. Upon final approval by the Clergy Session of the Conference, the probationer becomes a full member of the Conference and is then ordained as an elder or deacon by the resident bishop. Those ordained as elders are members of the Order of Elders, and those ordained deacons are members of the Order of Deacons.\nJohn Wesley appointed Thomas Coke (above mentioned as bishop) as 'Superintendent', his translation of the Greek \"episcopos\" (\"overseer\") \u2013 which is normally translated 'bishop' in English. The British Methodist Conference has two distinct orders of presbyter and deacon. It does not have bishops as a separate order of ministry. The British Methodist Church has more than 500 superintendents, who are not a separate order of ministry but a role within the order of presbyters. The roles normally undertaken by bishops are expressed in ordaining presbyters and deacons by the annual Conference through its president (or a past president); in confirmation by all presbyters; in local oversight by superintendents; in regional oversight by chairs of Districts.\nPresbyterian churches.\nPresbyterian churches, following their Scottish forebears, reject the traditions surrounding overseers and instead identify the offices of bishop (\"episkopos\" in Greek) and elder (\"presbuteros\" in Greek, from which the term \"presbyterian\" comes). The two terms seem to be used interchangeably in the Bible (compare https:// and https://). Their form of church governance is known as presbyterian polity. While there is increasing authority with each level of gathering of elders ('Session' over a congregation or parish, then presbytery, then possibly a synod, then the General Assembly), there is no hierarchy of elders. Each elder has an equal vote at the court on which they stand.\nElders are usually chosen at their local level, either elected by the congregation and approved by the Session, or appointed directly by the Session. Some churches place limits on the term that the elders serve, while others ordain elders for life.\nPresbyterians also ordain (by laying on of hands) ministers of Word and Sacrament (sometimes known as 'teaching elders'). These ministers are regarded simply as Presbyters ordained to a different function, but in practice they provide the leadership for the local Session.\nSome Presbyterians identify those appointed (by the laying on of hands) to serve in practical ways (https://) as deacons (\"diakonos\" in Greek, meaning 'servant'). In many congregations, a group of men or women is thus set aside to deal with matters such as congregational fabric and finance, releasing elders for more 'spiritual' work. These persons may be known as 'deacons', 'board members' or 'managers', depending on the local tradition. Unlike elders and ministers, they are not usually 'ordained', and are often elected by the congregation for a set period of time.\nOther Presbyterians have used an 'order of deacons' as full-time servants of the wider Church. Unlike ministers, they do not administer sacraments or routinely preach. The Church of Scotland has recently begun ordaining deacons to this role.\nUnlike the Episcopalian system, but similar to the United Methodist system described above, the two Presbyterian offices are different in \"kind\" rather than in \"degree\", since one need not be a deacon before becoming an elder. Since there is no hierarchy, the two offices do not make up an 'order' in the technical sense, but the terminology of holy orders is sometimes still developed.\nCongregationalist churches.\nCongregationalist churches implement different schemes, but the officers usually have less authority than in the presbyterian or episcopalian forms. Some ordain only ministers and rotate members on an advisory board (sometimes called a board of elders or a board of deacons). Because the positions are by comparison less powerful, there is usually less rigor or fanfare in how officers are ordained.\nIrvingian churches.\nIrvingian churches teach a fourfold ministry of \"apostles, prophets, evangelists, and pastors.\"\nLatter Day Saint movement.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) accepts the legal authority of clergy to perform marriages but does not recognize any other sacraments performed by ministers not ordained to the Latter-day Saint priesthood. Although the Latter-day Saints do claim a doctrine of a certain spiritual \"apostolic succession,\" it is significantly different from that claimed by Catholics and Protestants since there is no succession or continuity between the first century and the lifetime of Joseph Smith, the founder of the LDS church. Mormons teach that the priesthood was lost in ancient times not to be restored by Christ until the nineteenth century when it was given to Joseph Smith directly.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has a relatively open priesthood, ordaining nearly all worthy adult males and boys of the age of twelve and older. Latter-day Saint priesthood consists of two divisions: the Melchizedek Priesthood and Aaronic Priesthood. The Melchizedek Priesthood because Melchizedek was such a great high priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God. But out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of his name, the church, in ancient days, called that priesthood after Melchizedek. The lesser priesthood is an appendage to the Melchizedek Priesthood. It is called the Aaronic Priesthood because it was conferred on Aaron and his sons throughout all their generations.\nThe offices, or ranks, of the Melchizedek order (in roughly descending order) include apostle, seventy, patriarch, high priest, and elder. The offices of the Aaronic order are bishop, priest, teacher, and deacon. The manner of ordination consists of the laying on of hands by two or more men holding at least the office being conferred while one acts as voice in conferring the priesthood or office and usually pronounces a blessing upon the recipient. Teachers and deacons do not have the authority to ordain others to the priesthood. All church members are authorized to teach and preach regardless of priesthood ordination so long as they maintain good standing within the church. The church does not use the term \"holy orders.\"\nCommunity of Christ.\nCommunity of Christ has a largely volunteer priesthood, and all members of the priesthood are free to marry (as traditionally defined by the Christian community). The priesthood is divided into two orders, the Aaronic priesthood and the Melchisedec priesthood. The Aaronic order consists of the offices of deacon, teacher and priest. The Melchisedec Order consists of the offices of elder (including the specialized office of seventy) and high priest (including the specialized offices of evangelist, bishop, apostle, and prophet). Paid ministers include \"appointees\" and the general officers of the church, which include some specialized priesthood offices (such as the office of president, reserved for the three top members of the church leadership team). As of 1984, women have been eligible for priesthood, which is conferred through the sacrament of ordination by the laying-on-of-hands. While there is technically no age requirement for any office of priesthood, there is no automatic ordination or progression as in the LDS Church. Young people are occasionally ordained as deacon, and sometimes teacher or priest, but generally most priesthood members are called following completion of post secondary school education. In March 2007 a woman was ordained for the first time to the office of president.\nOrdination of women.\nThe Catholic Church, in accordance with its interpretation of the theological tradition on the issue, and the definitive clarification found in the encyclical letter \"Ordinatio sacerdotalis\" (1994) written by Pope John Paul II, officially teaches that it has no authority to ordain women as priests and thus there is no possibility of women becoming priests at any time in the future. \"Ordaining\" women as deaconesses is not a possibility in any sacramental sense of the diaconate, for a deaconess is not simply a female who is a deacon but instead holds a position of lay service. As such, she does not receive the sacrament of holy orders. Many Lutheran, Anglican and other Protestant churches ordain women, but in many cases, only to the office of deacon.\nVarious branches of the Eastern Orthodox churches, including the Greek Orthodox, currently set aside vows of deaconesses. Some churches are internally divided on whether the Scriptures permit the ordination of women. When one considers the relative size of the traditions (1.1 billion Catholics, 300 million Orthodox, 590 million Protestants), it is a minority of Christian churches that ordain women. Protestants constitute about 27 percent of Christians worldwide, and most of their churches that do ordain women have only done so within the past century; moreover, denominations within the same tradition may differ with respect to women's ordination. For example, in Methodism, the Primitive Methodist Church does not ordain women, while the Free Methodist Church does ordain women.\nIn some traditions women may be ordained to the same orders as men. In others women are restricted from certain offices. Women may be ordained bishop in the Old Catholic churches and in the Anglican/Episcopal churches in Scotland, Ireland, Wales, Cuba, Brazil, South Africa, Canada, US, Australia, Aotearoa New Zealand and Polynesia. The Church of Ireland had installed Pat Storey in 2013. On 19 September 2013, Storey was chosen by the House of Bishops to succeed Richard Clarke as Bishop of Meath and Kildare. She was consecrated to the episcopate at Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin, on 30 November 2013. She is the first woman to be elected as a bishop in the Church of Ireland and the first woman to be an Anglican Communion bishop in Ireland and Great Britain. The Church of England's General Synod voted in 2014 to allow women to be ordained to the episcopate, with Libby Lane being the first woman to be ordained bishop. Continuing Anglican churches of the world do not permit women to be ordained. In some Protestant denominations, women may serve as assistant pastors but not as pastors in charge of congregations. In some denominations, women can be ordained to be an elder or deacon. Some denominations allow for the ordination of women for certain religious orders. Within certain traditions, such as the Anglican and Lutheran, there is a diversity of theology and practice regarding ordination of women.\nOrdination of LGBT clergy.\nThe ordination of lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender clergy who are sexually active, and open about it, represents a fiercely contested subject within many mainline Protestant communities. The majority of churches are opposed to such ordinations because they view homosexuality as a sin and incompatible with Biblical teaching and traditional Christian practice. Yet there are an increasing number of Christian congregations and communities that are open to ordaining people who are gay or lesbian. These are liberal Protestant denominations, such as the Episcopal Church, the United Church of Christ, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, plus the small Metropolitan Community Church, founded as a church intending to minister primarily to LGBT people, and the Church of Sweden where such clergy may serve in senior clerical positions. The Church of Norway has for many years had both gay and lesbian priests, even bishops, and in 2006 the first woman who was appointed a bishop in Norway came out as an active homosexual herself, and that she had been a homosexual since before she joined the church.\nThe issue of ordination has caused particular controversy in the worldwide Anglican Communion, following the approval of Gene Robinson to be Bishop of New Hampshire in the US Episcopal Church.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13632", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13632", "title": "H.M.S. Titanic", "text": ""}
{"id": "13633", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13633", "title": "Homer", "text": "Credited author of the Iliad and Odyssey\nHomer (; , ; possibly born c.\u2009the 8th century BC) was an ancient Greek poet who is credited as the author of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", two epic poems that are foundational works of ancient Greek literature. Despite uncertainties about his authorship, Homer is considered one of the most influential authors in history.\nThe \"Iliad\" centers on a quarrel between King Agamemnon and the warrior Achilles during the last year of the Trojan War. The \"Odyssey\" chronicles the ten-year journey of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, back to his home after the fall of Troy. The epics depict man's struggle, the \"Odyssey\" especially so, as Odysseus perseveres through the punishment of the gods. The poems are in Homeric Greek, also known as Epic Greek, a literary language that shows a mixture of features of the Ionic and Aeolic dialects from different centuries; the predominant influence is Eastern Ionic. Most researchers believe that the poems were originally transmitted orally. Despite being predominantly known for their tragic and serious themes, the Homeric poems also contain instances of comedy and laughter.\nThe Homeric poems shaped aspects of ancient Greek culture and education, fostering ideals of heroism, glory, and honor. To Plato, Homer was simply the one who \"has taught Greece\" (, ). In Dante Alighieri's \"Divine Comedy\", Virgil refers to Homer as \"Poet sovereign\", king of all poets; in the preface to his translation of the \"Iliad\", Alexander Pope acknowledges that Homer has always been considered the \"greatest of poets\". From antiquity to the present day, Homeric epics have inspired many famous works of literature, music, art, and film.\nThe question of by whom, when, where, and under what circumstances the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" were composed continues to be debated. Scholars generally regard the two poems as the works of separate authors. It is thought that the poems were composed at some point around the late eighth or early seventh century BC. Many accounts of Homer's life circulated in classical antiquity, the most widespread that he was a blind bard from Ionia, a region of central coastal Anatolia in present-day Turkey. Modern scholars consider these accounts legendary.\nBiography, identity, and biographical traditions.\nThe identity of \"Homer\" is a mystery, and scholars generally regard the ancient conception of a single author behind the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" as a fictional narrative. During antiquity, biographical details about Homer's life became increasingly mythologized due to his anonymity and it was believed during that period that he lived after the Trojan War. Contemporary scholars study the life of Homer alongside the Homeric Question, the ongoing academic debate concerning Homer's authorship and the origins, composition, and transmission of the epic poems attributed to him. The two best-known ancient biographies of Homer are the \"Life of Homer\" by the Pseudo-Herodotus and the \"Contest of Homer and Hesiod\".\nThe first early implicit references to Homer in the 7th century BC are in works by Archilochus, Alcman, Tyrtaeus, and Callinus. In most ancient biographies, Homer is depicted as being blind; other biographies, such as that in the Byzantine encyclopedia \"Suda\", described Homer to be descended from one of the Muses, Apollo, Orpheus, Thamyris, Telemachus, or Musaeus. Another tradition from the time of the Roman emperor Hadrian says Epicaste (daughter of Nestor) and Telemachus (son of Odysseus) were the parents of Homer. The poet Pindar is credited with saying that Homer originated from Chios and Smyrna, both of which are also mentioned by other fifth-century writers. Other biographical traditions imagined Homer to have been a rhapsode or singer who performed at religious festivals, was a wandering bard or a composer of other works (the \"Homerica\"), or that he failed to solve a riddle set by fishermen. According to the Greek historian Ephorus, Homer studied poetry with the bard Phemius and was born in Cyme. Philochorus thought Homer's birthplace to be in Argos; later writers believed Pylos and Athens to have been Homer's birthplace. No account of Homer's origin became mainstream, but most accounts of his death place its location on Ios. \nWorks attributed to Homer.\nToday, only the \"Iliad\" and \"the\" \"Odyssey\" are associated with the name \"Homer\". In antiquity, a large number of other works were sometimes attributed to him, including the \"Homeric Hymns\", the \"Contest of Homer and Hesiod\", several epigrams, the \"Little Iliad\", the \"Nostoi\", the \"Thebaid\", the \"Cypria\", the \"Epigoni\", the comic mini-epic \"Batrachomyomachia\" (\"The Frog\u2013Mouse War\"), the \"Margites\", the \"Capture of Oechalia\", and the \"Phocais\". These claims are not considered authentic today and were not universally accepted in the ancient world. As with the multitude of legends surrounding Homer's life, they indicate little more than the centrality of Homer to ancient Greek culture.\nHistory of Homeric scholarship.\nAncient.\nThe study of Homer is one of the oldest topics in scholarship, dating back to antiquity. Nonetheless, the aims of Homeric studies have changed throughout the millennia. The earliest preserved comments on Homer concern his treatment of the gods, which hostile critics such as the poet Xenophanes of Colophon denounced as immoral. The allegorist Theagenes of Rhegium is said to have defended Homer by arguing that the Homeric poems are allegories. The \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" were widely used as school texts in ancient Greek and Hellenistic cultures. They were the first literary works taught to all students. The \"Iliad\", particularly its first few books, was far more intently studied than the \"Odyssey\" during the Hellenistic and Roman periods.\nAs a result of the poems' prominence in classical Greek education, extensive commentaries on them developed to explain parts that were culturally or linguistically difficult. During the Hellenistic and Roman periods, many interpreters, especially the Stoics, who believed that Homeric poems conveyed Stoic doctrines, regarded them as allegories, containing hidden wisdom. Perhaps partially because of the Homeric poems' extensive use in education, many authors believed that Homer's original purpose had been to educate. Homer's wisdom became so widely praised that he began to acquire the image of almost a prototypical philosopher. Byzantine scholars such as Eustathius of Thessalonica and John Tzetzes produced commentaries, extensions and scholia to Homer, especially in the twelfth century. Eustathius's commentary on the \"Iliad\" alone is massive, sprawling over nearly 4,000 oversized pages in a 21st-century printed version and his commentary on the \"Odyssey\" an additional nearly 2,000.\nModern.\nIn 1488, the Greek scholar Demetrios Chalkokondyles published in Florence the \"editio princeps\" of the Homeric poems. The earliest modern Homeric scholars started with the same basic approaches towards the Homeric poems as scholars in antiquity. The allegorical interpretation of the Homeric poems that had been so prevalent in antiquity returned to become the prevailing view of the Renaissance. Renaissance humanists praised Homer as the archetypically wise poet, whose writings contain hidden wisdom, disguised through allegory. In Western Europe during the Renaissance, Virgil was more widely read than Homer and Homer was often seen through a Virgilian lens.\nIn 1664, contradicting the widespread praise of Homer as the epitome of wisdom, Fran\u00e7ois H\u00e9delin, abb\u00e9 d'Aubignac wrote a scathing attack on the Homeric poems, declaring that they were incoherent, immoral, tasteless, and without style, that Homer never existed, and that the poems were hastily cobbled together by incompetent editors from unrelated oral songs. Fifty years later, the English scholar Richard Bentley concluded that Homer did exist but that he was an obscure, prehistoric oral poet whose compositions bear little relation to the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" as they have been passed down. According to Bentley, Homer \"wrote a Sequel of Songs and Rhapsodies, to be sung by himself for small Earnings and good Cheer at Festivals and other Days of Merriment; the \"Ilias\" he wrote for men, and the \"Odysseis\" for the other Sex. These loose songs were not collected together in the form of an epic Poem till Pisistratus' time, about 500 Years after\".\nGiambattista Vico analysed Homer and other ancient writings in his philological treatise The New Science (1744) and concluded that Homer was not one man, but many, or an amalgam of other writers. Vico writes \"he was a purely ideal poet who never existed as a particular man\" and that \"Homer was an idea or a heroic character of Grecian men insofar as they told their histories in song\".\nFriedrich August Wolf's \"Prolegomena ad Homerum\", published in 1795, argued that much of the material later incorporated into the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" was originally composed in the tenth century BC in the form of short, separate oral songs, which passed through oral tradition for roughly four hundred years before being assembled into prototypical versions of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" in the sixth century BC by literate authors. After being written down, Wolf maintained that the two poems were extensively edited, modernized, and eventually shaped into their present state as artistic unities. Wolf and the \"Analyst\" school, which led the field in the nineteenth century, sought to recover the original, authentic poems that were thought to be concealed by later excrescences.\nWithin the Analyst school were two camps: proponents of the \"lay theory\", which held that the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" were put together from a large number of short, independent songs, and proponents of the \"nucleus theory\", which held that Homer had originally composed shorter versions of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\", which later poets expanded and revised. A small group of scholars opposed to the Analysts, dubbed \"Unitarians\", saw the later additions as superior, the work of a single inspired poet. By around 1830, the central preoccupations of Homeric scholars, dealing with whether or not \"Homer\" actually existed, when and how the Homeric poems originated, how they were transmitted, when and how they were finally written down, and their overall unity, had been dubbed \"the Homeric Question\".\nFollowing World War I, the Analyst school began to fall out of favor among Homeric scholars. It did not die out entirely, but it came to be increasingly seen as a discredited dead end. Starting in around 1928, Milman Parry and Albert Lord, after they studied folk bards in the Balkans, developed the \"Oral-Formulaic Theory\" that the Homeric poems were originally composed through improvised oral performances, which relied on traditional epithets and poetic formulas. This theory found very wide scholarly acceptance and explained many previously puzzling features of the Homeric poems, including their unusually archaic language, their extensive use of stock epithets, and their other \"repetitive\" features. Many scholars concluded that the \"Homeric Question\" had finally been answered.\nMeanwhile, the \"Neoanalysts\" sought to bridge the gap between the \"Analysts\" and \"Unitarians\". The Neoanalysts sought to trace the relationships between the Homeric poems and other epic poems, which have now been lost, but of which modern scholars do possess some patchy knowledge. Neoanalysts hold that knowledge of earlier versions of the epics can be derived from anomalies of structure and detail in the surviving versions of the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\". These anomalies point to earlier versions of the \"Iliad\" in which Ajax played a more prominent role, in which the Achaean embassy to Achilles comprised different characters, and in which Patroclus was mistaken for Achilles by the Trojans. They point to earlier versions of the \"Odyssey\" in which Telemachus went in search of news of his father not to Menelaus in Sparta but to Idomeneus in Crete, in which Telemachus met up with his father in Crete and conspired with him to return to Ithaca disguised as the soothsayer Theoclymenus, and in which Penelope recognized Odysseus much earlier in the narrative and conspired with him in the destruction of the suitors. Neoanalysts have traditionally reconstructed specific lost poems as sources for the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\", but more recent scholarship has sought to reframe such neoanalytical arguments within the oral context of early Greek epic, exploring how the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" draw on established mythological traditions in general (such as the story of Achilles' death).\nContemporary.\nAlthough most contemporary scholars disagree on other questions about the genesis of the poems, they agree that the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" were not produced by the same author, based on \"the many differences of narrative manner, theology, ethics, vocabulary, and geographical perspective, and by the imitative character of certain passages of the \"Odyssey\" about the \"Iliad\"\". Nearly all scholars agree that the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" are unified poems, in that each poem shows a clear overall design and that they are not merely strung together from unrelated songs. It is also generally agreed that each poem was composed mostly by a single author, who probably relied heavily on older oral traditions. Nearly all scholars agree that the \"Doloneia\" in Book X of the \"Iliad\" is not part of the original poem, but rather a later insertion by a different poet.\nSome ancient scholars believed Homer to have been an eyewitness to the Trojan War; others thought he had lived up to 500 years afterwards. Contemporary scholars continue to debate the date of the poems. A long history of oral transmission lies behind the composition of the poems, complicating the search for a precise date. At one extreme, Richard Janko has proposed a date for both poems to the eighth century BC based on linguistic analysis and statistics. Barry B. Powell dates the composition of the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\" to sometime between 800 and 750 BC, based on the statement from Herodotus, who lived in the late fifth century BC, that Homer lived four hundred years before his own time \"and not more\" () and on the fact that the poems do not mention hoplite battle tactics, inhumation, or literacy.\nMartin Litchfield West has argued that the \"Iliad\" echoes the poetry of Hesiod and that it must have been composed around 660\u2013650 BC at the earliest, with the \"Odyssey\" up to a generation later. He also interprets passages in the \"Iliad\" as showing knowledge of historical events that occurred in the ancient Near East during the middle of the seventh century BC, including the destruction of Babylon by Sennacherib in 689 BC and the Sack of Thebes by Ashurbanipal in 664/663 BC. At the other extreme, a few American scholars such as Gregory Nagy see \"Homer\" as a continually evolving tradition, which grew much more stable as the tradition progressed, but which did not fully cease to continue changing and evolving until as late as the middle of the second century BC.\n\"'Homer\" is a name of unknown etymological origin, around which many theories were erected in antiquity. One such linkage was to the Greek ( 'hostage' or 'surety'). The explanations suggested by modern scholars tend to mirror their position on the overall Homeric Question. Nagy interprets it as \"he who fits (the song) together\". West has advanced both possible Greek and Phoenician etymologies.\nHistoricity of the Homeric epics and Homeric society.\nScholars continue to debate questions such as whether the Trojan War took place \u2013 and if so when and where \u2013 and to what extent the society depicted by Homer is based on his own or one which was, even at the time of the poems' composition, known only as legends. The Homeric epics are largely set in the east and center of the Mediterranean, with some scattered references to Egypt, Ethiopia and other distant lands, in a warlike society that resembles that of the Greek world slightly before the hypothesized date of the poems' composition.\nIn ancient Greek chronology, the sack of Troy was dated to 1184 BC. By the nineteenth century, there was widespread scholarly skepticism that the Trojan War had ever happened and that Troy had even existed, but in 1873 Heinrich Schliemann announced to the world that he had discovered the ruins of Homer's Troy at Hisarlik in modern Turkey. Some contemporary scholars think the destruction of Troy VIIa c. 1220 BC was the origin of the myth of the Trojan War, others that the poem was inspired by multiple similar sieges that took place over the centuries.\nMost scholars now agree that the Homeric poems depict customs and elements of the material world that are derived from different periods of Greek history. For instance, the heroes in the poems use bronze weapons, characteristic of the Bronze Age in which the poems are set, rather than the later Iron Age during which they were composed; yet the same heroes are cremated (an Iron Age practice) rather than buried (as they were in the Bronze Age). In some parts of the Homeric poems, heroes are described as carrying large shields like those used by warriors during the Mycenaean period, but, in other places, they are instead described carrying the smaller shields that were commonly used when the poems were written in the early Iron Age.\nIn the \"Iliad\" 10.260\u2013265, Odysseus is described as wearing a helmet made of boar's tusks. Such helmets were not worn in Homer's time but were commonly worn by aristocratic warriors between 1600 and 1150 BC.\nThe decipherment of Linear B in the 1950s by Michael Ventris and continued archaeological investigation has increased modern scholars' understanding of the Bronze Age Aegean civilisation, which in many ways resembles the ancient Near East more than the society described by Homer. Some aspects of the Homeric world are simply made up; for instance, the \"Iliad\" 22.145\u201356 describes two springs run near the city of Troy, one that runs steaming hot and the other that runs icy cold. It is here that Hector takes his final stand against Achilles. Archaeologists, however, have uncovered no evidence that springs of this description ever actually existed.\nStyle and language.\nThe Homeric epics are written in an artificial literary language or \"Kunstsprache\" only used in epic hexameter poetry. Homeric Greek shows features of multiple regional Greek dialects and periods but is fundamentally based on Ionic Greek, in keeping with the tradition that Homer was from Ionia. Linguistic analysis suggests that the \"Iliad\" was composed slightly before the \"Odyssey\" and that Homeric formulae preserve features older than other parts of the poems.\nThe poems were composed in unrhymed dactylic hexameters; the ancient Greek metre was quantity-based rather than stress-based. Homer frequently uses set phrases such as epithets (\"crafty Odysseus\", \"rosy-fingered Dawn\", \"owl-eyed Athena\", etc.), Homeric formulae (\"and then answered [him/her], Agamemnon, king of men\", \"when the early-born rose-fingered Dawn came to light\", \"thus he/she spoke\"), simile, type scenes, ring composition and repetition. These habits aid the extemporizing bard and are characteristic of oral poetry. For instance, the main words of a Homeric sentence are generally placed towards the beginning, whereas literate poets like Virgil or Milton use longer and more complicated syntactical structures. Homer then expands on these ideas in subsequent clauses; this technique is called parataxis.\nThe so-called \"type scenes\" (), were named by Walter Arend in 1933. He noted that Homer often, when describing frequently recurring activities such as eating, praying, fighting and dressing, used blocks of set phrases in sequence that were then elaborated by the poet. The \"Analyst\" school had considered these repetitions as un-Homeric, whereas Arend interpreted them philosophically. Parry and Lord noted that these conventions are found in many other cultures.\n\"Ring composition\" or chiastic structure (when a phrase or idea is repeated at both the beginning and end of a story, or a series of such ideas first appears in the order A, B, C ... before being reversed as ... C, B, A) has been observed in the Homeric epics. Opinion differs as to whether these occurrences are a conscious artistic device, a mnemonic aid or a spontaneous feature of human storytelling.\nBoth of the Homeric poems begin with an invocation to the Muse. In the \"Iliad\", the poet beseeches her to sing of \"the anger of Achilles\", and in the \"Odyssey\", he asks her to tell of \"the man of many ways\". A similar opening was later employed by Virgil in his \"Aeneid\".\nTextual transmission.\nThe orally transmitted Homeric poems were put into written form at some point between the eighth and sixth centuries BC. Some scholars believe that they were dictated to a scribe by the poet and that the current versions of the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" were in origin orally dictated texts. Albert Lord noted that the Balkan bards that he was studying revised and expanded their songs in their process of dictating. Some scholars hypothesise that a similar process of revision and expansion occurred when the Homeric poems were first written down.\nOther scholars hold that, after the poems were created in the eighth century, they continued to be orally transmitted with considerable revision until they were written down in the sixth century. After textualisation, the poems were each divided into 24 rhapsodes, today referred to as books, and labelled by the letters of the Greek alphabet. Most scholars attribute the book divisions to the Hellenistic scholars of Alexandria, in Egypt. Some trace the divisions back further to the Classical period. Very few credit Homer himself with the divisions.\nIn antiquity, it was widely held that the Homeric poems were collected and organised in Athens in the late sixth century BC by Pisistratus (died 528/527 BC), in what subsequent scholars have dubbed the \"Peisistratean recension\". The idea that the Homeric poems were originally transmitted orally and first written down during the reign of Pisistratus is referenced by the first-century BC Roman orator Cicero and is also referenced in several other surviving sources, including two ancient \"Lives of Homer\". From around 150 BC, the texts of the Homeric poems found in papyrus fragments exhibit much less variation, and the text seems to have become relatively stable. After the establishment of the Library of Alexandria, Homeric scholars such as Zenodotus of Ephesus, Aristophanes of Byzantium and in particular Aristarchus of Samothrace helped establish a canonical text.\nThe first printed edition of Homer was produced in 1488 in Milan, Italy by Demetrios Chalkokondyles. Today scholars use medieval manuscripts, papyri and other sources; some argue for a \"multi-text\" view, rather than seeking a single definitive text. The nineteenth-century edition of Arthur Ludwich mainly follows Aristarchus's work, whereas van Thiel's (1991, 1996) follows the medieval vulgate. Others, such as Martin West (1998\u20132000) or T. W. Allen, fall somewhere between these two extremes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnglish translations.\nThis is a partial list of translations into English of Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\":"}
{"id": "13635", "revid": "50825532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13635", "title": "Hugo Gernsback", "text": "American inventor, writer, editor and publisher (1884\u20131967)\nHugo Gernsback (; born Hugo Gernsbacher, August 16, 1884 \u2013 August 19, 1967) was a Luxembourgish American editor and magazine publisher whose publications included the first science fiction magazine, \"Amazing Stories\". His contributions to the genre as publisher were so significant that, along with the novelists Jules Verne and H. G. Wells, he is sometimes called \"The Father of Science Fiction\". In his honor, annual awards presented at the World Science Fiction Convention are named the \"Hugos\".\nGernsback emigrated to the U.S. in 1904 and later became a citizen. He was also a significant figure in the electronics and radio industries, even starting a radio station, WRNY, and the world's first magazine about electronics and radio, \"Modern Electrics\". Gernsback died in New York City in 1967.\nPersonal life.\nGernsback was born in 1884 in Luxembourg City, to Berta (D\u00fcrlacher), a housewife, and Moritz Gernsbacher, a winemaker. His family was Jewish. Gernsback emigrated to the United States in 1904 and later became a naturalized citizen. He married three times: to Rose Harvey in 1906, Dorothy Kantrowitz in 1921, and Mary Hancher (1914\u20131985) in 1951. In 1925, he founded radio station WRNY, which was broadcast from the 18th floor of the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City. In 1928, WRNY aired some of the first television broadcasts. During the show, audio stopped and each artist waved or bowed onscreen. When audio resumed, they performed. Gernsback is also considered a pioneer in amateur radio.\nBefore helping to create science fiction, Gernsback was an entrepreneur in the electronics industry, importing radio parts from Europe to the United States and helping to popularize amateur \"wireless\". In April 1908 he founded \"Modern Electrics\", the world's first magazine about both electronics and radio, called \"wireless\" at the time. While the cover of the magazine itself states it was a catalog, most historians note that it contained articles, features, and plotlines, qualifying it as a magazine.\nUnder its auspices, in January 1909, he founded the Wireless Association of America, which had 10,000 members within a year. In 1912, Gernsback said that he estimated 400,000 people in the U.S. were involved in amateur radio. In 1913, he founded a similar magazine, \"The Electrical Experimenter\", which became \"Science and Invention\" in 1920. It was in these magazines that he began including scientific fiction stories alongside science journalism, including his novel \"Ralph 124C 41+\", which he ran for 12 months from April 1911 in \"Modern Electrics\".\nHugo Gernsback started the \"Radio News\" magazine for amateur radio enthusiasts in 1919.\nHe died at Roosevelt Hospital (Mount Sinai West as of 2020) in New York City on August 19, 1967, at age 83.\nScience fiction.\nGernsback provided a forum for the modern genre of science fiction in 1926 by founding the first magazine dedicated to it, \"Amazing Stories\". The inaugural April issue comprised a one-page editorial and reissues of six stories, three less than ten years old and three by Poe, Verne, and Wells. He said he became interested in the concept after reading a translation of the work of Percival Lowell as a child. His idea of a perfect science fiction story was \"75 percent literature interwoven with 25 percent science\". As an editor, he valued the goal of scientific accuracy in science fiction stories: \"Not only did Gernsback establish a panel of experts\u2014\u2014all reputable professionals from universities, museums, and institutes\u2014to pass judgment on the accuracy of the science; he also encouraged his writers to elaborate on the scientific details they employed in their stories, comment on the impossibilities in each other's stories, and even offered his readers prize money for identifying scientific errors.\" He also played an important role in starting science fiction fandom, by organizing the Science Fiction League and by publishing the addresses of people who wrote letters to his magazines. Fans began to organize, and became aware of themselves as a movement, a social force; this was probably decisive for the subsequent history of the genre.\nGernsback created his preferred term for the emerging genre, \"scientifiction\", in 1916. He is sometimes also credited with coining \"science fiction\" in 1929 in the preface of the first \"Science Wonder Stories\", although instances of \"science-fiction\" (mostly, but not always, hyphenated) have been found as far back as 1851, and the preface itself makes no mention of it being a new term.\nIn 1929, he lost ownership of his first magazines after a bankruptcy lawsuit. There is some debate about whether this process was genuine, manipulation by publisher Bernarr Macfadden, or a Gernsback scheme to begin another company. After losing control of \"Amazing Stories\", Gernsback founded two new science fiction magazines, \"Science Wonder Stories\" and \"Air Wonder Stories\". A year later, due to Depression-era financial troubles, the two were merged into \"Wonder Stories\", which Gernsback continued to publish until 1936, when it was sold to Thrilling Publications and renamed \"Thrilling Wonder Stories\". Gernsback returned in 1952\u201353 with \"Science-Fiction Plus\".\nGernsback was noted for sharp, sometimes shady, business practices, and for paying his writers extremely low fees or not paying them at all. H. P. Lovecraft and Clark Ashton Smith referred to him as \"Hugo the Rat\".\nBarry Malzberg has said:\nGernsback's venality and corruption, his sleaziness and his utter disregard for the financial rights of authors, have been well documented and discussed in critical and fan literature. That the founder of genre science fiction who gave his name to the field's most prestigious award and who was the Guest of Honor at the 1952 Worldcon was pretty much a crook (and a contemptuous crook who stiffed his writers but paid himself $100K a year as President of Gernsback Publications) has been clearly established. \nJack Williamson, who had to hire an attorney associated with the American Fiction Guild to force Gernsback to pay him, summed up his importance for the genre:\nAt any rate, his main influence in the field was simply to start Amazing and Wonder Stories and get SF out to the public newsstands\u2014and to name the genre he had earlier called \"scientifiction.\"\nFiction.\nFrederik Pohl said in 1965 that Gernsback's \"Amazing Stories\" published \"the kind of stories Gernsback himself used to write: a sort of animated catalogue of gadgets\". Gernsback's fiction includes the novel \"Ralph 124C 41+\"; the title is a pun on the phrase \"one to foresee for many\" (\"one plus\"). Even though \"Ralph 124C 41+\" has been described as pioneering many ideas and themes found in later SF work, it has often been neglected due to what most critics deem poor artistic quality. Author Brian Aldiss called the story a \"tawdry illiterate tale\" and a \"sorry concoction\", while author and editor Lester del Rey called it \"simply dreadful.\" While most other modern critics have little positive to say about the story's writing, \"Ralph 124C 41+\" is considered by science fiction critic Gary Westfahl as \"essential text for all studies of science fiction.\"\nGernsback's second novel, \"Baron M\u00fcnchausen's Scientific Adventures\", was serialized in \"Amazing Stories\" in 1928.\nGernsback's third (and final) novel, \"Ultimate World\", written c.\u20091958, was not published until 1971. Lester del Rey described it simply as \"a bad book\", marked more by routine social commentary than by scientific insight or extrapolation. James Blish, in a caustic review, described the novel as \"incompetent, pedantic, graceless, incredible, unpopulated and boring\" and concluded that its publication \"accomplishes nothing but the placing of a blot on the memory of a justly honored man.\"\nGernsback combined his fiction and science into \"Everyday Science and Mechanics\" magazine, serving as the editor in the 1930s.\nLegacy.\nIn 1954, Gernsback was awarded an Officer of Luxembourg's Order of the Oak Crown, an honor equivalent to being knighted.\nThe Hugo Awards or \"Hugos\" are the annual achievement awards presented at the World Science Fiction Convention, selected in a process that ends with vote by current Convention members. They originated and acquired the \"Hugo\" nickname during the 1950s and were formally defined as a convention responsibility under the name \"Science Fiction Achievement Awards\" early in the 1960s. The nickname soon became almost universal and its use legally protected; \"Hugo Award(s)\" replaced the longer name in all official uses after the 1991 cycle.\nIn 1960 Gernsback received a special Hugo Award as \"The Father of Magazine Science Fiction\".\nThe Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 1996, its inaugural class of two deceased and two living persons.\nScience fiction author Brian W. Aldiss held a contrary view about Gernsback's contributions: \"It is easy to argue that Hugo Gernsback ... was one of the worst disasters to hit the science fiction field ... Gernsback himself was utterly without any literary understanding. He created dangerous precedents which many later editors in the field followed.\"\nGernsback made significant contributions to the growth of early broadcasting, mostly through his efforts as a publisher. He originated the industry of specialized publications for radio with \"Modern Electrics\" and \"Electrical Experimenter\". Later on, and more influentially, he published \"Radio News\", which would have the largest readership among radio magazines in radio broadcasting's formative years. He edited \"Radio News\" until 1929. For a short time he hired John F. Rider to be editor. Rider was a former engineer working with the US Army Signal Corps and a radio engineer for Alfred H. Grebe, a radio manufacturer. However, Rider would soon leave Gernsback and form his own publishing company, John F. Rider Publisher, New York around 1931.\nGernsback made use of the magazine to promote his interests, including having his radio station's call letters on the cover starting in 1925. WRNY and \"Radio News\" were used to cross-promote each other, with programs on his station often used to discuss articles he had published, and articles in the magazine often covering program activities at WRNY. He also advocated for future directions in innovation and regulation of radio. The magazine contained many drawings and diagrams, encouraging radio listeners of the 1920s to experiment themselves to improve the technology. WRNY was often used as a laboratory to see if various radio inventions were worthwhile.\nArticles that were published about television were also tested in this manner when the radio station was used to send pictures to experimental television receivers in August 1928. The technology, however, required sending sight and sound one after the other rather than sending both at the same time, as WRNY only broadcast on one channel. Such experiments were expensive, eventually contributing to Gernsback's Experimenter Publishing Company going into bankruptcy in 1929. WRNY was sold to Aviation Radio, who maintained the channel part-time to broadcast aviation weather reports and related feature programs. Along with other stations sharing the same frequency, it was acquired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and consolidated into that company's WHN in 1934.\nIn 2020, Eric Schockmel directed the documentary feature film \"Tune Into the Future\", which explores the life of Hugo Gernsback.\nPatents and inventions.\nGernsback held 80 patents by the time of his death in New York City on August 19, 1967.\nHis first patent was a new method for manufacturing dry cell batteries, a patent applied for on June 28, 1906, and granted February 5, 1907.\nAmong his inventions are a combined electric hair brush and comb (https://), 1912; an ear cushion (https://) in 1927; and a hydraulic fishery (https://), in 1955.\nGernsback published a work entitled \"Music for the Deaf\" in \"The Electrical Experimenter\" describing the Physiophone, a device which converted audio into electrical impulses that could be detected by humans. He advocated this device as a method for allowing the deaf to experience music.\nOther patents held by Gernsback are related to: Incandescent Lamp, Electrorheostat Regulator, Electro Adjustable Condenser, Detectorium, Relay, Potentiometer, Electrolytic Interrupter, Rotary Variable Condenser, Luminous Electric Mirror, Transmitter, Postal Card, Telephone Headband, Electromagnetic Sounding Device, Submersible Amusement Device, The Isolator, Apparatus for Landing Flying Machines, Tuned Telephone Receiver, Electric Valve, Detector, Acoustic Apparatus, Electrically Operated Fountain, Cord Terminal, Coil Mounting, Radio Horn, Variable Condenser, Switch, Telephone Receiver, Crystal Detector, Process for Mounting Inductances, Depilator, Code Learner's Instrument.\nBibliography.\nNovels:\nShort stories:\nMagazines edited or published:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13636", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13636", "title": "History of computing hardware", "text": "Developments from devices for simple calculations to complex analog and digital computers\nThe history of computing hardware spans the developments from early devices used for simple calculations to today's complex computers, encompassing advancements in both analog and digital technology.\nThe first aids to computation were purely mechanical devices which required the operator to set up the initial values of an elementary arithmetic operation, then manipulate the device to obtain the result. In later stages, computing devices began representing numbers in continuous forms, such as by distance along a scale, rotation of a shaft, or a specific voltage level. Numbers could also be represented in the form of digits, automatically manipulated by a mechanism. Although this approach generally required more complex mechanisms, it greatly increased the precision of results. The development of transistor technology, followed by the invention of integrated circuit chips, led to revolutionary breakthroughs. \nTransistor-based computers and, later, integrated circuit-based computers enabled digital systems to gradually replace analog systems, increasing both efficiency and processing power. Metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) large-scale integration (LSI) then enabled semiconductor memory and the microprocessor, leading to another key breakthrough, the miniaturized personal computer (PC), in the 1970s. The cost of computers gradually became so low that personal computers by the 1990s, and then mobile computers (smartphones and tablets) in the 2000s, became ubiquitous.\nEarly devices.\nAncient and medieval.\nDevices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years, mostly using one-to-one correspondence with fingers. The earliest counting device was probably a form of tally stick. The Lebombo bone from the mountains between Eswatini and South Africa may be the oldest known mathematical artifact. It dates from 35,000 BCE and consists of 29 distinct notches that were deliberately cut into a baboon's fibula. Later record keeping aids throughout the Fertile Crescent included calculi (clay spheres, cones, etc.) which represented counts of items, probably livestock or grains, sealed in hollow unbaked clay containers. The use of counting rods is one example. The abacus was early used for arithmetic tasks. What we now call the Roman abacus was used in Babylonia as early as c.\u20092700\u20132300 BC. Since then, many other forms of reckoning boards or tables have been invented. In a medieval European counting house, a checkered cloth would be placed on a table, and markers moved around on it according to certain rules, as an aid to calculating sums of money.\nSeveral analog computers were constructed in ancient and medieval times to perform astronomical calculations. These included the astrolabe and Antikythera mechanism from the Hellenistic world (c. 150\u2013100 BC). In Roman Egypt, Hero of Alexandria (c. 10\u201370 AD) made mechanical devices including automata and a programmable cart. The steam-powered automatic flute described by the \"Book of Ingenious Devices\" (850) by the Persian-Baghdadi Ban\u016b M\u016bs\u0101 brothers may have been the first programmable device.\nOther early mechanical devices used to perform one or another type of calculations include the planisphere and other mechanical computing devices invented by Al-Biruni (c. AD 1000); the equatorium and universal latitude-independent astrolabe by Al-Zarqali (c. AD 1015); the astronomical analog computers of other medieval Muslim astronomers and engineers; and the astronomical clock tower of Su Song (1094) during the Song dynasty. The castle clock, a hydropowered mechanical astronomical clock invented by Ismail al-Jazari in 1206, was the first programmable analog computer. Ramon Llull invented the Lullian Circle: a notional machine for calculating answers to philosophical questions (in this case, to do with Christianity) via logical combinatorics. This idea was taken up by Leibniz centuries later, and is thus one of the founding elements in computing and information science.\nRenaissance calculating tools.\nScottish mathematician and physicist John Napier discovered that the multiplication and division of numbers could be performed by the addition and subtraction, respectively, of the logarithms of those numbers. While producing the first logarithmic tables, Napier needed to perform many tedious multiplications. It was at this point that he designed his 'Napier's bones', an abacus-like device that greatly simplified calculations that involved multiplication and division.\nSince real numbers can be represented as distances or intervals on a line, the slide rule was invented in the 1620s, shortly after Napier's work, to allow multiplication and division operations to be carried out significantly faster than was previously possible. Edmund Gunter built a calculating device with a single logarithmic scale at the University of Oxford. His device greatly simplified arithmetic calculations, including multiplication and division. William Oughtred greatly improved this in 1630 with his circular slide rule. He followed this up with the modern slide rule in 1632, essentially a combination of two Gunter rules, held together with the hands. Slide rules were used by generations of engineers and other mathematically involved professional workers, until the invention of the pocket calculator.\nMechanical calculators.\nIn 1609, Guidobaldo del Monte made a mechanical multiplier to calculate fractions of a degree. Based on a system of four gears, the rotation of an index on one quadrant corresponds to 60 rotations of another index on an opposite quadrant. Thanks to this machine, errors in the calculation of first, second, third and quarter degrees can be avoided. Guidobaldo is the first to document the use of gears for mechanical calculation.\nWilhelm Schickard, a German polymath, designed a calculating machine in 1623 which combined a mechanized form of Napier's rods with the world's first mechanical adding machine built into the base. Because it made use of a single-tooth gear there were circumstances in which its carry mechanism would jam. A fire destroyed at least one of the machines in 1624 and it is believed Schickard was too disheartened to build another.\nIn 1642, while still a teenager, Blaise Pascal started some pioneering work on calculating machines and after three years of effort and 50 prototypes he invented a mechanical calculator. He built twenty of these machines (called Pascal's calculator or Pascaline) in the following ten years. Nine Pascalines have survived, most of which are on display in European museums. A continuing debate exists over whether Schickard or Pascal should be regarded as the \"inventor of the mechanical calculator\" and the range of issues to be considered is discussed elsewhere.\nGottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz invented the stepped reckoner and his famous stepped drum mechanism around 1672. He attempted to create a machine that could be used not only for addition and subtraction but would use a moveable carriage to enable multiplication and division. Leibniz once said \"It is unworthy of excellent men to lose hours like slaves in the labour of calculation which could safely be relegated to anyone else if machines were used.\" However, Leibniz did not incorporate a fully successful carry mechanism. Leibniz also described the binary numeral system, a central ingredient of all modern computers. However, up to the 1940s, many subsequent designs (including Charles Babbage's machines of 1822 and even ENIAC of 1945) were based on the decimal system.\nAround 1820, Charles Xavier Thomas de Colmar created what would over the rest of the century become the first successful, mass-produced mechanical calculator, the Thomas Arithmometer. It could be used to add and subtract, and with a moveable carriage the operator could also multiply, and divide by a process of long multiplication and long division. It utilised a stepped drum similar in conception to that invented by Leibniz. Mechanical calculators remained in use until the 1970s.\nPunched-card data processing.\nIn 1804, French weaver Joseph Marie Jacquard developed a loom in which the pattern being woven was controlled by a paper tape constructed from punched cards. The paper tape could be changed without changing the mechanical design of the loom. This was a landmark achievement in programmability. His machine was an improvement over similar weaving looms. Punched cards were preceded by punch bands, as in the machine proposed by Basile Bouchon. These bands would inspire information recording for automatic pianos and more recently numerical control machine tools.\nIn the late 1880s, the American Herman Hollerith invented data storage on punched cards that could then be read by a machine. To process these punched cards, he invented the tabulator and the keypunch machine. His machines used electromechanical relays and counters. Hollerith's method was used in the 1890 United States census. That census was processed two years faster than the prior census had been. Hollerith's company eventually became the core of IBM.\nBy 1920, electromechanical tabulating machines could add, subtract, and print accumulated totals. Machine functions were directed by inserting dozens of wire jumpers into removable control panels. When the United States instituted Social Security in 1935, IBM punched-card systems were used to process records of 26 million workers. Punched cards became ubiquitous in industry and government for accounting and administration.\nLeslie Comrie's articles on punched-card methods and W. J. Eckert's publication of \"Punched Card Methods in Scientific Computation\" in 1940, described punched-card techniques sufficiently advanced to solve some differential equations or perform multiplication and division using floating-point representations, all on punched cards and unit record machines. Such machines were used during World War II for cryptographic statistical processing, as well as a vast number of administrative uses. The Astronomical Computing Bureau of Columbia University performed astronomical calculations representing the state of the art in computing.\nCalculators.\nBy the 20th century, earlier mechanical calculators, cash registers, accounting machines, and so on were redesigned to use electric motors, with gear position as the representation for the state of a variable. The word \"computer\" was a job title assigned to primarily women who used these calculators to perform mathematical calculations. By the 1920s, British scientist Lewis Fry Richardson's interest in weather prediction led him to propose human computers and numerical analysis to model the weather; to this day, the most powerful computers on Earth are needed to adequately model its weather using the Navier\u2013Stokes equations.\nCompanies like Friden, Marchant Calculator and Monroe made desktop mechanical calculators from the 1930s that could add, subtract, multiply and divide. In 1948, the Curta was introduced by Austrian inventor Curt Herzstark. It was a small, hand-cranked mechanical calculator and as such, a descendant of Gottfried Leibniz's Stepped Reckoner and Thomas' Arithmometer.\nThe world's first \"all-electronic desktop\" calculator was the British Bell Punch ANITA, released in 1961. It used vacuum tubes, cold-cathode tubes and Dekatrons in its circuits, with 12 cold-cathode \"Nixie\" tubes for its display. The ANITA sold well since it was the only electronic desktop calculator available, and was silent and quick. The tube technology was superseded in June 1963 by the U.S. manufactured Friden EC-130, which had an all-transistor design, a stack of four 13-digit numbers displayed on a CRT, and introduced reverse Polish notation (RPN).\nFirst proposed general-purpose computing device.\nThe Industrial Revolution (late 18th to early 19th century) had a significant impact on the evolution of computing hardware, as the era's rapid advancements in machinery and manufacturing laid the groundwork for mechanized and automated computing. Industrial needs for precise, large-scale calculations\u2014especially in fields such as navigation, engineering, and finance\u2014prompted innovations in both design and function, setting the stage for devices like Charles Babbage's difference engine (1822). This mechanical device was intended to automate the calculation of polynomial functions and represented one of the earliest applications of computational logic.\nBabbage, often regarded as the \"father of the computer,\" envisioned a fully mechanical system of gears and wheels, powered by steam, capable of handling complex calculations that previously required intensive manual labor. His difference engine, designed to aid navigational calculations, ultimately led him to conceive the analytical engine in 1833. This concept, far more advanced than his difference engine, included an arithmetic logic unit, control flow through conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory. Babbage's plans made his analytical engine the first general-purpose design that could be described as Turing-complete in modern terms.\nThe analytical engine was programmed using punched cards, a method adapted from the Jacquard loom invented by Joseph Marie Jacquard in 1804, which controlled textile patterns with a sequence of punched cards. These cards became foundational in later computing systems as well. Babbage's machine would have featured multiple output devices, including a printer, a curve plotter, and even a bell, demonstrating his ambition for versatile computational applications beyond simple arithmetic.\nAda Lovelace expanded on Babbage's vision by conceptualizing algorithms that could be executed by his machine. Her notes on the analytical engine, written in the 1840s, are now recognized as the earliest examples of computer programming. Lovelace saw potential in computers to go beyond numerical calculations, predicting that they might one day generate complex musical compositions or perform tasks like language processing.\nThough Babbage's designs were never fully realized due to technical and financial challenges, they influenced a range of subsequent developments in computing hardware. Notably, in the 1890s, Herman Hollerith adapted the idea of punched cards for automated data processing, which was utilized in the U.S. Census and sped up data tabulation significantly, bridging industrial machinery with data processing.\nThe Industrial Revolution's advancements in mechanical systems demonstrated the potential for machines to conduct complex calculations, influencing engineers like Leonardo Torres Quevedo and Vannevar Bush in the early 20th century. Torres Quevedo designed an electromechanical machine with floating-point arithmetic, while Bush's later work explored electronic digital computing. By the mid-20th century, these innovations paved the way for the first fully electronic computers.\nAnalog computers.\nIn the first half of the 20th century, analog computers were considered by many to be the future of computing. These devices used the continuously changeable aspects of physical phenomena such as electrical, mechanical, or hydraulic quantities to model the problem being solved, in contrast to digital computers that represented varying quantities symbolically, as their numerical values change. As an analog computer does not use discrete values, but rather continuous values, processes cannot be reliably repeated with exact equivalence, as they can with Turing machines.\nThe first modern analog computer was a tide-predicting machine, invented by Sir William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin, in 1872. It used a system of pulleys and wires to automatically calculate predicted tide levels for a set period at a particular location and was of great utility to navigation in shallow waters. His device was the foundation for further developments in analog computing.\nThe differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration using wheel-and-disc mechanisms, was conceptualized in 1876 by James Thomson, the brother of the more famous Lord Kelvin. He explored the possible construction of such calculators, but was stymied by the limited output torque of the ball-and-disk integrators. In a differential analyzer, the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator, or a graphing output.\nA notable series of analog calculating machines were developed by Leonardo Torres Quevedo since 1895, including one that was able to compute the roots of arbitrary polynomials of order eight, including the complex ones, with a precision down to thousandths.\nAn important advance in analog computing was the development of the first fire-control systems for long range ship gunlaying. When gunnery ranges increased dramatically in the late 19th century it was no longer a simple matter of calculating the proper aim point, given the flight times of the shells. Various spotters on board the ship would relay distance measures and observations to a central plotting station. There the fire direction teams fed in the location, speed and direction of the ship and its target, as well as various adjustments for Coriolis effect, weather effects on the air, and other adjustments; the computer would then output a firing solution, which would be fed to the turrets for laying. In 1912, British engineer Arthur Pollen developed the first electrically powered mechanical analogue computer (called at the time the Argo Clock). It was used by the Imperial Russian Navy in World War I. The alternative Dreyer Table fire control system was fitted to British capital ships by mid-1916.\nMechanical devices were also used to aid the accuracy of aerial bombing. Drift Sight was the first such aid, developed by Harry Wimperis in 1916 for the Royal Naval Air Service; it measured the wind speed from the air, and used that measurement to calculate the wind's effects on the trajectory of the bombs. The system was later improved with the Course Setting Bomb Sight, and reached a climax with World War II bomb sights, Mark XIV bomb sight (RAF Bomber Command) and the Norden (United States Army Air Forces).\nThe art of mechanical analog computing reached its zenith with the differential analyzer, built by H. L. Hazen and Vannevar Bush at MIT starting in 1927, which built on the mechanical integrators of James Thomson and the torque amplifiers invented by H. W. Nieman. A dozen of these devices were built before their obsolescence became obvious; the most powerful was constructed at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School of Electrical Engineering, where the ENIAC was built.\nA fully electronic analog computer was built by Helmut H\u00f6lzer in 1942 at Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center.\nBy the 1950s the success of digital electronic computers had spelled the end for most analog computing machines, but hybrid analog computers, controlled by digital electronics, remained in substantial use into the 1950s and 1960s, and later in some specialized applications.\nAdvent of the digital computer.\nThe principle of the modern computer was first described by computer scientist Alan Turing, who set out the idea in his seminal 1936 paper, \"On Computable Numbers\". Turing reformulated Kurt G\u00f6del's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing G\u00f6del's universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines. He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm. He went on to prove that there was no solution to the \"Entscheidungsproblem\" by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: in general, it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.\nHe also introduced the notion of a \"universal machine\" (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other machine, or in other words, it is provably capable of computing anything that is computable by executing a program stored on tape, allowing the machine to be programmable. John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to this paper. Turing machines are to this day a central object of study in theory of computation. Except for the limitations imposed by their finite memory stores, modern computers are said to be Turing-complete, which is to say, they have algorithm execution capability equivalent to a universal Turing machine.\nElectromechanical computers.\nThe era of modern computing began with a flurry of development before and during World War II. Most digital computers built in this period were electromechanical \u2013 electric switches drove mechanical relays to perform the calculation. These mechanical components had a low operating speed due to their mechanical nature and were eventually superseded by much faster all-electric components, originally using vacuum tubes and later transistors.\nThe Z2 was one of the earliest examples of an electric operated digital computer built with electromechanical relays and was created by civil engineer Konrad Zuse in 1940 in Germany. It was an improvement on his earlier, mechanical Z1; although it used the same mechanical memory, it replaced the arithmetic and control logic with electrical relay circuits.\nIn the same year, electro-mechanical devices called bombes were built by British cryptologists to help decipher German Enigma-machine-encrypted secret messages during World War II. The bombe's initial design was created in 1939 at the UK Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park by Alan Turing, with an important refinement devised in 1940 by Gordon Welchman. The engineering design and construction was the work of Harold Keen of the British Tabulating Machine Company. It was a substantial development from a device that had been designed in 1938 by Polish Cipher Bureau cryptologist Marian Rejewski, and known as the \"cryptologic bomb\" (Polish: \"bomba kryptologiczna\").\nIn 1941, Zuse followed his earlier machine up with the Z3, the world's first working electromechanical programmable, fully automatic digital computer. The Z3 was built with 2000 relays, implementing a 22-bit word length that operated at a clock frequency of about 5\u201310\u00a0Hz. Program code and data were stored on punched film. It was quite similar to modern machines in some respects, pioneering numerous advances such as floating-point numbers. Replacement of the hard-to-implement decimal system (used in Charles Babbage's earlier design) by the simpler binary system meant that Zuse's machines were easier to build and potentially more reliable, given the technologies available at that time. Despite lacking explicit conditional execution, the Z3 was proven to have been a theoretically Turing-complete machine in 1998 by Ra\u00fal Rojas. In two 1936 patent applications, Zuse also anticipated that machine instructions could be stored in the same storage used for data\u2014the key insight of what became known as the von Neumann architecture, first implemented in 1948 in America in the electromechanical IBM SSEC and in Britain in the fully electronic Manchester Baby.\nZuse suffered setbacks during World War II when some of his machines were destroyed in the course of Allied bombing campaigns. Apparently his work remained largely unknown to engineers in the UK and US until much later, although at least IBM was aware of it as it financed his post-war startup company in 1946 in return for an option on Zuse's patents.\nIn 1944, the Harvard Mark I was constructed at IBM's Endicott laboratories. It was a similar general purpose electro-mechanical computer to the Z3, but was not quite Turing-complete.\nDigital computation.\nThe term digital was first suggested by George Robert Stibitz and refers to where a signal, such as a voltage, is not used to directly represent a value (as it would be in an analog computer), but to encode it. In November 1937, Stibitz, then working at Bell Labs (1930\u20131941), completed a relay-based calculator he later dubbed the \"Model K\" (for \"kitchen table\", on which he had assembled it), which became the first binary adder. Typically signals have two states \u2013 low (usually representing 0) and high (usually representing 1), but sometimes three-valued logic is used, especially in high-density memory. Modern computers generally use binary logic, but many early machines were decimal computers. In these machines, the basic unit of data was the decimal digit, encoded in one of several schemes, including binary-coded decimal or BCD, bi-quinary, excess-3, and two-out-of-five code.\nThe mathematical basis of digital computing is Boolean algebra, developed by the British mathematician George Boole in his work \"The Laws of Thought\", published in 1854. His Boolean algebra was further refined in the 1860s by William Jevons and Charles Sanders Peirce, and was first presented systematically by Ernst Schr\u00f6der and A. N. Whitehead. In 1879 Gottlob Frege developed the formal approach to logic and proposes the first logic language for logical equations.\nIn the 1930s and working independently, American electronic engineer Claude Shannon and Soviet logician Victor Shestakov both showed a one-to-one correspondence between the concepts of Boolean logic and certain electrical circuits, now called logic gates, which are now ubiquitous in digital computers. They showed that electronic relays and switches can realize the expressions of Boolean algebra. This thesis essentially founded practical digital circuit design. In addition Shannon's paper gives a correct circuit diagram for a 4 bit digital binary adder.\nElectronic data processing.\nPurely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents, at the same time that digital calculation replaced analog. Machines such as the Z3, the Atanasoff\u2013Berry Computer, the Colossus computers, and the ENIAC were built by hand, using circuits containing relays or valves (vacuum tubes), and often used punched cards or punched paper tape for input and as the main (non-volatile) storage medium.\nEngineer Tommy Flowers joined the telecommunications branch of the General Post Office in 1926. While working at the research station in Dollis Hill in the 1930s, he began to explore the possible use of electronics for the telephone exchange. Experimental equipment that he built in 1934 went into operation 5 years later, converting a portion of the telephone exchange network into an electronic data processing system, using thousands of vacuum tubes.\nIn the US, in 1940 Arthur Dickinson (IBM) invented the first digital electronic computer. This calculating device was fully electronic \u2013 control, calculations and output (the first electronic display). John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry of Iowa State University developed the Atanasoff\u2013Berry Computer (ABC) in 1942, the first binary electronic digital calculating device. This design was semi-electronic (electro-mechanical control and electronic calculations), and used about 300 vacuum tubes, with capacitors fixed in a mechanically rotating drum for memory. However, its paper card writer/reader was unreliable and the regenerative drum contact system was mechanical. The machine's special-purpose nature and lack of changeable, stored program distinguish it from modern computers.\nComputers whose logic was primarily built using vacuum tubes are now known as first generation computers.\nThe electronic programmable computer.\nDuring World War II, British codebreakers at Bletchley Park, north of London, achieved a number of successes at breaking encrypted enemy military communications. The German encryption machine, Enigma, was first attacked with the help of the electro-mechanical bombes. They ruled out possible Enigma settings by performing chains of logical deductions implemented electrically. Most possibilities led to a contradiction, and the few remaining could be tested by hand.\nThe Germans also developed a series of teleprinter encryption systems, quite different from Enigma. The Lorenz SZ 40/42 machine was used for high-level Army communications, code-named \"Tunny\" by the British. The first intercepts of Lorenz messages began in 1941. As part of an attack on Tunny, Max Newman and his colleagues developed the Heath Robinson, a fixed-function machine to aid in code breaking. Tommy Flowers, a senior engineer at the Post Office Research Station was recommended to Max Newman by Alan Turing and spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building the more flexible Colossus computer (which superseded the Heath Robinson). After a functional test in December 1943, Colossus was shipped to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January 1944 and attacked its first message on 5 February. By the time Germany surrendered in May 1945, there were ten Colossi working at Bletchley Park.\nColossus was the world's first electronic digital programmable computer. It used a large number of valves (vacuum tubes). It had paper-tape input and was capable of being configured to perform a variety of Boolean logical operations on its data, but it was not Turing-complete. Data input to Colossus was by photoelectric reading of a paper tape transcription of the enciphered intercepted message. This was arranged in a continuous loop so that it could be read and re-read multiple times \u2013 there being no internal store for the data. The reading mechanism ran at 5,000 characters per second with the paper tape moving at . Colossus Mark 1 contained 1500 thermionic valves (tubes), but Mark 2 with 2400 valves and five processors in parallel, was both 5 times faster and simpler to operate than Mark 1, greatly speeding the decoding process. Mark 2 was designed while Mark 1 was being constructed. Allen Coombs took over leadership of the Colossus Mark 2 project when Tommy Flowers moved on to other projects. The first Mark 2 Colossus became operational on 1 June 1944, just in time for the Allied Invasion of Normandy on D-Day.\nMost of the use of Colossus was in determining the start positions of the Tunny rotors for a message, which was called \"wheel setting\". Colossus included the first-ever use of shift registers and systolic arrays, enabling five simultaneous tests, each involving up to 100 Boolean calculations. This enabled five different possible start positions to be examined for one transit of the paper tape. As well as wheel setting some later Colossi included mechanisms intended to help determine pin patterns known as \"wheel breaking\". Both models were programmable using switches and plug panels in a way their predecessors had not been.\nWithout the use of these machines, the Allies would have been deprived of the very valuable intelligence that was obtained from reading the vast quantity of enciphered high-level telegraphic messages between the German High Command (OKW) and their army commands throughout occupied Europe. Details of their existence, design, and use were kept secret well into the 1970s. Winston Churchill personally issued an order for their destruction into pieces no larger than a man's hand, to keep secret that the British were capable of cracking Lorenz SZ cyphers (from German rotor stream cipher machines) during the oncoming Cold War. Two of the machines were transferred to the newly formed GCHQ and the others were destroyed. As a result, the machines were not included in many histories of computing. A reconstructed working copy of one of the Colossus machines is now on display at Bletchley Park.\nThe ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) was the first electronic programmable computer built in the US. Although the ENIAC used similar technology to the Colossi, it was much faster and more flexible and was Turing-complete. Like the Colossi, a \"program\" on the ENIAC was defined by the states of its patch cables and switches, a far cry from the stored-program electronic machines that came later. Once a program was ready to be run, it had to be mechanically set into the machine with manual resetting of plugs and switches. The programmers of the ENIAC were women who had been trained as mathematicians.\nIt combined the high speed of electronics with the ability to be programmed for many complex problems. It could add or subtract 5000 times a second, a thousand times faster than any other machine. It also had modules to multiply, divide, and square root. High-speed memory was limited to 20 words (equivalent to about 80 bytes). Built under the direction of John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert at the University of Pennsylvania, ENIAC's development and construction lasted from 1943 to full operation at the end of 1945. The machine was huge, weighing 30 tons, using 200 kilowatts of electric power and contained over 18,000 vacuum tubes, 1,500 relays, and hundreds of thousands of resistors, capacitors, and inductors. One of its major engineering feats was to minimize the effects of tube burnout, which was a common problem in machine reliability at that time. The machine was in almost constant use for the next ten years.\nStored-program computer.\nThe theoretical basis for the stored-program computer was proposed by Alan Turing in his 1936 paper \"On Computable Numbers\". Whilst Turing was at Princeton University working on his PhD, John von Neumann got to know him and became intrigued by his concept of a universal computing machine.\nEarly computing machines executed the set sequence of steps, known as a 'program', that could be altered by changing electrical connections using switches or a patch panel (or plugboard). However, this process of 'reprogramming' was often difficult and time-consuming, requiring engineers to create flowcharts and physically re-wire the machines. Stored-program computers, by contrast, were designed to store a set of instructions (a program), in memory \u2013 typically the same memory as stored data.\nENIAC inventors John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert proposed, in August 1944, the construction of a machine called the Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer (EDVAC) and design work for it commenced at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School of Electrical Engineering, before the ENIAC was fully operational. The design implemented a number of important architectural and logical improvements conceived during the ENIAC's construction, and a high-speed serial-access memory. However, Eckert and Mauchly left the project and its construction floundered.\nIn 1945, von Neumann visited the Moore School and wrote notes on what he saw, which he sent to the project. The U.S. Army liaison there had them typed and circulated as the \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\". The draft did not mention Eckert and Mauchly and, despite its incomplete nature and questionable lack of attribution of the sources of some of the ideas, the computer architecture it outlined became known as the 'von Neumann architecture'.\nIn 1945, Turing joined the UK National Physical Laboratory and began work on developing an electronic stored-program digital computer. His late-1945 report 'Proposed Electronic Calculator' was the first reasonably detailed specification for such a device. Turing presented a more detailed paper to the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) Executive Committee in March 1946, giving the first substantially complete design of a stored-program computer, a device that was called the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE).\nTuring considered that the speed and the size of computer memory were crucial elements, so he proposed a high-speed memory of what would today be called 25 KB, accessed at a speed of 1 MHz. The ACE implemented subroutine calls, whereas the EDVAC did not, and the ACE also used \"Abbreviated Computer Instructions,\" an early form of programming language.\nManchester Baby.\nThe Manchester Baby (Small Scale Experimental Machine, SSEM) was the world's first electronic stored-program computer. It was built at the Victoria University of Manchester by Frederic C. Williams, Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill, and ran its first program on 21\u00a0June 1948.\nThe machine was not intended to be a practical computer but was instead designed as a testbed for the Williams tube, the first random-access digital storage device. Invented by Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn at the University of Manchester in 1946 and 1947, it was a cathode-ray tube that used an effect called secondary emission to temporarily store electronic binary data, and was used successfully in several early computers.\nDescribed as small and primitive in a 1998 retrospective, the Baby was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer. As soon as it had demonstrated the feasibility of its design, a project was initiated at the university to develop the design into a more usable computer, the Manchester Mark 1. The Mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1, the world's first commercially available general-purpose computer.\nThe Baby had a 32-bit word length and a memory of 32\u00a0words. As it was designed to be the simplest possible stored-program computer, the only arithmetic operations implemented in hardware were subtraction and negation; other arithmetic operations were implemented in software. The first of three programs written for the machine found the highest proper divisor of 218 (262,144), a calculation that was known would take a long time to run\u2014and so prove the computer's reliability\u2014by testing every integer from 218\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 downwards, as division was implemented by repeated subtraction of the divisor. The program consisted of 17\u00a0instructions and ran for 52\u00a0minutes before reaching the correct answer of 131,072, after the Baby had performed 3.5\u00a0million operations (for an effective CPU speed of 1.1 kIPS). The successive approximations to the answer were displayed as a pattern of dots on the output CRT which mirrored the pattern held on the Williams tube used for storage.\nManchester Mark 1.\nThe SSEM led to the development of the Manchester Mark 1 at the University of Manchester. Work began in August 1948, and the first version was operational by April 1949; a program written to search for Mersenne primes ran error-free for nine hours on the night of 16/17 June 1949. The machine's successful operation was widely reported in the British press, which used the phrase \"electronic brain\" in describing it to their readers.\nThe computer is especially historically significant because of its pioneering inclusion of index registers, an innovation which made it easier for a program to read sequentially through an array of words in memory. Thirty-four patents resulted from the machine's development, and many of the ideas behind its design were incorporated in subsequent commercial products such as the IBM 701 and 702 as well as the Ferranti Mark 1. The chief designers, Frederic C. Williams and Tom Kilburn, concluded from their experiences with the Mark\u00a01 that computers would be used more in scientific roles than in pure mathematics. In 1951 they started development work on Meg, the Mark\u00a01's successor, which would include a floating-point unit.\nEDSAC.\nThe other contender for being the first recognizably modern digital stored-program computer was the EDSAC, designed and constructed by Maurice Wilkes and his team at the University of Cambridge Mathematical Laboratory in England at the University of Cambridge in 1949. The machine was inspired by John von Neumann's seminal \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\" and was one of the first usefully operational electronic digital stored-program computers.\nEDSAC ran its first programs on 6\u00a0May 1949, when it calculated a table of squares and a list of prime numbers.The EDSAC also served as the basis for the first commercially applied computer, the LEO I, used by food manufacturing company J. Lyons &amp; Co. Ltd. EDSAC 1 was finally shut down on 11 July 1958, having been superseded by EDSAC 2 which stayed in use until 1965.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"brain\" [computer] may one day come down to our level [of the common people] and help with our income-tax and book-keeping calculations. But this is speculation and there is no sign of it so far.\u2014\u200a\nEDVAC.\nENIAC inventors John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert proposed the EDVAC's construction in August 1944, and design work for the EDVAC commenced at the University of Pennsylvania's Moore School of Electrical Engineering, before the ENIAC was fully operational. The design implemented a number of important architectural and logical improvements conceived during the ENIAC's construction, and a high-speed serial-access memory. However, Eckert and Mauchly left the project and its construction floundered.\nIt was finally delivered to the U.S. Army's Ballistics Research Laboratory at the Aberdeen Proving Ground in August 1949, but due to a number of problems, the computer only began operation in 1951, and then only on a limited basis.\nCommercial computers.\nThe first commercial electronic computer was the Ferranti Mark 1, built by Ferranti and delivered to the University of Manchester in February 1951. It was based on the Manchester Mark 1. The main improvements over the Manchester Mark 1 were in the size of the primary storage (using random access Williams tubes), secondary storage (using a magnetic drum), a faster multiplier, and additional instructions. The basic cycle time was 1.2 milliseconds, and a multiplication could be completed in about 2.16 milliseconds. The multiplier used almost a quarter of the machine's 4,050 vacuum tubes (valves). A second machine was purchased by the University of Toronto, before the design was revised into the Mark 1 Star. At least seven of these later machines were delivered between 1953 and 1957, one of them to Shell labs in Amsterdam.\nIn October 1947, the directors of J. Lyons &amp; Company, a British catering company famous for its teashops but with strong interests in new office management techniques, decided to take an active role in promoting the commercial development of computers. The LEO I computer (Lyons Electronic Office) became operational in April 1951 and ran the world's first regular routine office computer job. On 17 November 1951, the J. Lyons company began weekly operation of a bakery valuations job on the LEO \u2013 the first business to go live on a stored-program computer.\nIn June 1951, the UNIVAC I (Universal Automatic Computer) was delivered to the U.S. Census Bureau. Remington Rand eventually sold 46 machines at more than US$ each ($ as of 2024). UNIVAC was the first \"mass-produced\" computer. It used 5,200 vacuum tubes and consumed of power. Its primary storage was serial-access mercury delay lines capable of storing 1,000 words of 11 decimal digits plus sign (72-bit words).\nIn 1952, Compagnie des Machines Bull released the Gamma 3 computer, which became a large success in Europe, eventually selling more than 1,200 units, and the first computer produced in more than 1,000 units. The Gamma 3 had innovative features for its time including a dual-mode, software switchable, BCD and binary ALU, as well as a hardwired floating-point library for scientific computing. In its E.T configuration, the Gamma 3 drum memory could fit about 50,000 instructions for a capacity of 16,384 words (around 100\u00a0kB), a large amount for the time.\nCompared to the UNIVAC, IBM introduced a smaller, more affordable computer in 1954 that proved very popular. The IBM 650 weighed over , the attached power supply weighed around and both were held in separate cabinets of roughly 1.5\u00d70.9\u00d7. The system cost US$ ($ as of 2024) or could be leased for US$ a month ($ as of 2024). Its drum memory was originally 2,000 ten-digit words, later expanded to 4,000 words. Memory limitations such as this were to dominate programming for decades afterward. The program instructions were fetched from the spinning drum as the code ran. Efficient execution using drum memory was provided by a combination of hardware architecture \u2013 the instruction format included the address of the next instruction \u2013 and software: the Symbolic Optimal Assembly Program, SOAP, assigned instructions to the optimal addresses (to the extent possible by static analysis of the source program). Thus many instructions were, when needed, located in the next row of the drum to be read and additional wait time for drum rotation was reduced.\nMicroprogramming.\nIn 1951, British scientist Maurice Wilkes developed the concept of microprogramming from the realisation that the central processing unit of a computer could be controlled by a miniature, highly specialized computer program in high-speed ROM. Microprogramming allows the base instruction set to be defined or extended by built-in programs (now called firmware or microcode). This concept greatly simplified CPU development. He first described this at the University of Manchester Computer Inaugural Conference in 1951, then published in expanded form in \"IEEE Spectrum\" in 1955.\nIt was widely used in the CPUs and floating-point units of mainframe and other computers; it was implemented for the first time in EDSAC 2, which also used multiple identical \"bit slices\" to simplify design. Interchangeable, replaceable tube assemblies were used for each bit of the processor.\nMagnetic memory.\nMagnetic drum memories were developed for the US Navy during WW II with the work continuing at Engineering Research Associates (ERA) in 1946 and 1947. ERA, then a part of Univac included a drum memory in its 1103, announced in February 1953. The first mass-produced computer, the IBM 650, also announced in 1953 had about 8.5 kilobytes of drum memory.\nMagnetic-core memory patented in 1949 with its first usage demonstrated for the Whirlwind computer in August 1953. Commercialization followed quickly. Magnetic core was used in peripherals of the IBM 702 delivered in July 1955, and later in the 702 itself. The IBM 704 (1955) and the Ferranti Mercury (1957) used magnetic-core memory. It went on to dominate the field into the 1970s, when it was replaced with semiconductor memory. Magnetic core peaked in volume about 1975 and declined in usage and market share thereafter.\nAs late as 1980, PDP-11/45 machines using magnetic-core main memory and drums for swapping were still in use at many of the original UNIX sites.\nTransistor computers.\nThe bipolar transistor was invented in 1947. From 1955 onward transistors replaced vacuum tubes in computer designs, giving rise to the \"second generation\" of computers. Compared to vacuum tubes, transistors have many advantages: they are smaller, and require less power than vacuum tubes, so give off less heat. Silicon junction transistors were much more reliable than vacuum tubes and had longer service life. Transistorized computers could contain tens of thousands of binary logic circuits in a relatively compact space. Transistors greatly reduced computers' size, initial cost, and operating cost. Typically, second-generation computers were composed of large numbers of printed circuit boards such as the IBM Standard Modular System, each carrying one to four logic gates or flip-flops.\nAt the University of Manchester, a team under the leadership of Tom Kilburn designed and built a machine using the newly developed transistors instead of valves (vacuum tubes). Initially the only devices available were germanium point-contact transistors, less reliable than the valves they replaced but which consumed far less power. Their first transistorized computer, and the first in the world, was operational by 1953, and a second version was completed there in April 1955. The 1955 version used 200 transistors, 1,300 solid-state diodes, and had a power consumption of 150 watts. However, the machine did make use of valves to generate its 125\u00a0kHz clock waveforms and in the circuitry to read and write on its magnetic drum memory, so it was not the first completely transistorized computer.\nThat distinction goes to the Harwell CADET of 1955, built by the electronics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell. The design featured a 64-kilobyte magnetic drum memory store with multiple moving heads that had been designed at the National Physical Laboratory, UK. By 1953 this team had transistor circuits operating to read and write on a smaller magnetic drum from the Royal Radar Establishment. The machine used a low clock speed of only 58\u00a0kHz to avoid having to use any valves to generate the clock waveforms.\nCADET used 324-point-contact transistors provided by the UK company Standard Telephones and Cables; 76 junction transistors were used for the first stage amplifiers for data read from the drum, since point-contact transistors were too noisy. From August 1956, CADET was offering a regular computing service, during which it often executed continuous computing runs of 80 hours or more. Problems with the reliability of early batches of point contact and alloyed junction transistors meant that the machine's mean time between failures was about 90\u00a0minutes, but this improved once the more reliable bipolar junction transistors became available.\nThe Manchester University Transistor Computer's design was adopted by the local engineering firm of Metropolitan-Vickers in their Metrovick 950, the first commercial transistor computer anywhere. Six Metrovick 950s were built, the first completed in 1956. They were successfully deployed within various departments of the company and were in use for about five years. A second generation computer, the IBM 1401, captured about one third of the world market. IBM installed more than ten thousand 1401s between 1960 and 1964.\nTransistor peripherals.\nTransistorized electronics improved not only the CPU (Central Processing Unit), but also the peripheral devices. The second generation disk data storage units were able to store tens of millions of letters and digits. Next to the fixed disk storage units, connected to the CPU via high-speed data transmission, were removable disk data storage units. A removable disk pack can be easily exchanged with another pack in a few seconds. Even if the removable disks' capacity is smaller than fixed disks, their interchangeability guarantees a nearly unlimited quantity of data close at hand. Magnetic tape provided archival capability for this data, at a lower cost than disk.\nMany second-generation CPUs delegated peripheral device communications to a secondary processor. For example, while the communication processor controlled card reading and punching, the main CPU executed calculations and binary branch instructions. One databus would bear data between the main CPU and core memory at the CPU's fetch-execute cycle rate, and other databusses would typically serve the peripheral devices. On the PDP-1, the core memory's cycle time was 5 microseconds; consequently most arithmetic instructions took 10 microseconds (100,000 operations per second) because most operations took at least two memory cycles; one for the instruction, one for the operand data fetch.\nDuring the second generation remote terminal units (often in the form of Teleprinters like a Friden Flexowriter) saw greatly increased use. Telephone connections provided sufficient speed for early remote terminals and allowed hundreds of kilometers separation between remote-terminals and the computing center. Eventually these stand-alone computer networks would be generalized into an interconnected \"network of networks\"\u2014the Internet.\nTransistor supercomputers.\nThe early 1960s saw the advent of supercomputing. The Atlas was a joint development between the University of Manchester, Ferranti, and Plessey, and was first installed at Manchester University and officially commissioned in 1962 as one of the world's first supercomputers \u2013 considered to be the most powerful computer in the world at that time. It was said that whenever Atlas went offline half of the United Kingdom's computer capacity was lost. It was a second-generation machine, using discrete germanium transistors. Atlas also pioneered the Atlas Supervisor, \"considered by many to be the first recognisable modern operating system\".\nIn the US, a series of computers at Control Data Corporation (CDC) were designed by Seymour Cray to use innovative designs and parallelism to achieve superior computational peak performance. The CDC 6600, released in 1964, is generally considered the first supercomputer. The CDC 6600 outperformed its predecessor, the IBM 7030 Stretch, by about a factor of 3. With performance of about 1\u00a0megaFLOPS, the CDC 6600 was the world's fastest computer from 1964 to 1969, when it relinquished that status to its successor, the CDC 7600.\nIntegrated circuit computers.\nThe \"third-generation\" of digital electronic computers used integrated circuit (IC) chips as the basis of their logic.\nThe idea of an integrated circuit was conceived by a radar scientist working for the Royal Radar Establishment of the Ministry of Defence, Geoffrey W.A. Dummer.\nThe first working integrated circuits were invented by Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor. Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit in July 1958, successfully demonstrating the first working integrated example on 12 September 1958. Kilby's invention was a hybrid integrated circuit (hybrid IC). It had external wire connections, which made it difficult to mass-produce.\nNoyce came up with his own idea of an integrated circuit half a year after Kilby. Noyce's invention was a monolithic integrated circuit (IC) chip. His chip solved many practical problems that Kilby's had not. Produced at Fairchild Semiconductor, it was made of silicon, whereas Kilby's chip was made of germanium. The basis for Noyce's monolithic IC was Fairchild's planar process, which allowed integrated circuits to be laid out using the same principles as those of printed circuits. The planar process was developed by Noyce's colleague Jean Hoerni in early 1959, based on Mohamed M. Atalla's work on semiconductor surface passivation by silicon dioxide at Bell Labs in the late 1950s.\nThird generation (integrated circuit) computers first appeared in the early 1960s in computers developed for government purposes, and then in commercial computers beginning in the mid-1960s. The first silicon IC computer was the Apollo Guidance Computer or AGC. Although not the most powerful computer of its time, the extreme constraints on size, mass, and power of the Apollo spacecraft required the AGC to be much smaller and denser than any prior computer, weighing in at only . Each lunar landing mission carried two AGCs, one each in the command and lunar ascent modules.\nSemiconductor memory.\nThe MOSFET (metal\u2013oxide\u2013semiconductor field-effect transistor, or MOS transistor) was invented by Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959. In addition to data processing, the MOSFET enabled the practical use of MOS transistors as memory cell storage elements, a function previously served by magnetic cores. Semiconductor memory, also known as MOS memory, was cheaper and consumed less power than magnetic-core memory. MOS random-access memory (RAM), in the form of static RAM (SRAM), was developed by John Schmidt at Fairchild Semiconductor in 1964. In 1966, Robert Dennard at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center developed MOS dynamic RAM (DRAM). In 1967, Dawon Kahng and Simon Sze at Bell Labs developed the floating-gate MOSFET, the basis for MOS non-volatile memory such as EPROM, EEPROM and flash memory.\nMicroprocessor computers.\nThe \"fourth-generation\" of digital electronic computers used microprocessors as the basis of their logic. The microprocessor has origins in the MOS integrated circuit (MOS IC) chip. Due to rapid MOSFET scaling, MOS IC chips rapidly increased in complexity at a rate predicted by Moore's law, leading to large-scale integration (LSI) with hundreds of transistors on a single MOS chip by the late 1960s. The application of MOS LSI chips to computing was the basis for the first microprocessors, as engineers began recognizing that a complete computer processor could be contained on a single MOS LSI chip.\nThe subject of exactly which device was the first microprocessor is contentious, partly due to lack of agreement on the exact definition of the term \"microprocessor\". The earliest multi-chip microprocessors were the Four-Phase Systems AL-1 in 1969 and Garrett AiResearch MP944 in 1970, developed with multiple MOS LSI chips. The first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, developed on a single PMOS LSI chip. It was designed and realized by Ted Hoff, Federico Faggin, Masatoshi Shima and Stanley Mazor at Intel, and released in 1971.\nWhile the earliest microprocessor ICs literally contained only the processor, i.e. the central processing unit, of a computer, their progressive development naturally led to chips containing most or all of the internal electronic parts of a computer. The integrated circuit in the image on the right, for example, an Intel 8742, is an 8-bit microcontroller that includes a CPU running at 12\u00a0MHz, 128 bytes of RAM, 2048 bytes of EPROM, and I/O in the same chip.\nDuring the 1960s, there was considerable overlap between second and third generation technologies. IBM implemented its IBM Solid Logic Technology modules in hybrid circuits for the IBM System/360 in 1964. As late as 1975, Sperry Univac continued the manufacture of second-generation machines such as the UNIVAC 494. The Burroughs large systems such as the B5000 were stack machines, which allowed for simpler programming. These pushdown automatons were also implemented in minicomputers and microprocessors later, which influenced programming language design. Minicomputers served as low-cost computer centers for industry, business and universities. It became possible to simulate analog circuits with the \"simulation program with integrated circuit emphasis\", or SPICE (1971) on minicomputers, one of the programs for electronic design automation (). The microprocessor led to the development of microcomputers, small, low-cost computers that could be owned by individuals and small businesses. Microcomputers, the first of which appeared in the 1970s, became ubiquitous in the 1980s and beyond.\nWhile which specific product is considered the first microcomputer system is a matter of debate, one of the earliest is R2E's Micral N (Fran\u00e7ois Gernelle, Andr\u00e9 Truong) launched \"early 1973\" using the Intel 8008. The first commercially available microcomputer kit was the Intel 8080-based Altair 8800, which was announced in the January 1975 cover article of \"Popular Electronics\". However, the Altair 8800 was an extremely limited system in its initial stages, having only 256 bytes of DRAM in its initial package and no input-output except its toggle switches and LED register display. Despite this, it was initially surprisingly popular, with several hundred sales in the first year, and demand rapidly outstripped supply. Several early third-party vendors such as Cromemco and Processor Technology soon began supplying additional S-100 bus hardware for the Altair 8800.\nIn April 1975, at the Hannover Fair, Olivetti presented the P6060, the world's first complete, pre-assembled personal computer system. The central processing unit consisted of two cards, code named PUCE1 and PUCE2, and unlike most other personal computers was built with TTL components rather than a microprocessor. It had one or two 8\" floppy disk drives, a 32-character plasma display, 80-column graphical thermal printer, 48 Kbytes of RAM, and BASIC language. It weighed . As a complete system, this was a significant step from the Altair, though it never achieved the same success. It was in competition with a similar product by IBM that had an external floppy disk drive.\nFrom 1975 to 1977, most microcomputers, such as the MOS Technology KIM-1, the Altair 8800, and some versions of the Apple I, were sold as kits for do-it-yourselfers. Pre-assembled systems did not gain much ground until 1977, with the introduction of the Apple II, the Tandy TRS-80, the first SWTPC computers, and the Commodore PET. Computing has evolved with microcomputer architectures, with features added from their larger brethren, now dominant in most market segments.\nA NeXT Computer and its object-oriented development tools and libraries were used by Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau at CERN to develop the world's first web server software, CERN httpd, and also used to write the first web browser, WorldWideWeb.\nSystems as complicated as computers require very high reliability. ENIAC remained on, in continuous operation from 1947 to 1955, for eight years before being shut down. Although a vacuum tube might fail, it would be replaced without bringing down the system. By the simple strategy of never shutting down ENIAC, the failures were dramatically reduced. The vacuum-tube SAGE air-defense computers became remarkably reliable \u2013 installed in pairs, one off-line, tubes likely to fail did so when the computer was intentionally run at reduced power to find them. Hot-pluggable hard disks, like the hot-pluggable vacuum tubes of yesteryear, continue the tradition of repair during continuous operation. Semiconductor memories routinely have no errors when they operate, although operating systems like Unix have employed memory tests on start-up to detect failing hardware. Today, the requirement of reliable performance is made even more stringent when server farms are the delivery platform. Google has managed this by using fault-tolerant software to recover from hardware failures, and is even working on the concept of replacing entire server farms on-the-fly, during a service event.\nIn the 21st century, multi-core CPUs became commercially available. Content-addressable memory (CAM) has become inexpensive enough to be used in networking, and is frequently used for on-chip cache memory in modern microprocessors, although no computer system has yet implemented hardware CAMs for use in programming languages. Currently, CAMs (or associative arrays) in software are programming-language-specific. Semiconductor memory cell arrays are very regular structures, and manufacturers prove their processes on them; this allows price reductions on memory products. During the 1980s, CMOS logic gates developed into devices that could be made as fast as other circuit types; computer power consumption could therefore be decreased dramatically. Unlike the continuous current draw of a gate based on other logic types, a CMOS gate only draws significant current, except for leakage, during the 'transition' between logic states.\nCMOS circuits have allowed computing to become a commercial product which is now ubiquitous, embedded in many forms, from greeting cards and telephones to satellites. The thermal design power which is dissipated during operation has become as essential as computing speed of operation. In 2006 servers consumed 1.5% of the total U.S. electricity consumption. The energy consumption of computer data centers was expected to double to 3% of world consumption by 2011. The SoC (system on a chip) has compressed even more of the integrated circuitry into a single chip; SoCs are enabling phones and PCs to converge into single hand-held wireless mobile devices.\nQuantum computing is an emerging technology in the field of computing. \"MIT Technology Review\" reported 10 November 2017 that IBM has created a 50-qubit computer; currently its quantum state lasts 50 microseconds. Google researchers have been able to extend the 50 microsecond time limit, as reported 14 July 2021 in \"Nature\"; stability has been extended 100-fold by spreading a single logical qubit over chains of data qubits for quantum error correction. \"Physical Review X\" reported a technique for 'single-gate sensing as a viable readout method for spin qubits' (a singlet-triplet spin state in silicon) on 26 November 2018. A Google team has succeeded in operating their RF pulse modulator chip at 3\u00a0kelvins, simplifying the cryogenics of their 72-qubit computer, which is set up to operate at 0.3\u00a0K; but the readout circuitry and another driver remain to be brought into the cryogenics. \"See: Quantum supremacy\" Silicon qubit systems have demonstrated entanglement at non-local distances.\nComputing hardware and its software have even become a metaphor for the operation of the universe.\nEpilogue.\nAn indication of the rapidity of development of this field can be inferred from the history of the seminal 1947 article by Burks, Goldstine and von Neumann. By the time that anyone had time to write anything down, it was obsolete. After 1945, others read John von Neumann's \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\", and immediately started implementing their own systems. To this day, the rapid pace of development has continued, worldwide.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n , \"Complex Computer\", issued , assigned to American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company\u00a0"}
{"id": "13637", "revid": "46812063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13637", "title": "Hausdorff space", "text": "Type of topological space\nIn topology and related branches of mathematics, a Hausdorff space ( , ), T2 space or separated space, is a topological space where distinct points have disjoint neighbourhoods. Of the many separation axioms that can be imposed on a topological space, the \"Hausdorff condition\" (T2) is the most frequently used and discussed. It implies the uniqueness of limits of sequences, nets, and filters.\nHausdorff spaces are named after Felix Hausdorff, one of the founders of topology. Hausdorff's original definition of a topological space (in 1914) included the Hausdorff condition as an axiom.\nDefinitions.\nPoints formula_1 and formula_2 in a topological space formula_3 can be \"separated by neighbourhoods\" if there exists a neighbourhood formula_4 of formula_1 and a neighbourhood formula_6 of formula_2 such that formula_4 and formula_6 are disjoint formula_10. formula_3 is a Hausdorff space if any two distinct points in formula_3 are separated by neighbourhoods. This condition is the third separation axiom (after T0 and T1), which is why Hausdorff spaces are also called T2 spaces. The name \"separated space\" is also used.\nA related, but weaker, notion is that of a preregular space. formula_3 is a preregular space if any two topologically distinguishable points can be separated by disjoint neighbourhoods. A preregular space is also called an R1 space.\nThe relationship between these two conditions is as follows. A topological space is Hausdorff if and only if it is both preregular (i.e. topologically distinguishable points are separated by neighbourhoods) and Kolmogorov (i.e. distinct points are topologically distinguishable). A topological space is preregular if and only if its Kolmogorov quotient is Hausdorff.\nEquivalences.\nFor a topological space \"formula_3\", the following are equivalent:\nExamples of Hausdorff and non-Hausdorff spaces.\nAlmost all spaces encountered in analysis are Hausdorff; most importantly, the real numbers (under the standard metric topology on real numbers) are a Hausdorff space. More generally, all metric spaces are Hausdorff. In fact, many spaces of use in analysis, such as topological groups and topological manifolds, have the Hausdorff condition explicitly stated in their definitions.\nA simple example of a topology that is T1 but is not Hausdorff is the cofinite topology defined on an infinite set, as is the cocountable topology defined on an uncountable set.\nPseudometric spaces typically are not Hausdorff, but they are preregular, and their use in analysis is usually only in the construction of Hausdorff gauge spaces. Indeed, when analysts run across a non-Hausdorff space, it is still probably at least preregular, and then they simply replace it with its Kolmogorov quotient, which is Hausdorff.\nIn contrast, non-preregular spaces are encountered much more frequently in abstract algebra and algebraic geometry, in particular as the Zariski topology on an algebraic variety or the spectrum of a ring. They also arise in the model theory of intuitionistic logic: every complete Heyting algebra is the algebra of open sets of some topological space, but this space need not be preregular, much less Hausdorff, and in fact usually is neither. The related concept of Scott domain also consists of non-preregular spaces.\nWhile the existence of unique limits for convergent nets and filters implies that a space is Hausdorff, there are non-Hausdorff T1 spaces in which every convergent sequence has a unique limit. Such spaces are called \"US spaces\". For sequential spaces, this notion is equivalent to being weakly Hausdorff.\nProperties.\nSubspaces and products of Hausdorff spaces are Hausdorff, but quotient spaces of Hausdorff spaces need not be Hausdorff. In fact, \"every\" topological space can be realized as the quotient of some Hausdorff space.\nHausdorff spaces are T1, meaning that each singleton is a closed set. Similarly, preregular spaces are R0. Every Hausdorff space is a Sober space although the converse is in general not true. \nAnother property of Hausdorff spaces is that each compact set is a closed set. For non-Hausdorff spaces, it can be that each compact set is a closed set (for example, the cocountable topology on an uncountable set) or not (for example, the cofinite topology on an infinite set and the Sierpi\u0144ski space). \nThe definition of a Hausdorff space says that points can be separated by neighborhoods. It turns out that this implies something which is seemingly stronger: in a Hausdorff space every pair of disjoint compact sets can also be separated by neighborhoods, in other words there is a neighborhood of one set and a neighborhood of the other, such that the two neighborhoods are disjoint. This is an example of the general rule that compact sets often behave like points.\nCompactness conditions together with preregularity often imply stronger separation axioms. For example, any locally compact preregular space is completely regular. Compact preregular spaces are normal, meaning that they satisfy Urysohn's lemma and the Tietze extension theorem and have partitions of unity subordinate to locally finite open covers. The Hausdorff versions of these statements are: every locally compact Hausdorff space is Tychonoff, and every compact Hausdorff space is normal Hausdorff.\nThe following results are some technical properties regarding maps (continuous and otherwise) to and from Hausdorff spaces.\nLet \"formula_25\" be a continuous function and suppose formula_26 is Hausdorff. Then the graph of \"formula_27\", formula_28, is a closed subset of \"formula_29\".\nLet \"formula_25\" be a function and let formula_31 be its kernel regarded as a subspace of \"formula_23\".\nIf \"formula_42\" are continuous maps and \"formula_26\" is Hausdorff then the equalizer formula_44 is a closed set in \"formula_3\". It follows that if \"formula_26\" is Hausdorff and \"formula_27\" and \"formula_48\" agree on a dense subset of \"formula_3\" then \"formula_50\". In other words, continuous functions into Hausdorff spaces are determined by their values on dense subsets.\nLet \"formula_25\" be a closed surjection such that \"formula_52\" is compact for all \"formula_53\". Then if \"formula_3\" is Hausdorff so is \"formula_26\".\nLet \"formula_25\" be a quotient map with \"formula_3\" a compact Hausdorff space. Then the following are equivalent:\nPreregularity versus regularity.\nAll regular spaces are preregular, as are all Hausdorff spaces. There are many results for topological spaces that hold for both regular and Hausdorff spaces.\nMost of the time, these results hold for all preregular spaces; they were listed for regular and Hausdorff spaces separately because the idea of preregular spaces came later.\nOn the other hand, those results that are truly about regularity generally do not also apply to nonregular Hausdorff spaces.\nThere are many situations where another condition of topological spaces (such as paracompactness or local compactness) will imply regularity if preregularity is satisfied. Such conditions often come in two versions: a regular version and a Hausdorff version. Although Hausdorff spaces are not, in general, regular, a Hausdorff space that is also (say) locally compact will be regular, because any Hausdorff space is preregular. Thus from a certain point of view, it is really preregularity, rather than regularity, that matters in these situations. However, definitions are usually still phrased in terms of regularity, since this condition is better known than preregularity.\nSee History of the separation axioms for more on this issue.\nVariants.\nThe terms \"Hausdorff\", \"separated\", and \"preregular\" can also be applied to such variants on topological spaces as uniform spaces, Cauchy spaces, and convergence spaces. The characteristic that unites the concept in all of these examples is that limits of nets and filters (when they exist) are unique (for separated spaces) or unique up to topological indistinguishability (for preregular spaces).\nAs it turns out, uniform spaces, and more generally Cauchy spaces, are always preregular, so the Hausdorff condition in these cases reduces to the T0 condition. These are also the spaces in which completeness makes sense, and Hausdorffness is a natural companion to completeness in these cases. Specifically, a space is complete if and only if every Cauchy net has at \"least\" one limit, while a space is Hausdorff if and only if every Cauchy net has at \"most\" one limit (since only Cauchy nets can have limits in the first place).\nAlgebra of functions.\nThe algebra of continuous (real or complex) functions on a compact Hausdorff space is a commutative C*-algebra, and conversely by the Banach\u2013Stone theorem one can recover the topology of the space from the algebraic properties of its algebra of continuous functions. This leads to noncommutative geometry, where one considers noncommutative C*-algebras as representing algebras of functions on a noncommutative space.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13644", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13644", "title": "Hawkwind", "text": "English rock band\nHawkwind are an English rock band known as one of the earliest space rock groups. Since their formation in November 1969, Hawkwind have gone through many incarnations and have incorporated many different styles into their music, including hard rock, progressive rock and psychedelic rock. They are regarded as an influential proto-punk band. Their lyrics often cover themes of urban life and science fiction.\nMany musicians, dancers and writers have worked with the band since their inception. Key members of Hawkwind have included Nik Turner, Huw Lloyd-Langton, Del Dettmar, Lemmy, Simon King, Robert Calvert, Michael Moorcock, Simon House and Ginger Baker, but the band are most closely associated with their singer, songwriter and guitarist Dave Brock, who founded the band and is the only remaining original member.\nHawkwind are best known for the song \"Silver Machine\", which became a number-three UK hit single in 1972, and they had further chart singles with \"Urban Guerrilla\" (another top 40 hit) and \"Shot Down in the Night\". The band had a run of twenty-two of their albums charting in the UK from 1971 to 1993, and another nine between 2012 and 2024.\nHistory.\n1969: formation.\nDave Brock and Mick Slattery had been in the London-based psychedelic band Famous Cure, and a meeting with bassist John Harrison revealed a mutual interest in electronic music, which led the trio to embark upon a new musical venture together. Seventeen-year-old drummer Terry Ollis replied to an advert in a music weekly; Nik Turner and Michael \"Dik Mik\" Davies, old acquaintances of Brock, offered help with transport and gear, but were soon pulled into the band.\nGatecrashing a local talent night at the All Saints Hall, Notting Hill, they were so disorganised as to not even have a name, opting for \"Group X\" at the last minute, nor any songs, choosing to play an extended 20-minute jam on the Byrds' \"Eight Miles High\". BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel was in the audience, and was impressed enough to tell event organiser Douglas Smith to keep an eye on them. Smith signed them up and got them a deal with Liberty Records on the back of a deal he was setting up for Cochise.\nThe band settled on the name \"Hawkwind\" after briefly being billed as \"Group X\" and \"Hawkwind Zoo\".\nA session took place at Abbey Road Studios to record demos of \"Hurry on Sundown\" and other tracks (which were eventually included on the remastered version of the group's debut album \"Hawkwind\"), after which Slattery left. He was replaced by Huw Lloyd-Langton who, during his former employment in a musical instrument shop, had known Brock (who at the time was a busker) and sold guitar strings to him.\n1970\u20131975: United Artists era.\nPretty Things guitarist Dick Taylor was brought in to produce the 1970 debut album \"Hawkwind\". Although it was not a commercial success, it did bring them to the attention of the UK underground scene, which found them playing free concerts, benefit gigs, and festivals. Playing free outside the Bath Festival, they encountered another Ladbroke Grove\u2013based band, the Pink Fairies, who shared similar interests in music and recreational substances; a friendship developed which led to the two bands becoming running partners and performing as \"Pinkwind\". Their use of drugs, however, led to the departure of Harrison, who did not partake, to be replaced briefly by Thomas Crimble (about July 1970 \u2013 March 1971). Crimble played on a few BBC sessions (which were eventually collected on the album \"The Text of Festival\") before leaving to help organise the Glastonbury Free Festival 1971; he sat in during the band's performance there. Lloyd-Langton also quit, after a bad LSD trip at the Isle of Wight Festival led to a nervous breakdown.\nTheir follow-up album, 1971's \"In Search of Space\", brought greater commercial success, reaching number 18 on the UK album charts. This album offered a refinement of the band's image and philosophy courtesy of graphic artist Barney Bubbles and underground press writer Robert Calvert, as depicted in the accompanying \"Hawklog\" booklet, which would be further developed into the \"Space Ritual\" stage show. Science fiction author Michael Moorcock and dancer Stacia also started contributing to the band. Dik Mik had left the band, replaced by sound engineer Del Dettmar, but chose to return for this album, thus giving the band two electronics players. Bass player Dave Anderson, who had been in the German band Amon D\u00fc\u00fcl II, had also joined and played on the album, but departed before its release because of personal tensions with some other members of the band. Anderson and Lloyd-Langton then formed the short-lived band Amon Din. Meanwhile, Ollis quit, unhappy with the commercial direction in which the band were heading.\nThe addition of bassist Ian \"Lemmy\" Kilmister and drummer Simon King propelled the band to greater heights. One of the early gigs the band played was a benefit for the Greasy Truckers at The Roundhouse on 13 February 1972. A live album of the concert, \"Greasy Truckers Party\", was released; from this, a single (with overdubbed vocal), \"Silver Machine\", was also released, reaching number three in the UK charts. This generated sufficient funds for the subsequent album \"Doremi Fasol Latido\" and Space Ritual tour. The show featured costumes, dancers Stacia and Miss Renee \u2013 typically performing either topless or wearing only body paint \u2013 mime artist Tony Carrera, and a light show by Liquid Len. The songs in the show were connected by electronic and spoken word segues and the show was recorded on the elaborate package \"Space Ritual\". At the height of their success, in 1973, the band released the single \"Urban Guerrilla\", which coincided with an IRA bombing campaign in London, so the BBC refused to play it and the band's management reluctantly decided to withdraw it fearing accusations of opportunism, despite the disc having already climbed to number 39 in the UK chart.\nDik Mik departed during 1973, and Calvert ended his association with the band to concentrate on solo projects. Dettmar also indicated that he was to leave the band, so Simon House was recruited as keyboardist and violinist playing live shows, a North America tour and recording the 1974 album \"Hall of the Mountain Grill\". Dettmar left after a European tour and emigrated to Canada, whilst Alan Powell deputised for an incapacitated King on that European tour, but remained, giving the band two drummers.\nAt the beginning of 1975, the band recorded the album \"Warrior on the Edge of Time\" in collaboration with Michael Moorcock, loosely based on his Eternal Champion figure. However, during a North American tour in May, Lemmy was caught in possession of amphetamine crossing the border from the US into Canada. The border police mistook the powder for cocaine and he was jailed, forcing the band to cancel some shows. Fed up with his erratic behaviour, the band dismissed the bass player replacing him with their long-standing friend and former Pink Fairies guitarist Paul Rudolph. Lemmy then teamed up with another Pink Fairies guitarist, Larry Wallis, to form Mot\u00f6rhead, named after the last song he had written for Hawkwind.\n1976\u20131978: Charisma era.\nCalvert made a guest appearance with the band for their headline set at the Reading Festival in August 1975, after which he chose to rejoin the band as a full-time lead vocalist. Stacia chose to relinquish her dancing duties and settle down to family life. The band changed record company to Tony Stratton-Smith's Charisma Records and, on Stratton-Smith's suggestion, band management from Douglas Smith to Tony Howard.\n\"Astounding Sounds, Amazing Music\" is the first album of this era. On the eve of recording the follow-up \"Back on the Streets\" single, Turner was dismissed for his erratic live playing and Powell was deemed surplus to requirements. After a tour to promote the single and during the recording of the next album, Rudolph was also dismissed, for allegedly trying to steer the band into a musical direction at odds with Calvert and Brock's vision.\nAdrian \"Ade\" Shaw, who, as bass player for Magic Muscle, had supported Hawkwind on the \"Space Ritual\" tour, came in for the 1977 album \"Quark, Strangeness and Charm\". The band continued to enjoy moderate commercial success, but Calvert's mental illness often caused problems. A manic phase saw the band abandon a European tour in France, while a depression phase during a 1978 North American tour convinced Brock to disband the group. In between these two tours, the band had recorded the album \"PXR5\" in January 1978, but its release was delayed until 1979.\nOn 23 December 1977 in Barnstaple, Brock and Calvert had performed a one-off gig with Devon band Ark as the Sonic Assassins, and looking for a new project in 1978, bassist Harvey Bainbridge and drummer Martin Griffin were recruited from this event. Steve Swindells was recruited as keyboard player. The band was named Hawklords, (probably for legal reasons, the band having recently split from their management), and recording took place on a farm in Devon using a mobile studio, resulting in the album \"25 Years On\". King had originally been the drummer for the project but quit during recording sessions to return to London, while House, who had temporarily left the band to join a David Bowie tour, elected to remain with Bowie full-time, but nevertheless contributed violin to these sessions. At the end of the band's UK tour, Calvert, wanting King back in the band, dismissed Griffin, then promptly resigned himself, choosing to pursue a career in literature. Swindells left to record a solo album after an offer had been made to him by the record company ATCO.\n1979\u20131986: Bronze, RCA and independents.\nIn late 1979, Hawkwind reformed with Brock, Bainbridge and King being joined by Huw Lloyd-Langton (who had played on the debut album) and Tim Blake (formerly of Gong), debuting at the first Futurama (The World's First Science Fiction Music Festival) on 9 September in Leeds, and then embarking upon a UK tour despite not having a record deal or any product to promote. Some shows were recorded and a deal was made with Bronze Records, resulting in the \"Live Seventy Nine\" album, quickly followed by the studio album \"Levitation\". However, during the recording of \"Levitation\" King quit and Ginger Baker was drafted in for the sessions, but he chose to stay with the band for the tour, during which Blake left to be replaced by Keith Hale.\nIn 1981 Baker and Hale left after their insistence that Bainbridge should be dismissed was ignored, and Brock and Bainbridge elected to handle synthesisers and sequencers themselves, with drummer Griffin from the Hawklords rejoining. Three albums, which again saw Moorcock contributing lyrics and vocals, were recorded for RCA/Active: \"Sonic Attack\", the electronic \"Church of Hawkwind\" and \"Choose Your Masques\". This band headlined the 1981 Glastonbury Festival and made an appearance at the 1982 Donington Monsters of Rock Festival, as well as continuing to play the summer solstice at Stonehenge Free Festival.\nIn the early 1980s, Brock had started using drum machines for his home demos and became increasingly frustrated at the inability of drummers to keep perfect time, leading to a succession of drummers coming and going. First, Griffin was ousted and the band tried King again, but, unhappy with his playing at that time, he was rejected. Andy Anderson briefly joined while he was also playing for the Cure, and Robert Heaton also filled the spot briefly prior to the rise of New Model Army. Lloyd Langton Group drummer John Clark did some recording sessions, and in late 1983 Rick Martinez joined the band to play drums on the \"Earth Ritual\" tour in February and March 1984, later replaced by Clive Deamer.\nTurner had returned as a guest for the 1982 \"Choose Your Masques\" tour and was invited back permanently. Further tours ensued with Phil \"Dead Fred\" Reeves augmenting the line-up on keyboards and violin, but neither Turner nor Reeves would appear on the only recording of 1983\u201384, \"The Earth Ritual Preview\"; however, there was a guest spot for Lemmy. The \"Earth Ritual\" tour was filmed for Hawkwind's first video release, \"Night of the Hawk\".\nAlan Davey was a young fan of the band who had sent a tape of his playing to Brock, and Brock chose to oust Reeves moving Bainbridge from bass to keyboards to accommodate Davey. This experimental line-up played at the Stonehenge Free Festival in 1984, which was filmed and release as \"Stonehenge 84\". Subsequent personal and professional tensions between Brock and Turner led to the latter's expulsion at the beginning of 1985. Clive Deamer, who was deemed \"too professional\" for the band, was eventually replaced in 1985 by Danny Thompson Jr (son of folk-rock bassist Danny Thompson), a friend of Alan Davey, and remained almost to the end of the decade.\nHawkwind's association with Moorcock climaxed in their most ambitious project, \"The Chronicle of the Black Sword\", based loosely around the Elric series of books and theatrically staged with Tony Crerar as the central character. Moorcock contributed lyrics, but only performed some spoken pieces on some live dates. The tour was recorded and issued as an album \"Live Chronicles\" and video \"The Chronicle of the Black Sword\". The band also performed at the Worldcon (World Science Fiction Convention) in Brighton.\nIn August 1985, The band performed at Crystal Palace Bowl, with several other rock bands, for a benefit concert for Pete Townshend's Double-O anti-heroin charity. Lemmy and Stacia were reunited with the band for this event. Vera Lynn preceded Hawkwinds set.\n1986\u20131999: GWR through to EBS.\nA headline appearance at the 1986 Reading Festival was followed by a UK tour to promote the \"Live Chronicles\" album which was filmed and released as \"Chaos\". In 1988 the band recorded the album \"The Xenon Codex\" with Guy Bidmead, but all was not well in the band and soon after, both Lloyd-Langton and Thompson departed.\nDrummer Richard Chadwick, who joined in the summer of 1988, had been playing in small alternative free festival bands, most notably Bath's Smart Pils, for a decade and had frequently crossed paths with Hawkwind and Brock. He was initially invited simply to play with the band, but eventually replaced stand in drummer Mick Kirton to become the band's drummer to the present day.\nTo fill in the gap of lead sound, lost when Lloyd-Langton left, violinist House was re-instated into the line-up in 1989 (having previously been a member from 1974 until 1978), and, notably, Hawkwind embarked on their first North American visit in eleven years (since the somewhat disastrous 1978 tour), in which House did not partake. The successfully received tour was the first of several over the coming years, in an effort by the band to re-introduce themselves to the American market.\nBridget Wishart, an associate of Chadwick's from the festival circuit, also joined to become the band's one and only singing front-woman, the band had been fronted in earlier days by Stacia but only as a dancer. This band produced two albums, 1990's \"Space Bandits\" and 1991's \"Palace Springs\" and also filmed a one-hour appearance for the \"Bedrock TV\" series with dancer Julie Murray-Anderson, who performed with Hawkwind between 1988 and 1991.\n1990 saw Hawkwind tour North America again, the second instalment in a series of American visits made at around this time in an effort to re-establish the Hawkwind brand in America. The original business plan was to hold three consecutive US tours, annually, from 1989 to 1991, with the first losing money, the second breaking even, and the third turning a profit, ultimately bringing Hawkwind back into recognition across the Atlantic. Progress, however, was somewhat stunted, due to ex-member Nik Turner touring the United States with his own band at the time, in which the shows were often marketed as Hawkwind.\nStill supporting Space Bandits, 1991 commenced with perhaps the most surprising Hawkwind tour in the band's history, without Dave Brock. Brock's temporary replacement was former Smart Pils guitarist Steve Bemand (who had played with Chadwick and Wishart in the Demented Stoats). The tour began in Amsterdam on 12 March and took in Germany, Greece, Italy and France before wrapping up in Belgium on 10 April after 24 dates.\nIn 1991 Bainbridge, House and Wishart departed and the band continued as a three piece relying heavily on synthesisers and sequencers to create a wall-of-sound. The 1992 album \"Electric Tepee\" combined hard rock and light ambient pieces, while \"It is the Business of the Future to be Dangerous\" is almost devoid of the rock leanings. \"The Business Trip\" is a record of the previous album's tour, but rockier as would be expected from a live outing. The \"White Zone\" album was released under the alias Psychedelic Warriors to distance itself entirely from the rock expectancy of Hawkwind.\nA general criticism of techno music at that time was its facelessness and lack of personality, which the band were coming to feel also plagued them. Ron Tree had known the band on the festival circuit and offered his services as a front-man, and the band duly employed him for the album \"Alien 4\" and its accompanying tour which resulted in the album \"Love in Space\" and \"video\".\nIn 1996, unhappy with the musical direction of the band, bassist Davey left, forming his own Middle-Eastern flavoured hard-rock group Bedouin and a Mot\u00f6rhead tribute act named Ace of Spades. His bass playing role was reluctantly picked up by singer Tree and the band were joined full-time by lead guitarist Jerry Richards (another stalwart of the festival scene, playing for Tubilah Dog who had merged with Brock's Agents of Chaos during 1988) for the albums \"Distant Horizons\" and \"In Your Area\". Rasta chanter Captain Rizz also joined the band for guest spots during live shows.\n1999\u20132007: Anniversaries, disputes and Voiceprint.\nHawkestra\u2014a re-union event featuring appearances from past and present members\u2014had originally been intended to coincide with the band's 30th anniversary and the release of the career spanning \"Epocheclipse \u2013 30 Year Anthology\" set, but logistical problems delayed it until 21 October 2000. It took place at the Brixton Academy with about 20 members taking part in a more than 3-hour set, which was filmed and recorded. Guests included Samantha Fox who sang \"Master of the Universe\". However, arguments and disputes over financial recompense and musical input resulted in the prospect of the event being re-staged unlikely, and any album or DVD release being indefinitely shelved.\nThe Hawkestra had set a template for Brock to assemble a core band of Tree, Brock, Richards, Davey, Chadwick and for the use of former members as guests on live shows and studio recordings. The 2000 Christmas Astoria show was recorded with contributions from House, Blake, Rizz, Moorcock, Jez Huggett and Keith Kniveton and released as \"Yule Ritual\" the following year. In 2001, Davey agreed to rejoin the band permanently, but only after the departure of Tree and Richards.\nMeanwhile, having rekindled relationships with old friends at the Hawkestra, Turner organised further Hawkestra gigs resulting in the formation of xhawkwind.com, a band consisting mainly of ex-Hawkwind members and playing old Hawkwind songs. An appearance at Guilfest in 2002 led to confusion as to whether this actually was Hawkwind, sufficiently irking Brock into taking legal action to prohibit Turner from trading under the name Hawkwind. Turner lost the case and the band began performing as Space Ritual.\nAn appearance at the Canterbury Sound Festival in August 2001, resulting in another live album \"Canterbury Fayre 2001\", saw guest appearances from Lloyd-Langton, House, Kniveton with Arthur Brown on \"Silver Machine\". The band organised the first of their own weekend festivals, named Hawkfest, in Devon in the summer of 2002. Brown joined the band in 2002 for a winter tour which featured some Kingdom Come songs and saw appearances from Blake and Lloyd-Langton, the Newcastle show being released on DVD as \"Out of the Shadows\" and the London show on CD as \"Spaced Out in London\".\nA new album, \"Take Me to Your Leader\", was released in 2005. Recorded by the core band of Brock/Davey/Chadwick, contributors included new keyboardist Jason Stuart, Arthur Brown, tabloid writer and TV personality Matthew Wright, 1970s New Wave singer Lene Lovich, Simon House and Jez Huggett. This was followed in 2006 by the CD/DVD \"Take Me to Your Future\".\nThe band were the subject of an hour-long television documentary titled \"Hawkwind: Do Not Panic\" that aired on BBC Four as part of the \"Originals\" series. It was broadcast on 30 March 2007 and repeated on 10 August 2007. Although Brock participated in its making, he did not appear in the programme; it is alleged that he requested all footage of himself be removed after he was denied any artistic control over the documentary. One of the documentary's opening narratives states that Brock declined to be interviewed for the programme because of Nik Turner's involvement, thus indicating that the two men had still not reconciled over the xhawkwind.com incident.\nDecember 2006 saw the official departure of Alan Davey, who left to perform and record with two new bands: Gunslinger and Thunor. He was replaced by Mr Dibs, a long-standing member of the road crew. The band performed at their annual Hawkfest festival and headlined the US festival Nearfest and played gigs in PA and NY. At the end of 2007, Tim Blake once again joined the band filling the lead role playing keyboards and theremin. The band played five Christmas dates, the London show being released as an audio CD and video DVD under the title \"Knights of Space\".\n2008\u20132016: Atomhenge and Eastworld.\nIn January 2008 the band reversed its anti-taping policy \u2013 which had long been a sore point with many fans \u2013 announcing that it would allow audio recording and non-commercial distribution of such recordings, provided there was no competing official release. At the end of 2008, Atomhenge Records (a subsidiary of Cherry Red Records) commenced the re-issuing of Hawkwind's back catalogue from the years 1976 through to 1997 with the release of two triple CD anthologies \"Spirit of the Age (anthology 1976\u201384)\" and \"The Dream Goes On (anthology 1985\u201397)\".\nOn 8 September 2008 keyboard player Jason Stuart died due to a brain haemorrhage. In October 2008, Niall Hone (former Tribe of Cro) joined Hawkwind for their winter 2008 tour playing guitar, along with returning synth/theremin player Tim Blake. In this period, Hone also occasionally played bass guitar alongside Mr Dibs and used laptops for live electronic improvisation.\nIn 2009, the band began occasionally featuring Jon Sevink from The Levellers as guest violinist at some shows. Later that year, Hawkwind embarked on a winter tour to celebrate the band's 40th anniversary, including two gigs on 28 and 29 August marking the anniversary of their first live performances. In 2010, Hawkwind held their annual Hawkfest at the site of the original Isle of Wight Festival, marking the 40th anniversary of their appearance there.\nOn 21 June 2010, Hawkwind released a studio album entitled \"Blood of the Earth\" on Eastworld Records. During and since the \"Blood of the Earth\" support tours, Hone's primary on-stage responsibility shifted to bass, while Mr. Dibs moved to a more traditional lead singer/front man role.\nIn 2011, Hawkwind toured Australia for the second time.\nApril 2012 saw the release of a new album, \"Onward\", again on Eastworld. Keyboardist Dead Fred rejoined Hawkwind for the 2012 tour in support of \"Onward\" and has since remained with the band. In November 2012, Brock, Chadwick and Hone\u2014credited as \"Hawkwind Light Orchestra\"\u2014released \"Stellar Variations\" on Esoteric Recordings.\n2013 marked the first Hawkeaster, a two-day festival held in Seaton, Devon during the Easter weekend. A US tour was booked for October 2013, but due to health issues, was postponed and later cancelled.\nIn February 2014, as part of a one-off Space Ritual performance, Hawkwind performed at the O2 Shepherd's Bush Empire featuring an appearance by Brian Blessed for the spoken word element of Sonic Attack; a studio recording of this performance was released as a single in September 2014. Later in the year, former Soft Machine guitarist John Etheridge joined the live line-up of the band, though he had departed again prior to early 2015 dates.\nFollowing Hawkeaster 2015, Hawkwind made their debut visit to Japan, playing two sold-out shows in Tokyo. Hawkwind performed two Solstice Ritual shows in December 2015, with Steve Hillage guesting, and Haz Wheaton joining Hawkwind on bass guitar. Wheaton is a former member of the band's road crew who had previously appeared with Technicians of Spaceship Hawkwind, a \"skeleton crew\" spin off live band. Additionally, he had guested on bass for Dave Brock's solo album \"Brockworld\" released earlier in the year.\n2016\u2013onwards: Cherry Red projects.\nThe band released \"The Machine Stops\" on 15 April 2016, a concept album based on E.M. Forster's short story of the same name. Brock and Chadwick were joined on the recording by Hone, Dibs and Wheaton sharing bass duties, while Hone and Dead Fred contributed one solo piece each. The album entered the UK album chart at number 29. Dead Fred's last live appearance was at Eastbourne Winter Gardens on 1 April; Hone took on keyboard and synth duties until Blake returned for the summer shows.\nThe trio of Brock, Chadwick and Wheaton recorded the album \"Into the Woods\", released on 5 May 2017, with additional contributions from Dibs, Magnus Martin (whose band Tarantism had supported Hawkwind on many occasions) and Big Bill Barry. Martin and saxophonist Micha\u0142 Sosna (from Polish group hipiersoniK) joined the band for a 16-date UK promotional tour in the same month, and festival appearances at Hellfest, Clisson, France in June and Bluedot Festival at Jodrell Bank Observatory, Cheshire in July. The Roundhouse gig, with a guest appearance from Phil Campbell, was released as \"Hawkwind At The Roundhouse\" on 8 December in 2CD/DVD and 3LP formats.\nFor the \"Into The Woods\" tour the group had performed an opening acoustic set before the main set, and they decided to capture some acoustic performances of their 1970s repertoire in the studio. A chance meeting with Mike Batt by Brock at the US Embassy brought him into the project contributing production, arrangement and additional orchestrations. The album \"Road to Utopia\" was released on 14 September 2018. There was a guest appearance from Eric Clapton, who Brock had performed with as a duo in the 1960s prior to his rise to fame in the Yardbirds. There was also a guest appearance of the band's former sax player, Jez Huggett, who's featured on \"The Age of the Micro Man\". The band played at Dreamland Margate with the Fierce and the Dead. Batt conducted a series of concerts titled \"In Search of Utopia \u2013 Infinity and Beyond\" featuring the band and Docklands Sinfonia Orchestra in October and November, with Arthur Brown guesting. After the recording of the album but before the shows, both Wheaton and Dibs left, while Hone rejoined on bass. Wheaton went on to join Electric Wizard, and Dibs stated \"irreconcilable differences\" on the Hawkwind fans Facebook page, Brock claiming \"we propped the fella up and kept him in the band longer than he should have been, because we were genuinely concerned... about his state of mind.\"\nIn October 2019 the group released \"All Aboard the Skylark\", marketed as a return to their space rock roots. This was the first album with the line-up of Brock, Chadwick, Hone and Martin. Accompanying the CD version, and sold as a separate vinyl LP, was \"Acoustic Daze\" which included tracks from the \"Road to Utopia\" minus the additions of Batt and Clapton. The album was promoted with a 15 date tour of Britain in November, culminating in a final show at London's Royal Albert Hall. The group were augmented by keyboard player Blake, with guest appearances from Phil Campbell and Clapton. A record of the live show titled \"50th Anniversary Live\", with the guest appearance from Campbell, is released on 4 December 2020 by Cherry Red in 3LP and 2CD formats.\nBrock had started work on new material in his home studio with some contributions from Chadwick and Martin when the COVID-19 pandemic spread curtailing any further band activity. Brock would continue work with remote contributions from Martin, and the album \"Carnivorous\" (an anagram of coronavirus) was released in October 2020 under the name Hawkwind Light Orchestra to reflect the reduced personnel.\nWhen the group returned to live performances post-COVID in late 2021, the line-up featured Brock, Chadwick, Martin and new members Thighpaulsandra on keyboards and Doug MacKinnon on bass, replacing Blake and Hone respectively. A new Hawkwind album, \"Somnia\", was released in 2021, followed in 2023 by \"The Future Never Waits\" and in 2024 by \"Stories from Time and Space\". The live album \"Live at the Royal Albert Hall\" recorded on 29 September 2023 was released on 13 December 2024 in 3CD a 3LP formats, the CD issue containing a bonus CD of studio rehearsals. Brown joined the band for this performance reciting the poems.\nInfluence and legacy.\nEduardo Rivadavia of \"Loudwire\" wrote: \"With all due respect to the ethereal Pink Floyd, late-blooming UFO, and \"Mothership\" funk rockers Parliament, the \"heavy\" crown of '70s space rock belongs to the one and only Hawkwind, who embraced the stars like few bands before them or since.\"\nHawkwind have been cited as an influence by artists such as Al Jourgensen of Ministry, Monster Magnet, the Sex Pistols (who covered \"Silver Machine\"), Henry Rollins and Dez Cadena of Black Flag, Siobhan Fahey, Ty Segall, the Mekano Set, Ozric Tentacles., King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard, and Neurosis.\nHard rock musician Lemmy of the band Mot\u00f6rhead gained a lot from his tenure in Hawkwind. He said: \"I really found myself as an instrumentalist in Hawkwind. Before that I was just a guitar player who was pretending to be good, when actually I was no good at all. In Hawkwind I became a good bass player. It was where I learned I was good at something.\"\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
