{"id": "16573", "revid": "1307446573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16573", "title": "James Flynn (academic)", "text": "New Zealand intelligence researcher (1934\u20132020)\nJames Robert Flynn (28 April 1934\u00a0\u2013 11 December 2020) was an American-born New Zealand moral philosopher and intelligence researcher. Originally from Washington, D.C., and educated at the University of Chicago, Flynn emigrated to Dunedin in 1963, where he taught political studies at the University of Otago. He was noted for his publications about the continued year-after-year increase of IQ scores throughout the world, which is now referred to as the Flynn effect. In addition to his academic work, he championed social democratic politics throughout his life.\nEarly life and education.\nJames Robert Flynn was born in an Irish-American community in Washington, D.C., on April 28, 1934. His parents were Irish-Americans from Missouri. His father, Joseph, left formal schooling at age 12 to work in a factory and later became a \"hard-drinking\" journalist and editor. Flynn described his father as a \"keen reader\" who took pride in completing the \"New York Times\" crossword puzzle in pen rather than pencil. Flynn's father read classical works to him at a young age, and Flynn said he was \"surrounded by good literature\" as a child. Flynn became an avid reader as well; later in life, he wrote a book about world literature, and in a 2010 commencement address, he encouraged graduates to learn by reading \"works of great literature\". His mother, Mae, was an office worker and homemaker who trained as a teacher. He had a brother, Joseph, who became a non-isothermal kinetics chemist.\nRaised Roman Catholic, Flynn was a choir boy at Washington, D.C.'s Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle and attended the Catholic private schools St. Paul's Primary School and St. John's Academy. Flynn renounced his Catholic religion at age 12 after winning a full set of \"World Book Encyclopedia\" in a city-wide competition and reading about scientific explanations for the creation of the universe that contradicted his creationist education. He credited his rejection of Catholicism and his parents' racial views for forming his secular, socialist views on racial and social equality. Flynn described himself as an \"atheist, a scientific realist, a social democrat\".\nFlynn was a lifelong competitive runner who ran for his high school and college and earned six US running medals over the course of his life.\nIn the 1950s, Flynn earned a scholarship to the University of Chicago, where he originally intended to study pure mathematics or theoretical physics \"because they seemed to pose the most difficult problems to solve\", but ended up studying moral and political philosophy, a field with more practical applications.\nAn \"ardent democratic socialist\" and \"man of the left\" throughout his life, Flynn joined the Socialist Party of America in college and, after graduating, became a civil rights activist.\nWhile working on his doctorate in politics and moral philosophy, he was political action co-chairman for the university branch of the NAACP, where he worked on its social housing initiatives.\nHis doctorate dissertation was titled, \"Ethics and the Modern Social Scientist.\"\nHe met his wife, an attorney whose family was active in the Communist Party USA, at a protest against segregation at Glen Echo Park in Maryland.\nHe was 26 years old at the time, and she was 17. His wife said that Flynn \"ticked the entire list of qualities I wanted in a husband and which I had written down in my diary at the age of 15\": he was tall, smart, funny, held left-wing political views, could stand up to her mother, and had a job with a pension. She proposed to him three times: he declined the first two times due to her young age before accepting the third proposal.\nThey named their eldest son, Oxford University maths professor Victor Flynn, after socialist Eugene Victor Debs.\nThe couple also had a daughter, who became a clinical psychologist.\nEarly career.\nAfter earning his doctorate in 1958 at age 24, Flynn taught at Eastern Kentucky University in Richmond, Kentucky, where he chaired the local chapter of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), a civil rights organisation in the US South.\nHe was reprimanded by the mayor of Richmond and the university for his anti-segregation activism, and removed as the university's track coach. In 1961, he left Kentucky to teach at the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, followed by Lake Forest College in Chicago, from which he was fired for giving a lecture on social medicine, working as a peace activist, and being a member of the Socialist Party.\nBy Flynn's own account, in early 1960s America he was consistently fired for his social democratic politics. Accordingly, in 1963, aged 29, he emigrated with his family to New Zealand, where he taught at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch and remained active (from afar) in the American civil rights movement.\nIn New Zealand Flynn continued to campaign for left-wing causes, and advised Labour Prime Minister Norman Kirk on foreign policy. He was a member of the anti-war Committee on Vietnam and gave lectures against nuclear proliferation.\nIn 1967, he joined the University of Otago in Dunedin as Foundation Professor of Political Studies and head of the university's politics department.\nIn 1973, Flynn published \"Humanism and Ideology: An Aristotelian View\".\nIQ research and the Flynn effect.\nIn 1978, while working on a refutation of classical racism for an upcoming book about \"humane ideals\", Flynn read University of California, Berkeley educational psychologist Arthur Jensen's 1969 article, \"How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?\", which argued that black people scored lower than white people on IQ tests because of genetic differences between the races.\nFlynn initially planned to spend only a few pages on his book refuting Jensen's work. After studying historical IQ tests, Flynn noticed that although the IQ tests were always calibrated so that a score of \"100\" was average, the actual raw scores showed that people's performance on the IQ tests improved over time. Flynn calculated that the average American in the year 1900 would have scored a 67 on the version of IQ tests administered in the year 2000, a score that suggested mental impairment. Because such an increase in IQ scores over only a few generations could not have been caused by genetic evolution, Flynn concluded that the increases must have been caused by changes in environmental factors, meaning that IQ is influenced more by environment than by genetics.\nIn 1980, Flynn published his research critiquing Jensen's work in his seminal book, \"Race, IQ and Jensen\", which argued that increases in IQ scores over time, and differences in scores between groups of people such as black people and white people, are caused by environmental rather than genetic factors.\nIn 1984, he published an article, \"The Mean IQ of Americans: Massive Gains 1932 to 1978\", examining Stanford-Binet and Wechsler IQ test results, and reported that Americans' average scores increased by 13.8 IQ points in 46 years, almost an entire standard deviation.\nIn response to critics suggesting that the IQ increase could be attributed in increases in education (as opposed to innate intelligence), Flynn examined the results of Raven's Progressive Matrices IQ tests, which use visual patterns rather than words to estimate fluid intelligence or \"on-the-spot problem solving\", irrespective of educational or cultural differences among test-takers. Such non-verbal tests can be used to compare diverse populations such as San people and Inuktun. In 1987, Flynn published \"Massive IQ Gains in 14 Nations: What IQ Tests Really Measure\", which found that IQ points in 14 countries, as measured by Raven tests, increased between five and 25 points.\nTest score increases have been continuous and approximately linear from the earliest years of testing to the present. For the Raven's Progressive Matrices test, subjects born over a 100-year period were compared in Des Moines, Iowa, and separately in Dumfries, Scotland. Improvements were remarkably consistent across the whole period, in both countries. This effect of an apparent increase in IQ has also been observed in various other parts of the world, though the rates of increase vary.\nIn 1994, Harvard University psychologist Richard Herrnstein and American Enterprise Institute political scientist Charles Murray published the highly-controversial book \"The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life\", which discussed Flynn's research and dubbed the increase in IQ scores the \"Flynn effect\".\nFlynn often debated Jensen and Murray, but there was mutual admiration between them, and he defended them against accusations of racism.\nFlynn believed in racial equality. He advocated for open scientific debate about controversial social science claims, and was critical of the suppression of research into race and intelligence. He urged those who believe in racial equality to use solid evidence to advance those beliefs.\nFlynn did not believe genetic differences in intelligence between races existed; he argued that intelligence is influenced by environmental factors that correlate with socioeconomic status.\nThe \"Flynn effect\" is the substantial and long-sustained increase in intelligence test scores measured in many parts of the world. When intelligence quotient (IQ) tests are initially standardised using a sample of test-takers, by convention the average of the test results is set to 100 and their standard deviation is set to 15 IQ points. When IQ tests are revised they are again standardised using a new sample of test-takers, usually born more recently than the first. Again, the average result is set to 100. However, when the new test subjects take the older tests, in almost every case their average scores are significantly above 100.\nFlynn gained international recognition for the Flynn effect, which has become widely accepted by psychologists and has been documented in large portions of the developed world and several developing countries, at rates too fast and dramatic to be caused by changes in genes, and correlating with environmental changes such as modernisation and improvements in education.\nAlthough Flynn was not the first to document increases in IQ or criticise IQ tests, international discussion and acceptance of the Flynn effect sparked a significant reassessment by researchers of IQ tests and the nature of human intelligence.\nThere are numerous proposed explanations of the Flynn effect, as well as some scepticism about its implications. Similar improvements have been reported for other cognitions such as semantic and episodic memory. Recent research suggests that the Flynn effect may have ended in at least a few developed nations, possibly allowing national differences in IQ scores to diminish if the Flynn effect continues in nations with lower average national IQs.\nFlynn himself, with co-worker William Dickens, has suggested an explanatory model which points to two-way causality between IQ and environment: a cognitively challenging environment raises an individual's IQ, while in addition, a higher individual IQ makes it more likely that an individual will self-select or be sorted into more cognitively challenging environments.\nLater career.\nHe was in favour of homosexual law reform in New Zealand and in 1985 listed his name openly in support.\nWhile teaching at Otago in the 1990s, Flynn became a founding member of the NewLabour and Alliance political parties. He stood unsuccessfully as an Alliance candidate for the New Zealand House of Representatives in general elections in the Dunedin North electorate in 1993, 1996, and 2005 elections. In 2008 he acted as the Alliance spokesperson for finance and taxation.\nIn 1996, Flynn stepped down as head of the University of Otago's politics department and in 1997, he became Emeritus Professor in the Politics and Psychology departments.\nIn 1999, Flynn had surgery for intestinal cancer, which remained in remission for twenty years.\nA 1999 article published in \"American Psychologist\" summarised much of his research up to that point. On the alleged genetic inferiority of Blacks on IQ tests, he lays out the argument and evidence for such a belief and then contests each point. He interprets the direct evidence\u2014when Blacks are raised in settings that are less disadvantageous\u2014as suggesting that environmental factors explain average group differences. And yet, he argues that the environmental explanation gained force after the discovery that IQ scores were rising over time. Inter-generational IQ differences among Whites and across nations were larger than the Black-White IQ Gap and could not be accounted for by genetic factors, which, if anything, should have reduced IQ, according to scholars he references. In that and in later works, he posited that the Black-White IQ score gap can be largely explained by environmental factors if \"the average environment for Blacks in 1995 matches the quality of the average environment for Whites in 1945.\"\nIn 2000, Flynn published what he considered his most important book, \"How to Defend Humane Ideals\", which he dedicated to his wife and which was a \"recalibration\" of the \"modern Aristotelianism\" of his earlier 1973 work, \"Humanism and Ideology\".\nIn 2006, with Brookings Institution economist William T. Dickens, Flynn published \"Black Americans reduce the racial IQ gap: evidence from standardization samples\", which suggested that the difference in IQ scores between blacks and whites narrowed by four to seven points between 1972 and 2002, a conclusion contested by Jensen and controversial University of Western Ontario psychologist J. Philippe Rushton.\nFlynn's 2007 book, \"What is Intelligence? Beyond the Flynn Effect\", was dedicated to Jensen and revisited and expanded upon his earlier work from the 1980s.\nDuring 2007, new research from the 2006 New Zealand census showed that women without a tertiary (college) education had produced 2.57 babies each, compared to 1.85 babies for those women with a higher education. During July 2007, \"The Sunday Star-Times\" quoted Flynn as saying that New Zealand risked having a less intelligent population and that a \"persistent genetic trend which lowered the genetic quality for brain physiology would have some effect eventually\". He referred to hypothetical eugenicists' suggestions for reversing the trend, including some sort of oral contraceptive \"in the water supply and \u2026 an antidote\" to conceive.\nFlynn later articulated his own views on the \"Close Up\" television programme in an interview with Paul Henry, suggesting that the \"Sunday Star-Times\" had grossly misrepresented his opinions. In the article, Flynn argued that he never intended for his suggestion to be taken seriously, as he only said this to illustrate a particular point.\nFlynn continued teaching and was a prolific author in his later life, publishing almost a book every year in his last decade on a number of topics.\nFlynn wrote a variety of books. His research interests included humane ideals and ideological debate, classics of political philosophy, and race, class and IQ (see race and intelligence). His books combined political and moral philosophy with psychology to examine problems such as justifying humane ideals and whether it makes sense to rank races and classes by merit.\nDespite the success of his work on IQ, Flynn considered himself primarily a philosopher who had simply taken a \"holiday\" in psychology.\n2008's \"Where have all the liberals gone? Race, class, and ideals in America\" argued that American liberalism had lost its way in response to alarmism from American conservatism.\nIn 2010, Flynn published \"The Torchlight List: Around the World in 200 Books\", which analysed world literature and proposed that a person can learn more from reading great works of literature than they can from going to university.\nFlynn published three books in 2012. \"Are We Getting Smarter? Rising IQ in the Twenty-First Century\" summarised his past IQ work and responded to criticisms, particularly regarding environmental causes for race and gender IQ gaps. \"Beyond patriotism: From Truman to Obama (2012)\" critiqued US foreign policy, and suggested people should put allegiance to the world community above national allegiances. \"Fate &amp; philosophy: A journey through life's great questions\" discussed science, ethics, religion, and free will.\nIn July 2012, several media outlets reported Flynn as saying that women had, for the first time in a century, surpassed men on IQ tests based on a study he conducted in 2010. However, Flynn announced that the media had seriously distorted his results and went beyond his findings, revealing that he had instead discovered that the differences between men and women on one particular test, the Raven's Progressive Matrices, had become minimal in five modernised nations (whereas before 1982 women had scored significantly lower). Women, he argued, caught up with men in these nations as a result of exposure to modernity by entering the professions and being allowed greater educational access. Therefore, he said, when a total account of the Flynn effect is considered, women's closing the gap had moved them up in IQ slightly faster than men as a result. Flynn had previously documented this same trend among ethnic minorities and other disadvantaged groups. According to Flynn, the sexes are \"dead equal on cognitive factors ... in their ability to deal with using logic on the abstract problems of Raven's\", but that temperamental differences in the way boys and girls take the tests likely account for the tiny variations in mean scores, rather than any difference in intellectual ability.\nFlynn's 2013 TED talk, \"Why our IQ levels are higher than our grandparents'\", has been viewed millions of times.\nIn 2016, Flynn published \"No Place to Hide: Climate Change: A short introduction for New Zealanders\", in which he advocated climate engineering as a way to delay the effects of climate change until renewable energy becomes available.\nIn 2019, Flynn was told that his latest book, originally titled \"In Defense of Free Speech: The University as Censor\", which examined whether modern universities continued to advance free inquiry and critical thinking, would not be published by the English publisher Emerald Group Publishing, who had previously accepted it and scheduled it for publication. Despite Flynn's stating that he was only summarising the positions of others with whom he disagreed, the book was originally thought too incendiary to be published. Dozens of academics, including Murray, defended Flynn, and a United States publisher, Academica Press, later published the book under the title \"A Book Too Risky to Publish: Free Speech and Universities\". In the preface, Flynn stated that it was thought too controversial by Emerald under the United Kingdom's laws about hate speech as the intent is irrelevant if it is thought likely that \"racial hatred could be stirred up as a result of the work\".\nHe became an Honorary Fellow for life of the New Zealand Psychological Society and in 1998 received its Special Award. In 2002, he was awarded the university's gold medal for Distinguished Career Research. In 2007, he became a Distinguished Contributor of the International Society for Intelligence Research. He received an honorary Doctorate of Science from the University of Otago in 2010. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand and in 2011 received its Aronui Medal, Distinguished Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Distinguished Visiting Speaker at Cornell University, and Distinguished Associate of The Psychometrics Centre at Cambridge University. Flynn was a member of the editorial board of \"Intelligence\" and on the Honorary International Advisory Editorial Board of the Mens Sana Monographs.\nFlynn retired in 2020. His cancer returned, and he underwent liver surgery that May. Flynn's wife described his final year as \"difficult\". Flynn died of intestinal cancer at Yvette Williams Retirement Village in Dunedin on 11 December 2020, aged 86.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16578", "revid": "43032617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16578", "title": "John Hay", "text": "American statesman (1838\u20131905)\nJohn Milton Hay (October 8, 1838\u00a0\u2013 July 1, 1905) was an American statesman and official whose career in government stretched over almost half a century. Beginning as a private secretary for Abraham Lincoln, he became a diplomat. He served as United States Secretary of State under Presidents William McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt. Hay was also a biographer of Lincoln, and wrote poetry and other literature throughout his life.\nBorn in Salem, Indiana to an anti-slavery family that moved to Warsaw, Illinois, Hay showed great potential from an early age, and his family sent him to Brown University. After graduation in 1858, Hay read law in his uncle's office in Springfield, Illinois, adjacent to that of Lincoln. Hay worked for Lincoln's successful presidential campaign and became one of his private secretaries in the White House. Throughout the American Civil War, Hay was close to Lincoln and stood by his deathbed after the President was shot. In addition to his other literary works, Hay co-authored, with John George Nicolay, Lincoln's other private secretary, a that helped shape the assassinated president's historical image.\nAfter Lincoln's death, Hay spent several years at diplomatic posts in Europe, then worked for the \"New-York Tribune\" under Horace Greeley and Whitelaw Reid. Hay remained active in politics, and from 1879 to 1881 served as Assistant Secretary of State. Afterward, he returned to the private sector, remaining there until President McKinley, of whom he had been a major backer, made him the Ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1897. Hay became the Secretary of State the following year.\nHay served for nearly seven years as Secretary of State under President McKinley and, after McKinley's assassination, under Theodore Roosevelt. Hay was responsible for negotiating the Open Door Policy, which kept China open to trade with all countries on an equal basis, with international powers. By negotiating the Hay\u2013Pauncefote Treaty with the United Kingdom, the (ultimately unratified) Hay\u2013Herr\u00e1n Treaty with Colombia, and finally the Hay\u2013Bunau-Varilla Treaty with the newly independent Republic of Panama, Hay also cleared the way for the building of the Panama Canal.\nEarly life.\nFamily and youth.\nJohn Milton Hay was born in Salem, Indiana, on October 8, 1838. He was the third son of Dr. Charles Hay and the former Helen Leonard. Charles Hay, born in Lexington, Kentucky, hated slavery and moved to the North in the early 1830s. A doctor, he practiced in Salem. Helen's father, David Leonard, had moved his family west from Assonet, Massachusetts, in 1818, but died en route to Vincennes, Indiana, and Helen relocated to Salem in 1830 to teach school. They married there in 1831. Charles was not successful in Salem, and moved, with his wife and children, to Warsaw, Illinois, in 1841.\nJohn attended the local schools, and in 1849 his uncle Milton Hay invited John to live at his home in Pittsfield, Pike County, and attend a well-regarded local school, the John D. Thomson Academy. Milton was a friend of Springfield attorney Abraham Lincoln and had read law in the firm Stuart and Lincoln. In Pittsfield, John first met John Nicolay, who was at the time a 20-year-old newspaperman. Once John Hay completed his studies there, the 13-year-old was sent to live with his grandfather in Springfield and attend school there. His parents and uncle Milton (who financed the boy's education) sent him to Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, \"alma mater\" of his late maternal grandfather.\nStudent and Lincoln supporter.\nHay enrolled at Brown in 1855. Although he enjoyed college life, he did not find it easy: his Western clothing and accent made him stand out; he was not well prepared academically and was often sick. Hay gained a reputation as a star student and became a part of Providence's literary circle that included Sarah Helen Whitman and Nora Perry. He wrote poetry and experimented with hashish. Hay received his Master of Arts degree in 1858, and was, like his grandfather before him, Class Poet. He returned to Illinois. Milton Hay had moved his practice to Springfield, and John became a clerk in his firm, where he could study law.\nMilton Hay's firm was one of the most prestigious in Illinois. Lincoln maintained offices next door and was a rising star in the new Republican Party. Hay recalled an early encounter with Lincoln:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He came into the law office where I was reading ... with a copy of \"Harper's Magazine\" in hand, containing Senator Douglas's famous article on Popular Sovereignty. [whether residents of each territory could decide on slavery] Lincoln seemed greatly roused by what he had read. Entering the office without a salutation, he said: \"This will never do. He puts the moral element out of this question. It won't stay out.\"\nHay was not a supporter of Lincoln for president until after his nomination in 1860. Hay then made speeches and wrote newspaper articles boosting Lincoln's candidacy. When Nicolay, who had been made Lincoln's private secretary for the campaign, found he needed help with the huge amounts of correspondence, Hay worked full-time for Lincoln for six months.\nAfter Lincoln was elected, Nicolay, who continued as Lincoln's private secretary, recommended that Hay be hired to assist him at the White House. Lincoln is reported to have said, \"We can't take all Illinois with us down to Washington\" but then \"Well, let Hay come\". Kushner and Sherrill were dubious about \"the story of Lincoln's offhand appointment of Hay\" as fitting well into Hay's self-image of never having been an office-seeker, but \"poorly into the realities of Springfield politics of the 1860s\"\u2014Hay must have expected some reward for handling Lincoln's correspondence for months. Hay biographer John Taliaferro suggests that Lincoln engaged Nicolay and Hay to assist him, rather than more seasoned men, both \"out of loyalty and surely because of the competence and compatibility that his two young aides had demonstrated\". Historian Joshua Zeitz argues that Lincoln was moved to hire Hay when Milton agreed to pay his nephew's salary for six months.\nAmerican Civil War.\nSecretary to Lincoln.\nMilton Hay desired that his nephew go to Washington as a qualified attorney, and John Hay was admitted to the bar in Illinois on February 4, 1861. On February 11, he embarked with President-elect Lincoln on a circuitous journey to Washington. By this time, several Southern states had seceded to form the Confederate States of America in reaction to the election of Lincoln, seen as an opponent of slavery. When Lincoln was sworn in on March 4, Hay and Nicolay moved into the White House, sharing a shabby bedroom. As there was only authority for payment of one presidential secretary (Nicolay), Hay was appointed to a post in the Interior Department at $1,600 per year, seconded to service at the White House. They were available to Lincoln 24 hours a day. As Lincoln took no vacations as president and worked seven days a week, often until 11\u00a0pm (or later, during crucial battles) the burden on his secretaries was heavy.\nHay and Nicolay divided their responsibilities, Nicolay tending to assist Lincoln in his office and in meetings, while Hay dealt with the correspondence, which was voluminous. Both men tried to shield Lincoln from office-seekers and others who wanted to meet with the President. Unlike the dour Nicolay, Hay, with his charm, escaped much of the hard feelings from those denied Lincoln's presence. Abolitionist Thomas Wentworth Higginson described Hay as \"a nice young fellow, who unfortunately looks about seventeen and is oppressed with the necessity of behaving like seventy.\" Hay continued to write, anonymously, for newspapers, sending in columns calculated to make Lincoln appear a sorrowful man, religious and competent, giving of his life and health to preserve the Union. Similarly, Hay served as what Taliaferro deemed a \"White House propagandist,\" in his columns explaining away losses such as that at First Bull Run in July 1861.\nDespite the heavy workload\u2014Hay wrote that he was busy 20 hours a day\u2014he tried to make as normal a life as possible, eating his meals with Nicolay at Willard's Hotel, going to the theater with Abraham and Mary Todd Lincoln, and reading \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" in French. Hay, still in his early 20s, spent time both in barrooms and at cultured get-togethers in the homes of Washington's elite. The two secretaries often clashed with Mary Lincoln, who resorted to various stratagems to get the dilapidated White House restored without depleting Lincoln's salary, which had to cover entertainment and other expenses. Despite the secretaries' objections, Mrs. Lincoln was generally the victor and managed to save almost 70 percent of her husband's salary in his four years in office.\nAfter the death of Lincoln's 11-year-old son Willie in February 1862 (an event not mentioned in Hay's diary or correspondence), \"it was Hay who became, if not a surrogate son, then a young man who stirred a higher form of parental nurturing that Lincoln, despite his best intentions, did not successfully bestow on either of his surviving children\". According to Hay biographer Robert Gale, \"Hay came to adore Lincoln for his goodness, patience, understanding, sense of humor, humility, magnanimity, sense of justice, healthy skepticism, resilience and power, love of the common man, and mystical patriotism\". Speaker of the House Galusha Grow stated, \"Lincoln was very much attached to him\"; writer Charles G. Halpine, who knew Hay then, later recorded that \"Lincoln loved him as a son\".\nHay and Nicolay accompanied Lincoln to Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, for the dedication of the cemetery there, where were interred many of those who fell at the Battle of Gettysburg. Although they made much of Lincoln's brief Gettysburg Address in their 1890 multi-volume biography of Lincoln, Hay's diary states \"the President, in a firm, free way, with more grace than is his wont, said his half-dozen lines of consecration.\"\nPresidential emissary.\nLincoln sent Hay away from the White House on various missions. In August 1861, Hay escorted Mary Lincoln and her children to Long Branch, New Jersey, a resort on the Jersey Shore, both as their caretaker and as a means of giving Hay a much-needed break. The following month, Lincoln sent him to Missouri to deliver a letter to Union General John C. Fr\u00e9mont, who had irritated the President with military blunders and by freeing local slaves without authorization, endangering Lincoln's attempts to keep the border states in the Union.\nIn April 1863, Lincoln sent Hay to the Union-occupied South Carolina coast to report back on the ironclad vessels being used in an attempt to recapture Charleston Harbor. Hay then went on to the Florida coast. He returned to Florida in January 1864, after Lincoln had announced his Ten Percent Plan, that if ten percent of the 1860 electorate in a state took oaths of loyalty and to support emancipation, they could form a government with federal protection. Lincoln considered Florida, with its small population, a good test case, and made Hay a major, sending him to see if he could get sufficient men to take the oath. Hay spent a month in the state during February and March 1864, but Union defeats there reduced the area under federal control. Believing his mission impractical, he sailed back to Washington.\nIn July 1864, New York publisher Horace Greeley sent word to Lincoln that there were Southern peace emissaries in Canada. Lincoln doubted that they actually spoke for Confederate President Jefferson Davis, but had Hay journey to New York to persuade the publisher to go to Niagara Falls, Ontario, to meet with them and bring them to Washington. Greeley reported to Lincoln that the emissaries lacked accreditation by Davis, but were confident they could bring both sides together. Lincoln sent Hay to Ontario with what became known as the Niagara Manifesto: that if the South laid down its arms, freed the slaves, and reentered the Union, it could expect liberal terms on other points. The Southerners refused to come to Washington to negotiate.\nAssassination of Lincoln.\nBy the end of 1864, with Lincoln re-elected and the victorious war winding down, both Hay and Nicolay let it be known that they desired different jobs. Soon after Lincoln's second inauguration in March 1865, the two secretaries were appointed to the U.S. delegation in Paris, Nicolay as consul and Hay as secretary of legation. Hay wrote to his brother Charles that the appointment was \"entirely unsolicited and unexpected\", a statement that Kushner and Sherrill found unconvincing given that Hay had spent hundreds of hours during the war with Secretary of State William H. Seward, who had often discussed personal and political matters with him, and the close relationship between the two men was so well known that office-seekers cultivated Hay as a means of getting to Seward. The two men were also motivated to find new jobs by their deteriorating relationship with Mary Lincoln, who sought their ouster, and by Nicolay's desire to wed his intended\u2014he could not bring a bride to his shared room at the White House. They remained at the White House pending the arrival and training of replacements.\nHay did not accompany the Lincolns to Ford's Theatre on the night of April 14, 1865, but remained at the White House, drinking whiskey with Robert Lincoln. When the two were informed that the President had been shot, they hastened to the Petersen House, a boarding house where the stricken Lincoln had been taken. Hay remained by Lincoln's deathbed through the night and was present when he died. At the moment of Lincoln's death, Hay observed \"a look of unspeakable peace came upon his worn features\". He heard War Secretary Edwin Stanton's declaration, \"Now he belongs to the ages.\"\nAccording to Kushner and Sherrill, \"Lincoln's death was for Hay a personal loss, like the loss of a father\u00a0... Lincoln's assassination erased any remaining doubts Hay had about Lincoln's greatness.\" In 1866, in a personal letter, Hay deemed Lincoln, \"the greatest character since Christ\". Taliaferro noted that \"Hay would spend the rest of his life mourning Lincoln\u00a0... wherever Hay went and whatever he did, Lincoln would \"always\" be watching\".\nEarly diplomatic career.\nHay sailed for Paris at the end of June 1865. There, he served under U.S. Minister to France John Bigelow. The workload was not heavy, and Hay found time to enjoy the pleasures of Paris. When Bigelow resigned in mid-1866, Hay, as was customary, submitted his resignation, though he was asked to remain until Bigelow's successor was in place, and stayed until January 1867. He consulted with Secretary of State Seward, asking him for \"anything worth having\". Seward suggested the post of Minister to Sweden, but reckoned without the new president, Andrew Johnson, who had his own candidate. Seward offered Hay a job as his private secretary, but Hay declined, and returned home to Warsaw, Illinois.\nInitially happy to be home, Hay quickly grew restive, and he was glad to hear, in early June 1867, that he had been appointed secretary of legation to act as charg\u00e9 d'affaires at Vienna. He sailed for Europe the same month, and while in England visited the House of Commons, where he was greatly impressed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Benjamin Disraeli. The Vienna post was only temporary, until Johnson could appoint a charg\u00e9 d'affaires and have him confirmed by the Senate, and the workload was light, allowing Hay, who was fluent in German, to spend much of his time traveling. It was not until July 1868 that Henry Watts became Hay's replacement. Hay resigned, spent the remainder of the summer in Europe, then went home to Warsaw.\nUnemployed again, in December 1868 Hay journeyed to the capital, writing to Nicolay that he \"came to Washington in the peaceful pursuit of a fat office. But there is nothing just now available\". Seward promised to \"wrestle with Andy for anything that turns up\", but nothing did prior to the departure of both Seward and Johnson from office on March 4, 1869. In May, Hay went back to Washington from Warsaw to press his case with the new Grant administration. The next month, due to the influence of his friends, he obtained the post of secretary of legation in Spain.\nAlthough the salary was low, Hay was interested in serving in Madrid both because of the political situation there\u2014Queen Isabella II had recently been deposed\u2014and because the U.S. Minister was the swashbuckling former congressman, General Daniel Sickles. Hay hoped to assist Sickles in gaining U.S. control over Cuba, then a Spanish colony. Sickles was unsuccessful and Hay resigned in May 1870, citing the low salary, but remaining in his post until September. Two legacies of Hay's time in Madrid were magazine articles he wrote that became the basis of his first book, \"Castilian Days\", and his lifelong friendship with Sickles's personal secretary, Alvey A. Adee, who would be a close aide to Hay at the State Department.\nWilderness years (1870\u20131897).\n\"Tribune\" and marriage.\nWhile still in Spain, Hay had been offered the position of assistant editor at the \"New-York Tribune\"\u2014both the editor, Horace Greeley, and his managing editor, Whitelaw Reid, were anxious to hire Hay. He joined the staff in October 1870. The \"Tribune\" was the leading reform newspaper in New York, and through mail subscriptions, the largest-circulating newspaper in the nation. Hay wrote editorials for the \"Tribune\", and Greeley soon proclaimed him the most brilliant writer of \"breviers\" (as such editorials were called) that he had ever had.\nWith his success as an editorial writer, Hay's duties expanded. In October 1871, he journeyed to Chicago after the great fire there, interviewing Mrs. O'Leary, whose cow was said to have started the blaze, describing her as \"a woman with a lamp [who went] to the barn behind the house, to milk the cow with the crumpled temper, that kicked the lamp, that spilled the kerosene, that fired the straw that burned Chicago\". His work at the \"Tribune\" came as his fame as a poet was reaching its peak, and one colleague described it as \"a liberal education in the delights of intellectual life to sit in intimate companionship with John Hay and watch the play of that well-stored and brilliant mind\". In addition to writing, Hay was signed by the prestigious Boston Lyceum Bureau, whose clients included Mark Twain and Susan B. Anthony, to give lectures on the prospects for democracy in Europe, and on his years in the Lincoln White House.\nBy the time President Grant ran for re-election in 1872, Grant's administration had been rocked by scandal, and some disaffected members of his party formed the Liberal Republicans, naming Greeley as their candidate for president, a nomination soon joined in by the Democrats. Hay was unenthusiastic about the editor-turned-candidate, and in his editorials mostly took aim at Grant, who, despite the scandals, remained untarred, and who won a landslide victory in the election. Greeley died only weeks later, a broken man. Hay's stance endangered his hitherto sterling credentials in the Republican Party.\nBy 1873, Hay was wooing Clara Stone, daughter of Cleveland multimillionaire railroad and banking mogul Amasa Stone. Their marriage in 1874 made the salary attached to office a small consideration for the rest of his life. Amasa Stone needed someone to watch over his investments, and wanted Hay to move to Cleveland to fill the post. Although the Hays initially lived in John's New York apartment and later in a townhouse there, they moved in June 1875 to Stone's ornate home on Cleveland's Euclid Avenue, \"Millionaire's Row\", and a mansion was quickly under construction for the Hays next-door. The Hays had four children, Helen Hay Whitney, Adelbert Stone Hay, Alice Evelyn Hay Wadsworth Boyd (who married James Wolcott Wadsworth Jr.), and Clarence Leonard Hay. Their father proved successful as a money manager, though he devoted much of his time to literary and political activities, writing to Adee that \"I do nothing but read and yawn\".\nOn December 29, 1876, a bridge over Ohio's Ashtabula River collapsed. The bridge had been built from metal cast at one of Stone's mills, and was carrying a train owned and operated by Stone's Lake Shore and Michigan Railway. Ninety-two people died; it was the worst rail disaster in American history up to that point. Blame fell heavily on Stone, who departed for Europe to recuperate and left Hay in charge of his businesses. The summer of 1877 was marked by labor disputes; a strike over wage cuts on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad soon spread to the Lake Shore, much to Hay's outrage. He blamed foreign agitators for the dispute, and vented his anger over the strike in his only novel, \"The Bread-Winners\" (1883).\nReturn to politics.\nHay remained disaffected from the Republican Party in the mid-1870s. Seeking a candidate of either party he could support as a reformer, he watched as his favored Democrat, Samuel Tilden, gained his party's nomination, but his favored Republican, James G. Blaine, did not, falling to Ohio Governor Rutherford B. Hayes, whom Hay did not support during the campaign. Hayes's victory in the election left Hay an outsider as he sought a return to politics, and he was initially offered no place in the new administration. Nevertheless, Hay attempted to ingratiate himself with the new president by sending him a gold ring with a strand of George Washington's hair, a gesture that Hayes deeply appreciated. Hay spent time working with Nicolay on their Lincoln biography, and traveling in Europe. When Reid, who had succeeded Greeley as editor of the \"Tribune\", was offered the post of Minister to Germany in December 1878, he turned it down and recommended Hay. Secretary of State William M. Evarts indicated that Hay \"had not been active enough in political efforts\", to Hay's regret, who told Reid that he \"would like a second-class mission uncommonly well\".\nFrom May to October 1879, Hay set out to reconfirm his credentials as a loyal Republican, giving speeches in support of candidates and attacking the Democrats. In October, President and Mrs. Hayes came to a reception at Hay's Cleveland home. When Assistant Secretary of State Frederick W. Seward resigned later that month, Hay was offered his place and accepted, after some hesitancy because he was considering running for Congress.\nIn Washington, Hay oversaw a staff of eighty employees, renewed his acquaintance with his friend Henry Adams, and substituted for Evarts at Cabinet meetings when the Secretary was out of town. In 1880, he campaigned for the Republican nominee for president, Ohio Congressman James A. Garfield. Hay felt that Garfield did not have enough backbone, and hoped that Reid and others would \"inoculate him with the gall which I fear he lacks\". Garfield consulted Hay before and after his election as president on appointments and other matters, but offered Hay only the post of private secretary (though he promised to increase its pay and power), and Hay declined. Hay resigned as assistant secretary effective March 31, 1881, and spent the next seven months as acting editor of the \"Tribune\" during Reid's extended absence in Europe. Garfield's death in September and Reid's return the following month left Hay again on the outside of political power, looking in. He would spend the next fifteen years in that position.\nWealthy traveler (1881\u20131897).\nAuthor and dilettante.\nAfter 1881, Hay did not again hold public office until 1897. Amasa Stone committed suicide in 1883; his death left the Hays very wealthy. They spent several months in most years traveling in Europe. The Lincoln biography absorbed some of Hay's time, the hardest work being done with Nicolay in 1884 and 1885; beginning in 1886, portions began appearing serially, and the was published in 1890.\nIn 1884, Hay and Adams commissioned architect Henry Hobson Richardson to construct houses for them on Washington's Lafayette Square; these were completed by 1886. Hay's house, facing the White House and fronting on Sixteenth Street, was described even before completion as \"the finest house in Washington.\" The price for the combined tract, purchased from William Wilson Corcoran, was $73,800, of which Adams paid a third for his lot. Hay budgeted the construction cost at $50,000; his ornate, mansion eventually cost over twice that. Despite their possession of two lavish houses, the Hays spent less than half the year in Washington and only a few weeks a year in Cleveland. They also spent time at The Fells, their summer residence in Newbury, New Hampshire. According to Gale, \"for a full decade before his appointment in 1897 as ambassador to England, Hay was lazy and uncertain.\"\nHay continued to devote much of his energy to Republican politics. In 1884, he supported Blaine for president, donating considerable sums to the senator's unsuccessful campaign against New York Governor Grover Cleveland. Many of Hay's friends were unenthusiastic about Blaine's candidacy, to Hay's anger, and he wrote to editor Richard Watson Gilder, \"I have never been able to appreciate the logic that induces some excellent people every four years because they cannot nominate the candidate they prefer to vote for the party they don't prefer.\" In 1888, Hay had to follow his own advice as his favored candidate, Ohio Senator John Sherman, was unsuccessful at the Republican convention. After some reluctance, Hay supported the nominee, former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison, who was elected. Though Harrison appointed men whom Hay supported, including Blaine, Reid, and Robert Lincoln, Hay was not asked to serve in the Harrison administration. In 1890, Hay spoke for Republican congressional candidates, addressing a rally of 10,000 people in New York City, but the party was defeated, losing control of Congress. Hay contributed funds to Harrison's unsuccessful re-election effort, in part because Reid had been made Harrison's 1892 running mate.\nMcKinley backer.\nHay was an early supporter of Ohio's William McKinley and worked closely with McKinley's political manager, Cleveland industrialist Mark Hanna. In 1889, Hay supported McKinley in his unsuccessful effort to become Speaker of the House. Four years later, McKinley\u2014by then Governor of Ohio\u2014faced a crisis when a friend whose notes he had imprudently co-signed went bankrupt during the Panic of 1893. The debts were beyond the governor's means to pay, and the possibility of insolvency threatened McKinley's promising political career. Hay was among those Hanna called upon to contribute, buying up $3,000 of the debt of over $100,000. Although others paid more, \"Hay's checks were two of the first, and his touch was more personal, a kindness McKinley never forgot\". The governor wrote, \"How can I ever repay you &amp; other dear friends?\"\nThe same panic that nearly ruined McKinley convinced Hay that men like himself must take office to save the country from disaster. By the end of 1894, he was deeply involved in efforts to lay the groundwork for the governor's 1896 presidential bid. It was Hay's job to persuade potential supporters that McKinley was worth backing. Nevertheless, Hay found time for a lengthy stay in New Hampshire\u2014one visitor at The Fells in mid-1895 was Rudyard Kipling\u2014and later in the year wrote, \"The summer wanes and I have done nothing for McKinley.\" He atoned with a $500 check to Hanna, the first of many. During the winter of 1895\u201396, Hay passed along what he heard from other Republicans influential in Washington, such as Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge.\nHay spent part of the spring and early summer of 1896 in the United Kingdom, and elsewhere in Europe. There was a border dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana, and Cleveland's Secretary of State, Richard Olney, supported the Venezuelan position, announcing the Olney interpretation of the Monroe Doctrine. Hay told British politicians that McKinley, if elected, would be unlikely to change course. McKinley was nominated in June 1896; still, many Britons were minded to support whoever became the Democratic candidate. This changed when the 1896 Democratic National Convention nominated former Nebraska congressman William Jennings Bryan on a \"free silver\" platform; he had electrified the delegates with his Cross of Gold speech. Hay reported to McKinley when he returned to Britain after a brief stay on the Continent during which Bryan was nominated in Chicago: \"they were all scared out of their wits for fear Bryan would be elected, and very polite in their references to you.\"\nOnce Hay returned to the United States in early August, he went to The Fells and watched from afar as Bryan barnstormed the nation in his campaign while McKinley gave speeches from his front porch. Despite an invitation from the candidate, Hay was reluctant to visit McKinley at his home in Canton. \"He has asked me to come, but I thought I would not struggle with the millions on his trampled lawn\". In October, after basing himself at his Cleveland home and giving a speech for McKinley, Hay went to Canton at last, writing to Adams,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had been dreading it for a month, thinking it would be like talking in a boiler factory. But he met me at the [railroad] station, gave me meat &amp; took me upstairs and talked for two hours as calmly &amp; serenely as if we were summer boarders in Bethlehem, at a loss for means to kill time. I was more struck than ever with his mask. It is a genuine Italian ecclesiastical face of the XVth Century.\nHay was disgusted by Bryan's speeches, writing in language that Taliaferro compares to \"The Bread-Winners\" that the Democrat \"simply reiterates the unquestioned truths that every man with a clean shirt is a thief and ought to be hanged: that there is no goodness and wisdom except among the illiterate &amp; criminal classes\". Despite Bryan's strenuous efforts, McKinley won the election easily, with a campaign run by himself and Hanna, and well-financed by supporters like Hay. Henry Adams later wondered, \"I would give sixpence to know how much Hay paid for McKinley. His politics must have cost.\"\nAmbassador.\nAppointment.\nIn the post-election speculation as to who would be given office under McKinley, Hay's name figured prominently, as did that of Whitelaw Reid; both men sought high office in the State Department, either as secretary or one of the major ambassadorial posts. Reid, in addition to his vice-presidential run, had been Minister to France under Harrison. An asthmatic, he handicapped himself by departing for Arizona Territory for the winter, leading to speculation about his health.\nHay was faster than Reid to realize that the race for these posts would be affected by Hanna's desire to be senator from Ohio, as with one of the state's places about to be occupied by the newly elected Joseph B. Foraker, the only possible seat for him was that held by Senator Sherman. As the septuagenarian senator had served as Treasury Secretary under Hayes, only the secretaryship of state was likely to attract him and cause a vacancy that Hanna could fill. Hay knew that with only eight cabinet positions, only one could go to an Ohioan, and so he had no chance for a cabinet post. Accordingly, Hay encouraged Reid to seek the State position, while firmly ruling himself out as a possible candidate for that post, and quietly seeking the inside track to be ambassador in London. Zeitz states that Hay \"aggressively lobbied\" for the position.\nAccording to Taliaferro, \"only after the deed was accomplished and Hay was installed as the ambassador to the Court of St. James's would it be possible to detect just how subtly and completely he had finessed his ally and friend, Whitelaw Reid\". A telegraph from Hay to McKinley in the latter's papers, dated December 26 (most likely 1896) reveals the former's suggestion that McKinley tell Reid that the editor's friends had insisted that Reid not endanger his health through office, especially in London's smoggy climes. The following month, in a letter, Hay set forth his own case for the ambassadorship, and urged McKinley to act quickly, as suitable accommodations in London would be difficult to secure. Hay gained his object (as did Hanna), and shifted his focus to appeasing Reid. Taliaferro states that Reid never blamed Hay, but Kushner and Sherrill recorded, \"Reid was certain that he had been wronged\" by Hay, and the announcement of Hay's appointment nearly ended their 26-year friendship.\nReaction in Britain to Hay's appointment was generally positive, with George Smalley of \"The Times\" writing to him, \"we want a man who is a true American yet not anti-English\". Hay secured a Georgian house on Carlton House Terrace, overlooking Horse Guards Parade, with 11 servants. He brought with him Clara, their own silver, two carriages, and five horses. Hay's salary of $17,000 \"did not even begin to cover the cost of their extravagant lifestyle\".\nService.\nDuring his service as ambassador, Hay attempted to advance the relationship between the U.S. and Britain. The United Kingdom had long been seen negatively by many Americans, a legacy of its role during the American Revolution that was refreshed by its neutrality in the American Civil War, when it allowed merchant raiders such as the \"Alabama\" to be constructed in British ports, which then preyed on US-flagged ships. In spite of these past differences, according to Taliaferro, \"rapprochement made more sense than at any time in their respective histories\". In his Thanksgiving Day address to the American Society in London in 1897, Hay echoed these points, \"The great body of people in the United States and England are friends\u00a0... [sharing] that intense respect and reverence for order, liberty, and law which is so profound a sentiment in both countries\". Although Hay was not successful in resolving specific controversies in his year and a third as ambassador, both he and British policymakers regarded his tenure as a success, because of the advancement of good feelings and cooperation between the two nations.\nAn ongoing dispute between the U.S. and Britain was over the practice of pelagic sealing, that is, the capture of seals offshore of Alaska. The U.S. considered them American resources; the Canadians (Britain was still responsible for that dominion's foreign policy) contended that the mammals were being taken on the high seas, free to all. Soon after Hay's arrival, McKinley sent former Secretary of State John W. Foster to London to negotiate the issue. Foster quickly issued an accusatory note to the British that was printed in the newspapers. Although Hay was successful in getting Lord Salisbury, then both Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary, to agree to a conference to decide the matter, the British withdrew when the U.S. also invited Russia and Japan, rendering the conference ineffective. Another issue on which no agreement was reached was that of bimetallism: McKinley had promised silver-leaning Republicans to seek an international agreement varying the price ratio between silver and gold to allow for free coinage of silver, and Hay was instructed to seek British participation. The British would only join if the Indian colonial government (on a silver standard until 1893) was willing; this did not occur, and coupled with an improving economic situation that decreased support for bimetallism in the United States, no agreement was reached.\nHay had little involvement in the crisis over Cuba that culminated in the Spanish\u2013American War. He met with Lord Salisbury in October 1897 and gained assurances Britain would not intervene if the U.S. found it necessary to go to war against Spain. Hay's role was \"to make friends and to pass along the English point of view to Washington\". Hay spent much of early 1898 on an extended trip to the Middle East, and did not return to London until the last week of March, by which time the USS \"Maine\" had exploded in Havana harbor. During the war, he worked to ensure U.S.\u2013British amity, and British acceptance of the U.S. occupation of the Philippines\u2014Salisbury and his government preferred that the U.S. have the islands than have them fall into the hands of the Germans. Hay succeeded in making sure that the British were kept \"in the loop\" with regards to the U.S. invasion of Cuba, and in both reassuring the British that none of their interests in Cuba would be harmed by the invasion, while simultaneously communicating those interests to the McKinley administration (McKinley was himself keen on maintaining a good relationship with the British).\nIn its early days, Hay described the war \"as necessary as it is righteous\". In July, writing to former Assistant Secretary of the Navy Theodore Roosevelt, who had gained wartime glory by leading the Rough Riders volunteer regiment, Hay made a description of the war for which, according to Zeitz, he \"is best remembered by many students of American history\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has been a splendid little war, begun with the highest motives, carried on with magnificent intelligence and spirit, favored by that Fortune that loves the brave. It is now to be concluded, I hope, with that fine good nature, which is, after all, the distinguishing trait of the American character.\nSecretary Sherman had resigned on the eve of war, and been replaced by his first assistant, William R. Day. One of McKinley's Canton cronies, with little experience of statecraft, Day was never intended as more than a temporary wartime replacement. With America about to splash her flag across the Pacific, McKinley needed a secretary with stronger credentials. On August 14, 1898, Hay received a telegram from McKinley that Day would head the American delegation to the peace talks with Spain, and that Hay would be the new Secretary of State. After some indecision, Hay, who did not think he could decline and still remain as ambassador, accepted. British response to Hay's promotion was generally positive, and Queen Victoria, after he took formal leave of her at Osborne House, invited him again the following day, and subsequently pronounced him, \"the most interesting of all the Ambassadors I have known.\"\nSecretary of State.\nMcKinley years.\nJohn Hay was sworn in as Secretary of State on September 30, 1898. He needed little introduction to Cabinet meetings, and sat at the President's right hand. Meetings were held in the Cabinet Room of the White House, where he found his old office and bedroom each occupied by several clerks. Now responsible for 1,300 federal employees, he leaned heavily for administrative help on his old friend Alvey Adee, the second assistant.\nHay believed that America's most valuable foreign relationship \"by far\" was its relationship with Great Britain. As Secretary of State he did everything he could to cultivate a positive relationship with London. Eventually this proved successful, one example of this success being the Hay\u2013Pauncefote Treaty. Hay formed a habit of confiding in the British, and sharing sensitive intelligence with them, while at the same time shutting out the governments of Spain, France, Germany and Russia. Senator Mark Hanna remarked that \"Hay and McKinley are \"outrageously\" pro-British.\" The French ambassador remarked that \"Hay is friendly to the British and unfriendly to us, we should regard him with much suspicion.\"\nBy the time Hay took office, the war was effectively over and it had been decided to strip Spain of her overseas empire and transfer at least part of it to the United States. At the time of Hay's swearing-in, McKinley was still undecided whether to take the Philippines, but in October finally decided to do so, and Hay sent instructions to Day and the other peace commissioners to insist on it. Spain yielded, and the result was the Treaty of Paris, narrowly ratified by the Senate in February 1899 over the objections of anti-imperialists.\nOpen Door Policy.\nBy the 1890s, China had become a major trading partner for Western nations and newly westernized Japan. China had had its army severely weakened by several disastrous wars, and several foreign nations took the opportunity to negotiate treaties with China that allowed them to control various coastal cities, known as treaty ports, for use as military bases or trading centers. Within those jurisdictions, the nation in possession often gave preference to its own citizens in trade or in developing infrastructure such as railroads. Although the United States did not claim any parts of China, a third of the China trade was carried in American ships, and having an outpost near there was a major factor in deciding to retain the former Spanish colony of the Philippines in the Treaty of Paris.\nHay had been concerned about the Far East since the 1870s. As Ambassador, he had attempted to forge a common policy with the British, but the United Kingdom was willing to acquire territorial concessions in China (such as Hong Kong) to guard its interests there, whereas McKinley was not. In March 1898, Hay warned that Russia, Germany, and France were seeking to exclude Britain and America from the China trade, but he was disregarded by Sherman, who accepted assurances to the contrary from Russia and Germany.\nMcKinley was of the view that equality of opportunity for American trade in China was key to success there, rather than colonial acquisitions; that Hay shared these views was one reason for his appointment as Secretary of State. Many influential Americans, seeing coastal China being divided into spheres of influence, urged McKinley to join in; still, in his annual message to Congress in December 1898, he stated that as long as Americans were not discriminated against, he saw no need for the United States to become \"an actor in the scene\".\nAs Secretary of State, it was Hay's responsibility to put together a workable China policy. He was advised by William Rockhill, an old China hand. Also influential was Lord Charles Beresford, a British Member of Parliament who gave a number of speeches to American businessmen, met with McKinley and Hay, and in a letter to the secretary stated that \"it is imperative for American interests as well as our own that the policy of the 'open door' should be maintained\". Assuring that all would play on an even playing field in China would give the foreign powers little incentive to dismember the Chinese Empire through territorial acquisition.\nIn mid-1899, the British inspector of Chinese maritime customs, Alfred Hippisley, visited the United States. In a letter to Rockhill, a friend, he urged that the United States and other powers agree to uniform Chinese tariffs, including in the enclaves. Rockhill passed the letter on to Hay, and subsequently summarized the thinking of Hippisley and others, that there should be \"an open market through China for our trade on terms of equality with all other foreigners\". Hay was in agreement, but feared Senate and popular opposition, and wanted to avoid Senate ratification of a treaty. Rockhill drafted the first Open Door note, calling for equality of commercial opportunity for foreigners in China.\nHay formally issued his Open Door note on September 6, 1899. This was not a treaty, and did not require the approval of the Senate. Most of the powers had at least some caveats, and negotiations continued through the remainder of the year. On March 20, 1900, Hay announced that all powers had agreed, and he was not contradicted. Former secretary Day wrote to Hay, congratulating him, \"moving at the right time and in the right manner, you have secured a diplomatic triumph in the 'open door' in China of the first importance to your country\".\nBoxer Rebellion.\nLittle thought was given to the Chinese reaction to the Open Door note; the Chinese minister in Washington, Wu Ting-fang, did not learn of it until he read of it in the newspapers. Among those in China who opposed Western influence there was a movement in Shantung Province, in the north, that became known as the Fists of Righteous Harmony, or Boxers, after the martial arts they practiced. The Boxers were especially angered by missionaries and their converts. As late as June 1900, Rockhill dismissed the Boxers, contending that they would soon disband. By the middle of that month, the Boxers, joined by imperial troops, had cut the railroad between Peking and the coast, killed many missionaries and converts, and besieged the foreign legations. Hay faced a precarious situation; how to rescue the Americans trapped in Peking, and how to avoid giving the other powers an excuse to partition China, in an election year when there was already Democrat opposition to what they deemed American imperialism.\nAs American troops were sent to China to relieve the nation's legation, Hay sent a letter to foreign powers (often called the Second Open Door note), stating while the United States wanted to see lives preserved and the guilty punished, it intended that China not be dismembered. Hay issued this on July 3, 1900, suspecting that the powers were quietly making private arrangements to divide up China. Communication between the foreign legations and the outside world had been cut off, and the personnel there were falsely presumed slaughtered, but Hay realized that Minister Wu could get a message in, and Hay was able to establish communication. Hay suggested to the Chinese government that it now cooperate for its own good. When the foreign relief force, principally Japanese but including 2,000 Americans, relieved the legations and sacked Peking, China was made to pay a huge indemnity but there was no cession of land.\nDeath of McKinley.\nMcKinley's vice president, Garret Hobart, had died in November 1899. Under the laws then in force, this made Hay next in line to the presidency should anything happen to McKinley. There was a presidential election in 1900, and McKinley was unanimously renominated at the Republican National Convention that year. He allowed the convention to make its own choice of running mate, and it selected Roosevelt, by then governor of New York. Senator Hanna bitterly opposed that choice, but nevertheless raised millions for the McKinley/Roosevelt ticket, which was elected.\nHay accompanied McKinley on his nationwide train tour in mid-1901, during which both men visited California and saw the Pacific Ocean for the only times in their lives. The summer of 1901 was tragic for Hay; his older son Adelbert, who had been consul in Pretoria during the Boer War and was about to become McKinley's personal secretary, died in a fall from a hotel window.\nSecretary Hay was at The Fells when McKinley was shot by Leon Czolgosz, an anarchist, on September 6 in Buffalo. With Vice President Roosevelt and much of the cabinet hastening to the bedside of McKinley, who had been operated on (it was thought successfully) soon after the shooting, Hay planned to go to Washington to manage the communication with foreign governments, but presidential secretary George Cortelyou urged him to come to Buffalo. He traveled to Buffalo on September 10; hearing on his arrival an account of the President's recovery, Hay responded that McKinley would die. He was more cheerful after visiting McKinley, giving a statement to the press, and went to Washington, as Roosevelt and other officials also dispersed. Hay was about to return to New Hampshire on the 13th, when word came that McKinley was dying. Hay remained at his office and the next morning, on the way to Buffalo, the former Rough Rider received from Hay his first communication as head of state, officially informing President Roosevelt of McKinley's death.\nTheodore Roosevelt administration.\nStaying on.\nHay, again next in line to the presidency, remained in Washington as McKinley's body was transported to the capital by funeral train, and stayed there as the late president was taken to Canton for interment. He had admired McKinley, describing him as \"awfully like Lincoln in many respects\" and wrote to a friend, \"what a strange and tragic fate it has been of mine\u2014to stand by the bier of three of my dearest friends, Lincoln, Garfield, and McKinley, three of the gentlest of men, all risen to be head of the State, and all done to death by assassins\".\nBy letter, Hay offered his resignation to Roosevelt while the new president was still in Buffalo, amid newspaper speculation that Hay would be replaced. When Hay met the funeral train in Washington, Roosevelt greeted him at the station and immediately told him he must stay on as secretary. According to Zeitz, \"Roosevelt's accidental ascendance to the presidency made John Hay an essential anachronism\u00a0... the wise elder statesman and senior member of the cabinet, he was indispensable to TR, who even today remains the youngest president ever\".\nThe deaths of his son and of McKinley were not the only griefs Hay suffered in 1901\u2014on September 26, John Nicolay died after a long illness, as did Hay's close friend Clarence King on Christmas Eve.\nPanama.\nHay's involvement in the efforts to have a canal joining the oceans in Central America went back to his time as Assistant Secretary of State under President Hayes, when he served as translator for Ferdinand de Lesseps in his efforts to interest the American government in investing in his canal company. Hayes was only interested in the idea of a canal under American control, which de Lesseps's project would not be. By the time Hay became Secretary of State, de Lesseps's project in Panama (then a Colombian province) had collapsed, as had an American-run project in Nicaragua. The 1850 Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty (between the United States and Britain) forbade the United States from building a Central American canal that it exclusively controlled, and Hay, from early in his tenure, sought the removal of this restriction. But the Canadians, for whose foreign policy Britain was still available, saw the canal matter as their greatest leverage to get other disputes resolved in their favor, and persuaded Salisbury not to resolve it independently. Shortly before Hay took office, Britain and the U.S. agreed to establish a Joint High Commission to adjudicate unsettled matters, which met in late 1898 but made slow progress, especially on the Canada-Alaska boundary.\nThe Alaska issue became less contentious in August 1899 when the Canadians accepted a provisional boundary pending final settlement. With Congress anxious to begin work on a canal bill, and increasingly likely to ignore the Clayton-Bulwer restriction, Hay and British Ambassador Julian Pauncefote began work on a new treaty in January 1900. The first Hay\u2013Pauncefote Treaty was sent to the Senate the following month, where it met a cold reception, as the terms forbade the United States from blockading or fortifying the canal, that was to be open to all nations in wartime as in peace. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee added an amendment allowing the U.S. to fortify the canal, then in March postponed further consideration until after the 1900 election. Hay submitted his resignation, which McKinley refused. The treaty, as amended, was ratified by the Senate in December, but the British would not agree to the changes.\nDespite the lack of agreement, Congress was enthusiastic about a canal, and was inclined to move forward, with or without a treaty. Authorizing legislation was slowed by discussion on whether to take the Nicaraguan or Panamanian route. Much of the negotiation of a revised treaty, allowing the U.S. to fortify the canal, took place between Hay's replacement in London, Joseph H. Choate, and the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Lansdowne, and the second Hay\u2013Pauncefote Treaty was ratified by the Senate by a large margin on December 6, 1901.\nSeeing that the Americans were likely to build a Nicaragua Canal, the owners of the defunct French company, including Philippe Bunau-Varilla, who still had exclusive rights to the Panama route, lowered their price. Beginning in early 1902, President Roosevelt became a backer of the latter route, and Congress passed legislation for it, if it could be secured within a reasonable time. In June, Roosevelt told Hay to take personal charge of the negotiations with Colombia. Later that year, Hay began talks with Colombia's acting minister in Washington, Tom\u00e1s Herr\u00e1n. The Hay\u2013Herr\u00e1n Treaty, granting $10\u00a0million to Colombia for the right to build a canal, plus $250,000 annually, was signed on January 22, 1903, and ratified by the United States Senate two months later. In August, however, the treaty was rejected by the Colombian Senate.\nRoosevelt was minded to build the canal anyway, using an earlier treaty with Colombia that gave the U.S. transit rights in regard to the Panama Railroad. Hay predicted \"an insurrection on the Isthmus [of Panama] against that regime of folly and graft\u00a0... at Bogot\u00e1\". Bunau-Varilla gained meetings with both men, and assured them that a revolution, and a Panamanian government more friendly to a canal, was coming. In October, Roosevelt ordered Navy ships to be stationed near Panama. The Panamanians duly revolted in early November 1903, with Colombian interference deterred by the presence of U.S. forces. By prearrangement, Bunau-Varilla was appointed representative of the nascent nation in Washington, and quickly negotiated the Hay\u2013Bunau-Varilla Treaty, signed on November 18, giving the United States the right to build the canal in a zone wide, over which the U.S. would exercise full jurisdiction. This was less than satisfactory to the Panamanian diplomats who arrived in Washington shortly after the signing, but they did not dare renounce it. The treaty was approved by the two nations, and work on the Panama Canal began in 1904. Hay wrote to Secretary of War Elihu Root, praising \"the perfectly regular course which the President did follow\" as much preferable to armed occupation of the isthmus.\nRelationship with Roosevelt, other events.\nHay had met the President's father, Theodore Roosevelt, Sr., during the Civil War, and during his time at the \"Tribune\" came to know the adolescent \"Teddy\", twenty years younger than himself. Although before becoming president Roosevelt often wrote fulsome letters of praise to Secretary Hay, his letters to others then and later were less complimentary. Hay felt Roosevelt too impulsive, and privately opposed his inclusion on the ticket in 1900, though he quickly wrote a congratulatory note after the convention.\nAs President and Secretary of State, the two men took pains to cultivate a cordial relationship. Roosevelt read all ten volumes of the Lincoln biography and in mid-1903, wrote to Hay that by then \"I have had a chance to know far more fully what a really great Secretary of State you are\". Hay for his part publicly praised Roosevelt as \"young, gallant, able, [and] brilliant\", words that Roosevelt wrote that he hoped would be engraved on his tombstone.\nPrivately, and in correspondence with others, they were less generous: Hay grumbled that while McKinley would give him his full attention, Roosevelt was always busy with others, and it would be \"an hour's wait for a minute's talk\". Roosevelt, after Hay's death in 1905, wrote to Senator Lodge that Hay had not been \"a great Secretary of State\u00a0... under me he accomplished little\u00a0... his usefulness to me was almost exclusively the usefulness of a fine figurehead\". Nevertheless, when Roosevelt successfully sought election in his own right in 1904, he persuaded the aging and infirm Hay to campaign for him, and Hay gave a speech linking the administration's policies with those of Lincoln: \"there is not a principle avowed by the Republican party to-day which is out of harmony with his [Lincoln's] teaching or inconsistent with his character.\" Kushner and Sherrill suggested that the differences between Hay and Roosevelt were more style than ideological substance.\nIn December 1902, the German government asked Roosevelt to arbitrate its dispute with Venezuela over unpaid debts. Hay did not think this appropriate, as Venezuela also owed the U.S. money, and quickly arranged for the International Court of Arbitration in The Hague to step in. Hay supposedly said, as final details were being worked out, \"I have it all arranged. If Teddy will keep his mouth shut until tomorrow noon!\" Hay and Roosevelt also differed over the composition of the Joint High Commission that was to settle the Alaska boundary dispute. The commission was to be composed of \"impartial jurists\" and the British and Canadians duly appointed notable judges. Roosevelt appointed politicians, including Secretary Root and Senator Lodge. Although Hay was supportive of the President's choices in public, in private he protested loudly to Roosevelt, complained by letter to his friends, and offered his resignation. Roosevelt declined it, but the incident confirmed him in his belief that Hay was too much of an Anglophile to be trusted where Britain was concerned. The American position on the boundary dispute was imposed on Canada by a 4\u20132 vote, with the one English judge joining the three Americans.\nOne incident involving Hay that benefitted Roosevelt politically was the kidnapping of Greek-American playboy Ion Perdicaris in Morocco by chieftain Mulai Ahmed er Raisuli, an opponent of Sultan Abdelaziz. Raisuli demanded a ransom, but also wanted political prisoners to be released and control of Tangier in place of the military governor. Raisuli supposed Perdicaris to be a wealthy American, and hoped United States pressure would secure his demands. In fact, Perdicaris, though born in New Jersey, had renounced his citizenship during the Civil War to avoid Confederate confiscation of property in South Carolina, and had accepted Greek naturalization, a fact not generally known until years later, but that decreased Roosevelt's appetite for military action. The sultan was ineffective in dealing with the incident, and Roosevelt considered seizing the Tangier waterfront, source of much of Abdelaziz's income, as a means of motivating him. With Raisuli's demands escalating, Hay, with Roosevelt's approval, finally cabled the consul-general in Tangier, Samuel Gummer\u00e9:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We want Perdicaris alive or Raisuli dead. We desire least possible complications with Morocco or other Powers. You will not arrange for landing marines or seizing customs house without specific direction from the [State] department.\nThe 1904 Republican National Convention was in session, and the Speaker of the House, Joseph Cannon, its chair, read the first sentence of the cable\u2014and only the first sentence\u2014to the convention, electrifying what had been a humdrum coronation of Roosevelt. \"The results were perfect. This was the fighting Teddy that America loved, and his frenzied supporters\u2014and American chauvinists everywhere\u2014roared in delight.\" In fact, by then the sultan had already agreed to the demands, and Perdicaris was released. What was seen as tough talk boosted Roosevelt's election chances.\nFinal months and death.\nHay never fully recovered from the death of his son Adelbert, writing in 1904 to his close friend Lizzie Cameron that \"the death of our boy made my wife and me old, at once and for the rest of our lives\". Gale described Hay in his final years as a \"saddened, slowly dying old man\".\nAlthough Hay gave speeches in support of Roosevelt, he spent much of the fall of 1904 at his New Hampshire house or with his younger brother Charles, who was ill in Boston. After the election, Roosevelt asked Hay to remain another four years. Hay asked for time to consider, but the President did not allow it, announcing to the press two days later that Hay would stay at his post. Early 1905 saw futility for Hay, as a number of treaties he had negotiated were defeated or amended by the Senate\u2014one involving the British dominion of Newfoundland due to Senator Lodge's fears it would harm his fisherman constituents. Others, promoting arbitration, were voted down or amended because the Senate did not want to be bypassed in the settlement of international disputes.\nBy Roosevelt's inauguration on March 4, 1905, Hay's health was so bad that both his wife and his friend Henry Adams insisted on his going to Europe, where he could rest and get medical treatment. Presidential doctor Presley Rixey issued a statement that Hay was suffering from overwork, but in letters the secretary hinted his conviction that he did not have long to live. An eminent physician in Italy prescribed medicinal baths for Hay's heart condition, and he duly journeyed to Bad Nauheim, near Frankfurt, Germany. Kaiser Wilhelm II was among the monarchs who wrote to Hay asking him to visit, though he declined; Belgian King Leopold II succeeded in seeing him by showing up at his hotel, unannounced. Adams suggested that Hay retire while there was still enough life left in him to do so, and that Roosevelt would be delighted to act as his own Secretary of State. Hay jokingly wrote to sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens that \"there is nothing the matter with me except old age, the Senate, and one or two other mortal maladies\".\nAfter the course of treatment, Hay went to Paris and began to take on his workload again by meeting with the French foreign minister, Th\u00e9ophile Delcass\u00e9. In London, King Edward VII broke protocol by meeting with Hay in a small drawing room, and Hay lunched with Whitelaw Reid, ambassador in London at last. There was not time to see all who wished to see Hay on what he knew was his final visit.\nOn his return to the United States, despite his family's desire to take him to New Hampshire, the secretary went to Washington to deal with departmental business and \"say \"Ave Caesar!\" to the President\", as Hay put it. He was pleased to learn that Roosevelt was well on his way to settling the Russo-Japanese War, an action for which the President would win the Nobel Peace Prize. Hay left Washington for the last time on June 23, 1905, arriving in New Hampshire the following day. He died there on July 1 of his heart ailment and complications. Hay was interred in Lake View Cemetery in Cleveland, near the grave of Garfield, in the presence of Roosevelt and many dignitaries, including Robert Lincoln.\nLiterary career.\nEarly works.\nHay wrote some poetry while at Brown University, and more during the Civil War. In 1865, early in his Paris stay, Hay penned \"Sunrise in the Place de la Concorde\", a poem attacking Napoleon III for his reinstitution of the monarchy, depicting the Emperor as having been entrusted with the child Democracy by Liberty, and strangling it with his own hands. In \"A Triumph of Order\", set in the breakup of the Paris Commune, a boy promises soldiers that he will return from an errand to be executed with his fellow rebels. Much to their surprise, he keeps his word and shouts to them to \"blaze away\" as \"The Chassepots tore the stout young heart,/And saved Society.\"\nIn poetry, he sought the revolutionary outcome for other nations that he believed had come to a successful conclusion in the United States. His 1871 poem, \"The Prayer of the Romans\", recites Italian history up to that time, with the \"Risorgimento\" in progress: liberty cannot be truly present until \"crosier and crown pass away\", when there will be \"One freedom, one faith without fetters,/One republic in Italy free!\" His stay in Vienna yielded \"The Curse of Hungary\", in which Hay foresees the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. After Hay's death in 1905, William Dean Howells suggested that the Europe-themed poems expressed \"(now, perhaps, old-fashioned) American sympathy for all the oppressed.\" \"Castilian Days\", souvenir of Hay's time in Madrid, is a collection of seventeen essays about Spanish history and customs, first published in 1871, although several of the individual chapters appeared in \"The Atlantic\" in 1870. It went through eight editions in Hay's lifetime. The Spanish are depicted as afflicted by the \"triple curse of crown, crozier, and saber\"\u2014most kings and ecclesiastics are presented as useless\u2014and Hay pins his hope in the republican movement in Spain. Gale deems \"Castilian Days\" \"a remarkable, if biased, book of essays about Spanish civilization\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnd this was all the religion he had\u2014\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0To treat his engine well,\n\u00a0\u00a0Never be passed on the river\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0And mind the pilot's bell.\nAnd if ever the \"Prairie Belle\" took fire,\u2014\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0A hundred times he swore,\n\u00a0\u00a0He'd hold her nozzle agin the bank\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Till the last soul got ashore.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nJohn Hay, \"Jim Bludso\" (1871)\n\"Pike County Ballads\", a grouping of six poems published (with other Hay poetry) as a book in 1871, brought him great success. Written in the dialect of Pike County, Illinois, where Hay went to school as a child, they are approximately contemporaneous with pioneering poems in similar dialect by Bret Harte and there has been debate as to which came first. The poem that brought the greatest immediate reaction was \"Jim Bludso\", about a boatman who is \"no saint\" with one wife in Mississippi and another in Illinois. Yet, when his steamboat catches fire, \"He saw his duty, a dead-sure thing,\u2014/And went for it, ther and then.\" Jim holds the burning steamboat against the riverbank until the last passenger gets ashore, at the cost of his life. Hay's narrator states that, \"And Christ ain't a-going to be too hard/On a man that died for men.\" Hay's poem offended some clergymen, but was widely reprinted and even included in anthologies of verse.\n\"The Bread-Winners\".\n\"The Bread-Winners\", one of the first novels to take an anti-labor perspective, was published anonymously in 1883 (published editions did not bear Hay's name until 1916) and he may have tried to disguise his writing style. The book examines two conflicts: between capital and labor, and between the \"nouveau riche\" and old money. In writing it, Hay was influenced by the labor unrest of the 1870s, that affected him personally, as corporations belonging to Stone, his father-in-law, were among those struck, at a time when Hay had been left in charge in Stone's absence. According to historian Scott Dalrymple, \"in response, Hay proceeded to write an indictment of organized labor so scathing, so vehement, that he dared not attach his name to it.\"\nThe major character is Arthur Farnham, a wealthy Civil War veteran, likely based on Hay. Farnham, who inherited money, is without much influence in municipal politics, as his ticket is defeated in elections, symbolic of the decreasing influence of America's old-money patricians. The villain is Andrew Jackson Offitt (true name Ananias Offitt), who leads the Bread-winners, a labor organization that begins a violent general strike. Peace is restored by a group of veterans led by Farnham, and, at the end, he appears likely to marry Alice Belding, a woman of his own class.\nAlthough unusual among the many books inspired by the labor unrest of the late 1870s in taking the perspective of the wealthy, it was the most successful of them, and was a sensation, gaining many favorable reviews. It was also attacked as an anti-labor polemic with an upper-class bias. There were many guesses as to authorship, with the supposed authors ranging from Hay's friend Henry Adams to New York Governor Grover Cleveland, and the speculation fueled sales.\nLincoln biography.\nEarly in his presidency, Hay and Nicolay requested and received permission from Lincoln to write his biography. By 1872, Hay was \"convinced that we ought to be at work on our 'Lincoln.' I don't think the time for publication has come, but the time for preparation is slipping away.\" Robert Lincoln in 1874 formally agreed to let Hay and Nicolay use his father's papers; by 1875, they were engaged in research. Hay and Nicolay enjoyed exclusive access to Lincoln's papers, which were not opened to other researchers until 1947. They gathered documents written by others, as well as many of the Civil War books already being published. They at rare times relied on memory, such as Nicolay's recollection of the moment at the 1860 Republican convention when Lincoln was nominated, but for much of the rest relied on research.\nHay began his part of the writing in 1876; the work was interrupted by illnesses of Hay, Nicolay, or family members, or by Hay's writing of \"The Bread-Winners\". By 1885, Hay had completed the chapters on Lincoln's early life, and they were submitted to Robert Lincoln for approval. Sale of the serialization rights to \"The Century\" magazine, edited by Hay's friend Richard Gilder, helped give the pair the impetus to bring what had become a massive project to an end.\nThe published work, \"Abraham Lincoln: A History\", alternates parts in which Lincoln is at center with discussions of contextual matters, such as legislative events or battles. The first serial installment, published in November 1886, received positive reviews. When the ten-volume set emerged in 1890, it was not sold in bookstores, but instead door-to-door, then a common practice. Despite a price of $50, and the fact that a good part of the work had been serialized, five thousand copies were quickly sold. The books helped forge the modern view of Lincoln as great war leader, against competing narratives that gave more credit to subordinates such as Seward. According to historian Joshua Zeitz, \"it is easy to forget how widely underrated Lincoln the president and Lincoln the man were at the time of his death and how successful Hay and Nicolay were in elevating his place in the nation's collective historical memory.\"\nAssessment and legacy.\nIn 1902, Hay wrote that when he died, \"I shall not be much missed except by my wife.\" Nevertheless, due to his premature death at age 66, he was survived by most of his friends. These included Adams, who although he blamed the pressures of Hay's office, where he was badgered by Roosevelt and many senators, for the Secretary of State's death, admitted that Hay had remained in the position because he feared being bored. He memorialized his friend in the final pages of his autobiographical \"The Education of Henry Adams\": with Hay's death, his own education had ended.\nGale pointed out that Hay \"accomplished a great deal in the realm of international statesmanship, and the world may be a better place because of his efforts as secretary of state\u00a0... the man was a scintillating ambassador\". Yet, Gale felt, any assessment of Hay must include negatives as well, that after his marriage to the wealthy Clara Stone, Hay \"allowed his deep-seated love of ease triumph over his Middle Western devotion to work and a fair shake for all.\" Despite his literary accomplishments, Hay \"was often lazy. His first poetry was his best.\"\nTaliaferro suggests that \"if Hay put any\u00a0... indelible stamp on history, perhaps it was that he demonstrated how the United States ought to comport itself. He, not Roosevelt, was the adult in charge when the nation and the State Department attained global maturity.\" He quotes John St. Loe Strachey, \"All that the world saw was a great gentleman and a great statesman doing his work for the State and for the President with perfect taste, perfect good sense, and perfect good humour\".\nHay's efforts to shape Lincoln's image increased his own prominence and reputation in making his association (and that of Nicolay) with the assassinated president ever more remarkable and noteworthy. According to Zeitz, \"the greater Lincoln grew in death, the greater they grew for having known him so well, and so intimately, in life. Everyone wanted to know them if only to ask what it had been like\u2014what \"he\" had been like.\" Their answer to that, expressed in ten volumes of biography, Gale wrote, \"has been incredibly influential\". In 1974, Lincoln scholar Roy P. Basler stated that later biographers such as Carl Sandburg did not \"ma[k]e revisions of the essential story told by N.[icolay] &amp; H.[ay]. Zeitz concurs, \"Americans today understand Abraham Lincoln much as Nicolay and Hay hoped that they would.\"\nHay brought about more than 50 treaties, including the Canal-related treaties, and settlement of the Samoan dispute, as a result of which the United States secured what became known as American Samoa. In 1900, Hay negotiated a treaty with Denmark for the cession of the Danish West Indies. That treaty failed in the Danish parliament on a tied vote.\nIn 1923 Mount Hay, also known as \"Boundary Peak 167\" on the Canada\u2013United States border, was named after John Hay in recognition of his role in negotiating the US-Canada treaty resulting in the Alaska Boundary Tribunal. Brown University's John Hay Library is named for him as well. Hay's New Hampshire estate has been conserved by various organizations. Although he and his family never lived there (Hay died while it was under construction), the Hay-McKinney House, home to the Cleveland History Center and thousands of artifacts, serves to remind Clevelanders of John Hay's lengthy service. During World War II the Liberty ship was built in Panama City, Florida, and named in his honor. Camp John Hay, a United States military base established in 1903 in Baguio, Philippines, was named for John Hay, and the base name was maintained by the Philippine government even after its 1991 turnover to Philippine authorities.\nAccording to historian Lewis L. Gould, in his account of McKinley's presidency,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the most entertaining and interesting letter writers who ever ran the State Department, the witty, dapper, and bearded Hay left behind an abundance of documentary evidence on his public career. His name is indelibly linked with that verity of the nation's Asian policy, the Open Door, and he contributed much to the resolution of the longstanding problems with the British. Patient, discreet, and judicious, Hay deserves to stand in the front rank of secretaries of state.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16579", "revid": "40999779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16579", "title": "Joy Division", "text": "English rock band (1976\u20131980)\nJoy Division were an English rock band formed in Salford in 1976. The group consisted of vocalist, guitarist and lyricist Ian Curtis, guitarist and keyboardist Bernard Sumner, bassist Peter Hook and drummer Stephen Morris.\nSumner and Hook formed the band after attending a June 1976 Sex Pistols concert. While Joy Division's first recordings were heavily influenced by early punk rock, they soon developed a sparse sound and style that made them one of the pioneering groups of the\u00a0post-punk genre. Their self-released 1978 debut EP \"An Ideal for Living\" drew the attention of the Manchester television personality Tony Wilson, who signed them to his independent label Factory Records. Their debut album \"Unknown Pleasures\", recorded with producer Martin Hannett, was released in 1979.\nCurtis struggled with personal problems, including a failing marriage, depression, and epilepsy. As the band's popularity grew, Curtis's health condition made it increasingly difficult for him to perform; he occasionally experienced seizures on stage. He died by suicide on the eve of what would have been the band's first North American tour in May 1980, aged 23. Joy Division's second and final album, \"Closer\", was released two months later; it and the single \"Love Will Tear Us Apart\" became their highest-charting releases.\nBetween July and October 1980, the remaining members, with the addition of keyboardist and guitarist Gillian Gilbert, regrouped under the name New Order. They were successful throughout the next decade, blending post-punk with electronic and dance music influences. Joy Division would remain a prominent influence on subsequent generations of alternative acts, particularly within the gothic rock genre.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nOn 4 June 1976, childhood friends Bernard Sumner and Peter Hook separately attended a Sex Pistols show at the Manchester Lesser Free Trade Hall. Afterwards, both felt inspired by the Pistols' performance. Sumner said that he felt the Pistols had \"destroyed the myth of being a pop star, of a musician being some kind of god that you had to worship\". The following day Hook borrowed \u00a335 from his mother to buy a bass guitar. They formed a band with Terry Mason, who had also attended the gig; Sumner bought a guitar, and Mason a drum kit. After their schoolfriend Martin Gresty declined an invitation to join as vocalist after getting a job at a factory, the band placed an advertisement for a vocalist in the Manchester Virgin Records shop. Ian Curtis, who knew them from earlier gigs, responded and was hired without audition. Sumner said that he \"knew he was all right to get on with and that's what we based the whole group on. If we liked someone, they were in.\"\nBuzzcocks manager Richard Boon and frontman Pete Shelley have both been credited with suggesting the band name \"Stiff Kittens\", but the band settled on \"Warsaw\" shortly before their first gig, a reference to David Bowie's song \"Warszawa\". Warsaw debuted on 29 May 1977 at the Electric Circus, supporting the Buzzcocks, Penetration and John Cooper Clarke. Tony Tabac played drums that night after joining the band two days earlier. Reviews in the \"NME\" by Paul Morley and in \"Sounds\" by Ian Wood brought them immediate national exposure. Mason became the band's manager and Tabac was replaced on drums in June 1977 by Steve Brotherdale, who also played in the punk band the Panik. Brotherdale tried to get Curtis to leave the band and join the Panik, and even had Curtis audition. On 18 July 1977, Warsaw recorded five demo tracks at Pennine Sound Studios, Oldham. Uneasy with Brotherdale's aggressive personality, the band fired him soon after the sessions. Driving home from the studio, they pulled over and asked Brotherdale to check on a flat tyre; when he got out of the car, they drove off.\nIn August 1977, Warsaw placed an advertisement in a music shop window seeking a replacement drummer. Stephen Morris, who had attended the same school as Curtis, was the sole respondent. Deborah Curtis, Ian's wife, stated that Morris \"fitted perfectly\" with the band, and that with his addition Warsaw became a \"complete 'family'\". To avoid confusion with the London punk band Warsaw Pakt, the band renamed themselves Joy Division in early 1978, borrowing the name from the sexual slavery wing of a Nazi concentration camp mentioned in the 1953 novel \"House of Dolls\". On 14 December, the group recorded their debut EP, \"An Ideal for Living\", at Pennine Sound Studio and played their final gig as Warsaw on New Year's Eve at the Swinging Apple in Liverpool. Billed as Warsaw to ensure an audience, the band played their first gig as Joy Division on 25 January 1978 at Pip's Disco in Manchester.\nEarly releases.\nJoy Division were approached by RCA Records to record a cover of Nolan \"N.F.\" Porter's \"Keep on Keepin' On\" at a Manchester recording studio. The band spent late March and April 1978 writing and rehearsing material. During the Stiff/Chiswick Challenge concert at Manchester's Rafters club on 14 April, they caught the attention of TV music presenter Tony Wilson and manager Rob Gretton. Curtis berated Wilson for not putting the group on his Granada Television show \"So It Goes\"; Wilson responded that Joy Division would be the next band he would showcase on TV. Gretton, the venue's resident DJ, was so impressed by the band's performance that he convinced them to take him on as their manager. Gretton, whose \"dogged determination\" was later credited for much of the band's public success, contributed the business skills to provide Joy Division with a better foundation for creativity. Joy Division spent the first week of May 1978 recording at Manchester's Arrow Studios. The band were unhappy with the Grapevine Records head John Anderson's insistence on adding synthesiser into the mix to soften the sound, and asked to be dropped from the contract with RCA.\nJoy Division made their recorded debut in June 1978 when the band self-released \"An Ideal for Living\", and two weeks later their track \"At a Later Date\" was featured on the compilation album \"\" (which had been recorded live in October 1977). In the \"Melody Maker\" review, Chris Brazier said that it \"has the familiar rough-hewn nature of home-produced records, but they're no mere drone-vendors\u2014there are a lot of good ideas here, and they could be a very interesting band by now, seven months on\". The packaging of \"An Ideal for Living\"\u2014which featured a drawing of a Hitler Youth member on the cover\u2014coupled with the nature of the band's name fuelled speculation about their political affiliations. While Hook and Sumner later said they were intrigued by fascism at the time, Morris believed that the group's dalliance with Nazi imagery came from a desire to keep memories of the sacrifices of their parents and grandparents during World War II alive. He argued that accusations of neo-Nazi sympathies merely provoked the band \"to keep on doing it, because that's the kind of people we are\".\nOn 20 September 1978, Joy Division made their television debut performing \"Shadowplay\" on \"So It Goes\", with an introduction by Wilson. In October, Joy Division contributed two tracks recorded with producer Martin Hannett to the compilation double-7\" EP \"A Factory Sample\", the first release by Tony Wilson's record label, Factory Records. In the \"NME\" review of the EP, Paul Morley praised the band as \"the missing link\" between Elvis Presley and Siouxsie and the Banshees. Joy Division joined Factory's roster, after buying themselves out of the RCA deal. Gretton was made a label partner to represent the interests of the band. On 27 December, during the drive home from a gig at the Hope and Anchor in London, Curtis had his first recognised severe epileptic seizure and was hospitalised. Meanwhile, Joy Division's career progressed, and Curtis appeared on the 13 January 1979 cover of \"NME\". That month the band recorded their session for BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel. According to Deborah Curtis, \"Sandwiched in between these two important landmarks was the realisation that Ian's illness was something we would have to learn to accommodate\".\n\"Unknown Pleasures\" and breakthrough.\nJoy Division's debut album, \"Unknown Pleasures\", was recorded at Strawberry Studios, Stockport, in April 1979. Producer Martin Hannett significantly altered their live sound, a fact that greatly displeased the band at the time; however, in 2006, Hook said that in retrospect Hannett had done a good job and \"created the Joy Division sound\". The album cover was designed by Peter Saville, who went on to provide artwork for future Joy Division and New Order releases. \"Unknown Pleasures\" was released in June and sold through its initial pressing of 10,000 copies. Wilson said the success turned the indie label into a true business and a \"revolutionary force\" that operated outside of the major record label system. Reviewing the album for \"Melody Maker\", writer Jon Savage described the album as an \"opaque manifesto\" and declared it \"one of the best, white, English, debut LPs of the year\".\nJoy Division performed on Granada TV again on 20 July 1979, and made their only nationwide TV appearance on 15 September on BBC2's \"Something Else\". They supported the Buzzcocks in a 24-venue UK tour that began that October, which allowed the band to quit their regular jobs. The non-album single \"Transmission\" was released in November. Joy Division's burgeoning success drew a devoted following who were stereotyped as \"intense young men dressed in grey overcoats\".\n\"Closer\" and Curtis's health problems.\nJoy Division toured Europe in January 1980. Although the schedule was demanding, Curtis experienced only two grand mal seizures, both in the final two months of the tour. That March, the band recorded their second album, \"Closer,\" with Hannett at London's Britannia Row Studios. That month they released the \"Licht und Blindheit\" single, with \"Atmosphere\" as the A-side and \"Dead Souls\" as the B-side, on the French independent label Sordide Sentimental.\nA lack of sleep and long hours destabilised Curtis's epilepsy, and his seizures became almost uncontrollable. He often had seizures during performances, which some audience members believed were part of the performance. The seizures left him feeling ashamed and depressed, and the band became increasingly worried about Curtis's condition. On 7 April 1980, Curtis attempted suicide by overdosing on his anti-seizure medication, phenobarbitone. The following evening, Joy Division were scheduled to play a gig at the Derby Hall in Bury. Curtis was too ill to perform, so at Gretton's insistence the band played a combined set with Alan Hempsall of Crispy Ambulance and Simon Topping of A Certain Ratio singing on the first few songs. When Topping came back towards the end of the set, some audience members threw bottles at the stage. Curtis's ill health led to the cancellation of several other gigs that April. Joy Division's final live performance was held at the University of Birmingham's High Hall on 2 May, and included their only performance of \"Ceremony\", one of the last songs written by Curtis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Basically, we want to play and enjoy what we like playing. I think that when we stop doing that, I think, well, that will be time to pack it in. That will be the end.\"\n Ian Curtis, \"Radio Lancashire\" interview, 1979.\nHannett's production has been widely praised. However, as with \"Unknown Pleasures\", both Hook and Sumner were unhappy with the production. Hook said that when he heard the final mix of \"Atrocity Exhibition\" he was disappointed that the abrasiveness had been toned down. He wrote; \"I was like, head in hands, 'Oh fucking hell, it's happening again ... Martin had fucking melted the guitar with his Marshall Time Waster. Made it sound like someone strangling a cat and, to my mind, absolutely killed the song. I was so annoyed with him and went in and gave him a piece of my mind but he just turned round and told me to fuck off.\"\nCurtis's suicide and aftermath.\nJoy Division were scheduled to commence their first US/Canada tour in May 1980. Curtis had expressed enthusiasm about the tour, but his relationship with his wife, Deborah, was under strain; Deborah was excluded from the band's inner circle and objected to Curtis being close to Belgian journalist and music promoter Annik Honor\u00e9, whom he met on tour in Europe in 1979. He was also anxious about how American audiences would react to his epilepsy.\nThe evening before the band were due to depart for America, Curtis returned to his Macclesfield home to talk to Deborah. He asked her to drop an impending divorce suit, and asked her to leave him alone in the house until he caught a train to Manchester the following morning. Early on 18 May 1980, having spent the night watching the Werner Herzog film \"Stroszek\" and listening to Iggy Pop's 1977 album \"The Idiot\", Curtis hanged himself in his kitchen. Deborah discovered his body later that day when she returned.\nThe suicide shocked the band and their management. In 2005, Wilson said: \"I think all of us made the mistake of not thinking his suicide was going to happen\u00a0... We all completely underestimated the danger. We didn't take it seriously. That's how stupid we were.\" Music critic Simon Reynolds said Curtis's suicide \"made for instant myth\". Jon Savage's obituary said that \"now no one will remember what his work with Joy Division was like when he was alive; it will be perceived as tragic rather than courageous\". In June 1980, Joy Division's single \"Love Will Tear Us Apart\" was released, which hit number thirteen on the UK Singles Chart. In July 1980, \"Closer\" was released, and peaked at number six on the UK Albums Chart. \"NME\" reviewer Charles Shaar Murray wrote, \"\"Closer\" is as magnificent a memorial (for 'Joy Division' as much as for Ian Curtis) as any post-Presley popular musician could have.\"\nMorris said that even without Curtis's death, it is unlikely that Joy Division would have endured. The members had made a pact long before Curtis's death that, should any member leave, the remaining members would change the band name. The band re-formed as New Order, with Sumner on vocals; they later recruited Morris's girlfriend Gillian Gilbert as keyboardist and second guitarist. Gilbert had befriended the band and played guitar at a Joy Division performance when Curtis had been unable to play.\nNew Order's debut single, \"Ceremony\" (1981), was formed from the last two songs written with Curtis. New Order struggled in their early years to escape the shadow of Joy Division, but went on to achieve far greater commercial success with a different, more upbeat and dance-oriented sound.\nVarious Joy Division outtakes and live material have been released. \"Still\", featuring live tracks and rare recordings, was issued in 1981. Factory issued the \"Substance\" compilation in 1988, including several out-of-print singles. \"Permanent\" was released in 1995 by London Records, which had acquired the Joy Division catalogue after Factory's 1992 bankruptcy. The comprehensive box set \"Heart and Soul\" was released in 1997.\nMusical style.\nSound.\nJoy Division took time to develop their style and quickly evolved from their punk roots. Their sound during their early inception as Warsaw was described as fairly generic and \"undistinguished punk-inflected hard-rock\". Critic Simon Reynolds observed how the band's originality only \"really became apparent as the songs got slower\", and their music took on a \"sparse\" quality. According to Reynolds, \"Hook's bass carried the melody, Bernard Sumner's guitar left gaps rather than filling up the group's sound with dense riffage and Steve Morris's drums seemed to circle the rim of a crater.\" According to music critic Jon Savage, \"Joy Division were not punk but they were directly inspired by its energy\". In 1994 Sumner said the band's characteristic sound \"came out naturally: I'm more rhythm and chords, and Hooky was melody. He used to play high lead bass because I liked my guitar to sound distorted, and the amplifier I had would only work when it was at full volume. When Hooky played low, he couldn't hear himself. Steve has his own style which is different to other drummers. To me, a drummer in the band is the clock, but Steve wouldn't be the clock, because he's passive: he would follow the rhythm of the band, which gave us our own edge.\" By \"Closer\", Curtis had adopted a low baritone voice, drawing comparisons to Jim Morrison of the Doors (one of Curtis's favourite bands).\nSumner largely acted as the band's director, a role he continued in New Order. While Sumner was the group's primary guitarist, Curtis played the instrument on a few recorded songs and during a few shows. Curtis hated playing guitar, but the band insisted he do so. Sumner said, \"He played in quite a bizarre way and that to us was interesting, because no one else would play like Ian\". During the recording sessions for \"Closer\", Sumner began using self-built synthesisers and Hook used a six-string bass for more melody.\nProducer Martin Hannett \"dedicated himself to capturing and intensifying Joy Division's eerie spatiality\". Hannett believed punk rock was sonically conservative because of its refusal to use studio technology to create sonic space. The producer instead aimed to create a more expansive sound on the group's records. Hannett said, \"[Joy Division] were a gift to a producer, because they didn't have a clue. They didn't argue\". Hannett demanded clean and clear \"sound separation\" not only for individual instruments, but even for individual pieces of Morris's drumkit. Morris recalled, \"Typically on tracks he considered to be potential singles, he'd get me to play each drum on its own to avoid any bleed-through of sound\". Music journalist Richard Cook noted that Hannett's role was \"crucial\". There are \"devices of distance\" in his production and \"the sound is an illusion of physicality\".\nLyrics.\nCurtis was the band's sole lyricist. He typically composed his lyrics in a notebook, independently of the eventual music to evolve. The music itself was largely written by Sumner and Hook as the group jammed during rehearsals. Curtis's imagery and word choice often referenced \"coldness, pressure, darkness, crisis, failure, collapse, loss of control\". In 1979, \"NME\" journalist Paul Rambali wrote, \"The themes of Joy Division's music are sorrowful, painful and sometimes deeply sad.\" Music journalist Jon Savage wrote that \"Curtis's great lyrical achievement was to capture the underlying reality of a society in turmoil, and to make it both universal and personal,\" while noting that \"the lyrics reflected, in mood and approach, his interest in romantic and science-fiction literature.\" Critic Robert Palmer wrote that William S. Burroughs and J. G. Ballard were \"obvious influences\" to Curtis, and Morris also remembered the singer reading T. S. Eliot. Deborah Curtis also remembered Curtis reading works by writers such as Fyodor Dostoevsky, Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre, Franz Kafka, and Hermann Hesse.\nCurtis was unwilling to explain the meaning behind his lyrics and Joy Division releases were absent of any lyric sheets. He told the fanzine \"Printed Noise\", \"We haven't got a message really; the lyrics are open to interpretation. They're multidimensional. You can read into them what you like.\" The other Joy Division members have said that at the time, they paid little attention to the contents of Curtis's lyrics. In a 1987 interview with \"Option\", Morris said that they \"just thought the songs were sort of sympathetic and more uplifting than depressing. But everyone's got their own opinion.\" Deborah Curtis recalled that only with the release of \"Closer\" did many who were close to the singer realise \"[h]is intentions and feelings were all there within the lyrics\". The surviving members regret not seeing the warning signs in Curtis's lyrics. Morris said that \"it was only after Ian died that we sat down and listened to the lyrics... you'd find yourself thinking, 'Oh my God, I missed this one'. Because I'd look at Ian's lyrics and think how clever he was putting himself in the position of someone else. I never believed he was writing about himself. Looking back, how could I have been so bleedin' stupid? Of course he was writing about himself. But I didn't go in and grab him and ask, 'What's up?' I have to live with that\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"I saw three attacks, and it was always two-thirds of the way through a set ... it came to a point where in the last year, you'd watch the group and suddenly you'd feel Ian may be dancing great and suddenly really great. Hooky and Barney would be looking nervously at the stage and you could see what was going through their minds ... for something was happening within a set, doing what he did, that actually took him to that point, that actually overcame the drugs and made him have the attack.\"\n Tony Wilson, reflecting upon Ian Curtis's seizures while performing live with Joy Division.\nLive performances.\nIn contrast to the relatively polished sound of their studio recordings, Joy Division typically played loudly and aggressively during live performances. The band were especially unhappy with Hannett's mix of \"Unknown Pleasures\", which reduced the abrasiveness of their live sound for a more cerebral and ghostly sound. According to Sumner \"the music was loud and heavy, and we felt that Martin had toned it down, especially with the guitars\".\nThe group did not typically interact with the audience during concerts. According to Paul Morley, \"During a Joy Division set, outside of the songs, you'll be lucky to hear more than two or three words. Hello and goodbye. No introductions, no promotion.\" Curtis would often perform what became known as his \"'dead fly' dance\", as if imitating a seizure; his arms would \"start flying in [a] semicircular, hypnotic curve\". Simon Reynolds noted that Curtis's dancing style was reminiscent of an epileptic seizure, and that he was dancing in the manner for some months before he was diagnosed with epilepsy.\nCurtis' diagnosis made live performances difficult for the band. Sumner later reflected in 2007, \"We didn't have flashing lights, but sometimes a particular drum beat would do something to him. He'd go off in a trance for a bit, then he'd lose it and have an epileptic fit. We'd have to stop the show and carry him off to the dressing room where he'd cry his eyes out because this appalling thing had just happened to him.\"\nInfluences.\nSumner wrote that Curtis was inspired by artists such as the Doors, Iggy Pop, David Bowie, Kraftwerk, the Velvet Underground and Neu!. Hook has also related that Curtis was particularly influenced by Iggy Pop's chaotic stage persona. The group were inspired by Kraftwerk's \"marriage between humans and machines\", and the inventiveness of their electronic music. Joy Division played \"Trans-Europe Express\" through the PA before they went on stage, \"to get a momentum\". Bowie's \"Berlin Trilogy\" elaborated with Brian Eno, influenced them; the \"cold austerity\" of the synthesisers on the B-sides of \"Heroes\" and \"Low\" albums, was a \"music looking at the future\". Morris cited the \"unique style\" of Velvet Underground's Maureen Tucker and the motorik drum beats, from Neu! and Can. Morris also credited Siouxsie and the Banshees because their \"first drummer Kenny Morris played mostly toms\" and \"the sound of cymbals was forbidden\". Hook said that \"Siouxsie and the Banshees were one of our big influences... The way the guitarist and the drummer played was a really unusual way of playing\". Hook drew inspiration from the style of bassist Jean-Jacques Burnel and his early material with the Stranglers; he also credited Carol Kaye and her musical basslines on early 1970s work of the Temptations. Sumner mentioned \"the raw, nasty, unpolished edge\" in the guitars of the Rolling Stones, the simple riff of \"Vicious\" on Lou Reed's \"Transformer\", and Neil Young. His musical horizon went up a notch with Jimi Hendrix, he realised \"it wasn't about little catchy tunes ... it was what you could do sonically with a guitar.\"\nLegacy.\nDespite their short career, Joy Division have exerted a wide-reaching influence and achieved widespread critical acclaim. John Bush of AllMusic argues that Joy Division \"became the first band in the post-punk movement by\u00a0... emphasizing not anger and energy but mood and expression, pointing ahead to the rise of melancholy alternative music in the '80s.\"\nThe band's dark and gloomy sound, which Martin Hannett described in 1979 as \"dancing music with Gothic overtones\", presaged in part the gothic rock genre. While the term \"gothic\" originally described a \"doomy atmosphere\" in music of the late 1970s, the term was soon applied to specific bands like Bauhaus that followed in the wake of Joy Division and Siouxsie and the Banshees. Standard musical fixtures of early gothic rock bands included \"high-pitched post-Joy Division basslines usurp[ing] the melodic role\" and \"vocals that were either near operatic and Teutonic or deep, droning alloys of Jim Morrison and Ian Curtis.\"\nJoy Division have been dramatised in two biopics. \"24 Hour Party People\" (2002) is a fictionalised account of Factory Records in which members of the band appear as supporting characters \u2014 Ian Curtis portrayed by Sean Harris, Bernard Sumner by John Simm, and Peter Hook by Ralf Little. Tony Wilson said of the film, \"It's all true, it's all not true. It's not a fucking documentary\", and that he favoured the \"myth\" over the truth. The 2007 film \"Control\", directed by Anton Corbijn, is a biography of Ian Curtis (portrayed by Sam Riley) that uses Deborah Curtis's biography of her late husband, \"Touching from a Distance\" (1995), as its basis. \"Control\" had its international premiere on the opening night of Director's Fortnight at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival, where it was critically well received. That year Grant Gee directed the band documentary \"Joy Division\".\nJoy Division have influenced many bands, including their contemporaries U2, the Cure and Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark. In 1980, U2 singer Bono said that Joy Division were \"one of the most important bands of the last four or five years\". Other acts that cite Joy Division as an influence include Tears for Fears, Soundgarden, the Proclaimers, Mogwai, H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, and Future Islands. Rapper Danny Brown named his album \"Atrocity Exhibition\" after the Joy Division song, whose title was partially inspired by the 1970 J. G. Ballard collection of condensed novels of the same name. In 2005 both New Order and Joy Division were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16580", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16580", "title": "Jacobite", "text": "A Jacobite is a follower of someone named Jacob or James, from the Latin \"J\u0101c\u014dbus\". Jacobite or Jacobitism may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStuart succession.\nJacobite succession is the line through which the British \"crown in pretence\" of the Stuart kingship has descended since 1688\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16581", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16581", "title": "Johnny Bench", "text": "American baseball player (born 1947)\nJohnny Lee Bench (born December 7, 1947) is an American former professional baseball player. He played his entire Major League Baseball career, which lasted from 1967 to 1983, with the Cincinnati Reds, primarily as a catcher. Bench led the Reds team known as the Big Red Machine that dominated the National League in the mid-1970s, winning six division titles, four National League pennants, and two World Series championships.\nA fourteen-time All-Star and a two-time National League Most Valuable Player, Bench excelled on offense and defense, twice leading the majors in home runs and three times in runs batted in. At the time of his retirement in 1983, he held the major league record for most home runs hit by a catcher. He was also the first catcher to lead the league in home runs. He hit 45 home runs in 1970, the single-season record for catchers until Salvador Perez hit 48 in 2021; Bench still holds the National League record. His 389 home runs and 1,376 runs batted in are the most in Cincinnati Reds history.\nOn defense, Bench was a ten-time Gold Glove Award winner who skillfully handled pitching staffs and possessed a strong, accurate throwing arm. He caught 100 or more games for 13 consecutive seasons. In 1986, Bench was inducted into the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame. He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1989 in his first year of eligibility. He was named to MLB's All-Time Team in 1997 and All-Century Team in 1999, and ESPN has called him the greatest catcher in baseball history.\nEarly life.\nBorn and raised in Oklahoma, Bench is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448 Choctaw. He played baseball and basketball and was class valedictorian at Binger-Oney High School in Binger. He survived a bus crash that killed two of his baseball teammates in 1965. His father, a truck driver, told him that the fastest route to becoming a major leaguer was as a catcher.\nProfessional career.\nDraft and minor leagues.\nAs a 17-year-old, the Cincinnati Reds selected Bench in the second round, with the 36th overall selection of the 1965 Major League Baseball draft. In 1965, he played for the Tampa Tarpons and Reds' Florida Instructional League team. He played for the Triple-A Buffalo Bisons in 1966 and 1967. During the 1967 season, he hit a grand slam against fellow future Hall of Famer Jim Palmer, who would go on to never allow another grand slam his major league career.\n1967\u20131969: debut and Rookie of the Year.\nBench was called up to the Reds in August 1967. He hit only .163, but impressed many people with his defense and strong throwing arm, among them Hall of Famer Ted Williams. Williams signed a baseball for him and predicted that the young catcher would be a \"Hall of Famer for sure!\" Williams' prophecy became fact 22 years later in 1989 when Bench was elected to Cooperstown.\nDuring a 1968 spring training game, Bench was catching right-hander Jim Maloney, an eight-year veteran. Maloney was once a hard thrower, but injuries had dramatically slowed down his fastball. Maloney nevertheless insisted on repeatedly \"shaking off\" his younger catcher by throwing fastballs instead of the breaking balls that Bench had called for. When an exasperated Bench bluntly told Maloney, \"Your fastball's not popping,\" Maloney replied with an epithet. To prove to Maloney that his fastball was no longer effective, Bench called for a fastball, and after Maloney released the ball, Bench dropped his catcher's mitt and caught the fastball barehanded.&lt;ref name=\"http://entertainment.howstuffworks.com\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Bench was the Reds' catcher on April 30, 1969, when Maloney pitched a no hitter against the \nIn 1968, the 20-year-old Bench impressed many in his first he won the National League Rookie of the Year Award, batting .275 with 15 home runs and 82 RBIs. This marked the first time that the award had been won by a catcher. He also won the 1968 National League Gold Glove Award for catchers, the first time a rookie had won that award. He made 102 assists in 1968, which was the first time in 23 years that a catcher had more than 100 assists in a season. During the Vietnam War, Bench served in the United States Army Reserve as a member of the 478th Engineer Battalion, which was based across the Ohio River from Cincinnati at Fort Thomas, Kentucky. This unit included several of his teammates, including Pete Rose, Bobby Tolan, and Darrel Chaney. In the winter of 1970\u20131971, Bench was part of Bob Hope's USO Tour of Vietnam.\n1970s: MVPs, World Series.\nIn 1970, Bench had his finest statistical season. At age 22, he became the youngest player to win the National League Most Valuable Player Award. He hit .293, led the majors with 45 home runs and a franchise-record 148 runs batted in as the Reds won the NL West Division. The Reds swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in the National League Championship Series (NLCS) but lost to the Baltimore Orioles in five games in the World Series.\nBench had another strong year in 1972, winning the MVP Award for a second time. He once again led the majors in home runs (40) and RBI (125) to help propel the Reds to another NL West Division title and won the NL pennant in the deciding fifth game over the Pittsburgh Pirates. One of his more dramatic home runs was likely his ninth-inning, lead off, opposite field home run in that fifth NLCS game. The solo shot tied the game at three; the Reds won later in the inning on a wild pitch, 4\u20133. The \"Cincinnati Enquirer\" later called that game one of the best in franchise history. However, the Reds lost the World Series to the Oakland Athletics in seven games.\nAfter the 1972 season, Bench underwent surgery to remove a lesion from his lung, out of concern that it might be cancerous. The lesion was benign, but Bench stated in an interview that he was never the same player after the surgery. \u201cThey cut the ribs, they cut the bones, they cut the nerves, and so I never was the same player afterwards.\u201d He remained productive but never again hit 40 home runs in a season.\nIn 1973, Bench hit 25 home runs and 104 RBI and helped the Reds rally from a 10&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442-game deficit to the Los Angeles Dodgers in early July to lead the majors with 99 wins and claim another NL West crown. In the NLCS, Cincinnati met a New York Mets team that won the NL East with an unimpressive 82\u201379 () record, 16&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 games behind the Reds. The Mets boasted three of the better starting pitchers in the NL, future Hall of Famer Tom Seaver, Jerry Koosman, and Jon Matlack. Bench's bottom of the ninth-inning home run off Seaver in the first game propelled the Reds to victory, but Seaver would get the best of the Reds and Bench in the deciding Game 5, winning 7\u20132 to put the Mets into the World Series.\nIn 1974, Bench led the league with 129 RBI and scored 108 runs, becoming only the fourth catcher in major league history with 100 or more runs and RBI in the same season. The Reds won the second-most games in the majors (98) but lost the West Division to the Los Angeles Dodgers. In 1975, the Reds finally broke through in the postseason. Bench had 28 home runs and 110 RBI during the regular season. Cincinnati swept the Pirates in three games to win the NLCS, and defeated the Boston Red Sox in a memorable seven-game World Series.\nBench struggled with ailing shoulders in 1976 and had one of his least productive years, with only 16 home runs and 74 RBI. He finished with an excellent postseason, starting with a 4-for-12 performance in the NLCS sweep over the Philadelphia Phillies. The World Series provided a head-to-head match-up with Yankees' All-Star catcher Thurman Munson. Bench rose to the occasion, hitting .533 with two home runs, while Munson also hit well, with a .529 average. The Reds won in a four-game sweep, and Bench was named the Series MVP. At the post-World Series press conference, Reds manager Sparky Anderson was asked to compare Munson with his catcher. Anderson replied, \"I don't want to embarrass any other catcher by comparing him to Johnny Bench.\" Bench bounced back in 1977 to hit 31 home runs and 109 RBI but the Dodgers won two straight NL pennants. The Reds reached the postseason just once more in his career, in 1979, but were swept in three straight in the NLCS by Pittsburgh.\n1980s: move to infield and retirement.\nFor the last three seasons of his career, Bench moved out from behind the plate, catching only 13 games, while primarily becoming a corner infielder (first or third base). The Reds proclaimed September 17, 1983, \"Johnny Bench Night\" at Riverfront Stadium, in which he hit his 389th and final home run, a line drive to left in the third inning, before a record crowd. He retired at the end of the season at age 35.\nMLB career statistics.\nBench had 2,048 hits for a .267 career batting average with 389 home runs and 1,376 RBI during his 17-year Major League career, all spent with the Reds. He retired as the career home run leader for catchers, a record which stood until surpassed by Carlton Fisk and the current record holder, Mike Piazza. In his career, Bench won 10 Gold Gloves, was named to the National League All-Star team 14 times, and won two Most Valuable Player awards. He led the National League three times in caught stealing percentage and ended his career with a .990 fielding percentage at catcher and an overall .987 fielding percentage. He caught 118 shutouts during his career, ranking him 12th all-time among major league catchers as of 2010[ [update]]. Bench also won the Lou Gehrig Award in 1975 for his philanthropic efforts, the Babe Ruth Award for his postseason performance in 1976, and the Hutch Award in 1981.\nBench popularized the hinged catcher's mitt, first introduced by Randy Hundley of the Chicago Cubs. He began using the mitt after a stint on the disabled list in 1966 for a thumb injury on his throwing hand. The mitt allowed Bench to tuck his throwing arm safely to the side when receiving the pitch. By the turn of the decade, the hinged mitt became standard catchers' equipment. Having huge hands (a famous photograph features him holding seven baseballs in his right hand), Bench also tended to block breaking balls in the dirt by scooping them with one hand instead of the more common way: dropping to both knees and blocking the ball using the chest protector to keep the ball in front.\nLegacy and post-playing career.\nBench was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1989, alongside Carl Yastrzemski. He was elected in his first year of eligibility, and appeared on 96% of the ballots, the third-highest percentage at that time. Three years earlier, Bench was inducted into the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame and the team retired his uniform No. 5. In 1989, he became the first individual baseball player to appear on a Wheaties box, a cereal he ate as a child.\nAfter turning 50, Bench was a part-time professional golfer and played in several events on the Senior PGA Tour. He had a home at the Mission Hills-Gary Player Course in Rancho Mirage, California.\nIn 1999, Bench ranked 16th on \"The Sporting News\" list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players. He was the highest-ranking catcher. Bench was also elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team as the top vote-receiving catcher. As part of the Golden Anniversary of the Rawlings Gold Glove Award, Bench was selected to the All-Time Rawlings Gold Glove Team.\nFrom 2000 until 2018, the best college baseball catcher annually received the Johnny Bench Award. Winners included future MLB players Buster Posey, Kurt Suzuki, Kelly Shoppach, and Mike Zunino. The award was renamed the Buster Posey Award for the 2019 season onwards.On September 17, 2011, the Reds unveiled a statue of Bench at the entrance way of the Reds Hall of Fame at Great American Ball Park. The larger-than-life bronze statue by Tom Tsuchiya shows Bench in the act of throwing out a base runner. Bench called the unveiling of his statue his \"greatest moment\".\nIn 2016, Bench was inducted into the International Sports Hall of Fame. He was also the Hall of Fame recipient of the Bob Feller Act of Valor Award in 2018, for his service and continued support of the United States military.\nBroadcasting and media career.\nIn 1986, Bench and Don Drysdale did the backup contests for ABC's Sunday afternoon baseball telecasts (Al Michaels and Jim Palmer were the primary commentating crew). Keith Jackson, usually working with Tim McCarver, did the No. 2 Monday night games. Bench took a week off in June (with Steve Busby filling in) and also worked one game with Michaels as the networks switched the announcer pairings. While Drysdale worked the All-Star Game in Houston as an interviewer, Bench did not resurface until the playoffs. Bench ultimately moved to CBS Radio to help Brent Musburger call that year's National League Championship Series. Bench would later serve as color commentator CBS Radio's World Series coverage alongside Jack Buck and later Vin Scully from 1989 to 1993. In 1994, Bench served as a field reporter for NBC/The Baseball Network's coverage of the All-Star Game in Pittsburgh. Bench co-hosted a Cincinnati radio show with Reds broadcaster Marty Brennaman but quit in 2000 following Brennaman's Hall of Fame speech supporting Pete Rose's induction.\nBench wrote several books. During his playing career, he wrote \"From Behind the Plate\", published in 1972, the instructional book \"Catching and Power Hitting\" in 1975, and \"Catch You Later,\" an autobiography published in 1979 co-authored with William Brashler. In 1999, he wrote \"The Complete Idiot's Guide to Baseball\". In 2008, he co-wrote \"Catch Every Ball: How to Handle Life's Pitches\" with Paul Daugherty.\nBench has acted several times, usually related to his baseball career. While still an active player, he made a cameo appearance as a Kings Island Inn poolside waiter in a Season 3 episode of \"The Partridge Family\" which first aired on January 26, 1973. Bench hosted the television series \"The Baseball Bunch\" from 1982 to 1985. In the show, Bench and other current and retired ballplayers would teach a cast of boys and girls from the Tucson, Arizona area about baseball. The San Diego Chicken provided comic relief, and Los Angeles Dodgers manager Tommy Lasorda appeared as \"The Dugout Wizard.\" In 1985, Bench starred as Joe Boyd/Joe Hardy in a Cincinnati stage production of the musical \"Damn Yankees\", which also included Marge Schott, Jerry Springer, and Marty Brennaman. In 2003, Bench guest starred on an episode of \"Yes, Dear\" as himself, along with Ernie Banks and Frank Robinson. Bench was a Savannah Bananas coach in a 2022 game.\nBench has also been a spokesperson in advertisements for several decades. In the 1980s, he was a spokesman for Krylon paint, featuring the catchphrases \"I'm Johnny Bench, and this is Johnny Bench's bench\" and \"no runs, no drips, no errors\" During his career, he also endorsed Fifth Third Bank and Gillette. Bench received a Stryker Corporation hip implant following his MLB career. He would then go on to become a spokesperson for the company. He has also been a spokesperson for pain relief company Blue-Emu.\nIn an interview during a 2008 Boston Red Sox game with knuckleballer Tim Wakefield on the mound for the Red Sox, Bench related a story that Reds manager Sparky Anderson told him that he was thinking of trading for knuckleballer Phil Niekro. Bench replied that Anderson had better trade for Niekro's catcher, too.\nPersonal life.\nBench has been married five times. Once hailed as \"baseball's most-eligible bachelor,\" he shed that distinction before the 1975 season when he married Vickie Chesser, a toothpaste model and the 1970 Miss South Carolina USA who had dated Joe Namath. Four days after they met, Bench proposed, and they were married on February 21, 1975. Quickly, the pair realized they were incompatible, especially after Bench suggested that his wife accept \"Hustler\" magazine's offer for her to pose nude for $25,000. They broke up at the end of the season (Bench reportedly said to her, \"Now I'm done with two things I hate: baseball and you\"), divorcing after just 13 months. \"I tried. I even hand-squeezed orange juice,\" Chesser told Phil Donahue in December 1975. \"I don't think either of us had any idea what marriage was really like.\" After returning to Manhattan, Chesser said, \"Johnny Bench is a great athlete, a mediocre everything else, and a true tragedy as a person.\"\nBefore Christmas 1987, Bench married Laura Cwikowski, an Oklahoma City model and aerobics instructor. They had a son, Bobby Binger Bench (named after Bob Hope and Bobby Knight, and Bench's hometown), before divorcing in 1995. They shared custody of their son. \"He was, and is, a great dad,\" according to Bobby, who works in Cincinnati as a production operator on Reds broadcasts. Bench married his third wife, Elizabeth Benton, in 1997. He filed for divorce in 2000 on grounds of marital infidelity. His fourth marriage took place in 2004, to 31-year-old Lauren Baiocchi, the daughter of pro golfer Hugh Baiocchi. After living in Palm Springs with their two sons, Bench wished to return to South Florida, where he lived from 2014 to 2017. However, she would not relocate to Florida, leading to their divorce. As of 2018, Bench has primary custody of their sons.\nBench was married for the fifth time in March 2024.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16584", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16584", "title": "Jasmuheen", "text": "Australian breatharian (born 1957)\nJasmuheen (born Ellen Greve; 1957) is a proponent of \"pranic nourishment\" or breatharianism, the alleged practice of living entirely without food and drink. She makes appearances at New Age conferences worldwide, has hosted spiritual retreats in Thailand and has released books and audio recordings. Her claims have been condemned by the scientific community as a dangerous pseudoscience.\nEarly life.\nJasmuheen was born in 1957 in New South Wales, Australia, of post-war Norwegian migrant parents.\nBreatharianism.\nJasmuheen developed financial and business management skills working full-time in the finance industry. In 1992, she began combining her experience in business and finance with meditation, selling access to workshops and seminars on the topic and, by deed poll, changed her name to Jasmuheen.\nThe Australian television programme \"60 Minutes\" challenged Jasmuheen to demonstrate how she could live without food and water. The supervising medical professional Dr. Beres Wenck found that, after 48 hours, Jasmuheen displayed symptoms of acute dehydration, stress, and high blood pressure. Jasmuheen claimed that this was a result of \"polluted air\". On the third day, she was moved to a mountainside retreat about 15 miles from the city, where she was filmed enjoying the fresh air, claiming she could now successfully practice inedia. But as filming progressed, Jasmuheen's speech slowed, her pupils dilated, and she lost over a stone (6\u00a0kg or 14\u00a0lb) in weight. After four days, she acknowledged that she had lost weight, but stated that she felt fine. Dr. Wenck stated: \"You are now quite dehydrated, probably over 10%, getting up to 11%.\" The doctor continued: \"Her pulse is about double what it was when she started. The risk if she goes any further is kidney failure.\" Jasmuheen's condition continued to deteriorate rapidly due to acute dehydration, despite her contrary insistence. Dr. Wenck concluded that continuing the experiment would ultimately prove fatal. The film crew agreed with this assessment and stopped filming.\nRegarding her intake of food, Jasmuheen said: \"Generally not much at all. Maybe a few cups of tea and a glass of water, but now and then if I feel a bit bored and I want some flavour, then I will have a mouthful of whatever it is I'm wanting the flavour of. So it might be a piece of chocolate or it might be a mouthful of a cheesecake or something like that.\" In the aftermath of the \"60 Minutes\" broadcast, Kathy Marks noted in \"The Independent\", \"Visitors to her large villa in the prosperous Chapel Hill area of Brisbane invariably find her refrigerator generously stocked with food, all of it destined, she insists, for the stomach of her second husband, Jeff Ferguson, a convicted fraudster\".\nJasmuheen has stated that she has lived on approximately 300 calories per day for the past fourteen years, maintaining full health through supplementing a fluid intake with \"cosmic particles\" or \"micro-food\", which she describes as prana. She has stated that she has not yet mastered the ability to be fluid-free for more than short periods.\nJasmuheen was awarded the Bent Spoon Award by Australian Skeptics in 2000 (\"presented to the perpetrator of the most preposterous piece of paranormal or pseudoscientific piffle\"). She was also awarded the 2000 Ig Nobel Prize for Literature for her book \"Pranic Nourishment\u00a0\u2013 Living on Light\", \"which explains that although some people do eat food, they don't ever really need to.\"\nJasmuheen maintains that some of her beliefs are based on the writings and \"more recent channelled material\" of the Count of St Germain. She states that her DNA expanded from 2 to 12 strands to take up more hydrogen. The extra strands of DNA have not been scientifically verified. When offered $30,000 to prove her claim with a blood test, Jasmuheen stated \"you cannot view spiritual energy under a microscope\". She claimed that such a challenge would be a deliberate attack on her beliefs, and that she refuses to act as an example of her alleged paranormal attributes.\nIn 2005, James Randi offered her the James Randi Educational Foundation US$1 million prize to demonstrate her claims. In 2010, she appeared in the documentaries \"3 Magic Words\" and \"In the Beginning There Was Light\".\nDeaths of followers.\n, five deaths had been directly linked to breatharianism and Jasmuheen's publications. Jasmuheen has denied any responsibility for the deaths.\nLani Marcia Roslyn Morris, a 53-year-old Melbourne resident, died in 1999 while attempting the breatharian \"diet\" advocated by Jasmuheen. Jim Vadim Pesnak, 63, and his wife Eugenia, 60, were jailed for six years and two years, respectively, on charges of manslaughter for their involvement in the death of Morris. Pesnak had delayed seeking medical attention. Referring to this case, Jasmuheen commented that Morris's practice of inedia perhaps was \"not coming from a place of integrity and did not have the right motivation\".\nJasmuheen offered similar defence in response to the death of Verity Linn, who died of hypothermia and dehydration with lack of nutrition while practising inedia in Scotland, her diary mentioning Jasmuheen's teachings. Linn's body was found in a tent. In 2012, it was reported that a Swiss woman died of starvation after having attempted to survive purely on light, as taught in one of Jasmuheen's books. In 2017, a Dutch woman living in a household of four practitioners of breatharianism inspired by Jasmuheen died under mysterious circumstances. The three remaining members of the household are suspected of withholding the malnourished woman adequate medical care.\nIn 1999, Michelle Shirley, spokeswoman for the Cult Information Centre, told the BBC that the centre had been contacted five times in the previous 12 months by concerned friends and family members of Breatharians and that \"although Breatharianism is not strictly a cult, the centre has been monitoring its activities\". She added, \"We are particularly concerned about any implication that if it doesn't work, it is the person's fault. That implies there is nothing wrong with the Breatharians' teachings.\"\nIn the end of 2017, 22-year-old German citizen Finn Bogumil died on the Caribbean island of Dominica, reportedly of fasting. According to witnesses, he was not eating or drinking for several days ahead of his death, and had told friends and family members of his plans to only live off of sunlight. German news station NDR also released a documentary about this case in March 2019.\nJasmuheen has written that \"If you haven't found the light that will nourish you, you may have the intention to become a breatharian, but in fact you may be putting yourself through food deprivation. There is one known case where a person died when trying to become a breatharian.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16585", "revid": "40909648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16585", "title": "Jell-O", "text": "Dessert brand made by Kraft Foods\nJell-O (stylized in all caps) is an American brand offering a variety of powdered gelatin dessert (fruit-flavored gels/jellies), pudding, and no-bake cream pie mixes. The original gelatin dessert (genericized as jello) is the signature of the brand. \"Jell-O\" is a registered trademark of Kraft Heinz, and is based in Chicago, Illinois.\nThe dessert was especially popular in the first half of the 20th century. The original gelatin dessert began in Le Roy, New York, in 1897, when Pearle Bixby Wait trademarked the name \"Jell-O\". He and his wife May had made the product by adding strawberry, raspberry, orange, and lemon flavoring to sugar and granulated gelatin (which had been patented in 1845). The powder is mixed with boiling water and then cooled to produce a gel.\nDescription.\nJell-O is sold prepared (ready-to-eat), or in powder form, and is available in various colors and flavors. The powder contains powdered gelatin and flavorings, including sugar or artificial sweeteners. It is dissolved in hot water, then chilled and allowed to set. Fruit, vegetables, and whipped cream can be added to make elaborate snacks that can be molded into shapes.\nSome non-gelatin pudding and pie-filling products are sold under the Jell-O brand. Ordinary Jell-O pudding is cooked on the stove top (with milk) then eaten warm or chilled, whereas Jell-O instant pudding is mixed with cold milk and chilled; it sets without cooking. To make pie fillings, the same pudding products are prepared with less liquid.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nGelatin, a protein produced from collagen extracted from boiled bones, connective tissues, and other animal products, has been a component of food, particularly desserts, since the 15th century.\nGelatin was popularized in New York in the Victorian era with spectacular and complex jelly molds. Gelatin was sold in sheets and had to be purified, which was time-consuming. Gelatin desserts were the province of royalty and the relatively well-to-do. In 1845, a patent for powdered gelatin was obtained by industrialist Peter Cooper, who built the first American steam-powered locomotive, the \"Tom Thumb\". This powdered gelatin was easy to manufacture and easier to use in cooking.\nIn 1897, in LeRoy, New York, carpenter and cough syrup manufacturer Pearle Bixby Wait trademarked a gelatin dessert called \"Jell-O\". Wait and his wife, May, added strawberry, raspberry, orange, and lemon flavoring to granulated gelatin and sugar. In 1899, Wait sold Jell-O to \"Orator Francis Woodward\", whose Genesee Pure Food Company produced the successful Grain-O health drink. Part of the legal agreement between Woodward and Wait dealt with the similar Jell-O name.\nGoing mainstream.\nVarious elements were key to Jell-O becoming a mainstream product: new technologies, such as refrigeration, powdered gelatin and machine packaging, home economics classes, and the company's marketing.\nInitially, Woodward struggled to sell the powdered product. Beginning in 1902, to raise awareness, Woodward's Genesee Pure Food Company placed advertisements in the \"Ladies' Home Journal\" proclaiming Jell-O to be \"America's Most Famous Dessert.\" Jell-O was a minor success until 1904, when Genesee Pure Food Company sent armies of salesmen into the field to distribute free Jell-O cookbooks, a pioneering marketing tactic.\nWithin a decade, Genesee Pure Food Company added three new flavors, chocolate (discontinued in 1927), cherry, and peach, and it launched the brand in Canada. Celebrity testimonials and recipes appeared in advertisements featuring actress Ethel Barrymore and opera singer Ernestine Schumann-Heink. Some Jell-O illustrated advertisements were painted by Maxfield Parrish.\nIn 1923, the newly rechristened Jell-O Company launched \"D-Zerta\", an artificially sweetened version of Jell-O. Two years later, Postum and Genesee merged, and in 1927 Postum acquired Clarence Birdseye's frozen foods company to form the General Foods Corporation.\nBy 1930, there appeared a vogue in American cuisine for congealed salads, and the company introduced lime-flavored Jell-O, to complement the add-ins that cooks across the country were combining in these aspics and salads. Popular Jell-O recipes often included ingredients like cabbage, celery, green peppers, and even cooked pasta.\nIn 1934, sponsorship from Jell-O made comedian Jack Benny the dessert's spokesperson. At this time Post introduced a jingle (\"featured\" by the agency Young &amp; Rubicam) that was familiar over several decades, in which the spelling \"J-E-L-L-O\" was (or could be) sung over a rising five-note musical theme.\nThe jingle was written by Don Bestor, who, at the time, was the bandleader on Jack Benny's radio show, \"The Jell-O Program Starring Jack Benny.\"\nIn 1936, chocolate returned to the Jell-O lineup, as an instant pudding made with milk. It proved enormously popular, and over time other pudding flavors were added such as vanilla, tapioca, coconut, pistachio, butterscotch, egg custard, flan, and rice pudding.\nBy the 1950s, salads became so popular that Jell-O responded with savory and vegetable flavors such as celery, Italian, mixed vegetable, and seasoned tomato. These flavors have since been discontinued.\nBaby boom.\nThough much of the elaborate and dainty tea time fare served between the 1920s and 1950s was luxurious and decorative, using fancy ingredients like caviar or lobster, Jell-O became an affordable ornamental ingredient that women were able to use to create feminine, light, delicate dishes that were the standard of refined tea time fare during that period. By the Jazz Age nearly 1/3 of salad recipes in an average cookbook were gelatin-based recipes including varied fillings of fruit, vegetables or even cream cheese.\nTypical recipes from the early 20th century included exotic fruits like figs, dates and bananas, or lemon flavored jello paired with maraschino cherries and other ingredients like marshmallows and almonds. One sweet gelatin-based fruit dessert called only \"Good Salad\" includes vanilla pudding, tapioca pudding, pineapple, mandarin oranges and orange gelatin. The pudding mixes are made with the reserved juice from the canned fruit and the flavored gelatin, the fruits are added and the dessert salad is allowed to set in the fridge and served cool.\nOne savory recipe collected by the \"Des Moines Register\", published in Iowa, is for a tomato soup gelatin salad. The salad, served chilled, is made from lemon gelatin, tomato soup, cream cheese, stuffed olives combined with various other ingredients and seasonings.\nThe baby boom saw a significant increase in sales for Jell-O. Young mothers didn't have the supporting community structures of earlier generations, so marketers were quick to promote easy-to-prepare prepackaged foods. By this time, creating a Jell-O dessert required simply boiling water, combining the water with Jell-O, and putting the mixture into Tupperware molds and refrigerating it for a short time.\nNew flavors were continually added and unsuccessful flavors were removed: in the 1950s and 1960s, apple, black cherry, black raspberry, grape, lemon-lime, mixed fruit, orange-banana, pineapple-grapefruit, blackberry, strawberry-banana, tropical fruit, and more intense \"wild\" versions of the venerable strawberry, raspberry, and cherry. In 1966, the Jell-O \"No-Bake\" dessert line was launched, which allowed a cheesecake to be made in 15 minutes. In 1969, Jell-O 1\u22172\u22173 (later Jell-O 1\u20222\u20223), a gelatin dessert that separated into three layers as it cooled, was unveiled. Until 1987, Jell-O 1\u20222\u20223 was readily found in grocery stores throughout most of the United States, but the dessert is now rare. In 1971 packaged prepared pudding called Jell-O Pudding Treats were introduced. Jell-O Whip 'n Chill, a mousse-style dessert, was introduced and widely promoted; it remains available in limited areas today. A similar dessert called Jell-O Soft Swirl was introduced in 1972, flavors included Chocolate Creme, Strawberry Creme, Vanilla Creme, and Peach Creme. Florence Henderson appeared in TV ads for this product.\nSales decline and turnaround.\nIn 1964, the slogan \"There's always room for Jell-O\" was introduced, promoting the product as a \"light dessert\" that could easily be consumed even after a heavy meal.\nThroughout the 1960s through the 1980s, Jell-O's sales steadily decreased. Many Jell-O dishes, such as desserts and Jell-O salads, became special occasion foods rather than everyday items. Marketers blamed this decline on decreasing family sizes, a \"fast-paced\" lifestyle and women's increasing employment. By 1986, a market study concluded that mothers with young children rarely purchased Jell-O.\nTo turn things around, Jell-O hired Dana Gioia to stop the decline. The marketing team revisited the Jell-O recipes published in past cookbooks and rediscovered Jigglers, although the original recipe did not use that name. Jigglers are Jell-O snacks molded into fun shapes and eaten as finger food. Jell-O launched a massive marketing campaign, notably featuring Bill Cosby as spokesman. The campaign was a huge success, causing a significant market gain.\nCosby became the brand's spokesperson in 1974, and he continued as the voice of Jell-O for almost thirty years. Over his tenure as the mouthpiece for the company, he helped introduce new products such as frozen Jell-O Pops (in gelatin and pudding varieties); the new Sugar-Free Jell-O, which replaced D-Zerta in 1984 and was sweetened with NutraSweet; Jell-O Jigglers concentrated gummi snacks; and Sparkling Jell-O, a carbonated version of the dessert touted as the \"Champagne of Jell-O\". In 2010, Cosby returned as Jell-O spokesperson in an on-line web series called \"OBKB\".\nIn 1990, General Foods was merged into Kraft Foods Inc. by parent company Philip Morris (now the Altria Group). New flavors were introduced: watermelon, blueberry, cranberry, margarita, and pi\u00f1a colada, among others. In 2001, the state Senate of Utah recognized Jell-O as a favorite snack food of Utah, recognizing the fundamental basis of Jell-O in Mormon cuisine such as Jell-O salad, and Governor Michael O. Leavitt declared an annual \"Jell-O Week.\" During the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, the souvenir pins included one depicting green Jell-O.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, Jell-O's family-friendly reputation was slightly tarnished by Jell-O shots and Jell-O wrestling.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], there were over 420 million boxes of Jell-O gelatin and over 1 billion Jell-O cups sold in the United States each year. As of 2016[ [update]], there were more than 110 products sold under the Jell-O brand name.\nJell-O is used as a substantial ingredient in a well-known dessert, the \"Jell-O mold\", which requires a mold designed to hold gelatin, and the depositing of small quantities of chopped fruit, nuts, and other ingredients before it hardens to its typical form. Fresh pineapple, papaya, kiwifruit, and ginger root cannot be used because they contain enzymes that prevent gelatin from \"setting\". In the case of pineapple juice and the enzyme bromelain that it contains though, the enzyme can be inactivated without denaturing through excessive heating and thus altering the flavor by the addition of a small measured amount of capsaicin sourced from hot chilies.\nJell-O shots.\nAn alternative recipe calls for the addition of an alcoholic beverage to the mix, contributing approximately one third to one half of the liquid added after the gelatin has dissolved in a boil. A serving of the resulting mixture is called a \"Jell-O shot\", or the genericized \"Jello shot\", at parties. The quantity and timing of the addition of the liquor are vital aspects; it is not possible to make Jell-O shots with liquor alone, as the colloidal proteins in dry gelatin consist of chains which require a hot liquid to denature them before they can then reform as a semisolid colloidal suspension. Pure alcohol cannot be heated sufficiently to break down these proteins, as it evaporates.\nVodka or rum is commonly used in Jell-O shots, but the shots can be made with almost any liquor or blends of multiple liquors. It is important to adjust the proportions of alcohol and cold water to ensure that the mixture sets when experimenting with various liquors. The Jell-O shots can be served in shot glasses or small paper or plastic cups; the paper or plastic cups are easier to eat from, but shot glasses are more attractive. The alcohol in Jell-O shots is contained within the Jell-O, so the body absorbs it more slowly, causing people to underestimate how much alcohol they have consumed. Drinkers must monitor their intake because of this.\nAmerican singer-songwriter Tom Lehrer claims to have invented the Jell-O shot in the 1950s to circumvent restrictions on alcoholic beverages at the army base where he was stationed. An early published recipe for an alcoholic gelatin drink dates from 1862, found in \"How to Mix Drinks, or The Bon Vivant's Companion\" by Jerry Thomas: his recipe for \"Punch Jelly\" calls for the addition of isinglass or other gelatin to a punch made from cognac, rum, and lemon juice. Thomas warns that strength of the punch is \"artfully concealed\" by the gelatin.\nManufacturing and tourism.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], LeRoy, New York, is known as the home of Jell-O and has the only Jell-O Museum in the world, located on the main road through the small town. Jell-O was manufactured here until General Foods closed the plant in 1964 and relocated manufacturing to Dover, Delaware. The Jell-O Gallery museum is operated by the Le Roy Historical Society at the Le Roy House and Union Free School, listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1997.\nAt the museum, visitors can learn about the history of the dessert from its inception. Visitors starting on East Main Street, follow Jell-O Brick Road, whose stones are inscribed with the names of former factory employees. The museum offers looks at starting materials for Jell-O, such as sturgeon bladder and calves' hooves, and various molds.\nThe Jell-O plant (Kraft Heinz) in Mason City, Iowa, produces America's supply of ready-to-eat Jell-O gelatin dessert and pudding cups.\nAdvertising.\nJell-O's early advertising campaign, initially directed by William E. Humelbaugh and later Frank LaBounty, first appeared in the \"Ladies' Home Journal\" in 1904. The print ads were often accompanied by recipes and color illustrations and became very popular. Artists such as Rose O'Neill, Maxfield Parrish, Coles Phillips, Norman Rockwell, Linn Ball, and Angus MacDonall contributed to the campaign. Franklin King, working for ad agency Dauchy Company, depicted his daughter Elizabeth in many of the illustrations, making her the recognizable \"Jell-O Girl\".\nJack Benny's top-rated radio program began its Jell-O sponsorship in 1934. The show did not break for commercials; instead, announcer Don Wilson incorporated speeches about Jell-O into the program at appropriate places, to Jack's feigned comic annoyance. The first show originated the five-note \"J-E-L-L-O!\" jingle retained in Jell-O's later advertising. Lucille Ball's \"My Favorite Husband\", the radio predecessor to TV's \"I Love Lucy\", was another popular program sponsored by Jell-O for much of its 124-episode run, beginning January 7, 1949. Ball's character Liz Cooper often opened the program with the lively greeting, \"Jell-O, everybody!\"\nComedian Bill Cosby was associated with Jell-O and, more famously, Jell-O pudding, and he appeared in many commercials promoting both before he was later dismissed due to the accusations in 2014. Later shows like \"Mad TV\", \"The Simpsons\" and \"Saturday Night Live\" parody Cosby, using Jell-O references like \"pudding pop\". In the 1960s, the cast of the sitcom \"Hogan's Heroes\" did a commercial with Carol Channing featuring Colonel Hogan, his men, Kommandant Klink and Sergeant Shultz having Jell-O and Dream Whip for dessert. Also, in the first few seasons of the first of Lucille Ball's two 1960s television series, \"The Lucy Show\", cast members including Vivian Vance often did commercials for Jell-O.\nIn 1995, Jell-O carried the tagline \"It's alive!\" and had the phrase \"J-E-L-L-OOOOOOO!\".\nIn August 2018, Jell-O released an animated series on YouTube and Amazon Prime Video titled \"JELL-O Wobz\" in partnership with DreamWorksTV.\nIn 2023, Jell-O updated the brand design for the first time in a decade, making it more playful. The logo became bolder and blockier, and hyper-realistic images of pudding and jelly fruit appeared.\nIn September 2024, Jell-O launches The Jelly Collection inflatable furniture series inspired by the iconic Jell-O molds.\nIn culture.\nJell-O is mentioned in the 1936 popular song \"A Fine Romance\" by Dorothy Fields (with music by Jerome Kern), where it is humorously referred to as a mundane alternative to the excitement of romantic love. In 1980, the American composer William Bolcom wrote a popular humorous song about Jell-O, \"Lime Jello Marshmallow Cottage Cheese Surprise\", satirising its use in combined sweet and savory dishes such as Jello salad.\nIn 1992, Ivette Bassa won the second ever Ig Nobel Prize in chemistry for inventing blue Jell-O.\nThe rock group Green Jell\u00ff was originally named Green Jell\u00f6, but had to change their name due to a lawsuit by Kraft Foods which claimed that the band was infringing the trademark for Jell-O.\nMormonism.\nJell-O is especially popular among Mormons, so much so that the Mormon Corridor region is nicknamed the \"Jell-O Belt\". Jell-O was recognized in 2001 as \"a favorite snack food of Utah\" by the Utah Senate, observing that Utah had had the highest per-capita consumption of Jell-O for many years, and how citizens of Utah had rallied to \"Take Back the Title\" after Des Moines, Iowa, exceeded Utah in Jell-O consumption in 1999. The culture of Utah, petitions by Utahns, and campaigning by students of Brigham Young University were also mentioned as reasons for recognizing Jell-O. Bill Cosby, longtime spokesperson for the Jell-O brand, appeared before the Utah Legislature in support of the resolution. \"He told the assembly that he believes the reason people in Utah love Jell-O is that the snack is perfect for families \u2013 and the people of Utah are all about family.\"\nThe stereotype of Mormons loving Jell-O does not have a long history. Media reports in 1969 and 1988 on foods popular among Mormons or in Utah make no mention of Jell-O, and a 1988 article mentions Jell-O as a Lutheran tradition. In the late 1980s, Jell-O had a marketing campaign promoting the snack and its Jigglers recipe as fun for children and easy for parents, which played well among family-oriented Mormons. In 1997, Kraft released sales figures revealing Salt Lake City to have the highest per-capita Jell-O consumption.\nCurrent flavors.\nThe following are the flavors of Jell-O products that are currently being produced:\nGelatin.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPudding.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16586", "revid": "40535987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16586", "title": "Jelly", "text": "Jelly may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16588", "revid": "46039825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16588", "title": "Javier Saviola", "text": "Argentine footballer (born 1981)\nJavier Pedro Saviola Fern\u00e1ndez (; born 11 December 1981), better known as El Conejo (\"The Rabbit\"), is an Argentine former professional footballer who played as a forward. He was trained in Club Atl\u00e9tico River Plate's academy.\nHe represented both Barcelona and Real Madrid, also having notable spells with Benfica and Olympiacos, and was named as the youngest player on Pel\u00e9's FIFA 100 list of the 125 greatest living footballers in 2004. Due to his ancestry he also holds Spanish nationality since 2004, and he amassed La Liga totals of 196 games and 70 goals over the course of eight seasons; he started and finished his career at River Plate.\nSaviola won league titles in Argentina, Spain, Portugal and Greece during his playing career, as well as a UEFA Cup. An Argentine international for seven years, he represented his country at the 2006 World Cup and the 2004 Copa Am\u00e9rica, where Argentina reached the final. He also won a gold medal at the 2004 Olympics in Athens.\nClub career.\nRiver Plate.\nBorn in Buenos Aires, Saviola made his debut for River Plate at the age of 16, and went on to be a prolific goalscorer for the club.\nHe helped River to the 1999 \"Apertura\" and 2000 \"Clausura\" championships, and earned the 1999 South American Footballer of the Year award. Still only 18, he gained a reputation as a phenomenal prospect, and was even regarded as a potential heir to Diego Maradona, in particular after he broke the latter's 1978 record by becoming the youngest player to win the Golden Boot award.\nBarcelona.\nIn 2001, aged 19, Saviola moved abroad to play for Barcelona in a \u00a315 million transfer. He obtained Spanish citizenship shortly after, thereby not being restricted by the Spanish league maximum on the number of non-European Union citizens allowed in each team; under coach Carles Rexach, he scored 17 goals in his first season, finishing joint-fourth top scorer in La Liga.\nSaviola's second year at the Camp Nou did not start well, as he only scored two goals in the first half of the season. Radomir Anti\u0107 became the new coach after Louis van Gaal was fired, and he went on to net eleven goals in the latter half of the campaign; Frank Rijkaard was subsequently appointed as new manager for 2003\u201304, and the player scored 14 times in the league alone, but was deemed surplus at the club as was longtime attacking partner Patrick Kluivert.\nSaviola was sent on loan in the summer of 2004, moving to Monaco in Ligue 1. As he did not fit into Rijkaard's plans, he was again loaned out the following year, this time to Sevilla who were seeking to replace Real Madrid-bound J\u00falio Baptista; with the Andalusians he won his first title in Europe, conquering the UEFA Cup \u2014 he also scored nine times in the league, good enough for fifth.\nSaviola returned to Barcelona for 2006\u201307, playing in 18 league games, six as a starter, and netting five goals. He benefited greatly from injuries to teammates, most notably to Samuel Eto'o, and added five in as many matches in that season's Copa del Rey, notably a hat-trick against Alav\u00e9s (3\u20132 win at home, 5\u20132 aggregate).\nReal Madrid.\nOn 10 July 2007, Real Madrid signed Saviola after his Barcelona contract expired, on a three-year deal. Although on a financially lucrative contract, he endured a difficult time at Real, being mainly restricted to cup matches and sporadic appearances (mainly as a substitute) in the league and the UEFA Champions League.\nThe arrival of Klaas-Jan Huntelaar limited Saviola's opportunities even more, and he finished his Real Madrid spell with five goals in 28 overall appearances.\nBenfica.\nOn 26 June 2009, Benfica and Real Madrid agreed on a \u20ac5 million deal that would see Saviola play in Portugal for the next three years, with an option for one more; a \u20ac30 million clause was added. On 16 July, he scored two goals to send his team into the Guadiana Trophy finals after defeating Athletic Bilbao.\nSaviola netted twice on 22 October 2009, guiding his side to a 5\u20130 victory over Everton for the UEFA Europa League (he would also score in their 2\u20130 win in Liverpool in the second match), adding another brace four days later in a 6\u20131 routing of C.D. Nacional for the Primeira Liga.\nOn 6 December 2009, Saviola scored through a chip shot against Acad\u00e9mica de Coimbra in a 4\u20130 home win. On 20 December, he netted the game's only goal as Benfica defeated rivals Porto at home; during the victorious campaign, he formed a deadly attacking partnership with Paraguayan \u00d3scar Cardozo, with the pair combining for more than 50 goals overall.\nOn 3 January 2010, shortly before receiving the SJPF Player of the Month award, Saviola scored another winning goal against Nacional, now for the Ta\u00e7a da Liga, again being the game's only scorer in an away defeat of Rio Ave, netting in the 48th minute. He scored his 19th goal overall in a 3\u20131 home triumph against Pa\u00e7os de Ferreira on 7 March, and the Lisbon club was eventually crowned league champions\nM\u00e1laga.\nIn the last hours of the 2012\u201313 summer transfer window, Saviola agreed on a move to M\u00e1laga. He played 45 minutes in his first appearance, a 1\u20130 win at Real Zaragoza on 1 September.\nOn 15 September 2012, Saviola scored once and provided one assist in a 3\u22121 home win against Levante. He continued with his streak the following game, M\u00e1laga's first-ever in the Champions League group stage, netting in a 3\u20130 home win over Zenit Saint Petersburg.\nOlympiacos.\nOn 25 July 2013, Saviola signed a two-year contract with Greek champions Olympiacos. He scored his first goal in the Superleague on 25 August, coming on at half-time and helping his team come from behind to win 2\u20131 at home to Atromitos On 10 December, he netted a brace \u2013 and also missed a penalty \u2013 in a 3\u20131 success over Anderlecht also at the Karaiskakis Stadium in the group stage's last round, which helped the Piraeus team finish second and qualify at the expense of former side Benfica.\nVerona.\nOn 2 September 2014, Saviola joined Serie A club Hellas Verona. He made his official debut on 22 September, starting in a 2\u20132 home draw against Genoa, and scored his first goal on 2 December, netting the only in a home win over Perugia for the Coppa Italia. His sole goal of the league season came on 25 January 2015, the only one in a home victory over Atalanta.\nReturn to River.\nOn 30 June 2015, River Plate announced that Saviola had returned to the club. He left in January of the following year, after failing to find the net in his second spell, and subsequently retired from professional football at the age of 34.\nRetirement, coaching and futsal career.\nShortly after retiring, Saviola settled in Andorra with his family and joined FC Ordino as an assistant coach in the Primera Divisi\u00f3.\nIn February 2018 he signed for local futsal side Encamp. In April 2018 he won the Andorran futsal league with Encamp.\nInternational career.\nSaviola starred in the 2001 edition of the FIFA U-20 World Cup, held in Argentina. He was top scorer and was voted player of the tournament, as the national team won the competition; with 11 goals in seven games, he became the record goal-scorer in the tournament's history.\nThree years later, Saviola played in the 2004 Olympic Games and won the gold medal. Under coach Marcelo Bielsa he was given few playing opportunities for the senior team but, after the former's resignation in 2004, new manager Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9kerman, who also worked with him at youth level, turned the tide in the player's favour; he was also a member of the squads that reached final of the 2004 Copa Am\u00e9rica and the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup, netting three times in the former tournament and one in the latter.\nSaviola was called up to represent Argentina at the 2006 World Cup \u2013 Luciano Figueroa and Luciano Galletti were also in contention for a place on the roster, but his excellent form for Sevilla secured his place in the squad. He scored against Ivory Coast in the country's opening game, and made two assists in the 6\u20130 victory over Serbia and Montenegro also in the group phase.\nSaviola retired from international football on 5 December 2009, although not yet 28. He stated that he felt his career as an Argentina player had come to an end, and that he wanted to concentrate on club football.\nStyle of play.\nSaviola was known for his speed, agility, dribbling and ability to score from almost any attacking position on the field. A diminutive, talented, and prolific forward, with a slender build, he was capable of playing as a striker, in a more creative role as a second striker, or even in a playmaking role as an attacking midfielder. Throughout his career, Saviola was nicknamed \"El Conejo\" (\"The Rabbit\", in Spanish), due to his appearance, and also \"El Pibito\" (\"The Little Kid\", in Spanish), a reference to compatriot Diego Maradona, who was nicknamed \"El Pibe de Oro\" (\"The Golden Kid\", in Spanish), and to whom Saviola was often compared in his youth.\nMedia.\nSaviola was sponsored by sportswear company Nike, and appeared in commercials for the brand. In a global advertising campaign in the run-up to the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan, he starred in a \"Secret Tournament\" commercial (branded \"Scopion KO\") directed by Terry Gilliam, appearing alongside footballers such as Lu\u00eds Figo, Thierry Henry, Hidetoshi Nakata, Roberto Carlos, Ronaldinho, Ronaldo and Francesco Totti, with former player Eric Cantona the tournament \"referee\".\n\"Scores and results list Argentina's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Saviola goal\".\nHonours.\nRiver Plate\nSevilla\nReal Madrid\nBenfica\nOlympiacos\nArgentina\nIndividual\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16590", "revid": "20685249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16590", "title": "Junkers Ju 87", "text": "1935 dive bomber aircraft family by Junkers\nThe Junkers Ju 87, popularly known as the \"Stuka\", is a German dive bomber and ground-attack aircraft. Designed by Hermann Pohlmann, it first flew in 1935. The Ju 87 made its combat debut in 1937 with the Luftwaffe's Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War of 1936\u20131939 and served the Axis in World War II from beginning to end (1939\u20131945).\nThe aircraft is easily recognisable by its inverted gull wings and fixed spatted undercarriage. Upon the leading edges of its faired main gear legs were mounted ram-air sirens, officially called \"L\u00e4rmger\u00e4t\" (noise device), which became a propaganda symbol of German air power and of the so-called \"Blitzkrieg\" victories of 1939\u20131942, as well as providing Stuka pilots with audible feedback as to speed. The Stuka's design included several innovations, including automatic pull-up dive brakes under both wings to ensure that the aircraft recovered from its attack dive even if the pilot blacked out from the high g-forces, or suffered from target fixation.\nThe Ju 87 operated with considerable success in close air support and anti-shipping roles at the outbreak of World War II. It led air assaults during the Invasion of Poland in September 1939. Stukas proved critical to the rapid conquest of Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France in 1940. Though sturdy, accurate, and very effective against ground targets, the Stuka was, like many other dive bombers of the period, vulnerable to fighter aircraft. During the Battle of Britain of 1940\u20131941, its lack of manoeuvrability, speed, or defensive armament meant that it required a heavy fighter escort to operate effectively.\nAfter the Battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe deployed Stuka units in the Balkans Campaign, the African and the Mediterranean theatres and in the early stages of the Eastern Front war, where it was used for general ground support, as an effective specialised anti-tank aircraft and in an anti-shipping role. Once the Luftwaffe lost air superiority, the Stuka became an easy target for enemy fighters, but it continued being produced until 1944 for lack of a better replacement. By 1945 ground-attack versions of the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 had largely replaced the Ju 87, but it remained in service until the end of the war in 1945.\nGermany built an estimated 6,000 Ju 87s of all versions between 1936 and August 1944.\n\"Oberst\" Hans-Ulrich Rudel became the most successful Stuka pilot and the most highly decorated German pilot of the war.\nDevelopment.\nEarly design.\nThe Ju 87's principal designer, Hermann Pohlmann, held the opinion that any dive-bomber design needed to be simple and robust. This led to many technical innovations, such as the retractable undercarriage being discarded in favour of one of the Stuka's distinctive features, its fixed and \"spatted\" undercarriage. Pohlmann continued to carry on developing and adding to his ideas and those of Dipl Ing Karl Plauth (Plauth was killed in a flying accident in November 1927), and produced the Ju A 48, which underwent testing on 29 September 1928. The military version of the Ju A 48 was designated the Ju K 47.\nAfter the Nazis came to power, the design was given priority. Despite initial competition from the Henschel Hs 123, the \"Reichsluftfahrtministerium\" (RLM/German aviation ministry) turned to the designs of Herman Pohlmann of Junkers and co-designer of the K 47, Karl Plauth. During the trials with the K 47 in 1932, double vertical stabilisers were introduced to give the rear gunner a better field of fire. The main, and what was to be the most distinctive, feature of the Ju 87 was its double-spar inverted gull wings.\nAfter Plauth's death, Pohlmann continued the development of the Junkers dive bomber. The Ju A 48 registration D-ITOR, was originally fitted with a BMW 132 engine, producing 450\u00a0kW (600\u00a0hp). The machine was also fitted with dive brakes for dive testing. The aircraft was given a good evaluation and \"exhibited very good flying characteristics\".\nErnst Udet took an immediate liking to the concept of dive-bombing after flying the Curtiss F11C Goshawk. When Walther Wever and Robert Ritter von Greim were invited to watch Udet perform a trial flight in May 1934 at the J\u00fcterbog artillery range, it raised doubts about the capability of the dive bomber. Udet began his dive at and released his bombs at , barely recovering and pulling out of the dive. The chief of the \"Luftwaffe\" Command Office Walther Wever, and the Secretary of State for Aviation Erhard Milch, feared that such high-level nerves and skill could not be expected of \"average pilots\" in the \"Luftwaffe\". Nevertheless, development continued at Junkers. Udet's \"growing love affair\" with the dive bomber pushed it to the forefront of German aviation development. Udet went so far as to advocate that all medium bombers should have dive-bombing capabilities, which initially doomed the only dedicated, strategic heavy bomber design to enter German front-line service during the war years\u2014the 30-metre wingspan Heinkel He 177A\u2014into having an airframe design (due to Udet examining its design details in November 1937) that could perform \"medium angle\" dive-bombing missions, until \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann G\u00f6ring exempted the He 177A, Germany's only operational heavy bomber, in September 1942 from being given the task of such a mismatched mission profile for its large airframe.\nEvolution.\nThe design of the Ju 87 had begun in 1933 as part of the \"Sturzbomber-Programm\". The Ju 87 was to be powered by the British Rolls-Royce Kestrel liquid-cooled V12 engine, ten of which were ordered by Junkers on 19 April 1934 at a cost of \u00a320,514 2s 6d (). The first Ju 87 prototype was built by AB Flygindustri in Sweden and secretly brought to Germany in late 1934. It was to have been completed in April 1935, but, due to the inadequate strength of the airframe, construction took until October 1935. The mostly complete Ju 87 V1 W.Nr. 4921 (less non-essential parts) took off for its maiden flight on 17 September 1935. The aircraft was later given the registration D-UBYR. The flight report, by \"Hauptmann\" Willy Neuenhofen, stated the only problem was with the small radiator, which caused the engine to overheat.\nThe Ju 87 V1, powered by a Kestrel engine and fitted with a twin tail, crashed on 24 January 1936 at Kleutsch near Dresden, killing Junkers' chief test pilot, Willy Neuenhofen, and his engineer, Heinrich Kreft. The square twin fins and rudders proved too weak; they collapsed and the aircraft crashed after it entered an inverted spin during the testing of the terminal dynamic pressure in a dive. The crash prompted a change to a single vertical stabiliser tail design. To withstand strong forces during a dive, heavy plating, along with brackets riveted to the frame and longeron, was fitted to the fuselage. Other early additions included the installation of hydraulic dive brakes that were fitted under the leading edge and could rotate 90\u00b0.\nThe RLM was still not interested in the Ju 87 and was not impressed that it relied on a British engine. In late 1935, Junkers suggested fitting a DB 600 inverted V12 engine, with the final variant to be equipped with the Jumo 210. This was accepted by the RLM as an interim solution. The reworking of the design began on 1 January 1936. The test flight could not be carried out for over two months due to a lack of adequate aircraft. The 24 January crash had already destroyed one machine. The second prototype was also beset by design problems. It had its twin stabilisers removed and a single tail fin installed due to fears over stability. Due to a shortage of engines, instead of a DB 600, a BMW \"Hornet\" engine was fitted. All these delays set back testing until 25 February 1936.\nBy March 1936, the second prototype, the V2, was finally fitted with the Junkers Jumo 210Aa engine, which a year later was replaced by a Jumo 210 G (W.Nr. 19310). The testing went well, and the pilot, Flight Captain Hesselbach, praised its performance. However, Wolfram von Richthofen, in charge of developing and testing new aircraft in the Technisches Amt, or Technical Service, told the Junkers representative and Construction Office chief engineer that the Ju 87 stood little chance of becoming the Luftwaffe's main dive bomber, as it was underpowered in his opinion. On 9 June 1936, the RLM ordered cessation of development in favour of the Heinkel He 118, a rival design. Udet cancelled the order the next day, and development continued.\nOn 27 July 1936, Udet crashed the He 118 prototype, He 118 V1 D-UKYM. That same day, Charles Lindbergh was visiting Ernst Heinkel, so Heinkel could communicate with Udet only by telephone. According to this version of the story, Heinkel warned Udet about the propeller's fragility. Udet failed to consider this, so in a dive, the engine oversped and the propeller broke away. Immediately after this incident, Udet announced the Stuka the winner of the development contest.\nRefinements.\nDespite being chosen, the design was still lacking and drew frequent criticism from Wolfram von Richthofen. Testing of the V4 prototype (A Ju 87 A-0) in early 1937 revealed several problems. The Ju 87 could take off in and climb to in eight minutes with a bomb load, and its cruising speed was . Richthofen pushed for a more powerful engine. According to the test pilots, the Heinkel He 50 had a better acceleration rate, and could climb away from the target area much more quickly, avoiding enemy ground and air defences. Richthofen stated that any maximum speed below was unacceptable for those reasons. Pilots also complained that navigation and powerplant instruments were mixed together, and were not easy to read, especially in combat. Despite this, pilots praised the aircraft's handling qualities and strong airframe.\nThese problems were to be resolved by installing the DB 600 engine, but delays in development forced the installation of the Jumo 210 D inverted V-12 engine. Flight testing began on 14 August 1936. Subsequent testing and progress fell short of Richthofen's hopes, although the machine's speed was increased to at ground level and at , while maintaining its good handling ability.\nDesign.\nBasic design (based on the B series).\nThe Ju 87 was a single-engined all-metal cantilever monoplane. It had a fixed undercarriage and could carry a two-person crew. The main construction material was duralumin, and the external coverings were made of duralumin sheeting. Parts that were required to be of strong construction, such as the wing flaps, were made of Pantal (a German aluminium alloy containing titanium as a hardening element) and its components made of Elektron. Bolts and parts that were required to take heavy stress were made of steel.\nThe Ju 87 was fitted with detachable hatches and removable coverings to aid and ease maintenance and overhaul. The designers avoided welding parts wherever possible, preferring moulded and cast parts instead. Large airframe segments were interchangeable as a complete unit, which increased speed of repair.\nThe airframe was also subdivided into sections to allow transport by road or rail. The wings were of standard Junkers double-wing construction. This gave the Ju 87 considerable advantage on take-off; even at a shallow angle, large lift forces were created through the aerofoil, reducing take-off and landing runs.\nIn accordance with the Aircraft Certification Centre for \"Stress Group 5\", the Ju 87 had reached the acceptable structural strength requirements for a dive bomber. It was able to withstand diving speeds of and a maximum level speed of near ground level, and a flying weight of . Performance in the diving attack was enhanced by the introduction of dive brakes under each wing, which allowed the Ju 87 to maintain a constant speed and allow the pilot to steady his aim. It also prevented the crew from suffering extreme g forces and high acceleration during \"pull-out\" from the dive.\nThe fuselage had an oval cross-section and housed, in most examples, a Junkers Jumo 211 water-cooled inverted V-12 engine. The cockpit was protected from the engine by a firewall ahead of the wing centre section where the fuel tanks were located. At the rear of the cockpit, the bulkhead was covered by a canvas cover which could be breached by the crew in an emergency, enabling them to escape into the main fuselage. The canopy was split into two sections and joined by a strong welded steel frame. The canopy itself was made of Plexiglas and each compartment had its own \"sliding hood\" for the two crew members.\nThe engine was mounted on two main support frames that were supported by two tubular struts. The frame structure was triangulated and emanated from the fuselage. The main frames were bolted onto the engine's top quarter. In turn, the frames were attached to the firewall by universal joints. The firewall itself was constructed from asbestos mesh with dural sheets on both sides. All conduits passing through had to be arranged so that no harmful gases could penetrate the cockpit.\nThe fuel system comprised two fuel tanks between the main (forward) and rear spars of the (inner) anhedral wing section of the port and starboard wings, each with capacity. The tanks also had a predetermined limit which, if passed, would warn the pilot via a red warning light in the cockpit. The fuel was injected via a pump from the tanks to the engine. Should this shut down, it could be pumped manually using a hand-pump on the fuel cock armature. The powerplant was cooled by a , ring-shaped aluminium water container situated between the propeller and engine. A further container of was positioned under the engine.\nThe control surfaces operated in much the same way as other aircraft, with the exception of the innovative automatic pull-out system. Releasing the bomb initiated the pull-out, or automatic recovery and climb, upon the deflection of the dive brakes. The pilot could override the system by exerting significant force on the control column and taking manual control.\nThe wing was the most unusual feature. It consisted of a single centre section and two outer sections, each installed using four universal joints. The centre section had a large negative dihedral (anhedral) and the outer surfaces a positive dihedral. This created the inverted gull, or \"cranked\", wing pattern along the leading edge. The shape of the wing improved the pilot's ground visibility and also allowed a shorter undercarriage height. The centre section protruded by only on either side.\nThe offensive armament was two 7.92\u00a0mm (.312\u00a0in) MG 17 machine guns fitted one in each wing outboard of undercarriage, operated by a mechanical pneumatics system from the pilot's control column. The rear gunner/radio operator operated one 7.92\u00a0mm (.312\u00a0in) MG 15 machine gun for defensive purposes.\nThe engine and propeller had automatic controls, and an auto-trimmer made the aircraft tail-heavy as the pilot rolled over into his dive, lining up red lines at 60\u00b0, 75\u00b0 or 80\u00b0 on the cockpit side window with the horizon and aiming at the target with the sight of the fixed gun. The heavy bomb was swung down clear of the propeller on crutches prior to release.\nDiving procedure.\nFlying at , the pilot located his target through a bombsight window in the cockpit floor. The pilot moved the dive lever to the rear, limiting the \"throw\" of the control column. The dive brakes were activated automatically, the pilot set the trim tabs, reduced his throttle and closed the coolant flaps. The aircraft then rolled 180\u00b0, automatically nosing the aircraft into a dive. Red tabs protruded from the upper surfaces of the wing as a visual indicator to the pilot that, in case of a g-force induced black-out, the automatic dive recovery system would be activated. The Stuka dived at a 60\u201390\u00b0 angle, holding a constant speed of due to dive-brake deployment, which increased the accuracy of the Ju 87's aim.\nWhen the aircraft was reasonably close to the target, a light on the contact altimeter (an altimeter equipped with an electrical contact which triggers at a preset altitude) came on to indicate the bomb-release point, usually at a minimum height of . The pilot released the bomb and initiated the automatic pull-out mechanism by depressing a knob on the control column. An elongated U-shaped crutch located under the fuselage swung the bomb out of the way of the propeller, and the aircraft automatically began a 6g pullout. Once the nose was above the horizon, dive brakes were retracted, the throttle was opened, and the propeller was set to climb. The pilot regained control and resumed normal flight. The coolant flaps had to be reopened quickly to prevent overheating. The automatic pull-out was not liked by all pilots. Helmut Mahlke later said that he and his unit disconnected the system because it allowed the enemy to predict the Ju 87's recovery pattern and height, making it easier for ground defences to hit an aircraft.\nPhysical stress on the crew was severe. Human beings subjected to more than 5g in a seated position will suffer vision impairment in the form of a grey veil known to Stuka pilots as \"seeing stars\". They lose vision while remaining conscious; after five seconds, they black out. The Ju 87 pilots experienced the visual impairments most during \"pull-up\" from a dive.\nEric \"Winkle\" Brown RN, a British test pilot and Commanding Officer of No. 1426 Flight RAF (the captured enemy aircraft Flight), tested the Ju 87 at RAE Farnborough. He said of the Stuka, \"I had flown a lot of dive-bombers and it's the only one that you can dive truly vertically. Sometimes with the dive-bombers\u00a0... maximum dive is usually in the order of 60 degrees\u00a0... When flying the Stuka, because it's all automatic, you are really flying vertically\u00a0... The Stuka was in a class of its own.\"\nG-force test at Dessau.\nExtensive tests were carried out by the Junkers works at their Dessau plant. It was discovered that the highest load a pilot could endure was 8.5\u00a0g for three seconds, when the aircraft was pushed to its limit by the centrifugal forces. At less than 4\u00a0g, no visual problems or loss of consciousness were experienced. Above 6\u00a0g, 50% of pilots suffered visual problems, or \"greyout\". With 40%, vision vanished altogether from 7.5\u00a0g upwards and black-out sometimes occurred. Despite this blindness, the pilot could maintain consciousness and was capable of \"bodily reactions\". After more than three seconds, half the subjects passed out. The pilot would regain consciousness two or three seconds after the centrifugal forces had dropped below 3\u00a0g and had lasted no longer than three seconds. In a crouched position, pilots could withstand 7.5\u00a0g and were able to remain functional for a short duration. In this position, Junkers concluded that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of pilots could withstand 8\u00a0g and perhaps 9\u00a0g for three to five seconds without vision defects which, under war conditions, was acceptable. During tests with the Ju 87 A-2, new technologies were tried out to reduce the effects of g. The pressurised cabin was of great importance during this research. Testing revealed that at high altitude, even 2\u00a0g could cause death in an unpressurised cabin and without appropriate clothing. This new technology, along with special clothing and oxygen masks, was researched and tested. When the United States Army occupied the Junkers factory at Dessau on 21 April 1945, they were both impressed at and interested in the medical flight tests with the Ju 87.\nOther designs.\nThe concept of dive bombing became so popular among the leadership of the Luftwaffe that it became almost obligatory in new aircraft designs. Later bomber models like the Junkers Ju 88 and the Dornier Do 217 were equipped for dive bombing. The Heinkel He 177 strategic bomber was initially supposed to have dive bombing capabilities, a requirement that contributed to the failure of the design, with the requirement not rescinded until September 1942 by G\u00f6ring.\nOnce the Stuka became too vulnerable to fighter opposition on all fronts, work was done to develop a replacement. None of the dedicated close-support designs on the drawing board progressed far due to the impact of the war and technological difficulties. So the Luftwaffe settled on the Focke-Wulf Fw 190 fighter aircraft, with the Fw 190F becoming the ground-attack version. The Fw 190F started to replace the Ju 87 for day missions in 1943, but the Ju 87 continued to be used as a night nuisance-raider until the end of the war.\nVariants.\nJu 87 A.\nThe second prototype had a redesigned single vertical stabiliser and a Jumo 210 A engine installed, and later the Jumo 210Da. The first A series variant, the A-0, was of all-metal construction, with an enclosed cockpit under a \"greenhouse\" well-framed canopy; bearing twin radio masts on its aft sections, diagonally mounted to either side of the airframe's planform centreline and unique to the -A version. To ease the difficulty of mass production, the leading edge of the wing was straightened out and the ailerons' two aerofoil sections had smooth leading and trailing edges. The pilot could adjust the elevator and rudder trim tabs in flight, and the tail was connected to the landing flaps, which were positioned in two parts between the ailerons and fuselage. The A-0 also had a flatter engine cowling, which gave the pilot a much better field of vision. In order for the engine cowling to be flattened, the engine was set down nearly . The fuselage was also lowered along with the gunner's position, allowing the gunner a better field of fire.\nThe RLM ordered seven A-0s initially, but then increased the order to 11. Early in 1937, the A-0 was tested with varied bomb loads. The underpowered Jumo 210A, as pointed out by von Richthofen, was insufficient, and was quickly replaced with the Jumo 210D engine.\nThe A-1 differed from the A-0 only slightly. As well as the installation of the Jumo 210D, the A-1 had two fuel tanks built into the inner wing, but it was not armoured or protected. The A-1 was also intended to be fitted with four MG 17 machine guns in its wings, but two of these\u2014one per side\u2014were omitted due to weight concerns; the pair that remained were fed a total of 500 rounds of ammunition, stored in the design's characteristic transverse strut-braced, large-planform undercarriage \"trousers\", not used on the Ju 87B versions and onward. The pilot relied on the Revi C 21C gun sight for the two MG 17s. The gunner had a single MG 15, with 14 drums of ammunition, each containing 75 rounds. This represented a 150-round increase in this area over the Ju 87 A-0. The A-1 was also fitted with a larger propeller.\nThe Ju 87 was capable of carrying a bomb, but only if not carrying the rear gunner/radio operator as, even with the Jumo 210D, the Ju 87 was still underpowered for operations with more than a bomb load. All Ju 87 As were restricted to weapons (although during the Spanish Civil War missions were conducted without the gunner).\nThe Ju 87 A-2 was retrofitted with the Jumo 210Da fitted with a two-stage supercharger. The only further significant difference between the A-1 and A-2 was the H-PA-III controllable-pitch propeller. By mid-1938, 262 Ju 87 As had been produced, 192 from the Junkers factory in Dessau and a further 70 from Weser Flugzeugbau (\"Weserflug\" \u2013 WFG) in Lemwerder near Bremen. The new, more powerful, Ju 87B model started to replace the Ju 87A at this time.\nProduction variants\nJu 87 B.\nThe Ju 87 B series was to be the first mass-produced variant. A total of six pre-production Ju 87 B-0 were produced, built from Ju 87 A airframes. The first production version was the Ju 87 B-1, with a considerably larger engine, its Jumo 211D generating 1,200\u00a0PS (), and completely redesigned fuselage and landing gear, replacing the twin radio masts of the \"A\" version with a single mast mounted further forward on the \"greenhouse\" canopy, and much simpler, lighter-weight wheel \"spats\" used from the -B version onwards, discarding the transverse strut bracing of the \"A\" version's maingear design. This new design was again tested in Spain, and after proving its abilities there, production was ramped up to 60 per month. As a result, by the outbreak of World War II, the Luftwaffe had 336 Ju 87 B-1s on hand.\nThe B-1 was also fitted with \"L\u00e4rmger\u00e4te\", essentially sirens driven by propellers with a diameter of The devices caused a loss of 20\u201325\u00a0km/h (12\u201315\u00a0mph) through drag, and over time the sirens were no longer installed on many units, although they remained in use to various extent. As an alternative, some bombs were fitted with whistles on the fin to produce the noise after release. The trumpets were a suggestion from Udet, but some authors say the idea originated from Adolf Hitler.\nThe Ju 87 B-2s that followed had some improvements and were built in several variants that included ski-equipped versions (the B-1 also had this modification) and at the other end, with a tropical operation kit called the Ju 87 B-2 trop. Italy's Regia Aeronautica received B-2s and named them the \"Picchiatello\", while others went to the other members of the Axis, including Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania. The B-2 also had an oil hydraulic system for closing the cowling flaps. This continued in all the later designs.\nProduction of the Ju 87 B started in 1937. 89 B-1s were to be built at Junkers' factory in Dessau and another 40 at the Weserflug plant in Lemwerder by July 1937. Production would be carried out by the Weserflug company after April 1938, but Junkers continued producing Ju 87 up until March 1940.\nJu 87 R.\nA long range version of the Ju 87 B was also built, known as the Ju 87 R, the letter being an abbreviation for \"Reichweite\", \"(operational) range\". They were primarily intended for anti-shipping missions. The Ju 87 R had a B-series airframe with an additional oil tank and fuel lines to the outer wing stations to permit the use of two standardised capacity under-wing drop tanks, used by a wide variety of Luftwaffe aircraft through most of the war. This increased fuel capacity to (500\u00a0litres in main fuel tank of which 480\u00a0litres were usable + 600\u00a0litres from drop tanks). To prevent overload conditions, bomb carrying ability was often restricted to a single bomb if the aircraft was fully loaded with fuel.\nThe Ju 87 R-1 had a B-1 airframe with the exception of a modification in the fuselage which enabled an additional oil tank. This was installed to feed the engine due to the increase in range with the extra fuel tanks.\nThe Ju 87 R-2 had the same airframe as the B-2, and strengthened to ensure it could withstand dives of . The Jumo 211D in-line engine was installed, replacing the R-1s Jumo 211A. Due to an increase in overall weight by , the Ju 87 R-2 was slower than the Ju 87 B-1 and had a lower service ceiling. The Ju 87 R-2 had an increased range advantage of . The R-3 and R-4 were the last R variants developed. Only a few were built. The R-3 was an experimental tug for gliders and had an expanded radio system so the crew could communicate with the glider crew by way of the tow rope. The R-4 differed from the R-2 in the Jumo 211J powerplant.\nJu 87 C.\nOn 18 August 1937, the RLM decided to introduce the Ju 87 Tr(C). The Ju 87 C was intended to be a dive and torpedo bomber for the Kriegsmarine. The type was ordered into prototype production and available for testing in January 1938. Testing was given two months and was to begin in February and end in April 1938. The prototype V10 was to be a fixed wing test aircraft, while the following V11 would be modified with folding wings. The prototypes were Ju 87 B-0 airframes powered by Jumo 211 A engines. Owing to delays, the V10 was not completed until March 1938. It first flew on 17 March and was designated Ju 87 C-1. On 12 May, the V11 also flew for the first time. By 15 December 1939, 915 arrested landings on dry land had been made. It was found that the arresting gear winch was too weak and had to be replaced. Tests showed the average braking distance was . The Ju 87 V11 was designated C-0 on 8 October 1938. It was fitted out with standard Ju 87 C-0 equipment and better wing-folding mechanisms. The \"carrier Stuka\" was to be built at the Weserflug Company's Lemwerder plant between April and July 1940.\nAmong the \"special\" equipment of the Ju 87 C was a two-seat rubber dinghy with a flare gun, signal ammunition and other emergency supplies. A quick fuel dump mechanism and two inflatable 750\u00a0L (200\u00a0US gal) bags in each wing and a further two 500\u00a0L (130\u00a0US gal) bags in the fuselage enabled the Ju 87 C to remain afloat for up to three days in calm seas. On 6 October 1939, with the war already underway, 120 of the planned Ju 87 Tr(C)s on order at that point were cancelled. Despite the cancellation, the tests continued using catapults. The Ju 87 C had a takeoff weight of and a speed of on departure. The Ju 87 could be launched with a SC bomb and four SC bombs under the fuselage. The C-1 was to have two MG 17s mounted in the wing with a MG 15 operated by the rear gunner. On 18 May 1940, production of the C-1 was switched to the R-1.\nJu 87 D.\nDespite the Stuka's vulnerability to enemy fighters having been exposed during the Battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe had no choice but to continue its development, as there was no replacement aircraft in sight. The result was the D-series. In June 1941, the RLM ordered five prototypes, the Ju 87 V21\u201325. A Daimler-Benz DB 603 powerplant was to be installed in the Ju 87 D-1, but it did not have the power of the Jumo 211 and performed \"poorly\" during tests and was dropped. The Ju 87 D-series featured two coolant radiators underneath the inboard sections of the wings, while the oil cooler was relocated to the position formerly occupied by the single, undernose \"chin\" coolant radiator. The D-series also introduced an aerodynamically refined cockpit with better visibility and space. Armour protection was increased and a new dual-barrel 7.92\u00a0mm (.312\u00a0in) MG 81Z machine gun with an extremely high rate of fire was installed in the rear defensive position. Engine power was increased again, the Jumo 211J now delivering 1,420\u00a0PS ().\nBomb carrying ability was nearly quadrupled from in the B-version to in the D-version (max. load for short ranges, overload condition), a typical bomb load ranged from .\nThe internal fuel capacity of the Ju 87 D was raised to 800\u00a0L (of which 780\u00a0L were usable) by adding wing tanks while retaining the option to carry two 300\u00a0L drop tanks. Tests at Rechlin-L\u00e4rz Airfield revealed it made possible a flight duration of 2 hours and 15 minutes. With an extra two 300\u00a0L (80\u00a0US gal) fuel tanks, it could achieve four hours flight time.\nThe D-2 was a variant used as a glider tug by converting older D-series airframes. It was intended as the tropical version of the D-1 and had heavier armour to protect the crew from ground fire. The armour reduced its performance and caused the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe to \"place no particular value on the production of the D-2\". The D-3 was an improved D-1 with more armour for its ground-attack role. Some Ju 87 D-3s were designated D-3N or D-3\u00a0trop and fitted with night or tropical equipment. The D-4 designation applied to a prototype torpedo-bomber version, which could carry a aerial torpedo on a PVC 1006 B rack\u2014this setup would have had the capacity to carry the \"Luftorpedo\" LT 850, the German version of the well-proven Japanese Type 91 aerial torpedo of 848\u00a0kg (1,870\u00a0lb). The D-4 was to be converted from D-3 airframes and, in place of the carrier-specific Ju 87C series designs, operated from the aircraft carrier \"\". Other modifications included a flame eliminator and, unlike earlier D variants, two 20\u00a0mm MG 151/20 cannon, while the radio operator/rear gunner's ammunition supply was increased by 1,000 to 2,000 rounds.\nThe Ju 87 D-5 was based on the D-3 design and was unique in the Ju 87 series as it had wings 0.6 metres (2\u00a0ft) longer than previous variants. The two 7.92\u00a0mm MG\u00a017 wing guns were exchanged for more powerful 20\u00a0mm MG\u00a0151/20s to better suit the aircraft's ground-attack role. The window in the floor of the cockpit was reinforced and four, rather than the previous three, aileron hinges were installed. Higher diving speeds were obtained of up to . The range was recorded as at ground level and at .\nThe D-6, according to \"Operating instructions, works document 2097\", was built in limited numbers to train pilots on \"rationalised versions\". Due to shortages in raw materials, it did not go into mass production. The D-7 was another ground attack aircraft based on D-1 airframes upgraded to D-5 standard (armour, wing cannons, extended wing panels), while the D-8 was similar to the D-7 but based on D-3 airframes. The D-7 and D-8 were both were fitted with exhaust flame dampers, and could conduct night operations.\nProduction of the D-1 variant started in 1941 with 495 ordered. These aircraft were delivered between May 1941 and March 1942. The RLM wanted 832 machines produced from February 1941. The Weserflug company was tasked with their production. From June to September 1941, 40 Ju 87 Ds were expected to be built, increasing to 90 thereafter. Various production problems were encountered. One of the planned 48 was produced in July. Of the 25 the RLM hoped for in August 1941, none were delivered. In September did the first two of the planned 102 Ju 87s came off the production lines. The shortfalls continued to the end of 1941. During this time, the WFG plant in Lemwerder moved production to Berlin. Over 165 Ju 87s had not been delivered and production was only 23 Ju 87 Ds per month out of the 40 expected. By the spring of 1942 to the end of production in 1944, 3,300 Ju 87s, mostly D-1s, D-2s and D-5s had been manufactured.\nIn January 1943, a variety of Ju 87 Ds became \"test beds\" for the Ju 87 G variants. At the start of 1943, the coastal Luftwaffe \"Erprobungsstelle\" test centre at Tarnewitz tested this combination from a static position. \"Oberst\" G. Wolfgang Vorwald noted the experiments were not successful, and suggested the cannon be installed on the Messerschmitt Me 410. Testing continued, and on 31 January 1943, Ju 87 D-1 W.Nr 2552 was tested by \"Hauptmann\" Hans-Karl Stepp near the Briansk training area. Stepp noted the increase in drag, which reduced the aircraft's speed to . Stepp also noted that the aircraft was also less agile than the existing D variants. D-1 and D-3 variants operated in combat with the BK 37 cannon in 1943.\nJu 87 G.\nWith the G variant, the ageing airframe of the Ju 87 found new life as an anti-tank aircraft. This was the final operational version of the Stuka, and was deployed on the Eastern Front. The reversal in German military fortunes after 1943 and the appearance of huge numbers of well-armoured Soviet tanks caused Junkers to adapt the existing design to combat this new threat. The Henschel Hs 129 had proved a potent ground attack weapon, but its large fuel tanks made it vulnerable to enemy fire, prompting the RLM to say, \"that in the shortest possible time a replacement of the Hs 129 type must take place.\" With Soviet tanks the priority targets, the development of a further variant as a successor to the Ju 87D began in November 1942. On 3 November, Milch raised the question of replacing the Ju 87, or redesigning it altogether. It was decided to keep the design as it was, but the power-plant was upgraded to a Junkers Jumo 211J, and two cannons were added. The variant was also designed to carry a free-fall bomb load. Furthermore, the armoured protection of the Ilyushin Il-2 \"Sturmovik\" was copied to protect the crew from ground fire now that the Ju 87 would be required to conduct low level attacks.\nHans-Ulrich Rudel, a Stuka ace, had suggested using two 37\u00a0mm (1.46\u00a0in) Flak 18 guns, each one in a self-contained under-wing gun pod, as the \"Bordkanone BK 3,7\", after achieving success against Soviet tanks with the 20\u00a0mm MG 151/20 cannon. These gun pods were fitted to a Ju 87 D-1, W.Nr 2552. The first flight of the machine took place on 31 January 1943, piloted by Stepp. The continuing problems with about two dozen of the Ju 88P-1 and slow development of the Henschel Hs 129 B-3, both designs using the large, 7.5 cm Pak 40-based, autoloading Bordkanone 7,5 7.5\u00a0cm (2.95\u00a0in) cannon in a conformal gun pod beneath the fuselage, meant the Ju 87G was put into production. In April 1943, the first production Ju 87 G-1s were delivered to front line units. The two 37\u00a0mm (1.46\u00a0in) \"Bordkanone\" BK 3,7 cannons were mounted in under-wing gun pods, each loaded with two six-round magazines of armour-piercing tungsten carbide-cored ammunition. With these weapons, the \"Kanonenvogel\" (\"cannon-bird\"), as it was nicknamed, proved very successful in the hands of Stuka aces such as Rudel. The G-1 was converted from older D-series airframes, retaining the smaller wing, but without the dive brakes. The G-2 was similar to the G-1 except for use of the extended wing of the D-5. 208 G-2s were built and at least a further 22 more were converted from D-3 airframes. Only a handful of production Gs were committed in the Battle of Kursk. On the opening day of the offensive, Hans-Ulrich Rudel flew the only \"official\" Ju 87 G, although a significant number of Ju 87 D variants were fitted with the 37\u00a0mm (1.46\u00a0in) cannon, and operated as unofficial Ju 87 Gs before the battle. In June 1943, the RLM ordered 20 Ju 87Gs as production variants.\nNight-harassment variants.\nThe Ju 87 had been used in the night intruder role in 1940 and 1941 during The Blitz, but the Soviet Air Force practice of harassing German ground forces using antiquated Polikarpov Po-2 and R-5 biplanes at night to drop flares and fragmentation bombs, inspired the Luftwaffe to form its own \"St\u00f6rkampfstaffeln\" (harassment squadrons). On 23 July 1942, Junkers offered the Ju 87 B-2, R-2 and R-4s with \"Flammenvernichter\" (\"flame eliminators\"). On 10 November 1943, the RLM GL/C-E2 Division finally authorised the design in directive No. 1117.\nThe need to equip night units and the phasing out of Ju 87s from ground attack groups in favour of the Fw 190, enabled the use of D-5 airframes awaiting repair and D-7 and 8s already in conversion units. The latter variants were either conversions or modified D-1 and D-3 air frames. Adding the necessary equipment, radios and dampeners was a requirement regardless of whether the aircraft was a production D-5 or a D-1 or 3 that had undergone wing changes. The change in designations due to conversions was not readily apparent, for with wing changes, the serial number and designation was applied to the fuselage by the manufacture which remained unaltered by wing changes. Some sub-contractors added an \"N\" designation (Nacht) for clarity on D-3 and 5s . Others added the roman numeral VII to the D-7s, perhaps to reflect that the aircraft was fitted with the FuG 7 radio. A great deal of confusion exists concerning the D-7. Its existence has been questioned, but the type is listed in Junkers company records and in the \"Der Reichsminister der Luftfahrt\" and \"Oberbefehlshaber der Luftwaffe Technisches Amt\". There was no production \"nacht stuka\", and modifications could vary according to the sub-contractor and depending on what parts were available.\nA Stuka repair centre was set up at Wels-Lichtenegg. From May 1940 to November 1944, 746 were repaired and flight-tested there. In the winter 1943/44, the \"Metal Works Lower Saxony Brinckmann und Mergell\" company (Menibum) converted approximately 300 Ju 87D-3 and 5s to night versions. Dive-brakes were removed there, while gun muzzles and dampers were installed to eliminate exhaust and muzzle flash. The Jumo 211P engine was installed in some cases. It took 2,170 technicians and workers to carry out the conversions. Total figures for conversions to night flying operations are unknown. The company's equipment was seized by the Soviet Union at the end of the war, and the records were lost or destroyed. A main piece of equipment, hereto not installed in the Ju 87, was the FuG 101 Electronic Radio Altimeter. This was used to measure height. Some Ju 87s also used FuG 16Z transmitter/receiver set to augment the FuG 25 IFF (Identification Friend or Foe).\nPilots were also asked to complete the new \"Blind Flying Certificate 3\", which was especially introduced for this new type of operation. Pilots were trained at night, over unfamiliar terrain, and forced to rely on their instruments for direction. The Ju 87's standard Revi C12D gunsight was replaced with the new \"Nachtrevi\" (\"Night revi\") C12N. On some Ju 87s, the Revi 16D was exchanged for the Nachtrevi 16D. To help the pilot see his instrument panel, a violet light was installed.\nOn 15 November 1942, the Auxiliary \"Staffel\" was created. By mid-1943, \"Luftflotte\" 1 was given four \"Staffeln\" while \"Luftflotte\" 4 and \"Luftwaffe Kommando Ost\" (Luftwaffe Command East) were given six and two respectively. In the first half of 1943, 12 \"Nachtschlachtgruppen\" (\"night battle groups\"\u2014NSGr) had been formed, flying a multitude of different types of aircraft, including the Ju 87, which proved itself ideally suited to the low-level slow flying needed. NSGr 1 and 2 fought with some success on the Western Front during the Battle of Normandy and Battle of the Bulge. NSGr 7 operated in \"anti-partisan\" role from bases in Albania from July 1944, replacing their use of German trainers. The 3rd and 4th group served on the Eastern Front, the 8th in the Arctic and the 9th in Italy. NSGr 20 fought against the Western Allied invasion of Germany in 1945. Photographic evidence exists of 16 NSGr 20 Ju 87s lining up to take-off in the woods circling the Lippe airfield, Germany while under attack from Republic P-47 Thunderbolts of the USAAF IX Tactical Air Command. The unit operated against the Ludendorff Bridge during the Battle of Remagen.\nProduction.\nDespite initial production issues with the Ju 87, the RLM ordered 216 Ju 87 A-1s into production and wanted to receive delivery of all machines between January 1936 and 1938. The Junkers production capacity was fully occupied and licensing to other production facilities became necessary. The first 35 Ju 87 A-1s were therefore produced by the Weser Flugzeugbau (WFG). By 1 September 1939, 360 Ju 87 As and Bs had been built by the Junkers factories at Dessau and Weserflug factory in Lemwerder near Bremen. By 30 September 1939, Junkers had received 2,365,196 Reichsmark (RM) for Ju 87 construction orders. The RLM paid another 243,646 RM for development orders. According to audit records in Berlin, by the end of the financial year on 30 September 1941, 3,059,000 RM had been spent on Ju 87 airframes. By 30 June 1940, 697 Ju 87 B-1s and 129 B-2s alone had been produced. Another 105 R-1s and seven R-2s had been built.\nThe range of the B-2 was insufficient, and dropped in favor of the Ju 87 R long-range versions in the second half of 1940. The 105 R-1s were converted to R-2 status and a further 616 production R-2s were ordered. In May 1941, the development of the D-1 was planned and was ordered into production by March 1942. The expansion of the Ju 88 production lines to compensate for the withdrawal of Dornier Do 17 production delayed production of the Ju 87 D. The Weserflug plant in Lemwerder experienced production shortfalls. This prompted Milch to visit and threaten the company into meeting the RLM's Ju 87 D-1 requirements on 23 February 1942. To meet these demands, 700 skilled workers were needed. Skilled workers had been called up for military service in the Wehrmacht. Junkers were able to supply 300 German workers to the Weserflug factory, and as an interim solution, Soviet prisoners of war and Soviet civilians deported to Germany. Working around the clock, the shortfall was made good. WFG received an official commendation. By May 1942, demand increased further. Chief of Procurement General Walter Herthel found that each unit needed 100 Ju 87s as standard strength and an average of 20 per month to cover attrition. Not until June\u2013December 1942 did production capacity increase, and 80 Ju 87s were produced per month.\nBy 17 August 1942, production had climbed rapidly after Blohm &amp; Voss BV 138 production was scaled down and licence work had shut down at WFG. Production now reached 150 Ju 87 D airframes per month, but spare parts were failing to reach the same production levels. Undercarriage parts were in particularly short supply. Milch ordered production to 350 Ju 87s per month in September 1942. This was not achievable due to the insufficient production capacity in the Reich.\nThe RLM considered setting up production facilities in Slovakia. But this would delay production until the buildings and factories could be furnished with the machine tools. These tools were also in short supply, and the RLM hoped to purchase them from Switzerland and Italy. The Slovaks could provide 3,500\u20134,000 workers, but no technical personnel. The move would produce only another 25 machines per month at a time when demand was increasing. In October, production plans were dealt another blow when one of WFGs plants burned down, leaving a chronic shortage of tailwheels and undercarriage parts. Junkers director and member of the Luftwaffe industry council Carl Frytag reported that by January 1943 only 120 Ju 87s could be produced at Bremen and 230 at Berlin-Tempelhof.\nDecline and end of production.\nAfter evaluating Ju 87 operations on the Eastern Front, G\u00f6ring ordered production limited to 200 per month in total. \"General der Schlachtflieger\" (\"General of Ground Attack\") Ernst Kupfer decided continued development would \"hardly bring any further tactical value\". Adolf Galland, a fighter pilot with operational and combat experience in ground attack, said that abandoning development would be premature, but 150 machines per month would be sufficient.\nOn 28 July 1943, strike and bomber production was to be scaled down, and fighter and bomber destroyer production given priority. On 3 August 1943, Milch contradicted this and declared that this increase in fighter production would not affect production of the Ju 87, Ju 188, Ju 288 and Ju 290. This was an important consideration as the life expectancy of a Ju 87 had been reduced (since 1941) from 9.5 months to 5.5 months to just 100 operational flying hours. On 26 October, Kupfer reported the Ju 87 could no longer survive in operations and that the Focke-Wulf Fw 190F should take its place. Milch finally agreed and ordered the minimal continuance of Ju 87 D-3 and D-5 production for a smooth transition period.\nIn May 1944, production wound down. 78 Ju 87s were built in May and 69 rebuilt from damaged machines. In the next six months, 438 Ju 87 Ds and Gs were added to the Ju 87 force as new or repaired aircraft. It is unknown whether any Ju 87s were built from parts unofficially after December 1944 and the end of production.\nOverall, 550 Ju 87 As and B2s were completed at the Junkers factory in Dessau. Production of the Ju 87 R and D variants was transferred to the Weserflug company, which produced 5,930 of the 6,500 Ju 87s produced in total. During the course of the war, little damage was done to the WFG plant at Lemwerder. Attacks throughout 1940-45 caused little lasting damage and succeeded only in damaging some Ju 87 airframes, in contrast to the Focke-Wulf plant in Bremen. At Berlin-Tempelhof, little delay or damage was caused to Ju 87 production, despite the heavy bombings and large-scale destruction inflicted on other targets. The WFG again went unscathed. The Junkers factory at Dessau was heavily attacked, but not until Ju 87 production had ceased. The Ju 87 repair facility at the Wels aircraft works was destroyed on 30 May 1944, and the site abandoned Ju 87 links.\nOperational history.\nSpanish Civil War.\nAmong the many German aircraft designs that participated in the Condor Legion, and as part of other German involvement in the Spanish Civil War, a single Ju 87 A-0 (the V4 prototype) was allocated serial number 29-1 and was assigned to the VJ/88, the experimental \"Staffel\" of the Legion's fighter wing. The aircraft was secretly loaded onto the ship \"Usaramo\" and departed Hamburg harbour on the night of 1 August 1936, arriving in C\u00e1diz five days later. The only known information pertaining to its combat career in Spain is that it was piloted by \"Unteroffizier\" Herman Beuer, and took part in the Nationalist offensive against Bilbao in 1937. Presumably the aircraft was then secretly returned to Germany.\nIn January 1938, three Ju 87 As from the Legion Condor arrived. Several problems became evident\u2014the spatted undercarriage sank into muddy airfield surfaces, and the spats were temporarily removed. The maximum bomb load could only be carried if the gunner vacated his seat, therefore the bomb load was restricted to . These aircraft supported the Nationalist forces and carried out anti-shipping missions until they returned to Germany in October 1938. During the Catalonia Offensive in January 1939, the Junkers Ju 87 returned to Spain. On the morning of 21 January 1939, 34 Heinkel He 111, along with some escorts and three Ju 87B, attacked the Port of Barcelona, five days before the city was captured by the Nationalists. 29 Republican fighters were defending the city. There were more than 100 aircraft operating over the city and, while a Ju 87 was dive-bombing a ship, a Republican Polikarpov I-15 pilot, Francisco Alf\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez, claimed it destroyed near El Vendrell, in Comarruga, but the Stuka was capable of landing on the beach without crashing. That was the only time a Stuka attacked the capital of Catalonia. On 24 January 1939, a group of Stukas prevented the destruction of a bridge near Barcelona by strafing the demolition engineers on Molins de Rei. During the attack the Republican ground defenders, equipped with a quadruple PM M1910 mounting, hit one pilot (Heinz Bohne) in both legs and the Stuka crashed, seriously injuring Bohne, and his machine gunner, Albert Conrad. Those two were the only Stuka casualties of the war.\nAs with the Ju 87 A-0, the B-1s were returned discreetly to the Reich. The experience of the Spanish Civil War proved invaluable\u2014air and ground crews perfected their skills, and equipment was evaluated under combat conditions. The Ju 87 had however not been tested against numerous and well-coordinated fighter opposition; this lesson was learned later at great cost to the Stuka crews.\nSecond World War.\nAll Stuka units were moved to Germany's eastern border in preparation for the invasion of Poland. On the morning of 15 August 1939, during a mass-formation dive-bombing demonstration for high-ranking commanders of the Luftwaffe at Neuhammer training grounds near Sagan, 13 Ju 87s and 26 crew members were lost when they crashed into the ground almost simultaneously. The planes dived through clouds, expecting to release their practice bombs and pull out of the dive once below the cloud ceiling. They were unaware that the ceiling was too low and unexpected ground mist formed, leaving them no time to pull out of the dive.\nPoland.\nOn 1 September 1939, the Wehrmacht invaded Poland, beginning World War II. \"Generalquartiermeister der Luftwaffe\" records indicate a total force of 366 Ju 87 A and Bs were available for operations on 31 August 1939. The first Ju 87 operation was to destroy Polish demolition charges fixed to the rail bridges over the Vistula, that linked Eastern Germany to the Danzig corridor and East Prussia as well as Polish Pomerania. To do this, Ju 87s were ordered to perform a low-level attack on the Polish Army Garrison headquarters. II. and III./StG 1 targeted the cables along the embankment, the electricity plant and signal boxes at Dirschau (now Tczew, Poland. At exactly 04:26 CET, a \"Kette\" (\"chain\" or flight of three) of Ju 87s of 3./StG 1 led by \"Staffelkapit\u00e4n\" \"Oberleutnant\" Bruno Dilly carried out the first bombing attack of the war. The Stukas attacked 11 minutes before the official German declaration of hostilities and hit the targets. The Ju 87s achieved complete success. The mission failed as the German Army delayed their advance allowing the Poles to carry out repairs and destroy all but one of the bridges before the Germans could reach them.\nA Ju 87 achieved the first air victory during World War II on the morning of 1 September 1939, when \"\" \"Leutnant\" Frank Neubert of I./StG 2 \"Immelmann\" shot down a Polish PZL P.11c fighter while it was taking off from Balice airfield; its pilot, Captain Mieczys\u0142aw Medwecki, was killed. In air-to-air combat, Ju 87 formations were well protected by German fighter aircraft and losses were light against the tenacious, but short lived opposition.\nThe Ju 87s reverted to ground attack missions for the campaign after the opening air attacks. Ju 87s were involved in the controversial but effective attacks at Wielu\u0144. The lack of anti-aircraft artillery in the Polish Army magnified the impact of the Ju 87. At Piotrk\u00f3w Trybunalski I./StG 76 and I./StG 2 destroyed a Polish infantry division de-training there. Troop trains were also easy targets. StG 77 destroyed one such target at Radomsko. During the Battle of Radom six Polish divisions trapped by encircling German forces were forced to surrender after a relentless four-day bombardment by StG 51, 76 and 77. Employed in this assault were fragmentation bombs, which caused appalling casualties to the Polish ground troops. Demoralised, the Poles surrendered. The Stukas also participated in the Battle of Bzura which resulted in the breaking of Polish resistance. The dive bomber wings (\"Sturzkampfgeschwader\") alone dropped 388\u00a0tonnes (428\u00a0tons) of bombs during this battle. During the Siege of Warsaw and the Battle of Modlin, the Ju 87 wings contributed to the defeat of well-entrenched and resolute Polish forces. IV(Stuka)./LG 1 was particularly effective in destroying the fortified Modlin.\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" had a few anti-shipping naval units such as 4.(St)/TrGr 186 to deal with Polish naval forces. This unit performed effectively, sinking the 1540-ton destroyer \"Wicher\" and the minelayer \"Gryf\" of the Polish Navy (both moored in a harbour). The torpedo boat \"Mazur\" (412 tons) was sunk at Oksywie; the gunboat \"General Haller\" (441 tons) was sunk in Hel Harbour on 6 September\u2014during the Battle of Hel\u2014along with the minesweeper \"Mewa\" (183 tons) and its sister ships \"Czapla\" and \"Jaskolka\" with several auxiliaries. The Polish naval units trapped in the Baltic were destroyed by Ju 87 operations. Once again, enemy air opposition was light, and the \"Stukawaffe\" (Stuka force) lost 31 aircraft during the campaign.\nNorway.\nOperation Weser\u00fcbung began on 9 April 1940 with the invasions of Norway and Denmark. Denmark capitulated within the day; Norway continued to resist with British and French help. The campaign was not a \"Blitzkrieg\" of fast-moving armoured divisions supported by air power as the mountainous terrain ruled out close Panzer/Stuka cooperation. Instead, the Germans relied on paratroops transported by Junkers Ju 52s and specialised ski troops. The Ju 87s were given the role of ground attack and anti-shipping missions; they proved to be the most effective weapon in the Luftwaffe's armoury carrying out the latter task.\nOn 9 April, the first Stukas took off at 10:59 from occupied airfields to destroy Oscarsborg Fortress, after the loss of the German cruiser \"Bl\u00fccher\", which disrupted the amphibious landings in Oslo through Oslofjord. The 22 Ju 87s had helped suppress the Norwegian defenders during the ensuing Battle of Dr\u00f8bak Sound, but the defenders did not surrender until after Oslo had been captured. As a result, the German naval operation failed. StG 1 caught the 735\u00a0ton Norwegian destroyer \"\u00c6ger\" off Stavanger and hit her in the engine room. \"\u00c6ger\" was run aground and scuttled. The Stuka wings were now equipped with the new Ju 87 R, which differed from the Ju 87 B by having increased internal fuel capacity and two 300l underwing drop tanks for more range.\nThe Stukas had numerous successes against Allied naval vessels and in particular the Royal Navy which posed a formidable threat to German naval and coastal operations. The British heavy cruiser HMS \"Suffolk\" was attacked on 17 April. Her stern was virtually destroyed but she limped back to Scapa Flow with 33 dead and 38 wounded crewmen. The light cruiser squadron consisting of the sister ships \"Curacoa\" and \"Curlew\" were subjected to lengthy attacks which badly damaged the former for one Ju 87 lost. A witness later said, \"they threatened to take our masthead with them in every screaming nerve-racking dive\". The same fate nearly befell the sloop \"Black Swan\". On 27 April, a bomb passed through the quarterdeck, a wardroom, a water tank and 4-inch (10.2\u00a0cm) ammunition magazine and out through the hull to explode in the fjord. The muffled explosion limited the damage to her hull. \"Black Swan\" fired 1,000 rounds, but failed to shoot down any of her attackers. The sloop was sunk on 30 April. The French large destroyer \"Bison\" was sunk along with by \"Sturzkampfgeschwader\" 1 on 3 May 1940 during the evacuation from Namsos. \"Bison\"'s forward magazine was hit, killing 108 of the crew. \"Afridi\", which had taken off some of \"Bison\"'s survivors, was sunk in a later attack with the loss of 63 sailors. 49 officers and men, 13 soldiers and 33 survivors from \"Bison\" were lost aboard \"Afridi\". All ships were targeted. Armed trawlers were used under the German air umbrella in an attempt to make smaller targets. Such craft were not armoured or armed. The Ju 87s demonstrated this on 30 April when they sank the \"Jardine\" (452 tons) and \"Warwickshire\" (466 tons). On 15 May, the Polish troopship \"Chrobry\" (11,442 tons) was sunk.\nThe \"Stukas\" also had an operational effect, even when little damage was done. On 1 May 1940, Vice Admiral Lionel Wells commanded a Home Fleet expedition of seven destroyers, the heavy cruiser \"Berwick\", the aircraft carriers \"Glorious\" and \"Ark Royal\", and the battleship \"Valiant\". The carriers mounted fighter patrols over the ships evacuating troops from Andalsnes. The \"Stuka\" waves (accompanied by He 111s) achieved several near misses, but were unable to obtain a hit. Nevertheless, Wells ordered that no ship was to operate within range of the Ju 87s' Norwegian airfields. The Ju 87s had, in effect, driven British sea power from the Norwegian coast. Moreover, Victor reported to the Commander-in-Chief of the Home Fleet, Admiral Charles Forbes, that carrier operations were no longer practical under the current conditions.\nIn the following weeks, StG 1 continued their sea operations. Off Namsos on 5 May 1940, they caught and sank the Royal Norwegian Navy transports \"Aafjord\" (335 tons) and \"Blaafjeld\" (1,146 tons). The Ju 87s then took to bombing the town and the airstrip to support the German forces under the command of Eduard Dietl. The town fell in the first week of May. In the remaining four weeks of the campaign in Norway, the Ju 87s supported German forces in containing the Allied land forces in Narvik until they withdrew in early June.\nFrance and the Low Countries.\nThe Ju 87 units had learned lessons from the Polish and Norwegian campaigns. The failures in Poland, and of the \"Stukas\" of I./StG 1 to silence the Oscarsborg fort, ensured even more attention was paid to pin-point bombing during the Phoney War period. This was to pay off in the Western campaign.\nWhen \"Fall Gelb\" (Case Yellow) began on 10 May 1940, the \"Stuka\" helped swiftly neutralise the fortress of Eben Emael, Belgium. The headquarters of the commander responsible for ordering the destruction of the Belgian Army-held bridges along the Albert Canal was stationed in the village of Lanaken (14\u00a0km/8.7\u00a0mi to the north). The \"Stuka\" demonstrated its accuracy when the small building was destroyed by four direct hits. As a result, only one of the three bridges was destroyed, allowing the German Army to rapidly advance in the opening days of the Battle of Belgium. The Ju 87 proved to be a useful asset to Army Group B in the Low Countries. In pitched battles against French armoured forces at Hannut and Gembloux, Ju 87s effectively neutralised artillery and armour.\nThe Ju 87s also assisted German forces in the Battle of the Netherlands. The Dutch Navy in concert with the British were evacuating the Dutch royal family and Dutch gold reserves through the country's ports. Ju 87s sank the Dutch ships \"Jan Van Galen\" (1,316 tons) and \"Johan Maurits Van Nassau\" (1,520 tons) as they provided close-shore artillery support at Waalhaven and the Afsluitdijk. The British \"Valentine\" was crippled, beached and scuttled while \"Winchester\", \"Whitley\" and \"Westminster\" were damaged. \"Whitley\" was later beached and scuttled after an air attack on 19 May.\nThe Ju 87 units were also instrumental in the Battle of France. It was here that most of the Ju 87-equipped units were concentrated. They assisted in the breakthrough at Sedan, the critical and first major land battle of the war on French territory. The \"Stukawaffe\" flew 300 sorties against French positions, with StG 77 alone flying 201 individual missions. The Ju 87s benefited from heavy fighter protection from Messerschmitt Bf 109 units. When resistance was organised, the Ju 87s could be vulnerable. For example, on 12 May, near Sedan, six French Curtiss H-75s from Groupe de Chasse I/5 (Group Interception) attacked a formation of Ju 87s, claiming 11 out of 12 unescorted Ju 87s without loss (the Germans recorded six losses over Sedan entire). For the most part, Allied opposition was disorganised. During the battles of Montcornet, Arras, Bolougne, and Calais, Ju 87 operations broke up counterattacks and offered pin-point aerial artillery support for German infantry.\nThe Luftwaffe benefited from excellent ground-to-air communications throughout the campaign. Radio equipped forward liaison officers could call upon the Stukas and direct them to attack enemy positions along the axis of advance. In some cases the Stukas responded in 10\u201320 minutes. Hans Seidemann (Richthofen's Chief of Staff) said that \"never again was such a smoothly functioning system for discussing and planning joint operations achieved.\"\nDuring the Battle of Dunkirk, many Allied ships were lost to Ju 87 attacks while evacuating British and French troops. The French destroyer was sunk on 21 May 1940, followed by the paddle steamer \"Crested Eagle\" on 28 May. The French Channel-steamer \"C\u00f4te d'Arzur\" (3,047 tons) followed. The Ju 87s operated to maximum effectiveness when the weather allowed. RAF fighter units were held back and Allied air cover was patchy at best. On 29 May the Royal Navy destroyer HMS \"Grenade\" was severely damaged by a Ju 87 attack within Dunkirk's harbour, and subsequently sank. The French destroyer \"Mistral\" was crippled by bomb damage the same day. \"Jaguar\" and \"Verity\" were badly damaged while the trawlers \"Calvi\" and \"Polly Johnson\" (363 and 290 tons) disintegrated under bombardment. The merchant ship \"Fenella\" (2,376 tons) was sunk having taken on 600 soldiers. The attacks brought the evacuation to a halt for a time. The ferries \"Lorina\" and \"Normannia\" (1,564 and 1,567 tons) were sunk also. By 29 May, the Allies had lost 31 vessels sunk and 11 damaged. On 1 June the Ju 87s sank the \"Halcyon\"-class minesweeper \"Skipjack\" while the destroyer \"Keith\" was sunk and \"Basilisk\" was crippled before being scuttled by \"Whitehall\". \"Whitehall\" was later badly damaged and along with \"Ivanhoe\", staggered back to Dover. \"Havant\", commissioned for just three weeks, was sunk and in the evening the French destroyer \"Foudroyant\" sank after a mass-attack. Further victories against shipping were claimed before nightfall on 1 June. The steamer \"Pavon\" was lost while carrying 1,500 Dutch soldiers most of whom were killed. The oil tanker \"Niger\" was also destroyed. A flotilla of French minesweepers were also lost\u2014\"Denis Papin\" (264 tons), the \"Le Moussaillon\" (380 tons) and \"Venus\" (264 tons).\nIn total, 89 merchantmen (of 126,518 grt) were lost, and of 40 RN destroyers used in the battle, eight were sunk (one to an E-boat and one to a submarine), and a further 23 damaged and out of service.\nThe campaign ended after the French surrender on 25 June 1940. Allied air power had been ineffective and disorganised, and as a result, \"Stuka\" losses were mainly due to ground fire. 120 machines, one-third of the Stuka force, were destroyed or damaged by all causes from 10 May to 25 June 1940.\nBattle of Britain.\nFor the Battle of Britain, the Luftwaffe's order of battle included bomber wings equipped with the Ju 87. Lehrgeschwader 2's IV.(St), Sturzkampfgeschwader 1's III. Gruppe and Sturzkampfgeschwader 2's III. Gruppe, Sturzkampfgeschwader 51 and Sturzkampfgeschwader 3's I. Gruppe were committed to the battle. As an anti-shipping weapon, the Ju 87 proved a potent weapon in the early stages of the battle. On 4 July 1940, StG 2 made a successful attack on a convoy in the English Channel, sinking four freighters: \"Britsum\", \"Dallas City\", \"Deucalion\" and \"Kolga\". Six more were damaged. That afternoon, 33 Ju 87s delivered the single most deadly air assault on British territory in history, when 33 Ju 87s of III./StG 51, avoiding Royal Air Force (RAF) interception, sank the 5,500 ton anti-aircraft ship in Portland Harbour, killing 176 of its 298 crew. One of \"Foylebank's\" gunners, Leading Seaman John F. Mantle continued to fire on the Stukas as the ship sank. He was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross for remaining at his post despite being mortally wounded. Mantle may have been responsible for the single Ju 87 lost during the raid.\nDuring August, the Ju 87s also had some success. On 13 August the opening of the main German attacks on airfields took place; it was known to the Luftwaffe as \"Adlertag\" (\"Eagle Day\"). Bf 109s of Jagdgeschwader 26 (JG 26) were sent out in advance of the main strike and drew off RAF fighters, allowing 86 Ju 87s of StG 1 to attack RAF Detling in Kent unhindered. The attack killed the station commander, destroyed 20 RAF aircraft on the ground and a great many of the airfield's buildings. Detling was not an RAF Fighter Command station.\nThe Battle of Britain proved for the first time that the Junkers Ju 87 was vulnerable in hostile skies against well-organised and determined fighter opposition. The Ju 87, like other dive bombers, was slow and possessed inadequate defences. Furthermore, it could not be effectively protected by fighters because of its low speed, and the very low altitudes at which it ended its dive bomb attacks. The Stuka depended on air superiority, the very thing being contested over Britain. It was withdrawn from attacks on Britain in August after prohibitive losses, leaving the Luftwaffe without precision ground-attack aircraft.\nSteady losses had occurred throughout their participation in the battle. On 18 August, known as the Hardest Day because both sides suffered heavy losses, the Stuka was withdrawn after 16 were destroyed and many others damaged. According to the Generalquartiermeister der Luftwaffe, 59 Stukas had been destroyed and 33 damaged to varying degrees in six weeks of operations. Over 20% of the total Stuka strength had been lost between 8 and 18 August; and the myth of the Stuka shattered. The Ju 87s did succeed in sinking six warships, 14 merchant ships, badly damaging seven airfields and three Chain Home radar stations, and destroying 49 British aircraft, mainly on the ground.\nOn 19 August, the units of VIII. Fliegerkorps moved up from their bases around Cherbourg-Octeville and concentrated in the Pas de Calais under Luftflotte 2, closer to the area of the proposed invasion of Britain. On 13 September, the Luftwaffe targeted airfields again, with a small number of Ju 87s crossing the coast at Selsey and heading for Tangmere. After a lull, anti-shipping operations attacks were resumed by some Ju 87 units from 1 November 1940, as part of the new winter tactic of enforcing a blockade. Over the next 10 days, seven merchant ships were sunk or damaged, mainly in the Thames Estuary, for the loss of four Ju 87s. On 14 November 19 Stukas from III./St.G 1 with escort drawn from JG 26 and JG 51 went out against another convoy; as no targets were found over the estuary, the Stukas attacked Dover, their alternative target.\nBad weather resulted in a decline of anti-shipping operations, and before long the Ju 87 groups began re-deploying to Poland, as part of the concealed build-up for Operation Barbarossa. By spring 1941, only St.G 1 with 30 Ju 87s remained facing the United Kingdom. Operations on a small scale continued throughout the winter months into March. Targets included ships at sea, the Thames Estuary, the Chatham naval dockyard and Dover and night-bomber sorties made over the Channel. These attacks were resumed the following winter.\nNorth Africa and the Mediterranean.\nAfter the Italian defeats in the Italo-Greek War and Operation Compass in North Africa, the ordered the deployment of German forces to these theatres. Amongst the Luftwaffe contingent deployed was the command unit StG 3, which touched down in Sicily in December 1940. In the next few days, two groups\u201480 Stukas\u2014were deployed under X. Fliegerkorps.\nThe first task of the \"Korps\" was to attack British shipping passing between Sicily and Africa, in particular the convoys aimed at re-supplying Malta. The Ju 87s first made their presence felt by subjecting the British aircraft carrier to heavy attack. The crews were confident that they could sink it as the flight deck had an area of about . On 10 January 1941, the Stuka crews were told that four direct hits with bombs would be enough to sink the carrier. The Ju 87s delivered six and three damaging near-misses but the ship's engines were untouched and she reached the besieged harbour of Malta.\nThe \"Regia Aeronautica\" was equipped for a while with the Stukas. In 1939, the Italian government asked the RLM to supply 100 Ju 87s. Italian pilots were sent to Graz in Austria to be trained for dive-bombing aircraft. In the spring of 1940, between 72 and 108 Ju 87 B-1s, some of them ex-Luftwaffe aircraft, were delivered to 96\u00b0 \"Gruppo Bombardamento a Tuffo\". The Italian Stuka, renamed \"Picchiatello\", was in turn assigned to \"Gruppi\" 97\u00b0, 101\u00b0 and 102\u00b0. The \"Picchiatelli\" were used against Malta, Allied convoys in Mediterranean and in North Africa (where they took part in conquering Tobruk). They were used by the Regia Aeronautica up to 1942.\nSome of the \"Picchiatelli\" saw action in the opening phase of the Italian invasion of Greece in October 1940. Their numbers were low and ineffective in comparison to German operations. The Italian forces were quickly pushed back. By early 1941, the Greeks had pushed into Italian-occupied Albania. Once again, Hitler decided to send military aid to his ally. Before the Luftwaffe could intervene, the Italian Ju 87s achieved some successes. 97 \"Gruppo\" (group) and its 239 \"Squadriglia\" (squadron) sinking the Hellenic Navy freighter \"Susanah\" off Corfu on 4 April 1941 while the torpedo boat \"Proussa\" was sunk later in the day. On 21 April the Greek freighter \"Ioanna\" was sunk and they accounted for the British tanker \"Hekla\" off Tobruk on 25 May and then the Royal Australian Navy destroyer \"Waterhen\" on 20 June. The British gunboat \"Cricket\" and supply submarine \"Cachalot\" became victims. The former was crippled and later sunk by Italian warships.\nIn March, the pro-German Yugoslav government was toppled. A furious Hitler ordered the attack to be expanded to include Yugoslavia. Operation Marita commenced on 7 April. The Luftwaffe committed StG 1, 2 and 77 to the campaign. The Stuka once again spearheaded the air assault, with a front line strength of 300 machines, against minimal Yugoslav resistance in the air, allowing the Stukas to develop a fearsome reputation in this region. Operating unmolested, they took a heavy toll of ground forces, suffering only light losses to ground fire. The effectiveness of the dive bombers helped bring about Yugoslav capitulation in ten days. The Stukas also took a peripheral part in Operation Punishment, Hitler's retribution bombing of Belgrade. The dive bombers were to attack airfields and anti-aircraft gun positions as the level bombers struck civilian targets. Belgrade was badly damaged, with 2,271 people killed and 12,000 injured.\nIn Greece, despite British aid, little air opposition was encountered. As the Allies withdrew and resistance collapsed, the Allies began evacuating to Crete. The Stukas inflicted severe damage on Allied shipping. On 22 April, the 1,389\u00a0ton destroyers \"Psara\" and \"Ydra\" were sunk. In the next two days, the Greek naval base at Piraeus lost 23 vessels to Stuka attack.\nDuring the Battle of Crete, the Ju 87s also played a significant role. On 21\u201322 May 1941, the Germans attempted to send in reinforcements to Crete by sea but lost 10 vessels to \"Force D\" under the command of Rear Admiral Irvine Glennie. The force, consisting of the cruisers , and , forced the remaining German ships to retreat. The Stukas were called upon to deal with the British naval threat. On 21 May, the destroyer was sunk and the next day the battleship was damaged and the cruiser was sunk, with the loss of 45 officers and 648 ratings. The Ju 87s also crippled the cruiser that morning, (she was later finished off by Bf 109 fighter bombers) while sinking the destroyer with one hit. As the Battle of Crete drew to a close, the Allies began yet another withdrawal. On 23 May, the Royal Navy lost the destroyers and , followed by on 26 May; \"Orion\" and \"Dido\" were also severely damaged. \"Orion\" had been evacuating 1,100 soldiers to North Africa; 260 of them were killed and another 280 wounded.\nThe dive bomber wing supported \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Erwin Rommel's Afrika Korps in its two-year campaign in North Africa; its other main task was attacking Allied shipping. In 1941, Ju 87 operations in North Africa were dominated by the Siege of Tobruk, which lasted for over seven months. It served during the Battle of Gazala and the First Battle of El Alamein, as well as the decisive Second Battle of El Alamein, which drove Rommel back to Tunisia. As the tide turned and Allied air power grew in the autumn of 1942, the Ju 87 became very vulnerable and losses were heavy. The entry of the Americans into North Africa with the Operation Torch invasion of French North Africa made the situation far worse; the Stuka was obsolete in what was now a fighter-bomber's war. The Bf 109 and Fw 190 could at least fight enemy fighters on equal terms after dropping their ordnance but the Stuka could not. The Ju 87's vulnerability was demonstrated on 11 November 1942, when 15 Ju 87Ds were shot down by United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) Curtiss P-40Fs in minutes. According to Ring and Shores there were 15 Ju 87s on the mission, 2 Squadron SAAF shot down eight with four probable and three were shot down by 57th Fighter Group. Two South-African and one American lost shot down by German fighter escort. Three Stuka crews were captured, one was wounded.\nBy 1943, the Allies enjoyed air supremacy in North Africa. The Ju 87s ventured out in \"Rotte\" strength only, often jettisoning their bombs at the first sight of enemy aircraft. Adding to this trouble, the German fighters had only enough fuel to cover the Ju 87s on takeoff, their most vulnerable point. After that, the Stukas were on their own.\nThe dive bombers continued operations in southern Europe; after the Italian surrender in September 1943, the Ju 87 participated in the last campaign-sized victory over the Western Allies, the Dodecanese Campaign. The Dodecanese Islands had been occupied by the British; the Luftwaffe committed 75 Stukas of StG 3 based in Megara (I./StG 3) and Argos (II.StG 3; from 17 October on Rhodes), to recover the islands. With the RAF bases away, the Ju 87 helped the German landing forces rapidly conquer the islands. On 5 October the minelayer \"Lagnano\" was sunk along with a patrol vessel, a steam ship and the auxiliary landing ship \"Porto Di Roma\". On 24 October Ju 87s sank the landing craft LCT-115 and cargo ship \"Taganrog\" at Samos. On 31 October the light cruiser \"Aurora\" was put out of action for a year. The light cruisers \"Penelope\" and \"Carlisle\" were badly damaged by StG 3 and the destroyer \"Panther\" was also sunk by Ju 87s before the capitulation of the Allied force. It proved to be the Stuka's final victory against the British.\nEastern front.\nBarbarossa; 1941.\nOn 22 June 1941, the Wehrmacht commenced Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. The Luftwaffe order of battle of 22 June 1941 contained four dive bomber wings. \"VIII. Fliegerkorps\" was equipped with units \"Stab\", II. and III./StG 1. Also included were \"Stab\", I., II. and III. of \"Sturzkampfgeschwader 2\" Immelmann. Attached to \"II. Fliegerkorps\", under the command of \"General der Flieger\" Bruno Loerzer, were \"Stab\", I., II. and III. of StG 77. \"Luftflotte 5\", under the command of \"Generaloberst\" Hans-J\u00fcrgen Stumpff, operating from Norway's Arctic Circle, were allotted IV. \"Gruppe\" (St)/\"Lehrgeschwader 1\" (\"LG 1\").\nThe first Stuka loss on the Soviet-German front occurred early at 03:40\u201303:47 in the morning of 22 June. While being escorted by Bf 109s from JG 51 to attack Brest Fortress, \"Oberleutnant\" Karl F\u00fchring of StG 77 was shot down by an I-153. The dive bomber wing suffered only two losses on the opening day of Barbarossa. As a result of the Luftwaffe's attention, the Soviet Air Force in the western Soviet Union was nearly destroyed. The official report claimed 1,489 Soviet aircraft destroyed. Even G\u00f6ring was unable to believe such a high total and ordered this checked. After picking their way through the wreckage across the front, Luftwaffe officers found that the tally exceeded 2,000. In the next two days, the Soviets reported the loss of another 1,922 aircraft.\nThe Ju 87 took a huge toll on Soviet ground forces, helping to break up counterattacks of Soviet armour, eliminating strongpoints and disrupting the enemy supply lines. A demonstration of the Stuka's effectiveness occurred on 5 July, when StG 77 knocked out 18 trains and 500 vehicles. As the 1st and 2nd Panzer Groups forced bridgeheads across the Dnieper river and closed in on Kyiv, the Ju 87s again rendered invaluable support. On 13 September, Stukas from StG 1 destroyed the rail network in the vicinity as well as inflicting heavy casualties on escaping Red Army columns, for the loss of one Ju 87. On 23 September, Rudel (who was to become the most decorated serviceman in the Wehrmacht) of StG 2, helped sink the Soviet battleship \"Marat\", during an air attack on Kronstadt harbour near Leningrad, which was struck by two bombs. During this action, \"Leutnant\" Egbert Jaeckel sank the destroyer \"Minsk\", while the destroyer \"Steregushchiy\" and submarine \"M-74\" were also sunk. The Stukas also crippled the battleship \"Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya\" and the destroyers \"Silnyy\" and \"Grozyashchiy\" in exchange for two Ju 87s shot down.\nElsewhere on the Eastern front, the Junkers assisted Army Group Centre in its drive toward Moscow. From 13 to 22 December 420 vehicles and 23 tanks were destroyed by StG 77, greatly improving the morale of the German infantry, who were by now on the defensive. StG 77 finished the campaign as the most effective dive bomber wing. It had destroyed 2,401 vehicles, 234 tanks, 92 artillery batteries and 21 trains for the loss of 25 Ju 87s to hostile action. At the end of Barbarossa, StG 1 had lost 60 Stukas in aerial combat and one on the ground. StG 2 lost 39 Ju 87s in the air and two on the ground, StG 77 lost 29 of their dive-bombers in the air and three on the ground (25 to enemy action). IV.(St)/LG1, operating from Norway, lost 24 Ju 87s, all in aerial combat.\nFall Blau to Stalingrad; 1942.\nIn early 1942, the Ju 87s gave the Heer yet more valuable support. On 29 December 1941, the Soviet 44th Army landed on the Kerch Peninsula. The Luftwaffe was only able to dispatch meager reinforcements of four bomber groups (\"Kampfgruppen\") and two dive bomber groups belonging to StG 77. With air superiority, the Ju 87s operated with impunity. In the first 10 days of the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula, half the landing force was destroyed, while sea lanes were blocked by the Stukas inflicting heavy losses on Soviet shipping. The Ju 87's effectiveness against Soviet armour was not yet potent. Later versions of the T-34 tank could withstand Stuka attacks in general, unless a direct hit was scored but the Soviet 44th Army had only obsolescent types with thin armour which were nearly all destroyed. During the Battle of Sevastopol, the Stukas repeatedly bombed the trapped Soviet forces. Some Ju 87 pilots flew up to 300 sorties against the Soviet defenders. StG 77 (Luftflotte 4) flew 7,708 combat sorties dropping 3,537 tonnes of bombs on the city. Their efforts help secure the capitulation of Soviet forces on 4 July.\nFor the German summer offensive, \"Fall Blau\", the Luftwaffe had concentrated 1,800 aircraft into \"Luftflotte 4\" making it the largest and most powerful air command in the world. The \"Stukawaffe\" strength stood at 151. During the Battle of Stalingrad, Stukas flew thousands of sorties against Soviet positions in the city. StG 1, 2 and 77 flew 320 sorties on 14 October 1942. As the German Sixth Army pushed the Soviets into a 1,000-metre enclave on the west bank of the Volga River, 1,208 Stuka sorties were flown against this small strip of land. The intense air attack, though causing horrific losses on Soviet units, failed to destroy them. The Luftwaffe's Stuka force made a maximum effort during this phase of the war. They flew an average of 500 sorties per day and caused heavy losses among Soviet forces, losing an average of only one Stuka per day. The Battle of Stalingrad marked the high point in the fortunes of the Junkers Ju 87 Stuka. As the strength of the Soviet Air Forces grew, they gradually wrested control of the skies from the Luftwaffe. From this point onward, Stuka losses increased.\nKursk and decline; 1943.\nThe Stuka was also heavily involved in Operation Citadel, the Kursk offensive. The Luftwaffe committed I, II, III./St.G 1 and III./StG 3 under the command of Luftflotte 6. I., II, III. of StGs 2 and 3 were committed under the command of \"Fliegerkorps\" VIII. Rudel's cannon-equipped Ju 87 Gs had a devastating effect on Soviet armour at Orel and Belgorod. The Ju 87s participated in a huge aerial counter-offensive lasting from 16 to 31 July against a Soviet offensive at Khotynets and saved two German armies from encirclement, reducing the attacking Soviet 11th Guards Army to 33 tanks by 20 July. The Soviet offensive had been completely halted from the air although losses were considerable. Fliegerkorps VIII lost eight Ju 87s on 8 July, six on 9 July, six on 10 July and another eight on 11 July. The Stuka arm also lost eight of their Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross holders. StG 77 lost 24 Ju 87s in the period 5\u201331 July (StG had lost 23 in July\u2013December 1942), while StG 2 lost another 30 aircraft in the same period. In September 1943, three of the Stuka units were re-equipped with the Fw 190F and G (ground attack versions) and began to be renamed \"Schlachtgeschwader\" (attack wings). In the face of overwhelming air opposition, the dive-bomber required heavy protection from German fighters to counter Soviet fighters. Some units like SG 2 \"Immelmann\" continued to operate with great success throughout 1943\u201345, operating the Ju 87 G variants equipped with 37\u00a0mm cannons, which became tank killers, although in increasingly small numbers.\nIn the wake of the defeat at Kursk, Ju 87s played a vital defensive role on the southern wing of the Eastern Front. To combat the Luftwaffe, the Soviets could deploy 3,000 fighter aircraft. As a result, the Stukas suffered heavily. SG 77 lost 30 Ju 87s in August 1943 as did SG 2 \"Immelmann\", which also reported the loss of 30 aircraft in combat operations. Despite these losses, Ju 87s helped the XXIX Army Corps break out of an encirclement near the Sea of Azov. The Battle of Kiev also included substantial use of the Ju 87 units, although again, unsuccessful in stemming the advances. Stuka units were with the loss of air superiority, becoming vulnerable on the ground as well. Some Stuka aces were lost this way. In the aftermath of Kursk, Stuka strength fell to 184 aircraft in total. This was well below 50 per cent of the required strength. On 18 October 1943, StG 1, 2, 3, 5 and 77 were renamed \"Schlachtgeschwader\" (SG) wings, reflecting their ground-attack role, as these combat wings were now also using ground-attack aircraft, such as the Fw 190F-series aircraft. The Luftwaffe's dive-bomber units had ceased to exist.\nA few Ju 87s were also retained for anti-shipping operations in the Black Sea, a role it had proved successful in when operating in the Mediterranean. In October 1943, this became evident again when StG 3 carried out several attacks against the Soviet Black Sea Fleet. On 6 October 1943 the most powerful flotilla in the fleet comprising the destroyer leader , and the destroyers and were sunk. After the disaster, Josef Stalin decreed that no more ships were to pass within range of German aircraft without his personal permission.\nOperation Bagration to Berlin 1944\u20131945.\nTowards the end of the war, as the Allies gained air supremacy, the Stuka was being replaced by ground-attack versions of the Fw 190. By early 1944, the number of Ju 87 units and operational aircraft terminally declined. For the Soviet summer offensive, Operation Bagration, 12 Ju 87 groups and five mixed groups (including Fw 190s) were on the Luftwaffe's order of battle on 26 June 1944. Gefechtsverband Kuhlmey, a mixed aircraft unit, which included large numbers of Stuka dive bombers, was rushed to the Finnish front in the summer of 1944 and was instrumental in halting the Soviet fourth strategic offensive. The unit claimed 200 Soviet tanks and 150 Soviet aircraft destroyed for 41 losses. By 31 January 1945, only 104 Ju 87s remained operational with their units. The other mixed \"Schlacht\" units contained a further 70 Ju 87s and Fw 190s between them. Chronic fuel shortages kept the Stukas grounded and sorties decreased until the end of the war in May 1945.\nIn the final months of the war the ground attack groups were still able to impose operational constraints upon the enemy. Most notably the aircraft participated in the defence of Berlin. On 12 January 1945 the 1st Belorussian Front initiated the Vistula\u2013Oder Offensive. The offensive made rapid progress. The Soviets eventually outran their air support, which was unable to use forward, quagmire-filled, airfields. The Germans, who had fallen back on airbases with good facilities and concrete runways, were able to mount uninterrupted attacks against Soviet army columns. Reminiscent of the early years, the \"Luftwaffe\" was able to inflict high losses largely unopposed. Over 800 vehicles were destroyed within two weeks. In the first three days of February 1945, 2,000 vehicles and 51 tanks were claimed to be lost to German air attacks. The Ju 87 participated in these intense battles in small numbers. It was the largest concentration of German air power since 1940 and even in February 1945 the Germans were able to achieve and challenge for air superiority on the Eastern Front. The air offensive was instrumental in saving Berlin, albeit only for three months. The effort exhausted German fuel reserves. The contribution of the Ju 87 was exemplified by Rudel, who claimed 13 enemy tanks on 8 February 1945.\nPost-war research revealed that generally, bombing pilots were far less effective than they claimed. The German Luftwaffe, in particular, did not do a scientific analysis of the Ju 87 pilot claims in 1939\u20131945 but instead relied on pre-war tests and assumptions, contrary to the Allies who did such research during the war, which showed that pilots, for a number of reasons, misjudged most of their tank kills and revealed the ineffectiveness of dive-bombers as an anti-tank weapon, except for the suppression effect of the bombing.\nSurviving aircraft.\nTwo intact Ju 87s survive, with a third being restored:\n A later, ground-attack variant, this is displayed at the Royal Air Force Museum in London; it was captured by British forces at Eggebek, Schleswig-Holstein in May 1945. It is thought to have been built in 1943\u20131944 as a D-5 before being rebuilt as a G-2 variant, possibly by fitting G-2 outer wings to a D-5 airframe. The wings have the hard-points for \"Bordkanone BK 3,7\" gun-pods, but these are not fitted. It was one of 12 captured German aircraft selected by the British for museum preservation and assigned to the Air Historical Branch. The aircraft was stored and displayed at various RAF sites until 1978, when it was moved to the RAF Museum. In 1967, permission was given to use the aircraft in the film \"Battle of Britain\" and it was repainted and modified to resemble a 1940 variant of the Ju 87. The engine was found to be in excellent condition and there was little difficulty in starting it, but returning the aircraft to airworthiness was considered too costly for the filmmakers and, ultimately, models were used in the film to represent Stukas. In 1998, the film modifications were removed, and the aircraft returned to the original G-2 configuration.\nThis aircraft is displayed in the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry. It was abandoned in North Africa and found by British forces in 1941. The Ju 87 was donated by the British government and sent to the US during the war. It was fully restored in 1974 by the EAA of Wisconsin.\nOne Ju 87 is under restoration:\nOne aircraft is being restored to airworthy condition from two wrecks, owned by Paul Allen's Flying Heritage &amp; Combat Armor Museum. The project takes its identification from Ju 87 R-4 Werk Nr. \"6234\", which was built in 1941 and served with Stukageschwader 5. Shot down in April 1942 on a mission to bomb Murmansk, it was recovered in 1992. The wreck was purchased by New Zealand collector Tim Wallis, who originally planned for a rebuild to airworthy status, and later went to the Deutsches Technikmuseum in Berlin. Parts from a second airframe, a Ju 87 R-2 \"Werknummer\" 857509 which served bearing the \"Stammkennzeichen\" of code LI+KU from 1./St.G.5, and was recovered to the United Kingdom in 1998, have also been incorporated. The project was displayed in November 2018 and the restoration was stated to take between 18 months and two years to complete. Work will be conducted in a display hangar to allow the public to observe the work underway.\nOther aircraft survive as wreckage at or recovered from crash sites:\nReplicas.\nReplicas at 7/10 scale were built by Louis Langhurst and Richard H. Kurzenberger. Langhurst's aircraft ended up with the Commemorative Air Force. Kurzenburger's was written off in a crash that killed the pilot in 2000.\nSpecifications (Ju 87D-1).\n\"Data from\" \"Warplanes of the Third Reich\" General characteristics* Crew: 2* Aspect ratio: * Airfoil: G\u00f6ttingen 256* Propellers: 3-bladed Junkers constant-speed propeller\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Time to altitude: in 20 minutes\nArmament\nIn popular culture.\nAccording to Richard King, the sound of the \"L\u00e4rmger\u00e4t\" (often incorrectly referred to as \"Jericho trumpets\") \"is often used in movies and TV shows as the classic dive bomber sound, plane crashing sound, or for an anvil dropping on Wile E. Coyote\u2019s head\".\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16591", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16591", "title": "Book of Jarom", "text": "Fifth book in the Book of Mormon\nThe Book of Jarom () is the fifth book in the Book of Mormon. According to the text it was written by Jarom, who was the son of Enos and a descendant of Jacob, the brother of the prophet Nephi.\nThe Book of Jarom is very short, consisting of only fifteen verses. According to the Book of Mormon, Jarom was the son of Enos, the grandson of Jacob, and the great-grandson of Lehi. He kept the commandment of his father to preserve the plates, and in turn he commanded his son Omni to do the same. In the meantime, he inscribed these few verses on them. In his account, Jarom described the Lamanites and explained that the Nephites had many wars against them. He also narrated that the Nephites did not listen to God but still kept the Mosaic Law.\nStructure.\nIn the Book of Mormon, the Book of Jarom succeeds the Book of Enos and precedes the Book of Omni; of the three, it is the shortest book.\nNarrative.\nJarom narrates the Book of Jarom and begins his record explaining that he will not write his prophesies and revelations because he feels that similar things have been written by his forefathers. Besides which, Jarom explains, there is not enough room left on the plates to write very much. But Jarom recommends that his readers go to the large plates if they want more information; University of Vermont associate professor of English Elizabeth Fenton points out that the only available version of the large plates is Mormon's abridgement. Jarom further states that the small plates are written for the Lamanites, though he expresses little hope for them in their present condition. The Lamanites, Jarom explains, murder and drink animal blood.\nJarom says that the laws of the land are strict and that many of the Nephites are unwilling to listen to God's words. Meanwhile, God is merciful and protects them in their wars against the Lamanites. During these wars, their leaders are faithful to God and strengthen the cities against attacks. Despite their lack of spiritual interest, the Nephites grow in population and keep the law of Moses. After possessing the plates for 59 years, Jarom passes them to his son Omni.\nInterpretation.\nLiterary.\nThe Book of Jarom is the shortest book in the Book of Mormon text, excepting the explanatory Words of Mormon. Fatimah Salleh and Margaret Hemming, co-authors of the three-volume series \"The Book of Mormon for the Least of These\", suggest that Jarom's choice of audience (the Lamanites) is based on his father Enos's covenant with God, in which the Lamanites would return to God. This impacts Jarom's practice of record keeping, Salleh and Hemming argue.\nDue to the absence of events while maintaining a \"narrative voice\", Jarom's account has been called an \"unnarration\" by Elizabeth Fenton, who adopted the term from Robyn Warhol. Brigham Young University professor Donald W. Parry contends that the book follows an \"AabcdBABBACDEEDCBAdbca\" chiasmus pattern that repeats ideas of faith, destruction, and obedience to commandments, among other things. \nTheological.\nProfessor of scripture, Nicholas Frederick, believes that according to Jarom, the Nephites keep the Law of Moses as a way to look forward to the then-future advent of Jesus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16593", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16593", "title": "KingdomOfDenmark", "text": ""}
{"id": "16595", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16595", "title": "KingdomProtista", "text": ""}
{"id": "16596", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16596", "title": "KurtCobain", "text": ""}
{"id": "16597", "revid": "42316941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16597", "title": "KingdomAnimalia", "text": ""}
{"id": "16598", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16598", "title": "KuleshovExperiment", "text": ""}
{"id": "16599", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16599", "title": "KnowLedge", "text": ""}
{"id": "16600", "revid": "1000582973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16600", "title": "KickBoxing", "text": ""}
{"id": "16601", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16601", "title": "KingCrimson", "text": ""}
{"id": "16602", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16602", "title": "Kuleshov experiment", "text": ""}
{"id": "16603", "revid": "48153177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16603", "title": "Keanu Reeves", "text": "Canadian actor (born 1964)\nKeanu Charles Reeves ( ; born September 2, 1964) is a Canadian actor and musician. The recipient of numerous accolades in a career on screen spanning four decades, he is known for his leading roles in action films, his amiable public image, and his philanthropic efforts. In 2020, \"The New York Times\" ranked him as the fourth-greatest actor of the 21st century, and in 2022, \"Time\" magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world.\nBorn in Beirut and raised in Toronto, Reeves made his acting debut in the Canadian television series \"Hangin' In\" (1984), before making his feature-film debut in \"Youngblood\" (1986). He had his breakthrough role in the science-fiction comedies \"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure\" (1989) and \"Bill &amp; Ted's Bogus Journey\" (1991). He gained praise for playing a hustler in the independent drama \"My Own Private Idaho\" (1991) and established himself as an action hero with leading roles in \"Point Break\" (1991) and \"Speed\" (1994). Following several box-office disappointments, Reeves's performance in the horror film \"The Devil's Advocate\" (1997) was well received. Greater stardom came with his role as Neo in \"The Matrix\" (1999); Reeves became the highest paid actor for a single production for reprising the role in its 2003 sequels \"Reloaded\" and \"Revolutions\". He also played John Constantine in \"Constantine\" (2005).\nReeves made his film directorial debut with \"Man of Tai Chi\" (2013). Following a period in which he enjoyed limited commercial success, he made a career comeback by playing the titular assassin in the action film series \"John Wick\" (2014\u2013present). Reeves voiced Duke Caboom in \"Toy Story 4\" (2019) and portrayed Johnny Silverhand in the video game \"Cyberpunk 2077\" (2020) as well as . He has since reprised his roles of Ted in \"Bill &amp; Ted Face the Music\" (2020) and Neo in \"\" (2021), and voiced Shadow the Hedgehog in \"Sonic the Hedgehog 3\" (2024).\nIn addition to acting, Reeves is a member of the musical band Dogstar, releasing albums including \"Somewhere Between the Power Lines and Palm Trees\" (2023). He is the co-writer and creator of the \"BRZRKR\" franchise, which started with the original comic book (2021\u20132023) and since expanded to include numerous spin-offs, including \"The Book of Elsewhere\" (2024). An avid motorcyclist, Reeves is the co-founder of the custom manufacturer ARCH Motorcycle. He also co-founded the production company Company Films.\nEarly life.\nKeanu Charles Reeves was born in Beirut, Lebanon, on September 2, 1964, the son of Patricia (n\u00e9e Taylor), a costume designer and performer, and Samuel Nowlin Reeves Jr. His mother is English, originating from Essex. His American father is from Hawaii, and is of Native Hawaiian, Chinese, English, and Portuguese descent. Reeves's paternal grandmother is of Hawaiian and Chinese descent. His mother was working in Beirut when she met his father, who abandoned his wife and family when Reeves was three years old. Reeves last met his father on the Hawaiian island of Kaua'i when he was thirteen.\nAfter his parents divorced in 1966, his mother moved the family to Sydney, Australia, and then to New York City, where she married Paul Aaron, a Broadway and Hollywood director, in 1970. The couple moved to Toronto and divorced in 1971. When Reeves was nine, he took part in a theatre production of \"Damn Yankees\". Aaron remained close to Reeves, offering him advice and recommending him a job at the Hedgerow Theatre in Pennsylvania. Reeves's mother married Robert Miller, a rock music promoter, in 1976; the couple divorced in 1980. Reeves and his sisters grew up primarily in the Yorkville neighbourhood of Toronto, with a nanny frequently caring for them. Reeves watched British comedy shows such as \"The Two Ronnies\", and his mother imparted English manners that he has maintained into adulthood. Because of his grandmother's Chinese ethnicity, Reeves grew up with Chinese art, furniture, and cuisine.\nDescribing himself as a \"private kid\", Reeves attended four different high schools, including the Etobicoke School of the Arts, from which he was expelled. Reeves said he was expelled because he was \"just a little too rambunctious and shot my mouth off once too often\u00a0... I was not generally the most well-oiled machine in the school\". Reeves has dyslexia and has said, \"Because I had trouble reading, I wasn't a good student\". At De La Salle College, he was a successful ice hockey goalkeeper. Reeves had aspirations to play for the Canadian Olympic team and was once considered an OHL prospect, but his hockey career ended due to injury. At the age of fifteen, he decided he wanted to become an actor. After leaving De La Salle College, he attended Avondale Secondary Alternative School, which allowed him to get an education while working as an actor. Reeves dropped out of high school when he was seventeen. He obtained a green card through his American stepfather and moved to Los Angeles three years later. Reeves holds only Canadian citizenship.\nCareer.\n1984\u20131990: Early work.\nIn 1984, Reeves was a correspondent for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) youth television program \"Going Great\". That same year, he made his acting debut in an episode of the television series, called \"Hangin' In\". In 1985, he played Mercutio in a stage production of \"Romeo and Juliet\" at the Leah Posluns Theatre in North York, Ontario. He made further appearances on stage, including Brad Fraser's cult hit \"Wolfboy\" in Toronto. He also appeared in a Coca-Cola commercial in 1983, and in the National Film Board of Canada (NFB) coming-of-age, short film \"One Step Away\". Reeves later said that, when he was looking for work in the mid-1980s, his agents advised him to go by a different name because his first name was \"too ethnic\". He briefly initialized his first and middle name and attended auditions as \"K. C.\" or \"Casey\" Reeves before reverting to Keanu.\nIn 1986, Reeves made a foray into television films, including NBC's \"Babes in Toyland, Act of Vengeance\" and \"Brotherhood of Justice\". He made his first motion picture appearances in Peter Markle's \"Youngblood\", in which he played a goalkeeper, and in the low-budget romantic drama, \"Flying\". He was cast as Matt in \"River's Edge\", a crime drama about a group of high school friends dealing with a murder case, loosely based on the 1981 murder of Marcy Renee Conrad. The film premiered in 1986 at the Toronto International Film Festival to a largely positive response. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" describes the performances of the young cast as \"natural and credible\", with Reeves being described as \"affecting and sympathetic\".\nIn 1988, Reeves starred in several dramas aimed at teen audiences, including as the lead in \"The Night Before\", a comedy starring opposite Lori Loughlin, \"The Prince of Pennsylvania\" and \"Permanent Record\". Although the latter received mixed reviews, \"Variety\" magazine praised Reeves's performance, \"which opens up nicely as the drama progresses\". His other acting efforts included a supporting role in \"Dangerous Liaisons\", which earned seven nominations at the 61st Academy Awards, winning three: Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Costume Design, and Best Production Design.\nIn 1989, Reeves starred in \"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure\", in which he portrays a slacker who travels through time with a friend (portrayed by Alex Winter), to assemble historical figures for a school presentation. The film was generally well received by critics and grossed $40.5\u00a0million at the worldwide box office. Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a 79% approval rating with the critical consensus: \"Keanu Reeves and Alex Winter are just charming, goofy, and silly enough to make this fluffy time-travel Adventure work\". Reeves then starred in the comedy-drama \"Parenthood\" directed by Ron Howard. Nick Hilditch of the BBC gave the film three out of five stars, calling it a \"feelgood movie\" with an \"extensive and entertaining ensemble cast\". In 1990, Reeves gave two acting performances; he portrayed an incompetent hitman in the black comedy \"I Love You to Death\", and played Martin, a radio station employee in the comedy \"Tune in Tomorrow\". He also appeared in Paula Abdul's music video for \"Rush Rush\" which featured a \"Rebel Without a Cause\" (1955) motif, with him in the James Dean role.\n1991\u20131994: Breakthrough with mature roles.\nIn 1991, Reeves starred in \"Bill &amp; Ted's Bogus Journey\", a sequel to \"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure\", with his co-star Winter. Michael Wilmington of the \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that the sequel was \"more imaginative, more opulent, wilder and freer, more excitingly visualized\", praising the actors for their \"fuller\" performances. Film critic Roger Ebert thought it was \"a riot of visual invention and weird humour that works on its chosen sub-moronic level\u00a0[...] It's the kind of movie where you start out snickering in spite of yourself, and end up actually admiring the originality that went into creating this hallucinatory slapstick\". The rest of 1991 marked a significant transition for Reeves's career as he undertook adult roles. Co-starring with River Phoenix as a street hustler in the adventure \"My Own Private Idaho\", the characters embark on a journey of personal discovery. The story was written by Gus Van Sant, and is loosely based on William Shakespeare's \"Henry IV, Part 1\", \"Henry IV, Part 2\", and \"Henry V\". The film premiered at the 48th Venice International Film Festival, followed by a theatrical release in the United States on September 29, 1991. The film earned $6.4\u00a0million at the box office. \"My Own Private Idaho\" was positively received, with Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" describing the film as \"a postmodern road movie with a mood of free-floating, trance-like despair[...] a rich, audacious experience\". \"The New York Times\" complimented Reeves and Phoenix for their insightful performances.\nReeves starred alongside Patrick Swayze, Lori Petty and Gary Busey in the action thriller \"Point Break\", directed by Kathryn Bigelow. He plays an undercover FBI agent tasked with investigating the identities of a group of bank robbers. To prepare for the film, Reeves and his co-stars took surfing lessons with professional surfer Dennis Jarvis in Hawaii; Reeves had never surfed before. Upon its release, \"Point Break\" was generally well-received, and a commercial success, earning $83.5\u00a0million at the box office. Reeves's performance was praised by \"The New York Times\" for \"considerable discipline and range\", adding, \"He moves easily between the buttoned-down demeanour that suits a police procedural story and the loose-jointed manner of his comic roles\". Writing for \"The Washington Post\", Hal Hinson called Reeves the \"perfect choice\" and praised the surfing scenes, but opined that \"the filmmakers have their characters make the most ludicrously illogical choices imaginable\". At the 1992 MTV Movie Awards, Reeves won the Most Desirable Male award.\nIn 1991, Reeves developed an interest in a music career; he formed the alternative rock band Dogstar, consisting of members Robert Mailhouse, Gregg Miller and Bret Domrose. Reeves played the bass guitar. A year later, he played Jonathan Harker in Francis Ford Coppola's Gothic horror \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\", based on Stoker's 1897 novel \"Dracula\". Starring alongside Gary Oldman, Winona Ryder and Anthony Hopkins, the film was critically and commercially successful. It grossed $215.8\u00a0million worldwide. For his role, Reeves was required to speak with an English accent, which drew some ridicule; \"Overly posh and entirely ridiculous, Reeves's performance is as painful as it is hilarious\", wrote Limara Salt of Virgin Media. In a retrospective interview in 2015, director Coppola said, \"[Reeves] tried so hard\u00a0[...] He wanted to do it perfectly and in trying to do it perfectly it came off as stilted\". \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\" was nominated for four Academy Awards, winning three in Best Costume Design, Best Sound Editing and Best Makeup. The film also received four nominations at the British Academy Film Awards.\nIn 1993, he had a role in \"Much Ado About Nothing\", based on Shakespeare's play of the same name. The film received positive reviews, although Reeves was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor. \"The New Republic\" magazine thought his casting was \"unfortunate\" because of his amateur performance. In that same year, he starred in two more drama films, \"Even Cowgirls Get the Blues\" and \"Little Buddha\", both of which garnered a mixed-to-negative reception. \"The Independent\" critic gave \"Little Buddha\" a mixed review but opined that Reeves's part as a prince was \"credible\". The film also left an impression on Reeves; he later said, \"When I played this innocent prince who starts to suspect something when he has the first revelations about old age, sickness and death, it hit me. [...] That lesson has never left me.\"\nIn 1994, he starred in the action thriller \"Speed\" alongside Sandra Bullock and Dennis Hopper. He plays police officer Jack Traven, who must prevent a bus from exploding by keeping its speed above 50\u00a0mph. \"Speed\" was the directorial debut of Dutch director Jan de Bont. Several actors were considered for the lead role, but Reeves was chosen because de Bont was impressed with his \"Point Break\" performance. To look the part, Reeves shaved all his hair off and spent two months in the gym to gain muscle mass. During production, Reeves's friend and his \"My Own Private Idaho\" co-star River Phoenix died, resulting in adjustments to the filming schedule to allow him to mourn. \"Speed\" was released on June\u00a010 to a critically acclaimed response. Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" lauded Reeves, calling him \"absolutely charismatic\u00a0[...] giving a performance juiced with joy as he jumps through elevator shafts\u00a0[...] and atop a subway train\". David Ansen, writing for \"Newsweek\", summarized \"Speed\" as, \"Relentless without being overbearing, this is one likely blockbuster that doesn't feel too big for its britches. It's a friendly juggernaut\". The film grossed $350\u00a0million from a $30\u00a0million budget and won two Academy Awards in 1995\u00a0\u2013 Best Sound Editing and Best Sound.\n1995\u20131998: Career fluctuations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI do love it [Shakespeare]. It's like this kind of code that once you start to inhabit it with breath and sound and feeling and thought, it is the most powerful and consuming and freeing at the same time. Just, literally, elemental in sound, consonants and vowels. What I found out in doing it \"[Hamlet]\" was that it brought up for me all the anger that was inside me for my mother. I mean, it surprised me, just what was there, and I hadn't seen that before.\n\u2014Reeves on his \"Hamlet\" performance\nReeves's next leading role came in the 1995 cyberpunk action thriller \"Johnny Mnemonic\", directed by artist Robert Longo and based on the 1981 short story by William Gibson. Set in 2021, it is about a man who has a cybernetic brain implant and must deliver a data package before he dies or is killed by the yakuza. The film received mainly negative reviews and critics felt Reeves was \"woefully miscast\". Roger Ebert opined that the film is one of the \"great goofy gestures of recent cinema, a movie that doesn't deserve one nanosecond of serious analysis but has a kind of idiotic grandeur that makes you almost forgive it.\" He next appeared in the romantic drama \"A Walk in the Clouds\", which also garnered mixed-to-negative reviews. Reeves plays a young soldier returning home from World War\u00a0II, trying to settle down with a woman he married impulsively just before he enlisted. Film critic Mick LaSalle opined that \"\"A Walk in the Clouds\" is for the most part a beautiful, well-acted and emotionally rich picture\", whereas Hal Hinson from \"The Washington Post\" said, \"The film has the syrupy, Kodak magic-moment look of a Bo Derek movie, and pretty much the same level of substance\".\nBesides film work, Reeves retreated briefly to the theatre playing Prince Hamlet in a 1995 Manitoba Theatre Centre production of \"Hamlet\" in Winnipeg, Manitoba. \"The Sunday Times\" critic Roger Lewis believed his performance, writing he \"quite embodied the innocence, the splendid fury, the animal grace of the leaps and bounds, the emotional violence, that form the Prince of Denmark\u00a0... He is one of the top three Hamlets I have seen, for a simple reason: he \"is\" Hamlet\". In 1996, Reeves was soon drawn to science fiction roles, appearing in \"Chain Reaction\" with co-stars Morgan Freeman, Rachel Weisz, Fred Ward, Kevin Dunn and Brian Cox. He plays a researcher of a green energy project, who has to go on the run when he is framed for murder. The film gained a mostly negative reaction; review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave it a rating of 16% and described it as \"a man-on-the-run thriller that mostly sticks to generic formula\". Reeves's film choices after \"Chain Reaction\" were also critical disappointments. He starred in the independent crime comedy \"Feeling Minnesota\", with Vincent D'Onofrio and Cameron Diaz, which was described as \"shoddily assembled, and fundamentally miscast\" by Rotten Tomatoes.\nReeves turned down an offer to star in the 1997 film \"\", despite being offered a salary of $12\u00a0million. According to Reeves, this decision caused 20th Century Fox to sever ties with him for a decade. Instead, Reeves toured with his band Dogstar, and appeared in the drama \"The Last Time I Committed Suicide\", based on a 1950 letter written by Neal Cassady to Jack Kerouac. Reeves's performance gained mixed reviews; Paul Tatara of CNN called him \"void of talent\u00a0[...] here he is again, reciting his lines as if they're non-related words strung together as a memory exercise\", whereas \"Empire\" magazine thought \"Reeves gives the nearest thing to a performance in his career as the enthusiastic feckless drunk\". He starred in the 1997 supernatural horror \"The Devil's Advocate\" alongside Al Pacino and Charlize Theron; Reeves agreed to a pay cut of several million dollars so that the film studio could afford to hire Pacino. Based on Andrew Neiderman's novel of the same name, the feature is about a successful young lawyer invited to New York City to work for a major firm, who discovers the owner of the firm is a devil. \"The Devil's Advocate\" attracted positive reviews from critics. Film critic James Berardinelli called the film \"highly enjoyable\" and wrote, \"There are times when Reeves lacks the subtlety that would have made this a more multi-layered portrayal, but it's nevertheless a solid job\".\n1999\u20132004: Resurgence with \"The Matrix\" franchise and comedies.\nIn 1999, Reeves starred in the critically acclaimed science fiction film \"The Matrix\", the first installment in what would become \"The Matrix\" franchise. Reeves portrays computer programmer Thomas Anderson, a hacker using the alias \"Neo\", who discovers humanity is trapped inside a simulated reality created by intelligent machines. To prepare for the film, which was written and directed by the Wachowskis, Reeves had read Kevin Kelly's \"\", and Dylan Evans's ideas on evolutionary psychology. The principal cast underwent months of intense training with martial arts choreographer Yuen Woo-ping to prepare for the fight scenes. \"The Matrix\" proved to be a box office success; several critics considered it to be one of the best science fiction films of all time. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" felt it was a \"wildly cinematic futuristic thriller that is determined to overpower the imagination\", despite perceiving weaknesses in the film's dialogue. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" credited Reeves for being a \"strikingly chic Prada model of an action hero\", and thought the martial arts stunts were the film's strongest feature. \"The Matrix\" received Academy Awards for Best Film Editing, Best Sound Editing, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound.\nAfter the success of \"The Matrix\", Reeves avoided another blockbuster in favour of the 2000 sports comedy \"The Replacements\". He agreed to a pay cut to enable Gene Hackman to co-star in the film. Against his wishes, Reeves starred in the thriller \"The Watcher\", playing a serial killer who stalks a retired FBI agent. He said that a friend forged his signature on a contract, which he could not prove; he appeared in the film to avoid legal action. Upon its release, the film was critically panned. That year, he had a supporting role in another thriller, Sam Raimi's \"The Gift\", a story about a woman (played by Cate Blanchett) with extrasensory perception asked to help find a young woman who disappeared. The film grossed $44\u00a0million worldwide. Film critic Paul Clinton of CNN thought the film was fairly compelling, saying of Reeves's acting: \"[Raimi] managed to get a performance out of Reeves that only occasionally sounds like he's reading his lines from the back of a cereal box.\"\nIn 2001, Reeves continued to explore and accept roles in a diverse range of genres. The first was a romantic drama, \"Sweet November\", a remake of the 1968 film. This was his second collaboration with Charlize Theron; the film was met with a generally negative reception. Desson Thompson of \"The Washington Post\" criticized it for its \"syrupy cliches, greeting-card wisdom and over-the-top tragicomedy\", but commended Reeves for his likability factor in every performance he gives. Later that year, \"Hardball\" marked Reeves's attempt in another sports comedy. Directed by Brian Robbins, it is based on the book \"Hardball: A Season in the Projects\" by Daniel Coyle. Reeves plays Conor O'Neill, a troubled young man who agrees to coach a Little League team from the Cabrini Green housing project in Chicago as a condition of obtaining a loan. Film critic Roger Ebert noted the film's desire to tackle difficult subjects and baseball coaching, but felt it lacked depth, and Reeves's performance was \"glum and distant\".\nBy 2002, his professional music career had come to an end when Dogstar disbanded. The band had released two albums during their decade together; \"Our Little Visionary\" in 1996 and \"Happy Ending\" in 2000. Sometime afterwards, Reeves performed in the band Becky for a year, founded by Dogstar band-mate Mailhouse, but quit in 2005, citing a lack of interest in a serious music career. After being absent from the screen in 2002, Reeves returned to \"The Matrix\" sequels in 2003 with \"The Matrix Reloaded\" and \"The Matrix Revolutions\", released in May and November, respectively. Principal photography for both films was completed back-to-back, primarily at Fox Studios in Australia. \"The Matrix Reloaded\" garnered mostly favourable reviews; John Powers of \"LA Weekly\" praised the \"dazzling pyrotechnics\" but was critical of certain machine-like action scenes. Of Reeves's acting, Powers thought it was somewhat \"wooden\" but felt he has the ability to \"exude a charmed aura\". Andrew Walker, writing for the \"Evening Standard\", praised the cinematography \"visually it gives full value as a virtuoso workout for your senses\" but he was less taken by the film's \"dime-store philosophy\". The film grossed $739 million worldwide.\n\"The Matrix Revolutions\", the third installment, was met with mixed reception. According to review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the consensus was that \"characters and ideas take a back seat to the special effects\". Paul Clinton, writing for CNN, praised the special effects but felt Reeves's character was unfocused. In contrast, the \"San Francisco Chronicle\"'s Carla Meyer was highly critical of the special effects, writing, \"[The Wachowskis] computer-generated imagery goes from dazzling to deadening in action scenes that favor heavy, clanking weaponry over the martial-arts moves that thrilled viewers of \"The Matrix\" and \"The Matrix Reloaded\".\" Nevertheless, the film grossed $427\u00a0million worldwide, although less than the two previous films. \"Something's Gotta Give\", a romantic comedy, was Reeves's last release of 2003. He co-starred with Jack Nicholson and Diane Keaton, and played Dr. Julian Mercer in the film. \"Something's Gotta Give\" received generally favourable reviews.\n2005\u20132013: Thrillers, documentaries and directorial debut.\nIn 2005, Reeves played John Constantine in \"Constantine\", an occult detective film, about a man who has the ability to perceive and communicate with half-angels and half-demons. The film was a respectable box office hit, grossing $230\u00a0million worldwide from a $100\u00a0million budget but attracted mixed-to-positive reviews. \"The Sydney Morning Herald\"'s critic wrote that \"\"Constantine\" isn't bad, but it doesn't deserve any imposing adjectives. It's occasionally cheesy, sometimes enjoyable, intermittently scary, and constantly spiked with celestial blatherskite\". He next appeared in \"Thumbsucker\", which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2005. A comedy adapted from the 1999 novel by Walter Kirn, the story follows a boy with a thumb-sucking problem. Reeves and the cast garnered positive critical reviews, with \"The Washington Post\" describing it as \"a gently stirring symphony about emotional transition filled with lovely musical passages and softly nuanced performances\".\nIn 2006, Reeves appeared in the Richard Linklater-directed animated science fiction thriller \"A Scanner Darkly\", which premiered at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival. Reeves played Bob Arctor/Fred, an undercover agent in a futuristic dystopia under high-tech police surveillance. Based on the 1977 novel by Philip K. Dick, the film was a box office failure. However, the film attracted generally favourable reviews; Paul Arendt of the BBC thought the film was \"beautiful to watch\", but that Reeves was outshone by his co-star Robert Downey Jr. His next role was Alex Wyler in \"The Lake House\", a romantic drama adaptation of the 2000 South Korean film \"Il Mare\", which reunited him with Sandra Bullock. Despite its box office success, Mark Kermode of \"The Guardian\" was highly critical, writing \"this syrup-drenched supernatural whimsy achieves stupidity at a genuinely international level\u00a0[...] The last time Bullock and Reeves were together on screen the result was \"Speed\". This should have been entitled Stop\". Towards the end of 2006, he co-narrated \"The Great Warming\" with Alanis Morissette, a documentary about climate change mitigation.\nIn 2008, Reeves collaborated with director David Ayer on the crime thriller \"Street Kings\". He played an undercover policeman who must clear his name after the death of another officer. Released on April 11, the film grossed a moderate $66\u00a0million worldwide. The film's plot and Reeves' performance, however, were met with mostly unenthusiastic reviews. Paul Byrnes of \"The Sydney Morning Herald\" stated, \"It's full of twists and turns, a dead body in every reel, but it's not difficult to work out who's betraying whom, and that's just not good enough\". \"The Guardian\" opined that \"Reeves is fundamentally blank and uninteresting\". Reeves starred in another science fiction film, \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\", a loose adaptation of the 1951 film. He portrayed Klaatu, an alien sent from outer space to try to change human behaviour or eradicate humans because of their environmental impact. At the 2009 Razzie Awards, the film was nominated for Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-off or Sequel. Many critics were unimpressed with the heavy use of special effects; \"The Telegraph\" credited Reeves's ability to engage the audience, but thought the cinematography was abysmal and the \"sub-Al-Gore environment lecture leaves you light-headed with tedium\".\nRebecca Miller's \"The Private Lives of Pippa Lee\" was Reeves's sole release of 2009, which premiered at the 59th Berlin International Film Festival. The romantic comedy and its ensemble received an amicable review from \"The Telegraph\"'s David Gritten; \"Miller's film is a triumph. Uniformly well acted, it boasts a psychologically knowing script, clearly written by a smart, assertive human\". In 2010, he starred in another romantic comedy, \"Henry's Crime\", about a man who is released from prison for a crime he did not commit, but then targets the same bank with his former cellmate. The film was not a box office hit. Reeves's only work in 2011 was an adult picture book titled \"Ode to Happiness\", which he wrote, complemented by Alexandra Grant's illustrations. Reeves co-produced and appeared in a 2012 documentary, \"Side by Side\". He interviewed filmmakers including James Cameron, Martin Scorsese, and Christopher Nolan; the feature investigated digital and photochemical film creation. Reeves then starred in \"Generation Um...\", an independent drama which was critically panned.\nIn 2013, Reeves starred in his own directorial debut, the martial arts film \"Man of Tai Chi\". The film has multilingual dialogue and follows a young man drawn to an underground fight club, partially inspired by the life of Reeves' friend Tiger Chen. Principal photography took place in China and in Hong Kong. Reeves was also assisted by Yuen Woo-ping, the fight choreographer of \"The\" \"Matrix\" films. \"Man of Tai Chi\" premiered at the Beijing Film Festival and the Cannes Film Festival, and received praise from director John Woo. A wider, warm response followed suit; Bilge Ebiri of \"Vulture\" thought the fight sequences were \"beautifully assembled\", and Reeves showed restraint with the film editing to present the fighters' motion sequences. The \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote, \"The brutally efficient shooting style Reeves employs to film master choreographer Yuen Woo-ping's breathtaking fights\u00a0[...] is refreshingly grounded and old-school kinetic\", while Dave McGinn of \"The Globe and Mail\" called the film \"ambitious but generic\". At the box office, \"Man of Tai Chi\" was a commercial disappointment, grossing only $5.5\u00a0million worldwide from a budget of $25\u00a0million. Also in 2013, Reeves played Kai in the fantasy \"47 Ronin\", a Japanese fable about a group of rogue samurai. The film premiered in Japan but failed to gain traction with audiences; reviews were not positive, causing Universal Pictures to reduce advertising for the film elsewhere. \"47 Ronin\" was a box office flop and was mostly poorly received.\n2014\u20132022: Resurgence with \"John Wick\".\nAfter another series of commercial failures, Reeves's made a career comeback in 2014, playing the title role in the action thriller \"John Wick\", directed by Chad Stahelski. In the first installment of the \"John Wick\" franchise, Reeves plays a retired hitman seeking vengeance. He worked closely with the screenwriter to develop the story; \"We all agreed on the potential of the project. I love the role, but you want the whole story, the whole ensemble to come to life\", Reeves said. Filmed on location in the New York City area, the film was eventually released on October 24 in the United States. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" was impressed by the director's \"confident, muscular action debut\", and Reeves's \"effortless\" performance, which marked his return to the action genre. Jeannette Catsoulis of \"The New York Times\" praised Reeves's fight scenes and wrote he is \"always more comfortable in roles that demand cool over hot, attitude over emotion\". \"John Wick\" proved to be a box office success, grossing $86\u00a0million worldwide. In 2015, Reeves starred in a smaller-scale horror feature, \"Knock Knock\", a remake of the 1977 film \"Death Game\". Described as \"over-the-top destruction\" by the \"Toronto Star\", Reeves plays a father, home alone, when two young women show up and start a game of cat and mouse. His other releases in 2015 were the documentaries \"Deep Web\", about crime on the dark web, and \"\", about the life of Toshiro Mifune, famous for playing samurai characters. He narrated both films.\nReeves appeared in five film releases in 2016. The first was \"Exposed\", a crime thriller about a detective who investigates his partner's death and discovers police corruption along the way. The film received negative reviews for its confused plot, and Reeves was criticized for displaying limited facial expressions. His next release, the comedy \"Keanu\", was better received. In it he voiced the eponymous kitten. Reeves then had a minor role in \"The Neon Demon\", a psychological horror directed by Nicolas Winding Refn. He played Hank, a lustful motel owner who appears in Jesse's (played by Elle Fanning) nightmare. In his fourth release, he played a charismatic leader of a settlement in \"The Bad Batch\". His final release of the year was \"The Whole Truth\", featuring Gabriel Basso, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Ren\u00e9e Zellweger, and Jim Belushi. He played Richard, a defence attorney. Noel Murray of \"The A.V. Club\" described it as \"moderately clever, reasonably entertaining courtroom drama\", with a skilled cast but overall a \"mundane\" film. Reeves also appeared in \"Swedish Dicks\", a two-season web television series.\nIn 2017, Reeves agreed to reprise his role for a sequel in the \"John Wick\" franchise, \"\". The story carries on from the first film and follows \"John Wick\" as he goes on the run when a bounty is placed on him. The film was a critical and commercial success, grossing $171.5\u00a0million worldwide, more than its predecessor. Chris Hewitt of \"Empire\" magazine praised Reeves's performance, which complemented his previous action roles in \"Point Break\" and \"Speed\". However, Justin Chang of the \"Los Angeles Times\" described the picture as \"a down-and-dirty B-picture with a lustrous A-picture soul\". Reeves then starred in a drama, \"To the Bone\", in which he plays a doctor helping a young woman with anorexia. It premiered at the 2017 Sundance Film Festival, followed by distribution on Netflix in July. Early reviews were positive, with praise for its non-glamorized portrayal of anorexia, although the \"New Statesman\" magazine thought it was irresponsible. That year, Reeves also made cameo appearances in the films \"A Happening of Monumental Proportions\" and \"SPF-18\".\nIn 2018, Reeves reunited with Winona Ryder in the comedy \"Destination Wedding\", about wedding guests who develop a mutual affection for each other. They had worked together previously in \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\", \"A Scanner Darkly\" and \"The Private Lives of Pippa Lee\". Reeves also co-produced and starred in two thrillers. \"Siberia\", in which he plays a diamond trader who travels to Siberia to search for his Russian partner, and \"Replicas\", which tells the story of a neuroscientist who violates laws and bioethics to bring his family back to life after they die in a car crash. \"Siberia\" was critically panned; reviewers thought the plot was nonsensical and Reeves had little chemistry with co-star Ana Ularu. \"Replicas\" did not fare well with critics either; \"The A.V. Club\" praised Reeves's performance, but gave the film a grade D\u2212, adding it is \"garbage\". It was also a box office failure, earning $9.3 million from a budget of $30 million.\nIn 2019, Reeves starred in \"\", the third film in the series directed by Stahelski. The film takes place immediately after the events of \"John Wick: Chapter 2\" and features new cast members including Halle Berry. The film was another box office hit, grossing $171\u00a0million in the United States and more than $155\u00a0million internationally. \"The Globe and Mail\"'s reviewer gave the film three out of four stars, praising the fight scenes, but felt there was \"aesthetic overindulgence\" with the cinematography. \"The Guardian\"'s Cath Clarke questioned Reeves's acting; she wrote that \"he keeps his face statue-still [...] three movies in, franchise bloat is beginning to set in\". Reeves was nominated for Favorite Male Movie Star of 2019 in the People's Choice Awards, and the film itself was nominated for Best Contemporary Film in the Art Directors Guild Awards. Reeves then voiced Duke Caboom in \"Toy Story 4\", the fourth installment of Pixar's \"Toy Story\" franchise. In that same year on April 27 and 28, a film festival was held in his honour, called KeanuCon, hosted in Glasgow, Scotland. Over two days, nine of his films were screened for guests. Also in 2019, Reeves played a supporting role as himself in the Ali Wong-led romantic comedy \"Always Be My Maybe\". In 2019, Reeves travelled to S\u00e3o Paulo to produce a Netflix series, \"Conquest\". Footage shot for the project would remain in development hell for years due to creator Carl Rinsch's erratic behaviour and mental health state, which caused him to miss several deadlines and enter litigation with Netflix over the rights to the series.\nAs early as 2008, Reeves and Alex Winter had shown enthusiasm for a third \"Bill &amp; Ted\" film, but the project went into development limbo. In 2020, the third film in the franchise \"Bill &amp; Ted Face the Music\" was released. The critic from \"Salon\" magazine was disappointed in Reeves's performance, but praised the film for its message that \"music has the power to unite the world\". Leah Greenblatt of \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave the film a grade B, and complimented the onscreen chemistry between Reeves and Winter. He also appeared in \"\" as a tumbleweed named Sage. Reeves appears as Johnny Silverhand in the video game \"Cyberpunk 2077.\" In December 2021, Reeves returned to the screen for the fourth film in \"The Matrix\" franchise: \"The Matrix Resurrections\". Carrie-Anne Moss also reprised her role as Trinity. \"The Matrix Resurrections\" was a box office disappointment; one critic praised Reeves's and Moss's performances, but thought the film was a \"no game-changer\".\n2023\u2013present: Post-\"John Wick\".\nIn 2023, Reeves reprised his role as the title character in '. It received critical acclaim; several reviewers cited the film among the greatest action films ever made. He also reprised his role as Johnny Silverhand in the \"Cyberpunk 2077\" expansion, '.\nA comic book series, \"BRZRKR\", co-written by Reeves was published in three volumes starting in March 2021 and concluding in October 2023. Issue #1 sold over 615,000 copies, making it the top-selling single issue since Star Wars #1 in 2015.\nAfter occasionally meeting up for jam sessions in the years following their dissolution, Dogstar began recording new material during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, which turned into a finished album, \"Somewhere Between the Power Lines and Palm Trees\" (2023). Following their first performance in 20 years at BottleRock Napa Valley music festival, Reeves and the band embarked on a 25-date tour in North America and Japan in support of the album, beginning August 10 in Hermosa Beach, California. In July, Boom! Studios published the first issue of \"BRZRKR: Bloodlines\", titled '. Reeves appeared as the featured guest for the season 6 premiere episode of \"Ride with Norman Reedus\", titled \"The Utah Desert with Keanu Reeves\". \"CinemaBlend\"'s Nick Venable said, \"the installment makes for some truly heartwarming viewing for anyone who needs something to smile about\". In November of that year, he appeared as the host for and executive produced the 4-part documentary series \"Brawn: The Impossible Formula 1 Story\" for Hulu and Disney+. Jack Seale of \"The Guardian\" felt that Reeves was \"there to humanize the story\", and pointed out his \"numerous adorable habits that most interviewers would deem unprofessional, but which don't offend.\" He felt that much of the emotion in the series owed to the way \"he gets his interviewees to open up. He often asks an emotion-based question \u2013 how did someone feel about what they did, rather than just what did they do\". At the end of that month, Boom! Studios published the second comic in the \"BRZRKR: Bloodlines\" series, entitled '.\nIn May 2024, Netflix won litigation over the rights to the Reeves-produced \"Conquest\" series, with the footage reverting to their ownership alongside being reimbursed for $8.78 million worth of creator Carl Erik Rinsch's misused production money. That June, Reeves and Dogstar announced their Summer Vacation Tour, with shows scheduled from August to September in the US and Canada. On July 23, 2024, Reeves published a novel, \"The Book of Elsewhere\", co-written with China Mi\u00e9ville, a telling of the story of \"BRZRKR\". The first issue of the second volume of the \"Bloodlines\" series, \"A Faceful of Bullets\", written with Jason Aaron and art by Francesco Manna was released the following day after a delay from June. Another \"BRZRKR\" \"Bloodlines\" spin-off, titled \"The Lost Book of B\" released on August 21, 2024. He joined Graham Hancock in the second season of the series \"Ancient Apocalypse\" on Netflix, where he discussed his insights into storytelling as an act of preserving culture. Reeves starred in the \"Armored Core\" episode of the animated anthology series \"Secret Level\". In April, Reeves was cast as the voice of Shadow the Hedgehog in the third installment of the \"Sonic the Hedgehog\" film series, \"Sonic the Hedgehog 3\", which released on December 20, 2024. He also voiced the character in a DLC for the video game \"Shadow Generations\", developed as a tie-in for the film.\nIn January 2025, Reeves had an uncredited role voicing a stop-motion Lumon building in the second season of the television series \"Severance\". In June 2025, Reeves reprised his role as John Wick in the series spin-off film \"Ballerina\", starring Ana de Armas. Reeves then starred alongside Seth Rogen and Aziz Ansari in the latter's directorial debut, \"Good Fortune\". In September 2025, Reeves made his Broadway debut in a production of \"Waiting for Godot\" directed by Jamie Lloyd, alongside \"Bill &amp; Ted\" co-star Alex Winter.\nUpcoming projects.\nReeves will star in Jonah Hill's upcoming black comedy film \"Outcome\" on Apple TV+. Reeves is set to star in Ruben \u00d6stlund's satire film \"The Entertainment System Is Down\". Reeves will co-produce a documentary film about the life of Benny Urquidez, set for release in 2025. \nA film adaptation of \"BRZRKR\" written by Mattson Tomlin and produced by and starring Reeves is being developed for Netflix, with Reeves open to the possibility of directing. After the release of the film, a two-season anime series also planned for release on Netflix and produced by Production I.G is planned to follow. A fifth film in the \"John Wick\" series was planned by distributor Lionsgate, but franchise director Chad Stahelski had said he would like to give the franchise a \"rest\" for the time being. Besides plans for a fifth film, a sequel television series titled \"John Wick: Under the High Table\" is being developed with Reeves attached as an executive producer.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1998, Reeves met director David Lynch's assistant Jennifer Syme at a party thrown for his band Dogstar, and they started dating. On December 24, 1999, Syme gave birth eight months into her pregnancy to the couple's child, who was stillborn. The couple broke up several weeks afterward, but later reconciled. On April 2, 2001, Syme was killed when her vehicle collided with three parked cars on Cahuenga Boulevard in Los Angeles. Syme had been under the influence and also not belted in. Reeves told investigators that they were back together, and had brunch together in San Francisco the day before the accident. Reeves acted as a pallbearer for Syme, who was buried next to their daughter. He was scheduled to film the sequels to \"The Matrix\" the following spring, but sought \"peace and time\", according to friend Bret Domrose of Dogstar.\nReeves has also been romantically linked to longtime friend and filmmaker Brenda Davis, to whose child he is godfather, and model-actress China Chow. Reeves also maintains a close friendship with his \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\" co-star Winona Ryder; after taking part in a wedding scene with a Romanian priest for the film, they still call each other \"husband and wife\" when speaking personally.\nIn 2009, Reeves met Alexandra Grant at a dinner party; they went on to collaborate on two books together. They went public with their relationship in November 2019.\nReeves is discreet about his spiritual beliefs, saying that it is something \"personal and private\". When asked if he was a spiritual person, he said that he believes \"in God, faith, inner faith, the self, passion, and things\", and that he is \"very spiritual\". Although he does not formally practice Buddhism, the religion has left a strong impression on him, especially after filming \"Little Buddha\". He said, \"Most of the things I've come away with from Buddhism have been human\u2014understanding feelings, impermanence, and trying to understand other people and where they're coming from.\" In 2024, Reeves spoke on his thoughts about mortality, saying, \"I'm thinking about death all the time. That's a good thing. Hopefully it's not crippling, but hopefully it's sensitised [us] to an appreciation of the breath we have, and the relationships that we have the potential to have.\" \nIn 2023, the lipopeptide keanumycin, a substance deadly to fungi, was named in honour of Reeves.\nIn October 2024, Reeves made his motorsport debut in the Toyota GR Cup North America where he finished in 25th on Race 1 and 24th on Race 2 at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway.\nBusiness and philanthropy.\nReeves supports several charities and causes. In response to his sister's battle with leukemia, he founded a private cancer foundation, which aids children's hospitals and provides cancer research. He prefers for the foundation to operate privately, stating in a 2009 interview that he does not like to attach his name to it. In June 2020, he volunteered for Camp Rainbow Gold, an Idaho children's cancer charity. Reeves was also recognized as one of the 100 Influential Celebrities in Oncology by OncoDaily. Reeves has said, \"Money is the last thing I think about. I could live on what I have already made for the next few centuries\". It was rumoured that Reeves gave away a substantial portion, estimated to be $35\u2013$125\u00a0million, of his earnings from \"The Matrix\" to the special effects and makeup crews. However, this has been significantly embellished; Reeves negotiated a smaller deal, relinquishing his contractual right to a percentage of the sequels' profits in exchange for a more extensive special effects budget. During production on that film, Reeves heard that a crew member was having \"family trouble\", and elected to gift the man 20,000 dollars to help him with his finances. As a wrap gift for the twelve-person stunt team of \"The Matrix Reloaded\" (2003), Reeves purchased Harley-Davidson motorcycles for each of the members, saying of the gifts, \"I just wanted ... to give a bigger thank-you to all these guys who helped me make this\".\nAfter filming \"John Wick: Chapter 4\", Reeves, Chad Stahelski and Brazilian jiu-jitsu instructor Dave Camarillo, signed an exclusive training uniform that was put up for auction in March 2023 to raise money for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital. Reeves also presented his personal stunt team for the film with engraved custom Rolex Submariner watches, and bought the larger \"Chapter 4\" stunt crews each personalized T-shirts indicating how many times that the various extras they portrayed \"died\" in the film. In 2024, Reeves signed a one-day contract with the Windsor Spitfires, and signed items which were auctioned off in benefit of the Canadian Mental Health Association of Windsor-Essex.\nReeves co-founded a production company, Company Films, with friend Stephen Hamel. In 2011, Reeves, an avid motorcyclist, co-founded ARCH Motorcycle Company, which builds and sells custom motorcycles, with Gard Hollinger. In 2017, Reeves, Jessica Fleischmann, and Alexandra Grant founded book publisher, X Artists' Books (also known as XAB). He has written two books with Grant: \"Ode to Happiness\" and \"Shadows\"; he provided the text to her photographs and art.\nCensorship.\nIn 2022, Reeves's recitation of the Beat poem \"Pull My Daisy\" for a virtual benefit concert for Tibet House US, a nonprofit organization affiliated with the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, stirred a negative reaction from \"jingoistic\" crowds on Chinese social media. Reeves's films have subsequently been banned from streaming platforms in China such as iQiyi, Tencent Video and Youku.\nIn the media.\nIn a 2005 article for \"Time\" magazine, Lev Grossman called Reeves \"Hollywood's ultimate introvert\". He has been described as a workaholic, charming and \"excruciatingly shy\". During the production of \"Constantine\", director Francis Lawrence commented on his personality, calling him \"hardworking\" and \"generous\". His co-star Shia LaBeouf said, \"I've worked with him for a year and a couple of months, but I don't really know him that much\". Erwin Stoff of 3 Arts Entertainment has served as Reeves's agent and manager since he was 16, and produced many of his films. Stoff said Reeves \"is a really private person\" and keeps his distance from other people. In 2023, Reeves's frequent collaborator Laurence Fishburne remarked on him, \"He's kinder, yeah. He's much kinder than people say he is. He's a very gentle, highly intelligent man. Really thoughtful and gifted and incredibly patient. Yeah, he has a lot of grace, Keanu.\" Aziz Ansari, who directed and starred with Reeves in \"Good Fortune\", joked that he \"actually is an angel\", and that \"he's been pretending to be human for all these other roles.\" In a 2024 interview with \"People\" magazine, Hiroyuki Sanada said, \"He [is] so humble, very kind to others but very hard on himself\". [...] He's always trying to do his best: aim higher, move forward\".\nIn 2010, an image of Reeves became an internet meme after photographs of him were published, sitting on a park bench with a sad facial expression. The images were posted on the 4chan discussion board and were soon distributed via several blogs and media outlets, leading to the \"Sad Keanu\" meme being spread on the internet. An unofficial holiday was created when a Facebook fan page declared June 15 as \"Cheer-up Keanu Day\". He would later downplay the photo, saying, \"Man, I was eating a sandwich. I was thinking\u2014I had some stuff going on. I was hungry.\"\nReeves's casual persona and ability to establish rapport have been observed by the public, leading him to be dubbed the \"Internet's boyfriend\". In 2019, \"Vox\" named Reeves's unorthodox filmography and ability to appeal to nerd culture as the primary reasons for his internet popularity. \"The Guardian\" noted that he holds a reputation as \"one of the nicest, humblest guys on the Hollywood A-list\", and the BBC wrote that he is known for his \"gentle, mild-mannered persona\", and is often described as \"the nicest man in Hollywood.\" \"Time\" dubbed Reeves as the \"master of the fan encounter\", and \"Snopes\" observed that he is \"so beloved that he's a cultural fixture\".\nIn March 2019, Reeves went viral after his United Airlines flight to Burbank, California was grounded in Bakersfield. Taking initiative in arranging alternate travel plans, Reeves boarded a travel van with the other passengers. Reeves read fun facts from his phone about Bakersfield to the passengers, and later used YouTube to share 1950s American country music that was native to the town. \"Time\" said of the events, \"One thing's for certain after this eventful trip: if you're looking for a road trip buddy, Keanu Reeves should be on the top of your list\".\nReeves again gained media attention in May when a clip of his guest episode on \"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\" went viral online. Colbert asked at the end of the show about his views on death, then Reeves answered, \"I know that the ones who love us will miss us.\" The response incited an emotional reaction from the audience, and Colbert shook Reeves's hand before wrapping up the show. \"Vice\"'s River Donaghey declared that \"Keanu is my new religion\" in response to the clip, and called the moment \"transcendent\". \"The New Yorker\" called it \"a response so wise, so genuinely thoughtful, that it seemed like a rebuke to the usual canned blather of late-night television\"\u2014staff writer Naomi Fry recounted that she \"felt like [she] was standing alone in a rock garden, having a koan whispered into [her] ear\" after watching the viral clip on Twitter. The interaction would later inspire science communicator Hank Green to end his \"Pissing Out Cancer\" comedy special, based on his experiences fighting Hodgkin's Lymphoma, with a quote inspired by Reeves's answer; \"Either way, what comes next is going to be beautiful\". In choosing the ending, he felt that Reeves's words reflected a larger understanding of the human experience.\nWhile filming \"Bill &amp; Ted Face the Music\" in July 2019, Reeves and other cast members came across a house with a banner reading \"You're Breathtaking\" and \"Mini Keanu\", two memes that had come out of Reeves's appearance at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2019 for the game \"Cyberpunk 2077\". Reeves took time to sign the banner, and talk to the family. \"Business Insider\" reported that the actor's fans were quick to praise him in response to the incident, calling him \"good guy Keanu\" and lauding him as \"the best human on the planet\".\nIn August 2022, Reeves went viral for attending a fan's wedding in Northamptonshire, United Kingdom. James and Nikki Roadnight saw Reeves at a bar at Fawsley Hall Hotel shortly before their marriage ceremony and started to chat with him, with Reeves congratulating the couple on their marriage. Later, after James had secretly asked Reeves to meet Nikki during the wedding, he turned up during the ceremony. Nikki described Reeves as \"a genuinely kind guy\" and \"relaxed and down to earth\" during the wedding, and he participated in a photoshoot with the family. Another interaction between Reeves at an October 2023 Dogstar concert in Houston gained media attention. A young fan named Elijah approached Reeves before they started their show, asking if Reeves would play catch with him. Reeves obliged, with a game ensuing between the two. Calling the game \"the top moment\" of his life, the boy stated his intent to keep the football \"forever and ever\". Oliver Browning of \"The Independent\" called the interaction \"a wholesome moment\" for Reeves.\nReeves appeared on \"Forbes\"' annual Celebrity 100 list in 2001 and 2002, at number 36 and 49, respectively. In 2005, Reeves received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion picture industry. In 2016, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" calculated that Reeves had earned $250\u00a0million for \"The Matrix\" franchise, making him one of the highest-paid actors. In 2020, \"The New York Times\" ranked him at number four on its list of the 25 Greatest Actors of the 21st Century.\nA popular internet meme asserts that Reeves is \"secretly immortal\" and has lived throughout the last millennia under the identities of several historical figures, including Charlemagne and French actor Paul Mounet. The meme came to media prominence in 2017 when Reeves was asked on \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\" about it. Reeves addressed his resemblance with Charlemagne, saying \"We have a likeness in the eyes. And the nose and the mustache and the beard and the cheekbones and the forehead\". When asked in a Q&amp;A event for \"John Wick: Chapter 4\" \"if he ever ages\", Reeves responded, \"Yeah man, I age. I really \u2013 I age. It's happening, man\". In 2023, a website dedicated to chronicling every time Reeves has spoken the word \"whoa\" in his film career was created by web developer Avi Mamenko to honor him. In 2022, \"Time\" magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world.\nFilmography and awards.\nProlific in film since 1985, Reeves's most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include: \"River's Edge\" (1987), \"Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure\" (1989), \"My Own Private Idaho\" (1991), \"Much Ado About Nothing\" (1993), \"Speed\" (1994), \"The Matrix\" (1999), \"John Wick\" (2014), \"John Wick: Chapter2\" (2017), \"John Wick: Chapter 3\u00a0\u2013 Parabellum\" (2019), and \"Toy Story 4\" (2019). Reeves has won four MTV Movie Awards, and received two Best Actor nominations at the Saturn Awards. He was nominated twice for a People's Choice Award: Favorite Male Movie Star and Favorite Action Movie Star, for his performance in \"John Wick: Chapter 3\u00a0\u2013 Parabellum\" (2019).\nIn November 2015, \"People\" retroactively named him 1994's Sexiest Man Alive. In September 2021, \"Tae Kwon Do Life Magazine\" deemed Reeves the \"#1 Martial Arts movie star in the world\" based upon his multiple films in the genre, their popularity, and sheer box office gross. In 2024, Gold House honored him on its Most Impactful Asians A100 list, and he was presented with the Inkpot Award for Lifetime Contributions to Movies, TV, Comics, and Books at San Diego Comic-Con.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16604", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16604", "title": "Keanu Reeves/Filmography", "text": ""}
{"id": "16606", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16606", "title": "K\u00f6penhamn", "text": ""}
{"id": "16607", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16607", "title": "K\u00f8benhavn", "text": ""}
{"id": "16608", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16608", "title": "Keyboard", "text": "Keyboard may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16610", "revid": "50214485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16610", "title": "Koto (instrument)", "text": "Japanese plucked string instrument\nThe is a Japanese plucked half-tube zither instrument, and the national instrument of Japan. It is derived from the Chinese and , and similar to the Mongolian , the Korean and , the Vietnamese , the Sundanese and the Kazakh . Koto are roughly in length, and made from Paulownia wood (\"Paulownia tomentosa\", known as ). The most common type uses 13 strings strung over movable bridges used for tuning, different pieces possibly requiring different tuning. Seventeen-string koto are also common, and act as bass in ensembles. Koto strings are generally plucked using three fingerpicks (), worn on the first three fingers of the right hand.\nNames and types.\nThe character for \"koto\" is , although is often used. However, (\"koto\") is the general term for all string instruments in the Japanese language, including instruments such as the , , , , , and so on. When read as , it indicates the Chinese instrument . The term is used today in the same way.\nThe term \"koto\" appears in the in reference to an ancient string instrument in this usage. Variations of the instrument were eventually created, and eventually a few of them would become the standard variations for modern day koto. The four types of koto () were all created by different subcultures, but also adapted to change the playing style.\nOne regional style of the koto is the \"Tategoto\" (\u7aea\u7434) from the Amami Islands. Unlike other varieties of the koto, it is held upright on the lap and played with one hand, may have more strings, is shorter, and is typically strung with steel strings. \nHistory.\nThe ancestor of the koto was the Chinese . It was first introduced to Japan from China in the 7th and 8th centuries. The first known version had five strings, which eventually increased to seven strings. The Japanese koto belongs to the Asian zither family that also comprises the Chinese (ancestral to the other zithers in the family), the Korean , and the Vietnamese . This variety of instrument came in two basic forms, a zither that had bridges and a zither without bridges.\nWhen the koto was first imported to Japan, the native word koto was a generic term for any and all Japanese stringed instruments. As the number of different stringed instruments in Japan grew, the once-basic definition of koto could not describe the wide variety of these instruments and so the meanings changed. The or was called the , the was called the , and the ( being an older pronunciation of ) was called the or koto.\nThe modern koto originates from the used in Japanese court music (). It was a popular instrument among the wealthy; the instrument was considered a romantic one. Some literary and historical records indicate that solo pieces for koto existed centuries before , the music of the solo koto genre, was established. According to Japanese literature, the koto was used as imagery and other extra music significance. In one part of \"The Tale of Genji\", the titular character falls deeply in love with a mysterious woman whom he has never seen before, after hearing her playing the koto from a distance.\nThe koto of the was made for the tradition, originally intended only for blind men. Women were forbidden from playing the instrument in the professional world, nor were they allowed to teach it. When these strict rules were relieved, women began to play the koto, with the exception of the , as its design for the blind led to a decline in use; other koto proved more useful. The two main koto varieties still used today are the and . These two have relatively stayed the same, with the exception of material innovations such as the use of plastic, as well as modern material for the strings. The is the newest addition to the koto family, surfacing in the 19th century. It was purposefully created to extend the range of the instrument and advance the style of play. These were made with 17, 21, and 31 strings.\nPerhaps the most important influence on the development of koto was Yatsuhashi Kengyo (1614\u20131685). Yatsuhashi was a gifted blind musician from Kyoto who vastly extended the limited selection of only six traditional koto songs to a brand-new style of koto music which he called . Yatsuhashi changed the tunings, which were based on the older ways of tuning; and with this change, a new style of koto was born. Yatsuhashi is now known as the \"Father of Modern Koto\".\nA smaller influence in the evolution of the koto is found in the inspiration of a woman named Keiko Nosaka. Nosaka (a musician who won Grand Prize in Music from the Japanese Ministry of Culture in 2002), felt confined by playing a koto with just 13 strings, and created new versions of the instrument with 20 or more strings.\nJapanese developments in bridgeless zithers include the one-stringed koto () and two-stringed koto ( or ). Around the 1920s, Goro Morita created a new version of the two-stringed koto. On this koto, one would push down buttons above the metal strings like the western autoharp. It was named the after the Taish\u014d period.\nAt the beginning of the Meiji Period (1868\u20131912), Western music was introduced to Japan. Michio Miyagi (1894\u20131956), a blind composer, innovator, and performer, is considered to have been the first Japanese composer to combine western music and traditional koto music. Miyagi is largely regarded as being responsible for keeping the koto alive when traditional Japanese arts were being forgotten and replaced by Westernization. He wrote over 300 new works for the instrument before his death in a train accident at the age of 62. He also invented the popular 17-string bass koto, created new playing techniques, advanced traditional forms, and most importantly increased the koto's popularity. He performed abroad and by 1928 his piece for koto and , (\"Spring Sea\") had been transcribed for numerous instruments. is even played to welcome each New Year in Japan.\nSince Miyagi's time, many composers such as Kimio Eto (1924\u20132012) and Tadao Sawai (1937\u20131997) have written and performed works that continue to advance the instrument. Sawai's widow Kazue Sawai, who as a child was Miyagi's favored disciple, has been the largest driving force behind the internationalization and modernization of the koto. Her arrangement of composer John Cage's prepared piano duet \"Three Dances\" for four prepared bass koto was a landmark in the modern era of koto music.\nFor about 150 years after the Meiji Restoration, the Japanese shirked their isolationist ideals and began to openly embrace American and European influences, the most likely explanation for why the koto has taken on many different variations of itself.\nConstruction.\nA koto is typically made of Paulownia wood (known as ), although treatment of the wood varies tremendously between artisans. A koto may or may not be adorned. Adornments include inlays of ivory and ebony, tortoise shell, metal figures, etc. The wood is also cut into two patterns, (also called ), which has a swirling pattern, or straight-lined . The straight lined pattern is easier to manufacture, so the swirl raises the cost of production, and is therefore reserved for decorative and elegant models.\nThe body of a traditional koto is made of Paulownia wood. Every piece of the instrument comes with cultural significance, especially since the koto is the national instrument. The wood is dried and cut into precise measurements. The size of the soundboard on a standard modern koto has remained approximately , where in the past it ranged from .\nThe bridges () used to be made of ivory, but nowadays are typically made of plastic, and occasionally made of wood. One can alter the pitch of a string by manipulating or moving the bridge. For some very low notes, there are small bridges made, as well as specialty bridges with three different heights, depending on the need of the tuning. When a small bridge is unavailable for some very low notes, some players may, as an emergency measure, use a bridge upside down, though this is unstable and not ideal. Bridges have been known to break during playing, and with some older instruments which have the surface where the bridges rest being worn due to much use, the bridges may fall during playing, especially when pressing strings. There are, of course, various sorts of patch materials sold to fill the holes which cause the legs of a bridge to rest on an unstable area. About long and wide, the koto is traditionally placed on the floor in front of the player, who kneels.\nThe strings are made from a variety of materials. Various types of plastic strings are popular. Silk strings, typically yellow in color, are still made, despite their higher price and lower durability than modern strings; some musicians prefer them, perceiving a difference in sound quality to modern strings. The strings are tied with a half hitch to a roll of paper or cardboard, about the size of a cigarette butt, strung through the holes at the head of the koto, threaded through the holes at the back, tightened, and tied with a special knot. Strings can be tightened by a special machine, but often are tightened by hand, and then tied. One can tighten by pulling the string from behind, or sitting at the side of the koto, although the latter is much harder and requires much arm strength. Some instruments may have tuning pins (like a piano) installed, to make tuning easier.\nThe , the silk thread used in the instrument, is a pivotal part of its construction. This feature was not seen on the speculated nobility-style instruments because they used a more tension of theirs and valued the relict nature of their instruments. The commoners did all the innovations that made the koto not only a sturdy instrument, but more sonically adept. The was used in paper so the fine silk was in abundance in Japan. As of the beginning of the 19th century, an ivory called became the standard for the koto.\nFor every part of the koto, there is a traditional name which connects with the opinion that the body of a koto resembles that of a dragon. Thus, the top part is called the , while the bottom part is called the . One end of the koto, noticeable because of the removable colorful fabricshell, is known as the , consisting of parts such as the \u2013 the saddle of the bridge or the \u2013 , and \u2013 the space above the . The other end of the koto is called the ; the string nut is called the .\nKoto today.\nThe influence of Western pop music has made the koto less prominent in Japan, although it is still developing as an instrument. The 17-string bass koto () has become more prominent over the years since its development by Michio Miyagi. There are also 20-, 21-, and 25-string koto. Works are being written for 20- and 25-string koto and 17-string bass koto. Reiko Obata has also made the koto accessible to Western music readers with the publication of two books for solo koto using Western notation. The current generation of koto players, such as American performers Reiko Obata and Miya Masaoka, Japanese master Kazue Sawai, and Michiyo Yagi, are finding places for the koto in today's jazz, experimental music and even pop music. The members of the band Rin' are popular 17-string koto players in the modern music scene.\nJune Kuramoto of the jazz fusion group Hiroshima was one of the first koto performers to popularize the koto in a non-traditional fusion style. Reiko Obata, founder of East West Jazz, was the first to perform and record an album of jazz standards featuring the koto. Obata also produced the first-ever English language koto instructional DVD, titled \"You Can Play Koto\". Obata is one of the few koto performers to perform concertos with United States orchestras, having done so on multiple occasions, including with Orchestra Nova for San Diego's KPBS in 2010.\nOther solo performers outside Japan include award-winning recording artist Elizabeth Falconer, who also studied for a decade at the Sawai Koto School in Tokyo, and Linda Kako Caplan, Canadian (grandmaster) and member of Fukuoka's Chikushi Koto School for over two decades. Another Sawai disciple, Masayo Ishigure, holds down a school in New York City. Yukiko Matsuyama leads her KotoYuki band in Los Angeles. Her compositions blend the timbres of world music with her native Japanese culture. She performed on the Grammy-winning album \"\" (2010) by the Paul Winter Consort, garnering additional exposure to Western audiences for the instrument. In November 2011, worldwide audiences were further exposed to the koto when she performed with Shakira at the Latin Grammy Awards.\nIn March 2010, the koto received widespread international attention when a video linked by the Grammy Award-winning hard rock band Tool on its website became a viral hit. The video showed Tokyo-based ensemble Soemon playing member Brett Larner's arrangement of the Tool song \"Lateralus\" for six bass and two bass koto. Larner had previously played koto with John Fahey, Jim O'Rourke, and members of indie rock groups including Camper Van Beethoven, Deerhoof, Jackie O Motherfucker, and Mr. Bungle.\nIn older pop and rock music, David Bowie used a koto in the instrumental piece \"Moss Garden\" on his album \"Heroes\" (1977). The multi-instrumentalist, founder, and former guitarist of The Rolling Stones Brian Jones played the koto in the song \"Take It Or Leave It\" on the album \"Aftermath\" (1966).\nPaul Gilbert, a popular guitar virtuoso, recorded his wife Emi playing the koto on his song \"Koto Girl\" from the album \"Alligator Farm\" (2000). Rock band Kagrra, are well known for using traditional Japanese musical instruments in many of their songs, an example being , a song in which the koto has a prominent place. Winston Tong, the singer of Tuxedomoon, uses it on his 15-minute song \"The Hunger\" from his debut solo album \"Theoretically Chinese\" (1985).\nThe rock band Queen used a (toy) koto in \"The Prophet's Song\" on their 1975 album \"A Night at the Opera\". Ex-Genesis guitarist Steve Hackett used a koto on the instrumental song \"The Red Flower of Tachai Blooms Everywhere\" from the album \"Spectral Mornings\" (1979), and Genesis keyboardist Tony Banks sampled a koto using an Emulator keyboard for the band's song \"Mama\". A koto played by Hazel Payne is featured in A Taste of Honey's 1981 English cover of the Japanese song \"Sukiyaki\". A synthesized koto appears in their cover of The Miracles' \"I'll Try Something New\". Steve Howe used a koto in the instrumental break of Asia's single \"Heat of the Moment\", from their self-titled 1982 album. Howe also played a koto on the Yes song \"It Will Be a Good Day (The River)\", from the 1999 album \"The Ladder\".\nDr. Dre's 1999 album \"2001\" prominently features a synthesized koto on two of its tracks, \"Still D.R.E.\" and \"The Message\". A 2020 acoustic cover of Led Zeppelin's \"The Battle of Evermore\" by PianoRock feat. Dean McNeill also prominently features a synthesized koto.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16611", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16611", "title": "Kinetics", "text": "Kinetics (, \"movement\" or \"to move\") may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16613", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16613", "title": "Kahului", "text": ""}
{"id": "16615", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16615", "title": "Kludge", "text": "Unmaintainable solution\nA kludge or kluge () is a workaround or makeshift solution that is clumsy, inelegant, inefficient, difficult to extend, and hard to maintain. Its only benefit is that it rapidly solves an important problem using available resources. A famous example is the improvised CO2 scrubber that kept the astronauts alive on Apollo 13. This term is used in diverse fields such as computer science, aerospace engineering, Internet slang, evolutionary neuroscience, animation and government. It is similar in meaning to the naval term \"jury rig\".\nEtymology.\nThe word has alternate spellings (' and '), pronunciations ( and , rhyming with \"judge\" and \"stooge\", respectively), and several proposed etymologies.\nJackson W. Granholm.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (2nd ed., 1989), cites Jackson W. Granholm's 1962 \"How to Design a Kludge\" article in the American computer magazine \"Datamation\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;kludge Also kluge. (J. W. Granholm's jocular invention: see first quot.; cf. also \"bodge\" v., \"fudge\" v.)'An ill-assorted collection of poorly-matching parts, forming a distressing whole' (Granholm); esp. in \"Computing\", a machine, system, or program that has been improvised or 'bodged' together; a hastily improvised and poorly thought-out solution to a fault or 'bug'. ...\n\"OED\" defines these two \"kludge\" cognates as: \"bodge\" 'to patch or mend clumsily' and \"fudge\" 'to fit together or adjust in a clumsy, makeshift, or dishonest manner'. The \"OED\" entry also includes the verb \"kludge\" ('to improvise with a kludge or kludges') and \"kludgemanship\" ('skill in designing or applying kludges').\nGranholm humorously imagined a fictitious source for the term:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Phineas Burling is the chief calligrapher with the Fink and Wiggles Publishing Company, Inc.\u00a0... According to Burling, the word \"kludge\" first appeared in the English language in the early fifteen-hundreds. ...\nThe word \"kludge\" is, according to Burling, derived from the same root as the German (Dutch , Swedish , Danish , Gothic , Lettish [Latvian] and Sanskrit ), originally meaning 'smart' or 'witty'. In the typical machinations of language in evolutionary growth, the word \"kludge\" eventually came to mean 'not so smart' or 'pretty ridiculous'\u00a0... Today \"kludge\" forms one of the most beloved words in design terminology, and it stands ready for handy application to the work of anyone who gins up 110-volt circuitry to plug into the 220 VAC source. The building of a kludge, however, is not work for amateurs.\nAlthough \"OED\" accepts Granholm's coinage of the term (not the fanciful pseudo-etymology quoted above), there are examples of its use before the 1960s.\nGermanic sources.\nAmerican Yiddish speakers use () to mean 'too smart by half', the reflected meaning of German ('clever'). This may explain the idea of 'clever but clumsy and temporary', as well as the pronunciation variation from German. A reasonable translation of \"kludge\" into German yields i.e. 'crutch' (cf. \"bridge\" vs. ).\nCf. German ('dumpling', 'clod', diminutive ), Low Saxon , , Dutch , perhaps related to Low German diminutive ('dumpling', 'clod'), standard Danish ('mess, disorder, clutter') and Danish Jutland dialect ('piece of bad workmanship').\nArguments against the derivation from German :\nAn alternative etymology suggests that the \"kludge\" spelling in particular derives ultimately from a word in Scots (a language closely related to English): or meaning 'toilet' (in either the room or device sense), with the \"kluge\" spelling possibly deriving from German, until the two terms were confused in the mid-20th century, as British and American (respectively) military slang. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKludge vs. kluge.\nThe \"Jargon File\" (a.k.a. \"The New Hacker's Dictionary\"), a glossary of computer programmer slang maintained by Eric S. Raymond, differentiates \"kludge\" from \"kluge\" and cites usage examples pre-dating 1962. \"Kluge\" seems to have the sense of 'overcomplicated', while \"kludge\" has only the sense of 'poorly done'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nkludge /kluhj/\nThis \"Jargon File\" entry notes that \"kludge\" apparently derives via British military slang from Scots ('toilet'), and became confused with American \"kluge\" during or after World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nkluge: /klooj/ [from the German , 'clever'; poss. related to Polish &amp; Russian ('a key, a hint, a main point')]\nThis entry notes \"kluge\", which is now often spelled \"kludge\", \"was the original spelling, reported around computers as far back as the mid-1950s and, at that time, used exclusively of hardware kluges\".\n\"Kluge\" \"was common Navy slang in the World War II era for any piece of electronics that worked well on shore but consistently failed at sea\". A summary of a 1947 article in the \"New York Folklore Quarterly\" states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On being drafted into the navy, Murgatroyd gave his profession as \"kluge maker\"\u00a0... Whenever Murgatroyd was asked what he was doing, he said he was making a kluge, and actually he was one of the world's best kluge makers. Not wanting to seem ignorant, his superiors kept giving him commendations and promotions.\u00a0... One day\u00a0... the admiral asked him what a kluge was\u00a0\u2013 the first person ever to do so. Murgatroyd said it was hard to explain, but he would make one so the admiral could see what it was. After a couple of days, he returned with a complex object.\n\"Interesting,\" said the admiral, \"but what does it do?\" In reply, Murgatroyd dropped it over the side of the ship. As the thing sank, it went \"kluge\".\nThe \"Jargon File\" further includes \"kluge around\", 'to avoid a bug or difficult condition by inserting a kluge', and \"kluge up\", 'to lash together a quick hack to perform a task'.\nAfter Granholm's 1962 article popularized the \"kludge\" variant, both were interchangeably used and confused. The \"Jargon File\" concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The result of this history is a tangle. Many younger U.S. hackers pronounce the word as /klooj/ but spell it, incorrectly for its meaning and pronunciation, as 'kludge'. ... British hackers mostly learned /kluhj/ orally, use it in a restricted negative sense and are at least consistent. European hackers have mostly learned the word from written American sources and tend to pronounce it /kluhj/ but use the wider American meaning! Some observers consider this mess appropriate in view of the word's meaning.\nIndustries.\nAerospace engineering.\nIn aerospace, a kludge was a temporary design using separate commonly available components that were not flightworthy in order to proof the design and enable concurrent software development while the integrated components were developed and manufactured. The term was in common enough use to appear in a fictional movie about the US space program.\nPerhaps the ultimate kludge was the first US space station, Skylab. Its two major components, the Saturn Workshop and the Apollo Telescope Mount, began development as separate projects (the SWS was kludged from the S-IVB stage of the Saturn 1B and Saturn V launch vehicles, the ATM was kludged from an early design for the descent stage of the Apollo Lunar Module). Later the SWS and ATM were folded into the Apollo Applications Program, but the components were to have been launched separately, then docked in orbit. In the final design, the SWS and ATM were launched together, but for the single-launch concept to work, the ATM had to pivot 90 degrees on a truss structure from its launch position to its on-orbit orientation, clearing the way for the crew to dock its Apollo Command/Service Module at the axial docking port of the Multiple Docking Adapter.\nThe Airlock Module's manufacturer, McDonnell Douglas, even recycled the hatch design from its Gemini spacecraft and kludged what was originally designed for the conical Gemini Command Module onto the cylindrical Skylab Airlock Module. The Skylab project, managed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Marshall Space Flight Center, was seen by the Manned Spacecraft Center (later Johnson Space Center) as an invasion of its historical role as the NASA center for manned spaceflight. Thus, MSC personnel missed no opportunity to disparage the Skylab project, calling it \"the kludge\".\nComputer science.\nIn modern computing terminology, a \"kludge\" (or often a \"hack\") is a solution to a problem, the performance of a task, or a system fix which is inefficient, inelegant (\"hacky\"), or even incomprehensible, but which somehow works. It is similar to a workaround, but quick. To \"kludge around something\" is to avoid a bug or difficulty by building a kludge, perhaps exploiting properties of the bug itself. A kludge is often used to modify a working system while avoiding fundamental changes, or to ensure backwards compatibility. \"Hack\" can also be used with a positive connotation, for a quick solution to a frustrating problem.\nA kludge is often used to fix an unanticipated problem in an earlier kludge; this is essentially a kind of cruft.\nA solution might be a kludge if it fails in corner cases. An intimate knowledge of the problem domain and execution environment is typically required to build a corner-case kludge. More commonly, a kludge is a heuristic which was expected to work almost always, but ends up failing often.\nA 1960s Soviet anecdote tells of a computer part which needed a slightly delayed signal to work. Rather than setting up a timing system, the kludge was to connect long coils of internal wires to slow the electrical signal.\nAnother type of kludge is the evasion of an unknown problem or bug in a computer program. Rather than continue to struggle to diagnose and fix the bug, the programmer may write additional code to compensate. For example, if a variable keeps ending up doubled, a kludge may be to add later code that divides by two rather than to search for the original incorrect computation.\nIn computer networking, use of NAT (Network Address Translation) (RFC 1918) or PAT (Port Address Translation) to cope with the shortage of IPv4 addresses is an example of a kludge.\nIn FidoNet terminology, \"kludge\" refers to a piece of control data embedded inside a message.\nEvolutionary neuroscience.\nThe \"kludge\" or \"kluge\" metaphor has been adapted in fields such as evolutionary neuroscience, particularly in reference to the human brain.\nThe neuroscientist David Linden discusses how intelligent design proponents have misconstrued brain anatomy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The transcendent aspects of our human experience, the things that touch our emotional and cognitive core, were not given to us by a Great Engineer. These are not the latest design features of an impeccably crafted brain. Rather, at every turn, brain design has been a kludge, a workaround, a jumble, a pastiche. The things we hold highest in our human experience (love, memory, dreams, and a predisposition for religious thought) result from a particular agglomeration of ad hoc solutions that have been piled on through millions of years of evolution history. It's not that we have fundamentally human thoughts and feelings despite the kludgy design of the brain as molded by the twists and turns of evolutionary history. Rather, we have them precisely because of that history.\nThe research psychologist Gary Marcus's book \"Kluge: The Haphazard Construction of the Human Mind\" compares evolutionary kluges with engineering ones like manifold vacuum-powered windshield wipers\u00a0\u2013 when accelerating or driving uphill, \"Your wipers slowed to a crawl, or even stopped working altogether.\" Marcus described a biological kluge:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For instance, the vertebrate eye's retina that is installed backward, facing the back of the head rather than the front. As a result, all kinds of stuff gets in its way, including a bunch of wiring that passes through the eye and leaves us with a pair of blind spots, one in each eye.\nOther uses.\nIn John Varley's 1985 short story \"Press Enter_\", the antagonist, a reclusive hacker, adopts the identity Charles Kluge.\nIn the science fiction television series \"Andromeda\", genetically engineered human beings called Nietzscheans use the term disparagingly to refer to genetically unmodified humans.\nIn a 2012 article, political scientist Steven Teles used the term \"kludgeocracy\" to criticize the complexity of social welfare policy in the United States. Teles argues that institutional and political obstacles to passing legislation often drive policy makers to accept expedient fixes rather than carefully thought out reforms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16616", "revid": "11849550", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16616", "title": "King Crimson", "text": "English progressive rock band (1968\u2013present)\nKing Crimson are an English progressive rock band formed in London in 1968 by Robert Fripp, Michael Giles, Greg Lake, Ian McDonald and Peter Sinfield. Guitarist and leader Fripp has remained the only constant member throughout the band's long history. The band drew inspiration from a wide variety of music, incorporating elements of classical, jazz, folk, heavy metal, gamelan, blues, industrial, electronic, and experimental music. They also exerted a strong influence on the early 1970s progressive rock movement, including on contemporaries such as Yes and Genesis, and continue to inspire subsequent generations of artists across multiple genres. The band has earned a large cult following, especially in the 21st century.\nThe band's debut album, \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" (1969), remains their most commercially successful and influential release. The next two albums, \"In the Wake of Poseidon\" and \"Lizard\" (both 1970), were recorded during a period of instability in the band's line-up, before a stable group with Fripp, Sinfield, Mel Collins, Boz Burrell and Ian Wallace recorded \"Islands\" in 1971. In mid-1972, Fripp disbanded this line-up, recruited new members Bill Bruford (formerly of Yes), John Wetton (formerly of Family), David Cross and Jamie Muir, and changed the group's musical approach, drawing from European free improvisation and modernist classical music and developing ever more complex compositions. The band reached what some saw as a creative peak on \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\" (1973), \"Starless and Bible Black\" (1974), and \"Red\" (1974). Fripp disbanded the group at the end of 1974.\nAfter seven years of inactivity, King Crimson was recreated in 1981 with Fripp, Bruford and new American members Adrian Belew and Tony Levin. Drawing influence from African music, gamelan, post-punk and New York minimalism, this band lasted three years, recording the albums \"Discipline\" (1981), \"Beat\" (1982) and \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" (1984). Following a decade-long hiatus, they reformed in 1994, adding Pat Mastelotto (formerly of Mr. Mister) and Trey Gunn for a sextet line-up Fripp called \"The Double Trio\". The double trio participated in another three-year cycle of activity that included the EP \"Vrooom\" (1994) and the album \"Thrak\" (1995). Fripp, Belew, Mastelotto and Gunn reunited in 2000 as a quartet, called \"The Double Duo\", releasing \"The Construkction of Light\" (2000) and \"The Power to Believe\" (2003). After another hiatus, the band reformed for a 2008 tour celebrating the 40th anniversary of their 1968 formation, with Gavin Harrison of Porcupine Tree being added, and Levin returning in place of Gunn.\nFollowing another hiatus (2009\u20132012), during which Fripp was thought to be retired, King Crimson came together again in 2013, this time as a septet (and, later, octet) with an unusual three-drumkit frontline, and new singer and secondary guitarist Jakko Jakszyk. This version of King Crimson toured from 2014 to 2021. After the band's final show in 2021, Fripp commented that King Crimson had \"moved from sound to silence\". However, band members have made studio recordings of their parts for material written during the last phase of the band's live work as of July 2025, which may or may not become a new album according to band manager David Singleton.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1967\u20131968: Giles, Giles and Fripp.\nIn August 1967, brothers Michael and Peter Giles, drummer and singer/bassist respectively and pro musicians in working bands since their mid-teens in Dorset, England, advertised for a \"singing organist\" to join a group they were forming. Fellow Dorset musician Robert Fripp \u2013 a guitarist who neither played organ nor sang \u2013 responded, and Giles, Giles and Fripp was born. The trio recorded several quirky singles and one eclectic album, \"The Cheerful Insanity of Giles, Giles and Fripp\". They hovered on the edge of success, and even made a television appearance, but were never able to make a commercial breakthrough.\nAttempting to expand their sound, the three recruited Ian McDonald on keyboards and woodwinds. McDonald brought along two new participants: his then-girlfriend, former Fairport Convention singer Judy Dyble, whose brief tenure with the group ended when the two split, and lyricist, roadie, and art strategist Peter Sinfield, with whom he had been writing songs \u2013 a partnership initiated when McDonald had said to Sinfield (regarding his band Creation), \"Peter, I have to tell you that your band is hopeless, but you write some great words. Would you like to get together on a couple of songs?\" Fripp, meanwhile, saw Clouds at the Marquee Club in London, which spurred him to incorporate classically inspired melodies into his writing and utilise improvisation to find new ideas.\nNo longer interested in Peter Giles's more whimsical pop songs, Fripp recommended that his old friend, fellow guitarist and singer Greg Lake, could join to replace either Peter or Fripp himself. Peter Giles later called it one of Fripp's \"cute political moves\". According to Michael Giles, his brother had become disillusioned with the band's lack of success and departed before Fripp suggested Lake to fill Peter Giles's position as bassist and singer.\n1968\u20131970: Original lineup and \"In the Court of the Crimson King\".\nThe first incarnation of King Crimson\u2014Fripp, Michael Giles, Lake, McDonald and Sinfield\u2014was formed on 30 November 1968 with rehearsals beginning on 13 January 1969. Sinfield coined the band's name in \"a moment of pressured panic\". Sinfield had already used the term \"crimson king\" in a set of lyrics before his involvement with Giles, Giles and Fripp. Sinfield insisted that the name did not refer to Beelzebub, prince of demons, and that a \"crimson king\" was any ruler during whose reign there were \"societal rumblings\" and \"sort of the dark forces of the world\". According to Fripp, King Crimson is a synonym for Beelzebub, which is an anglicised form of the Arabic phrase \"B'il Sabab\", meaning \"the man with an aim\", to which he related.\nAt this early point, McDonald was the primary composer, with vital contributions from Fripp and Lake, while Sinfield wrote all the lyrics on his own, and also designed and operated the band's unique stage lighting, being credited with \"words and illumination\" on the album sleeve. Inspired by the Moody Blues, McDonald suggested the group purchase a Mellotron keyboard, and this became a key component of the early Crimson sound. Sinfield described the original Crimson thus: \"If it sounded at all popular, it was out. So it had to be complicated, it had to be more expansive chords, it had to have strange influences. If it sounded, like, too simple, we'd make it more complicated, we'd play it in 7/8 or 5/8, just to show off\".\nKing Crimson's first live performance was at the Speakeasy Club in London on 9 April 1969 (with Yes guitarist Peter Banks among the audience). Their big breakthrough came on 5 July 1969 by playing as a support act at the Rolling Stones' free concert in Hyde Park, London, before an estimated 500,000 people.\nThe debut album, \"In the Court of the Crimson King\", was released in October 1969 on Island Records. Fripp would later describe it as having been \"an instant smash\" and \"New York's acid album of 1970\" (notwithstanding Fripp and Giles's assertion that the band never used psychedelic drugs). The Who guitarist and composer Pete Townshend called the album \"an uncanny masterpiece\". The album contains Sinfield's gothic lyrics, and its sound was described as having \"dark and doom-laden visions\". Its opening track \"21st Century Schizoid Man\" was described as \"proto-metal\" and the song's lyrics criticise the Vietnam War. In contrast to the blues-based hard rock of the contemporary British and American scenes, King Crimson presented a more Europeanised approach that blended antiquity and modernity. The band's music drew on a wide range of influences provided by all five group members. These elements included classical music, the psychedelic rock spearheaded by Jimi Hendrix, folk, jazz, military music (partially inspired by McDonald's stint as an army musician) and free improvisation.\nAfter playing gigs across England, the band toured the United States with various pop and rock acts, their first show being at Goddard College in Plainfield, Vermont. While the band found success and critical acclaim, creative tensions were already developing. Giles and McDonald, still striving to cope with King Crimson's rapid success and the realities of touring life, became uneasy with their musical direction. Although he was neither the dominant composer nor the frontman, Fripp was very much the group's driving force and spokesman, leading them into progressively darker and more intense musical areas. McDonald and Giles, now favouring a lighter and more nuanced romantic style, became increasingly uncomfortable and resigned after the conclusion of the US tour in January 1970. To keep the band together, Fripp offered to resign himself, but McDonald declared that King Crimson was \"more (him) than them\" and that he and Giles should therefore be the ones to leave. McDonald later said he \"was probably not emotionally mature enough to handle it\" and made a \"rash decision to leave without consulting anyone\". The original lineup played their last show at the Fillmore West in San Francisco on 14 December 1969, a little over one year after forming. Live recordings of the band from 1969 were released in 1997 on \"Epitaph\" and in 2010 on the \"In the Court of the Crimson King (1969)\" box set. McDonald and Giles, as a spin-off duo from King Crimson, released the album \"McDonald and Giles\" (1971).\n1970\u20131971: \"In the Wake of Poseidon\" and \"Lizard\".\nKing Crimson spent 1970 in a state of flux with various lineup changes, thwarted tour plans, and difficulties in finding a satisfactory musical direction, while Fripp was learning and developing as a songwriter during the writing process of the next three albums. As well as guitar, Fripp took on keyboard duties, while Sinfield expanded his creative role to operating synthesizers.\nFollowing McDonald's and Giles's departure, Lake, unsure of the band's future without them, began discussions with Keith Emerson of the Nice about possibly forming a new band together. With Fripp and Sinfield planning the recording of the second King Crimson album, and Lake's position uncertain, the band's management booked Elton John to sing the material as a session musician, but Fripp decided against this idea after listening to his \"Empty Sky\" album. Lake agreed to stay with the band until Emerson had completed remaining commitments with the Nice, at which point he left to form Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer with Emerson and Carl Palmer of Atomic Rooster. On the resulting \"In the Wake of Poseidon\" album, Lake provided all the lead vocals except on \"Cadence and Cascade\", which featured Fripp's old school friend Gordon Haskell. The sessions also included Michael and Peter Giles on drums and bass respectively, saxophonist Mel Collins (formerly of the band Circus) and jazz pianist Keith Tippett.\nUpon its release in May 1970, \"In the Wake of Poseidon\" reached No. 4 in the UK and No. 31 in the US. It received some criticism from those who thought it sounded too similar to their first album. With no set band to perform the new material, Fripp and Sinfield brought Mel Collins and Gordon Haskell onboard (with Haskell doubling as lead vocalist and bassist and Collins quadrupling as saxophonist, flautist, occasional keyboard player, and backing vocalist), and Andy McCulloch joined as drummer.\nFripp and Sinfield wrote the band's third album, \"Lizard\", themselves \u2013 with Haskell, Collins and McCulloch having no say in the direction of the material. In addition to the core band, several session musicians contributed to the \"Lizard\" recording, including the returning Keith Tippett, who was offered to be a member of the new lineup, but due to other commitments preferred to continue working with the band as an occasional guest musician, and two members of Tippett's band, Mark Charig on cornet and Nick Evans on trombone. Robin Miller (on oboe and cor anglais) also appeared, while Jon Anderson of Yes was brought in to sing a section of the album's title track, \"Prince Rupert Awakes\", which Fripp and Sinfield considered to be outside Haskell's natural range and style. \"Lizard\" featured stronger jazz and chamber-classical influences than previous albums. The album contains Sinfield's \"phantasmagorical\" lyrics, including \"Happy Family\" (an allegory of the break-up of the Beatles), and the title track, a suite which took up the entire second side, describing a medieval battle and its outcome.\nReleased in December 1970, \"Lizard\" reached No. 29 in the UK and No. 113 in the US. Described retrospectively as an \"outlier\", the album had been made by a group in disagreement over method and taste. The more rhythm-and-blues-oriented Haskell and McCulloch both found the music difficult to relate to, and tedious and confusing to record. Collins disliked how his parts were composed, while both Fripp and Haskell detested Sinfield's lyrics. This lineup of the band did not survive much longer than the \"Lizard\" recording sessions. Haskell quit the band acrimoniously during initial tour rehearsals after refusing to sing live with distortion and electronic effects on his voice, and McCulloch departed soon after. With Sinfield not being a musician and Fripp having seemingly given up on the band, Collins was left to search for new members.\n1971\u20131972: \"Islands\".\nAfter a search for a drummer to replace McCulloch, Ian Wallace was secured. Fripp was re-energised by the addition of a new member, and he joined Collins and Wallace to audition singers and bassists. Vocalists who tried out included Bryan Ferry of Roxy Music and even one of the band's managers, John Gaydon. The position eventually went to Raymond \"Boz\" Burrell. John Wetton was invited to join on bass, but declined in order to join Family instead. Rick Kemp (later of Steeleye Span) rehearsed with the band, but declined the final offer to formally join. Fripp decided to teach Boz to play bass rather than continue the labored auditions. Though he had not played bass before, Burrell had played enough acoustic guitar to assist him in learning the instrument quickly. Wallace was able to further instruct Burrell in functioning on the instrument in a rhythm section.\nWith a lineup now complete, King Crimson began touring in May 1971, the first time they had played live since the original lineup's last show on 14 December 1969. The concerts were well received, but the musical differences between Fripp and the rest of the group, and the somewhat wilder lifestyles of Collins, Wallace and Burrell, alienated the non-drug-taking Fripp, who began to withdraw socially from his bandmates, creating further tension.\nIn 1971, the new King Crimson formation recorded \"Islands\". Sinfield, who favoured a softer approach, took lyrical inspiration from Homer's \"Odyssey\", musical inspiration from jazz players like Miles Davis and Ahmad Jamal, and a trip to the Balearic Islands. \"Islands\" featured the instrumental \"Sailor's Tale\", with a droning Mellotron and Fripp's banjo-inspired guitar solo; the raunchy blues-rocker \"Ladies of the Road\", a tribute to groupies which featured Wallace and Collins singing Beatles-esque backing vocals; and \"Song of the Gulls\", which was developed from an earlier Fripp instrumental (\"Suite No. 1\" from Giles, Giles &amp; Fripp's 1968 album), and would be the only time the band would utilize an orchestra. Burrell disliked Sinfield's lyrics and one of the band members allegedly called \"Islands\" \"an airy-fairy piece of shit\".\nReleased in December 1971, \"Islands\" charted at No. 30 in the UK and No. 76 in the US. Following a tour of the United States in December 1971, Fripp informed Sinfield that he could no longer work with him and asked him to leave the band. In January 1972, the remainder of the band broke up acrimoniously in rehearsals, owing partially to Fripp's refusal to play a composition by Collins. He later cited this as \"quality control\", with the idea that King Crimson would perform the \"right\" kind of music.\nIn order to fulfill touring contracts in the United States in 1972, King Crimson reformed with the intention of disbanding immediately after the tour. Recordings from various North American dates between January and February 1972 were released as \"Earthbound\" in June of that year. The album was noted for its performance style, that occasionally veered towards funk, and for Burrell's scat singing on the improvised pieces, but was criticised for its sub-par sound quality. Further, better-quality, live recordings from this era would be released in 2002 as \"Ladies of the Road\" and in 2017 on the \"Sailors' Tales (1970\u20131972)\" box set.\nBy this time the musical rift between Fripp and the rest of the band had grown very wide. Wallace, Burrell and Collins favoured improvised blues and funk. Fripp would later describe the 1971\u20131972 line-up as more of a jam band than an \"improvising\" band, an opinion with which Wallace disagreed. Personal relations actually improved during the tour to the point where most of the band decided to continue. However Fripp opted to part company with the other three, restructuring King Crimson with new musicians, as he felt the other members would not fully engage with the musical direction he now had in mind.\n1972\u20131975: \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\", \"Starless and Bible Black\", \"Red\" and hiatus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It was going to be an interesting ride when ... I wasn't given a setlist when I joined the band, more a reading list. Ouspensky, J.\u00a0G. Bennett, Gurdjieff and Castaneda were all hot. Wicca, personality changes, low-level magic, pyromancy \u2013 all this from the magus in the court of the Crimson King. This was going to be more than three chords and a pint of Guinness.\"\n\u2014Bill Bruford.\nThe next incarnation of King Crimson was radically different from the previous configurations. Fripp's four new recruits were free-improvising percussionist Jamie Muir; drummer Bill Bruford, who left Yes at a commercial peak in their career in favour of the \"darker\" Crimson; bassist and vocalist John Wetton (who left Family); and violinist, keyboardist and flautist David Cross, whom Fripp had met when he was invited to a rehearsal of Waves, a band Cross was working in.\nMost of the compositions by this lineup were collaborations between Fripp and Wetton, who each composed segments independently and fitted together those which they found compatible. With Sinfield gone, the band recruited Wetton's friend Richard Palmer-James, formerly of Supertramp, as their new lyricist. Unlike Sinfield, Palmer-James was not an official member of King Crimson, playing no part in artistic decisions, visual ideas, or sonic directions; his sole contributions to the group were his lyrics, sent via mail from his home in Germany. Following a period of rehearsals, King Crimson resumed touring on 13 October 1972 at the Zoom Club in Frankfurt, with the band's penchant for improvisation and Muir's startling stage presence gaining them renewed press attention.\nIn January and February 1973, King Crimson recorded \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\" in London; the album was released that March. The band's new sound was exemplified by the album's two-part title track \u2013 the piece emphasised the sharp instrumental interplay of the band and drew influence from modernist classical music, noisy free improvisation, and heavy metal. The record displayed Muir's unusual approach to percussion, which included a self-modified drum kit, assorted toys, a bullroarer, mbira, gongs, balloons, thunder sheet and chains. On stage, Muir also employed unpredictable, manic movements, bizarre clothing, and fake blood capsules (occasionally spit or applied to the head), becoming the sole example of such theatrical stage activity in the band's long history. The album reached No. 20 in the UK and No. 61 in the US.\nAfter a period of further touring, Muir departed in 1973, quitting the music industry altogether. Muir told King Crimson's management that he had decided a musician's life was not for him, and he had chosen to join a Scottish Buddhist monastery. He offered to serve a period of notice which the management declined. Instead of reiterating Muir's decision, the management informed the band and the public that Muir had sustained an onstage injury caused by a gong landing on his foot.\nWith Muir gone, the remaining members reconvened in January 1974 to produce \"Starless and Bible Black\", released in March 1974, which earned them a positive \"Rolling Stone\" review. Though most of the album was recorded live during the band's late 1973 tour, the recordings were carefully edited and overdubbed to sound like a studio record, with \"The Great Deceiver\", \"Lament\" and the second half of \"The Night Watch\" the only tracks recorded entirely in the studio. The album reached No. 28 in the UK and No. 64 in the US.\nFollowing the album's release, the band began to divide once more, this time over performance. Musically, Fripp found himself positioned between Bruford and Wetton, who played with such force and increasing volume that Fripp once compared them to \"a flying brick wall\", and Cross, whose amplified acoustic violin was consistently being drowned out by the rhythm section, leading him to concentrate more on keyboards. An increasingly frustrated Cross began to withdraw both musically and personally, with the result being that he was voted out of the group following the band's 1974 tour.\nIn July 1974, Fripp, Bruford, and Wetton began recording \"Red\". Before recording began, Fripp, now increasingly disillusioned with the music industry, turned his attention to the works of English mystic John G. Bennett and had a spiritual experience in which \"the top of my head blew off\". Most of the album had been developed during live improvisations before Fripp retreated into himself and \"withdrew his opinion\", leaving Bruford and Wetton to direct the recording sessions. The album contains one live track, \"Providence\", recorded on 30 June 1974 in Providence, Rhode Island with Cross playing violin. Several guest musicians (including former members Ian McDonald and Mel Collins) contributed to the album. Released on 6 October 1974, \"Red\" went to No. 45 in the UK and No. 66 in the US. AllMusic later called it \"an impressive achievement\" for a group about to disband, with \"intensely dynamic\" musical chemistry between the band members.\nTwo months before the release of \"Red\", King Crimson's future looked bright, with talks regarding founder member Ian McDonald rejoining the group. However, Fripp wished not to tour as he felt increasingly disenchanted by the group and the music industry. He also felt the world was going to drastically change by 1981 and that he had to prepare for it. Despite a band meeting while touring the US in which Fripp expressed a desire to end the band, the group did not formally disband until 25 September 1974 and later Fripp announced that King Crimson had \"ceased to exist\" and was \"completely over for ever and ever\". It was later revealed that Fripp had attempted to replace himself with McDonald and Steve Hackett of Genesis, but this was rejected by the managers.\nFollowing the band's disbandment, the live album \"USA\" was released in May 1975, formed of recordings from their 1974 North American tour. It received some positive reviews, including \"a must\" for fans of the band and \"insanity you're better off having\". Issues with the tapes rendered some of Cross's playing inaudible, so Eddie Jobson of Roxy Music was hired to perform violin and keyboard overdubs in a studio; further edits were also made to allow the music to fit on a single LP. More live recordings from the 1972\u20131974 era would be issued as \"The Night Watch\" in 1997, and as part of the box sets \"The Great Deceiver\" (1992), \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic (1972\u20131973)\" (2012), \"The Road to Red (1974)\", and \"Starless (1973\u20131974)\" (both 2014). Between 1975 and 1981, King Crimson were completely inactive.\n1981\u20131984: \"Discipline\", \"Beat\", \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" and second hiatus.\nIn the late autumn of 1980, having spent several years on spiritual pursuits and then gradually returning to music (playing guitar for David Bowie, Peter Gabriel and Daryl Hall, pursuing an experimental solo career, leading instrumental new wave band The League of Gentlemen), Fripp decided to form a new \"first division\" rock group.\nHaving recruited Bruford as drummer, Fripp asked the American singer and guitarist Adrian Belew, who had previously played with Bowie and Frank Zappa, to join; this was the first time Fripp would actively seek collaboration with another guitarist in a band, and therefore indicative of his desire to create something unlike any of his previous work. After touring with Talking Heads, Belew agreed to join and also become the band's lyricist. Bruford's suggestion of bassist Jeff Berlin, with whom he had played in Bruford, was rejected as Fripp thought his playing was \"too busy\", so auditions were held in New York: on the third day, Fripp left after roughly three auditions, only to return several hours later with session bassist Tony Levin (who got the job after playing a single chorus of \"Red\"). Fripp later confessed that, had he known that Levin (whom Fripp had played with in Peter Gabriel's group) was available and interested, he would have selected him without holding auditions. Fripp named the new quartet Discipline, and they went to England to rehearse and write new material. They made their live debut at Moles Club in Bath, Somerset on 30 April 1981, and completed a short tour supported by the Lounge Lizards. By October 1981, the band had opted to change their name to King Crimson.\nIn 1981, King Crimson recorded \"Discipline\" in London with producer Rhett Davies, who had previously worked with Belew on Talking Heads' \"Remain in Light\" and with Fripp on Brian Eno's \"Another Green World\" and \"Before and After Science\". The album displayed a very different version of the band, with newer influences including post-punk, new wave, funk, minimalism, pointillism, world music and African percussion and a sound described in \"The New Rolling Stone Album Guide\" as having a \"jaw-dropping technique\" of \"knottily rhythmic, harmonically demanding workouts\". The title track \"Discipline\" was described as a postminimalist rock song. Fripp intended to create the sound of a \"rock gamelan\", with an interlocking rhythmic quality to the paired guitars that he found similar to Indonesian gamelan ensembles. Fripp concentrated on playing complex picked arpeggios, while Belew provided an arsenal of guitar sounds that \"often mimic animal noises\". In addition to bass guitar, Levin used the Chapman Stick, a ten-string two-handed tapping, hybrid guitar and bass instrument which he played in an \"utterly original style\". Bruford experimented with cymbal-less acoustic kits and a Simmons SDS-V electronic drum kit. The band's songs were shorter in comparison to previous King Crimson albums, shaped by Belew's pop sensibilities and quirky approach to writing lyrics. Though the band's previous taste for improvisation was now tightly reined in, one instrumental (\"The Sheltering Sky\") emerged from group rehearsals; the noisy, half-spoken/half-shouted \"Indiscipline\" was a partially written, part-improvised piece created in order to give Bruford a chance to escape from the strict rhythmic demands of the rest of the album. Released in September 1981, \"Discipline\" reached No. 41 in the UK and No. 45 in the US.\nIn June 1982, King Crimson followed \"Discipline\" with \"Beat\", the first King Crimson album recorded with the same band lineup as the album preceding it. \"Beat\" is the only album where Fripp had no involvement in the original mixing; Davies and Belew undertook production duties. The album had a linked theme of the Beat Generation and its writings, reflected in song titles such as \"Neal and Jack and Me\" (inspired by Neal Cassady and Jack Kerouac), \"Heartbeat\" (inspired by Carolyn Cassady's \"Heart Beat: My Life with Jack and Neal\"), \"The Howler\" (inspired by Allen Ginsberg's \"Howl\") and \"Waiting Man\" (inspired by William Burroughs). The album contained themes of life on the road, existential angst and romanticism. While \"Beat\" was more accessible, it had the improvised \"Requiem\", which featured Frippertronics, a guitar technique invented by Brian Eno and Robert Fripp using a tape loop system.\nThe recording of \"Beat\" was faced with tension, with Belew suffering high stress levels over his duties as front man, lead singer, and principal songwriter. On one occasion, he clashed with Fripp and ordered him out of the studio. As \"Beat\" reached No. 39 in the UK and No. 52 in the US, King Crimson resumed touring. \"Heartbeat\" was released as a single, which peaked at No. 57 on the \"Billboard\" Mainstream Rock chart. Around this time the band released the VHS \"The Noise: Live in Frejus\", a document of a show played at the Arena, Frejus, France on 27 August 1982, co-headlining with Roxy Music (whose set from the same show was also released on VHS as \"The High Road\"). The VHS was later re-released as part of the \"Neal and Jack and Me\" DVD in 2004.\nKing Crimson's next album, \"Three of a Perfect Pair\", was recorded in 1983 and released in March 1984. Having encountered difficulty in both writing and determining a direction for the album, the band chose to record and call the album's first half a \"left side\" \u2013 four of the band's more pop-oriented songs plus an instrumental \u2013 and the second half a \"right side\" \u2013 containing experimental work, improvisations that drew influence from industrial music and the third part of the \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\" suite. Stress during the writing process and the tension between the band members manifested in both lyrical content and music. The 2001 remaster of the album included the \"other side\", a collection of remixes and improvisational out-takes plus Levin's humorous song, \"The King Crimson Barbershop\". \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" peaked at No. 30 in the UK and No. 58 in the US, with \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" and \"Sleepless\" being released as singles. A VHS document of the \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" tour, \"Three of a Perfect Pair: Live in Japan\", was released later in 1984 (and later also included on the \"Neal and Jack and Me\" DVD). The last concert of the \"Three of a Perfect Pair\" tour, at the Spectrum in Montreal, Canada on 11 July 1984, was recorded and released in 1998 as \"\". Further live recordings of the 1980s band would be released in 2016 as part of the \"On (and off) The Road (1981\u20131984)\" box set. Despite their conflict, the musicians remained professional on stage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Robert broke up the group, again, for the umpteenth time, dwelling at length, I suppose, on our lack of imagination, ability, direction and a thousand other things we were doubtless missing. I suppose this only because I remember not listening to this litany of failures. Might as well quit while you're ahead, I thought.\"\n\u2014Bill Bruford on the band's 1984 disbanding.\nFollowing the 1984 tour, Fripp dissolved King Crimson for the second time, exactly ten years after dissolving the previous group. Bruford and Belew expressed frustration over this; Belew recalled the first he had heard of the split was when he read about it in a report in \"Musician\" magazine.\n1994\u20131999: The Double Trio, \"Vrooom\", \"Thrak\" and the ProjeKcts.\nIn the summer of 1991, Belew met with Fripp in England to express an interest in reviving King Crimson. One year later, Fripp established his Discipline Global Mobile (DGM) record label with producer David Singleton. Subsequently, DGM would be the primary home for Fripp's work, with larger album releases distributed to bigger record companies (initially Virgin Records), and smaller releases handled by DGM. This afforded Fripp and his associates greater creative freedom and more control over all aspects of their work.\nIn late 1991, Fripp asked former Japan singer David Sylvian to join the new King Crimson band, but Sylvian declined the offer, though the two collaborated as Sylvian/Fripp. In June 1993, Fripp began to assemble a larger version of the band, joined by Belew and Levin, Chapman Stick player Trey Gunn (a veteran of Fripp's Guitar Craft courses) and drummer Jerry Marotta, with whom Fripp had played with Peter Gabriel. After Sylvian/Fripp's closing concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in December 1993,&lt;ref name=\"Fripp/sylvian\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Fripp decided to ask the tour's drummer Pat Mastelotto, formerly of Mr. Mister, to join instead of Marotta. Bruford wound up being the last of the 1980s group to return to the band. Fripp explained that he had a vision of a \"Double Trio\" with two drummers while driving along the Chalke Valley in Wiltshire one afternoon in 1992. Bruford later said he had lobbied Fripp at the last minute because he believed that Crimson was still very much \"his gig\", and that Fripp had come up with a philosophical explanation for utilizing both Mastelotto and himself later. One of the conditions Fripp imposed upon Bruford if he were to return was to give up all creative control to Fripp.\nFollowing rehearsals in Woodstock, New York, the group released the EP \"Vrooom\" in October 1994. This revealed the new King Crimson sound, which featured the interlocking guitars of the 1980s mixed with the layered, heavier feel of the 1970s period. There was also a vague influence from the industrial music of that time. Many of the songs were written or finalised by Belew, and displayed stronger elements of 1960s pop than before; in particular, a Beatles influence. Bruford would refer to this lineup as sounding like \"a dissonant Shadows on steroids\". As with previous lineups, new technology was utilised, including MIDI (which Fripp used to replace Frippertronics with \"Soundscapes\") and the Warr Guitar with which Gunn replaced his Chapman Stick in 1995. King Crimson toured from 28 September 1994 in Buenos Aires, Argentina; portions of these concerts were released on the double live CD set \"\" in 1995.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The meaning of \"THRAK\" ... the first one is: a sudden and precise impact moving from direction and commitment in service of an aim ... The second definition is: 117 guitars almost hitting the same chord simultaneously. So, the album \"THRAK\", what is it? 56 minutes and 37 seconds of songs and music about love, dying, redemption and mature guys who get erections.\"\n \u2014Robert Fripp's press release for \"Thrak\" and the sleeve notes to \"Vrooom Vrooom\"\nIn October and December 1994, King Crimson recorded their eleventh studio album, \"Thrak\", at Peter Gabriel's Real World Studios. Containing revised versions of the songs from \"Vrooom\", plus some new tracks, the album was described by \"Q\" magazine as having \"jazz-scented rock structures, characterised by noisy, angular, exquisite guitar interplay\" and an \"athletic, ever-inventive rhythm section\", while being in tune with the sound of alternative rock of the mid-1990s. Examples of the band's efforts to integrate their multiple elements could be heard on the accessible (but complex) songs \"Dinosaur\" and \"Sex Sleep Eat Drink Dream\", the more straightforward ballad \"One Time\", as well as \"Radio I\" and \"Radio II\"- a pair of Fripp's Soundscapes instrumentals.\nKing Crimson resumed touring in 1995 and into 1996; dates from October and November 1995 were recorded and released on the live album \"Thrakattak\" in May 1996, which is an hour of improvised music integrating sections from performances from the \"THRAK\" tour in the United States and Japan, mixed and arranged by Fripp's DGM partner, engineer David Singleton. A more conventional live recording from the period was later made available as the double CD release \"Vrooom Vrooom\" (2001), while a full 1995 concert was released on VHS in 1996 as \"Live in Japan\" and re-released on DVD in 1999 as \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vrooom\". The double trio would be further honored by the \"Thrak (1994\u20131997)\" box set in 2015.\nThe band began rehearsing again in May 1997 in Nashville, Tennessee. Fripp was dissatisfied with the quality of the new music being developed by the band; longstanding friction and disagreements between himself and Bruford led to the latter deciding to leave King Crimson for good. The resulting bad atmosphere and the lack of workable material almost broke the band up altogether. Instead, the six members opted to work in four smaller groups (or \"fraKctalisations\", as Fripp called them) known as ProjeKcts. This enabled the group to continue developing ideas and searching for a new direction without the practical difficulty (and expense) of convening all six musicians at once. From 1997 to 1999, the first four ProjeKcts played live in the United States and the United Kingdom, and released recordings that showed a high degree of free improvisation, with influences ranging from jazz, industrial, techno and drum and bass. These have been collectively described by music critic J. D. Considine as \"frequently astonishing\" but lacking in melody. After Bruford had played four dates with Projekct One in December 1997, he left King Crimson to resume working with his own jazz group Earthworks.\n1999\u20132003: The Double Duo, \"The Construkction of Light\" and \"The Power to Believe\".\nIn October 1999, King Crimson reconvened. Tony Levin was busy working as a session musician and decided to take a hiatus from the group, so the remaining members (Fripp, Belew, Gunn and Mastelotto) formed the \"Double Duo\" to write and record \"The Construkction of Light\" at Belew's home studio in Mount Juliet, Tennessee. Fripp was inspired by Tool's album \"Undertow\" during the writing process of \"The Construkction of Light\". Released in May 2000, the album reached No. 129 in the UK. Most of the pieces were metallic, harsh and industrial metal\u2013influenced in sound. They featured Mastelotto performing exclusively on electronic drums, Gunn taking over the bass role on Warr Guitar, and a different take on the interlocking guitar sound that the band had pioneered in the 1980s. With the exception of an industrial blues (sung by Belew through a voice changer under the pseudonym of \"Hooter J. Johnson\"), the songs were dense and complex. The album contains the fourth installment of \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\". It received a negative reception for lacking new ideas. The band recorded an album of improvised instrumentals at the same time, and released them under the name ProjeKct X, on the CD \"Heaven and Earth\".\nKing Crimson toured to support both albums, including double bill shows with Tool. The tour was documented on the live album \"Heavy ConstruKction\" in 2000 and the \"Heaven &amp; Earth (1997\u20132008)\" box set in 2019. Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones and his band supported Crimson on some live shows.\nOn 9 November 2001, King Crimson released a limited edition live EP called \"Level Five\", featuring three new pieces: \"Dangerous Curves\", \"Level Five\" and \"Virtuous Circle\", plus versions of \"The Construkction of Light\" and ProjeKct's \"The Deception of the Thrush\", followed by an unlisted track called \"ProjeKct 12th and X\" after one minute of silence. A second EP followed in October 2002, \"Happy with What You Have to Be Happy With\". This featured eleven tracks (including a live version of \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic, Part IV\"). Half of the tracks were processed vocal snippets by Belew, and the songs themselves varied between Soundscapes, gamelan, heavy metal and blues.\nThe double duo lineup released King Crimson's thirteenth album, \"The Power to Believe\", in March 2003. Fripp described it as \"the culmination of three years of Crimsonising\". The album incorporated, reworked and retitled versions of \"Deception of the Thrush\" (\"The Power to Believe III\"); tracks from their previous two EPs; and an extract from a Fripp Soundscape with added instrumentation and vocals. \"The Power to Believe\" reached No. 162 in the UK and No. 150 in the US. King Crimson toured in 2003 to support the album; recordings from it were used for the live album \"\". 2003 also saw the release of the DVD \"Eyes Wide Open\", a compilation of the band's shows Live at the Shepherds Bush Empire (London, 3 July 2000) and Live in Japan (Tokyo, 16 April 2003).\nIn November 2003, Gunn left the group to pursue solo projects and was replaced by Levin. The band reconvened in early 2004 for rehearsals, but nothing developed from these sessions; they then went on another hiatus. At this point, Fripp was publicly reassessing his desire to work within the music industry, often citing the unsympathetic aspects of the life of a touring musician, such as \"the illusion of intimacy with celebrities\".\nOn 21 September 2006, former King Crimson member Boz Burrell died of a heart attack, followed by another former member, Ian Wallace, who died of esophageal cancer on 22 February 2007.\n2008: 40th Anniversary tour and third hiatus.\nA new King Crimson formation was announced in 2007: Fripp, Belew, Levin, Mastelotto, and a new second drummer, Gavin Harrison of Porcupine Tree. In August 2008, after a period of rehearsals, the five completed the band's 40th Anniversary Tour. The setlists featured no new material, drawing instead from the existing mid '70s era/\"Discipline\"-era/Double Trio/Double Duo repertoire. Additional shows were planned for 2009, but were cancelled due to scheduling clashes with Belew.\nKing Crimson began another hiatus after the 40th Anniversary Tour. Belew continued to lobby for reviving the band, and discussed it with Fripp several times in 2009 and 2010. Among Belew's suggestions was a temporary reunion of the 1980s line-up for a thirtieth anniversary tour: an idea declined by both Fripp and Bruford, the latter commenting \"I would be highly unlikely to try to recreate the same thing, a mission I fear destined to failure.\" In December 2010, Fripp wrote that the King Crimson \"switch\" had been set to \"off\" since October 2008, citing several reasons for this decision.\nIn August 2012, Fripp announced his planned retirement from the music industry, leaving the future of King Crimson uncertain.\n2014\u20132021: The Seven-Headed Beast and Three Over Five lineups.\nPrior to Fripp's retirement announcement, a band called Jakszyk, Fripp and Collins (subtitled \"A King Crimson ProjeKct\") had released an album called \"A Scarcity of Miracles\" in 2011. The band featured guitarist and singer Jakko Jakszyk (who'd previously performed King Crimson material with 21st Century Schizoid Band), Fripp and former Crimson saxophonist Mel Collins as the main players/composers, with Tony Levin playing bass and Gavin Harrison playing drums. At one point, Fripp referred to the band as \"P7\" (ProjeKct Seven). Unusually for a ProjeKct, it was based around \"finely crafted\" and \"mid-paced\" original songs derived from improvised sessions.\nIn September 2013, Fripp announced King Crimson's return to activity with a \"very different reformation to what has gone before: seven players, four English and three American, with three drummers\". He cited several reasons to make a comeback, varying from the practical to the whimsical: \"I was becoming too happy. Time for a pointed stick.\" The new line-up drew from both the previous lineup (retaining Fripp, Levin, Harrison and Mastelotto) and the \"Scarcity of Miracles\" project (Jakszyk and Collins), with Guitar Craft alumnus and former R.E.M./Ministry drummer Bill Rieflin as the seventh member. Adrian Belew was not asked to take part, thus ending his 32-year tenure in King Crimson: Jakszyk took his place as singer and second guitarist. This version of the group took on the nickname of \"the Seven-Headed Beast\".\nThis drastically revamped King Crimson had no plans to record in the studio, focussing instead on playing \"reconfigured\" versions of past material in live concerts. Looking back later at this King Crimson phase, Tony Levin would comment \"we were instructed/advised by Robert Fripp to look at the older classic King Crimson material as if we had written it. And so we did that with a lot of older material that the band had done before the '80s. We didn't actually cover that much of the '80s material outside of a few songs.\"\nFor the most part, this approach would remain consistent for the remainder of the band's lifetime. In early 2014, and for the first time since 1974, the band's repertoire included songs from the run of albums between \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" and \"Larks' Tongues in Aspic\" as well as reviving song material from \"Red\". No Adrian Belew-era songs were included in the setlist, although some instrumentals from the period were played (including items from \"THRAK\" and \"The Power to Believe\"). Some material from \"A Scarcity of Miracles\" (the title track, plus \"The Light of Day\") was also incorporated into the band's repertoire.\nAfter rehearsing in England, King Crimson toured North America from 9 September to 6 October. Recordings from the Los Angeles dates were released as \"Live at the Orpheum\": this included new King Crimson instrumental music in the shape of \"Banshee Legs Bell Hassle\" and \"Walk On: Monk Morph Chamber Music\".\nTours across Europe, Canada, and Japan followed in the later half of 2015. Brand-new songs mainly written by Fripp and Jakszyk were debuted at the concerts, as well as drum showcases. A live recording from the Canadian leg of the tour was released at the end of February 2016 as \"Live In Toronto\", which included new songs \"Radical Action (To Unseat the Hold of Monkey Mind)\" and \"Meltdown\". A European tour was planned for 2016. Following Rieflin's decision to take a break from music, drummer Jeremy Stacey of Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds was called in place for dates from September.\nA further live album, \"Radical Action to Unseat the Hold of Monkey Mind\", was released in September 2016, drawing from 2015 concert dates of Japan, Canada and France preceding Rieflin's departure and Stacey's arrival. A 4-disc set aimed at documenting the band's shuffling and evolving live setlist, it included one performance of every song the band presented onstage during the tour, and concert footage mostly recorded in Takamatsu, on 19 December 2015.\nOn 7 December 2016, founding King Crimson member Greg Lake died of cancer. Another former King Crimson member, John Wetton, died of colon cancer on 31 January 2017.\nOn 3 January 2017, Bill Rieflin returned to King Crimson. Since the band wished to retain Jeremy Stacey, King Crimson became an octet with four drummers, which Fripp initially referred to as the \"Double Quartet Formation\". Later on, Rieflin shifted his group role and became King Crimson's first full-time keyboard player, with Fripp rechristening the lineup the \"Three Over Five\" (or \"Five Over Three\") Formation.\nOn 2 June 2017, King Crimson released a new live EP named \"Heroes\", featuring a cover of the David Bowie song of the same name. The EP was intended as a tribute to Bowie, for whom Fripp had provided distinctive guitar work on the albums \"Heroes\" (1977) and \"Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps)\" (1980). The video to King Crimson's version of \"Heroes\" won \"Video of the Year\" at the 2017 Progressive Music Awards. Shortly afterwards, King Crimson embarked on the first leg of a North American tour, from 11 June until 19 July. On 3 September, Robert Fripp said that his differences with Adrian Belew had been resolved and that there were \"no current plans for (him) to come out with the current formation\" but \"the doors to the future are open\". Belew confirmed this, adding \"it means I may be back in the band in the future at some point\".\nOn 14 October 2017, King Crimson released another contemporary live album, \"Live in Chicago\", recorded on tour in June of the same year. As had been the case with its two predecessors, it included new music in the absence of a new studio album (in this case \"Bellscape &amp; Orchestral Werning\", \"The Errors\" and \"Interlude\"). It also documented the return to the live set of material from the long-neglected 1970 album \"Lizard\" (in the form of \"Cirkus\", which the band had begun adding to their sets in 2016, and the second half of the title suite), as well as new arrangements of some Belew-era songs.\nOn 13 October 2017, it was announced that Bill Rieflin would be unable to join the Three Over Five Formation on the 2017 Autumn tour in the U.S. He was temporarily replaced by Seattle-based Crafty Guitarist Chris Gibson. During 2018, King Crimson performed the extensive 33-date Uncertain Times tour through the UK and Europe between 13 June and 16 November.\nAlthough the band continued their \"no new studio album\" policy, April 2018 saw the full release of another live album, \"Live in Vienna\", presenting the complete concert in Vienna on 1 December 2016. The album was originally scheduled for worldwide release in 2017, but was postponed in lieu of \"Live in Chicago\"; however, it was only released in Japan in September 2017, with a bonus disc with recordings from the band's tour there in December 2015. The worldwide release added a performance of \"Fracture\", plus three pieces drawn from the nightly Fripp-composed introductory soundscapes with improvisations by Collins and Levin: these pieces were arranged and realised by David Singleton, reflecting similar work he'd performed for \"Thrakattak\" twenty years earlier. On 20 October 2018, a further live album/video was released, \"\", recorded during dates in July 2017.\nOn 6 April 2019, it was announced at a press conference that Rieflin would take another break from King Crimson to attend to family matters, his place on keyboards for the 2019 50th anniversary tour taken by Theo Travis, better known as a saxophonist, Soft Machine member and occasional duo collaborator with Robert Fripp. Although Travis joined the band for rehearsals, Fripp said on 2 May that the band had decided that it was no longer possible to have other musicians deputising for Rieflin and for this reason were \"proceed(ing) as a Seven-Headed Beast\" without Travis. Rieflin's parts were divided among other band members, with Fripp, Stacey, Jakszyk and Collins adding keyboards to their on-stage rigs, and Levin once again using the synthesizer he used during the '80s tours. Soon after on 11 June, King Crimson's entire discography was made available to stream online on all the major streaming platforms, as part of the band's 50th anniversary celebration.\nOn 24 March 2020, Bill Rieflin died of cancer. In the same year, King Crimson collaborator Keith Tippett died after several years of illness on 14 June, and former bassist and singer Gordon Haskell died from lung cancer on 15 October.\nKing Crimson toured North America and then Japan in 2021. Recordings from dates on the American leg of the tour were released as the \"official bootleg\" live album \"\", featuring music from across the band's lifetime plus two new Tony Levin cadenzas.\n2022: \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" documentary; end of band activity.\nFollowing the 2021 tour dates, King Crimson ceased activity, although without expressly announcing a breakup. Reasons cited were practical ones involving the old age of several of the members plus the rising cost of services during the pandemic, with no band intentions for any more tours.\nOn 9 February 2022, founding King Crimson member Ian McDonald died of cancer.\nIn March 2022, the documentary film \"\" was premiered at the 2022 SXSW Film Festival. Directed by Toby Amies and filmed between 2019 and 2021, it covered live and backstage activity by the then-current band but also featured a historical overview plus contributions from Crimson alumni Ian McDonald, Michael Giles, Bill Bruford, Adrian Belew and Trey Gunn (as well as prolonged interview footage with the late Bill Rieflin). Amies described the film's development as follows: \"What began as a traditional documentary about the legendary band King Crimson as it turned fifty, mutated into an exploration of time, death, family, and the transcendent power of music to change lives; but with jokes.\"\nAs of 2022, no King Crimson activity was planned for the future, excepting ongoing archive/curatorial matters. Levin said in a late 2022 interview that, \"the sense I got from Robert [Fripp] was that it's over. Maybe King Crimson will speak to him in the future in some way, and will revive its head with who-knows-what line up?\"\nAt a post-screening Q&amp;A session for \"In the Court of the Crimson King\", Fripp referred to the seven-member 2021 lineup of King Crimson as \"the final incarnation\" of the band. Asked if there could ever be a lineup that did not include him, he answered negatively, stating \"I see the whole. I see the music. I see the musicians. I see the audience and I see the music industry [...] and you have to engage with all of that to have the overview. So that's the quick answer\".\nPossible future activity/upcoming studio album.\nThe 2021 retirement of King Crimson's \"Seven-Headed Beast\" line-up, and Fripp's subsequent statement that the band had finished, left a certain amount of written/performed King Crimson music unrecorded in the studio, although some of that material had appeared on live recordings from the time. New original songs performed in concert by the band had included \"Meltdown\", \"Radical Action\", \"Radical Action II\", \"The Errors\", and more. Versions of two Fripp/Jakszyk songs originally intended for King Crimson (\"Uncertain Times\" and \"Separation\") had also emerged on Jakszyk's 2020 solo album \"Secrets and Lies\", with participation from Fripp, Harrison, Levin and Collins. \nFollowing the most recent retirement of the band, Jakko Jakszyk hinted, suggested and ultimately stated that this material will see formal release as a studio album, the band's first in over twenty years since the release of \"The Power to Believe\". In August 2021, Jakszyk referred to the existence of \"about forty to fifty minutes' worth of new (King Crimson) stuff, a number of songs I've co-written with Robert and some instrumental things he's written. During the lockdown Gavin suggested, 'Why don't we record these things so we've at least got studio recordings of this material?' That doesn't mean we're going to make a new album or it's ever gonna come out, but we have started this process.\"\nIn a November 2024 interview with \"Louder Sound\", Jakszyk was questioned about the band's future and mentioned the possibility of new studio recordings being released, stating: \"The honest answer is, you'll have to ask Robert. It's all in his hands. He's retired a million times before, but he is 78. One of the things we have been doing of late is recording studio versions of the new material [only previously played live]. We've used the live recordings as a template, and I've done guitars, overdubs and backing vocals. Whether that comes out as a King Crimson album or whether it lies in the vaults, I don't know.\"\nEight months later, in a July 2025 interview with \"Goldmine\" magazine, Jakszyk stated that \"as we speak, we're doing a King Crimson studio album\" and confirmed that it featured the most recent band line-up. He cautioned \"when that will come out and what format or how \u2014 that's beyond my brief. But yeah, we've been doing it piecemeal, and then a couple of months ago, the management said, 'Can we?' So, yeah. I've been recording that with a view to it coming out in some format at some point. But who knows when?... There also are future plans for some live film of us playing in various places. There's an ongoing thread. Whether that ever means we'll ever play live again, I don't know, especially after Robert's recent [heart attack].\" He confirmed that the new album would feature the studio versions of new songs performed by the band between 2014 and 2021, and that \"some other bits and pieces will emerge from putting it together. I think so.\" This news suggests that despite Fripp's 2021 announcement, King Crimson may still be active (albeit as a studio project). \nIn a DGM homepage and Facebook posting on 11 July 2025, while suggesting the possibility of \"an album the very sound of which no-one has ever heard before. A sound driven by the three drummers,\" David Singleton both clarified and cautioned speculation about the album. He commented that \"it is true that [the three] drummers have now recorded studio versions of their parts \u2013 separately, so that there is perfect separation. So there is indeed the seed of a new recording. Whether it is an album, whether it sees the light of day, whether it is something else is unknown. As is the outcome of any creative process. So yes, recordings have taken place. We are building a new studio, and when it is complete I am looking forward to seeing what may, or may not, exist. Getting excited about the possibility of a new album, as has been happening in some quarters, is however somewhat premature. Carts before horses.\"\nNo release date or name has yet been given regarding this project, and Fripp himself has not commented on the rumours other than drawing attention to Singleton's comments.\nMusical style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen it comes to the absurdly resourceful bench of progressive rock bands, King Crimson were probably the most versatile of them all. [...] Ceaselessly shifting line-ups [inspired] entirely new sounds. One could play a song from their first, third, and fifth albums and the average listener would have no clue it was the same band. And that, in some regards, is the premise and essence of progressive rock.\nSean Murphy, \"Pop Matters\" (7 March 2023)\nKing Crimson have been described musically as progressive rock, art rock, and post-progressive, with their earlier works being described as proto-prog. Their music was initially grounded in the rock of the 1960s, especially the acid rock and psychedelic rock movements. The band played Donovan's \"Get Thy Bearings\" in concert, and were known to play the Beatles' \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\" in their rehearsals. However, for their own compositions, King Crimson (unlike the rock bands that had come before them) largely stripped away the blues-based foundations of rock music and replaced them with influences derived from classical composers. The first incarnation of King Crimson played the \"Mars\" section of Gustav Holst's suite \"The Planets\" live and later the band used \"Mars\" as a foundation for the song \"Devil's Triangle\". As a result of this influence, \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" is frequently viewed as the nominal starting point of the progressive rock movements. King Crimson also initially displayed strong jazz influences, especially on its signature track \"21st Century Schizoid Man\". The band also drew on English folk music for compositions such as \"Moonchild\" and \"I Talk to the Wind\". In the 1972 lineup, Fripp's intention was to combine the music of Jimi Hendrix, Igor Stravinsky and B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k.\nThe 1981 reunion of the band brought in even more elements, displaying the influence of funk, post-punk, new wave, gamelan music and minimalist classical composers such as Philip Glass, Steve Reich and Terry Riley. For its 1994 reunion, King Crimson reassessed both the mid-1970s and 1980s approaches in the light of new technology, intervening music forms such as drum and bass and techno, and further developments in industrial music, as well as expanding the band's ambient textural content via Fripp's Soundscapes.\nThe 2013 version of the band returned, for the most part, to the band's 1960s and 1970s influences and repertoire but addressed them via current technology and rearrangements suited to a larger ensemble of more experienced musicians, while also incorporating the new standard tuning used by Fripp since 1984.\nCompositional approaches.\nSeveral King Crimson compositional approaches remained constant throughout the band's lifetime. These included:\nImprovisation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We're so different from each other that one night someone in the band will play something that the rest of us have never heard before and you just have to listen for a second. Then you react to his statement, usually in a different way than they would expect. It's the improvisation that makes the group amazing for me. You know, taking chances. There is no format really in which we fall into. We discover things while improvising and if they're really basically good ideas we try and work them in as new numbers, all the while keeping the improvisation thing alive and continually expanding.\"\n\u2014King Crimson violinist David Cross on the mid-1970s band's approach to improvisation.\nKing Crimson incorporated improvisation into their performances and studio recordings from the beginning, some of which was embedded into pieces such as \"Moonchild\", \"Providence\", \"Requiem\" and \"No Warning\", including passages of restrained silence, as with Bill Bruford's contribution to the improvised \"Trio\". Rather than using the standard jazz or rock \"jamming\" format for improvisation (in which one soloist at a time takes centre stage while the rest of the band lies back and plays along with established rhythm and chord changes), King Crimson improvisation consisted of musicians collectively making creative decisions and contributions as the music is being played. Individual soloing was largely eschewed; each musician was to listen to each other and to the group sound, to be able to react creatively within the group dynamic. Fripp has used the metaphor of \"magic\" to describe this process, in particular when the method works particularly well.\nSimilarly, King Crimson's improvised music was varied in sound and the band has been able to release several box sets and albums consisting mostly or entirely of improvised music, such as the \"Thrakattak\" album, and the band's series of ProjeKcts. Occasionally, particular improvised pieces were recalled and reworked in different forms at different shows, becoming more and more refined and eventually appearing on official studio releases.\nInfluence and legacy.\nKing Crimson have been influential both on the early 1970s progressive rock movement and numerous contemporary artists. Genesis and Yes were directly influenced by the band's usage of the mellotron, and many King Crimson band members were involved in other notable bands: Bruford in Yes; Lake in Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer; McDonald in Foreigner; Burrell in Bad Company, and Wetton in King Crimson spin-off U.K. and Asia. Canadian rock band Rush's drummer Neil Peart credited the adventurous and innovative style of Michael Giles as an influence on his own approach to percussion.\nKing Crimson's influence extends to many bands from diverse genres, especially of the 1990s and 2000s. Kurt Cobain, the frontman of the grunge band Nirvana, had stated that the album \"Red\" had a major influence on the sound of their final studio album \"In Utero\". Tool are known to be heavily influenced by King Crimson, with vocalist Maynard James Keenan joking on a tour with them: \"Now you know who we ripped off. Just don't tell anyone, especially the members of King Crimson.\" Modern progressive, experimental, psychedelic and indie rock bands have cited them as an influence as well, including MGMT,The Fierce and the Dead, the Mars Volta, Primus, Black Country, New Road, Mystery Jets, Fanfarlo, Phish, and Anekdoten, who first practiced together playing King Crimson songs. Steven Wilson, the leader of Porcupine Tree, was responsible for remixing King Crimson's back catalogue in surround sound and said that the process had an enormous influence on his solo albums, and his band was influenced by King Crimson. In November 2012 the Flaming Lips in collaboration with Stardeath and White Dwarfs released a track-by-track reinterpretation of \"In the Court of the Crimson King\" entitled \"Playing Hide and Seek with the Ghosts of Dawn\". Colin Newman, of Wire, said he saw King Crimson perform many times, and that they influenced him deeply. The seminal hardcore punk group Black Flag acknowledge Wetton-era King Crimson as an influence on their experimental period in the mid-1980s. Melvin Gibbs said that the Rollins Band was influenced most by King Crimson, using similar chords. Bad Religion cites the lyrics of \"21st Century Schizoid Man\" on their single \"21st Century (Digital Boy)\" and the name of their record label, Epitaph (founded by their guitarist Brett Gurewitz), comes from the song of the same name on Crimson's debut album. Living Colour guitarist Vernon Reid considered Robert Fripp as one of his guitar influences.\nKing Crimson have frequently been cited as pioneers of progressive metal and as an influence on bands of this genre, including Dream Theater, Opeth, Mastodon, Between the Buried and Me, Leprous, Haken, the Ocean, Caligula's Horse, Last Chance to Reason, and Indukti. Members of metal bands Mudvayne, Voivod, Enslaved, Yob, Pyrrhon, and Pallbearer have cited King Crimson as an influence. Heavy experimental and avant-garde acts like the Dillinger Escape Plan, Neurosis, Zeni Geva, Ancestors, and Oranssi Pazuzu all cite King Crimson's influence.\nOther artists affected by King Crimson include video game composer Nobuo Uematsu, noise music artist Masami Akita of Merzbow, jazz guitarist Dennis Rea of Land, folktronica exponent Juana Molina, hip hop producer RJD2, hip hop and soul composer Adrian Younge, film director Hal Hartley, and folk-pop singer Ian Kelly.\n\"Golden Wind\", the fifth part of the Japanese manga and anime franchise \"JoJo's Bizarre Adventure\", has its main antagonist Diavolo possess a Stand known as King Crimson. Stephen King's \"The Dark Tower\" also has its main antagonist, the Crimson King, named after the band.\nRelated legacy/cover bands featuring former King Crimson members.\nSince the early 2000s, several bands containing former, recent or current King Crimson members have toured and recorded, performing King Crimson music.\nActive between 2002 and 2005, the 21st Century Schizoid Band reunited several former King Crimson members who had played on the band's first four albums. The band featured Ian McDonald, Mel Collins, Peter Giles and Michael Giles (the latter subsequently replaced by Ian Wallace), and was fronted by Jakko Jakszyk, a decade prior to his own recruitment into King Crimson. The band engaged in several tours, played material from King Crimson's '60s and '70s catalogue, and recorded several live albums. The band disbanded upon Wallace's death in 2007.\nSince 2007, Tony Levin has led the trio Stick Men, which also features Pat Mastelotto. The band was initially completed by Chapman Stick player Michael Bernier, replaced in 2010 by touch guitarist and former Fripp student Markus Reuter. This band includes (and reinterprets) King Crimson compositions in their live sets. Reuter and Mastelotto also play together as a duo (previously called \"Tuner\"), within which they have been known to rework the mid-1980s King Crimson instrumental \"Industry\" live. Starting in 2023, Reuter, Mastelotto and Trey Gunn revived the moniker \"Tuner\" (re-styled as \"Tu-ner\") to perform music from the Double Duo era of King Crimson, plus material from each of their respective solo and combined careers.\nBetween 2011 and 2014, Stick Men and Adrian Belew's Power Trio band (Belew plus drummer Tobias Ralph and bass player Julie Slick) joined forces to play and tour as The Crimson ProjeKCt, covering the music made during the '80s and '90s. Following the return of King Crimson in 2014, the Crimson ProjeKct name has been formally abandoned, but the Stick Men and the Power Trio have still performed together from time to time, usually under names like \"Belew, Levin, Mastelotto and friends\".\nDuring his solo career, including performances with the Power Trio, Adrian Belew has performed various versions of King Crimson songs.\nIn March 2024, a new spin-off supergroup performing the 1980s King Crimson repertoire was announced: this featured former members Adrian Belew and Tony Levin along with guitarist Steve Vai and drummer Danny Carey of Tool. Fripp and Bruford had both declined offers to join, but gave their blessings to the group. Fripp also suggested the eventual project name, \"Beat\" (after the 1982 King Crimson album). The band went on to tour the United States during the latter half of 2024.\nBand members.\nCurrent\nFormer\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16617", "revid": "4546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16617", "title": "Killfile", "text": ""}
{"id": "16618", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16618", "title": "Kishka", "text": "Kishka may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16619", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16619", "title": "Kilogram", "text": "Metric unit of mass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe kilogram (also spelled kilogramme) is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI), equal to one thousand grams. It has the unit symbol kg. The word \"kilogram\" is formed from the combination of the metric prefix kilo- (meaning one thousand) and gram; it is commonly shortened to \"kilo\" (plural \"kilos\").\nThe kilogram is an SI base unit, defined ultimately in terms of three defining constants of the SI, namely a specific transition frequency of the caesium-133 atom, the speed of light, and the Planck constant. A properly equipped metrology laboratory can calibrate a mass measurement instrument such as a Kibble balance as a primary standard for the kilogram mass.\nThe kilogram was originally defined in 1795 during the French Revolution as the mass of one litre of water (originally at 0\u00a0\u00b0C, later changed to the temperature of its maximum density, approximately 4\u00a0\u00b0C). The current definition of a kilogram agrees with this original definition to within 30 parts per million (0.003%). In 1799, the platinum \"Kilogramme des Archives\" replaced it as the standard of mass. In 1889, a cylinder composed of platinum\u2013iridium, the International Prototype of the Kilogram (IPK), became the standard of the unit of mass for the metric system and remained so for 130 years, before the current standard was adopted in 2019.\nDefinition.\nThe kilogram is defined in terms of three defining constants: \nThe formal definition according to the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nDefined in term of those units, the kg is formulated as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;kg = \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\u2248 ().\nThis definition is generally consistent with previous definitions: the kilogram remains within 30 parts per million (0.003%) of the mass of one litre of water at the temperature of its maximum density (approximately 4\u00a0\u00b0C), with the density of water at that temperature very close to 1\u00a0kg/L.\nName and terminology.\nThe kilogram is the only base SI unit with an SI prefix (\"kilo\") as part of its name. The word \"kilogramme\" or \"kilogram\" is derived from the French , which itself was a learned coinage, prefixing the Greek stem of \"a thousand\" to , a Late Latin term for \"a small weight\", itself from Greek . \nThe word was written into French law in 1795, in the \"Decree of 18 Germinal\",\nwhich revised the provisional system of units introduced by the French National Convention two years earlier, where the had been defined as weight () of a cubic centimetre of water, equal to 1/1000 of a . In the decree of 1795, the term thus replaced , and replaced .\nThe French spelling was adopted in Great Britain when the word was used for the first time in English in 1795, with the spelling \"kilogram\" being adopted in the United States. In the United Kingdom both spellings are used, with \"kilogram\" having become by far the more common. UK law regulating the units to be used when trading by weight or measure does not prevent the use of either spelling.\nIn the 19th century the French word , a shortening of , was imported into the English language where it has been used to mean both kilogram and kilometre. While \"kilo\" as an alternative is acceptable, to \"The Economist\" for example, the Canadian government's Termium Plus system states that \"SI (International System of Units) usage, followed in scientific and technical writing\" does not allow its usage and it is described as \"a common informal name\" on Russ Rowlett's Dictionary of Units of Measurement. When the United States Congress gave the metric system legal status in 1866, it permitted the use of the word \"kilo\" as an alternative to the word \"kilogram\", but in 1990 revoked the status of the word \"kilo\".\nThe SI system was introduced in 1960 and in 1970 the BIPM started publishing the \"SI Brochure\", which contains all relevant decisions and recommendations by the CGPM concerning units. The \"SI Brochure\" states that \"It is not permissible to use abbreviations for unit symbols or unit names ...\".\nFor use with east Asian character sets, the SI symbol is encoded as a single Unicode character, in the CJK Compatibility block.\nRedefinition based on fundamental constants.\nThe replacement of the International Prototype of the Kilogram (IPK) as the primary standard was motivated by evidence accumulated over a long period of time that the mass of the IPK and its replicas had been changing; the IPK had diverged from its replicas by approximately 50\u00a0micrograms since their manufacture late in the 19th century. This led to several competing efforts to develop measurement technology precise enough to warrant replacing the kilogram artefact with a definition based directly on physical fundamental constants.\nThe International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) approved a revision in November 2018 that defines the kilogram by defining the Planck constant to be exactly , effectively defining the kilogram in terms of the second and the metre. The new definition took effect on 20 May 2019.\nPrior to the redefinition, the kilogram and several other SI units based on the kilogram were defined by a man-made metal artifact: the \"Kilogramme des Archives\" from 1799 to 1889, and the IPK from 1889 to 2019.\nIn 1960, the metre, previously similarly having been defined with reference to a single platinum-iridium bar with two marks on it, was redefined in terms of an invariant physical constant (the wavelength of a particular emission of light emitted by krypton, and later the speed of light) so that the standard can be independently reproduced in different laboratories by following a written specification.\nAt the 94th Meeting of the CIPM in 2005, it was recommended that the same be done with the kilogram.\nIn October 2010, the CIPM voted to submit a resolution for consideration at the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM), to \"take note of an intention\" that the kilogram be defined in terms of the Planck constant, \"h\" (which has dimensions of energy times time, thus mass \u00d7 length2 / time) together with other physical constants. This resolution was accepted by the 24th conference of the CGPM in October 2011 and further discussed at the 25th conference in 2014. Although the Committee recognised that significant progress had been made, they concluded that the data did not yet appear sufficiently robust to adopt the revised definition, and that work should continue to enable the adoption at the 26th meeting, scheduled for 2018. Such a definition would theoretically permit any apparatus that was capable of delineating the kilogram in terms of the Planck constant to be used as long as it possessed sufficient precision, accuracy and stability. The Kibble balance is one way to do this.\nAs part of this project, a variety of very different technologies and approaches were considered and explored over many years. Some of these approaches were based on equipment and procedures that would enable the reproducible production of new, kilogram-mass prototypes on demand (albeit with extraordinary effort) using measurement techniques and material properties that are ultimately based on, or traceable to, physical constants. Others were based on devices that measured either the acceleration or weight of hand-tuned kilogram test masses and that expressed their magnitudes in electrical terms via special components that permit traceability to physical constants. All approaches depend on converting a weight measurement to a mass and therefore require precise measurement of the strength of gravity in laboratories (gravimetry). All approaches would have precisely fixed one or more constants of nature at a defined value.\nSI multiples.\nBecause an SI unit may not have multiple prefixes (see SI prefix), prefixes are added to \"gram\", rather than the base unit \"kilogram\", which already has a prefix as part of its name. For instance, one-millionth of a kilogram is 1mg (one milligram), not 1\u03bckg (one microkilogram).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16622", "revid": "48974111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16622", "title": "Knitting", "text": "Method of forming fabric\nKnitting is the process of interlooping yarn to create textile fabric made of interconnected loops, done by hand, machine or both.\nKnitting creates stitches: loops of yarn in a row; the loops are created with a pair of knitting needles, which can either be straight and cylindrical or in \"the round\" with (often times plastic) tubes joining the ends of both. There are usually many \"active stitches\" on the needle at one time. Knitted fabric consists of a number of consecutive rows of connected loops that intermesh with the next and previous rows. As each row is formed, each newly created loop is pulled through one or more loops from the prior row and placed on the 'gaining needle' (the needle that is receiving newly created stitches) so that the loops from the prior row can be pulled off the other needle without unraveling.\nDifferences in yarn (varying in fiber type, \"weight\", uniformity and \"twist\"), needle size, and stitch type allow for a variety of knitted fabrics with different properties, including color, texture, thickness, heat retention, water resistance, and integrity. A small sample of knitwork is known as a \"swatch\" and helps the maker determine the gauge of the intended work.\nEtymology of the words knit and knitting.\nThere are several origins of the word knit and knitting which include the German derivation from the word \"\"knutten\" (to tie), the Old Norse word \"knytja\", and the Old English words \"cnyttan\"\" (to tie a knot, bind together, fasten by tieing) and \"cnotta\" (knot).\nN\u00e5lebinding (Danish: literally \"binding with a needle\" or \"needle-binding\") is a fabric creation technique predating both knitting and crochet.\nHistory and culture.\nKnitting is believed to be an evolution of the ancient craft of n\u00e5lbinding, the Norwegian word for \u201cneedle binding.\u201d Artifacts of this form of fabric making have been found in many regions including Egypt, China, Denmark, and Sweden, dating as far back as 4200 B.C.E. In n\u00e5lbinding, fabric is created through forming loops and knots of yarn with a single needle. The exact origins of the invention knitting are unknown, however the earliest known examples are cotton socks dating from the 11th century, found in the remains of the city of Fustat, now part of Cairo.\nThe first commercial knitting guilds appear in Western Europe in the early fifteenth century (Tournai in 1429, Barcelona in 1496). The Guild of Saint Fiacre was founded in Paris in 1527 but the archives mention an organization (not necessarily a guild) of knitters from 1268. The occupation \"cap knitter\" was described Margaret Yeo, of London, in 1473 as these textile artists primarily produced knit caps and dyed stockings.\nIn 1589, William Lee of Nottinghamshire invented the first knitting frame, or stocking frame, which was an early form of the knitting machine. Lee petitioned Queen Elizabeth I for a patent but was denied due to the coarse nature of the frame-knit fabric and the fear that frame knitting would take away the jobs of hand knitters in England. Lee improved the knitting frame to accommodate a finer gauge, or number of stitches per inch, producing a smoother fabric, but his petition for a patent failed following the death of his court sponsor and apprentice, Lord Hunsdon, in 1596. Lee traveled to Normandy, France, and later Paris along with a group of apprentices in search of court sponsorship for his invention. After further trials and tribulations due to the assassination of King Henry IV in 1610, Lee was unable to establish a successful business in Paris. William Lee died in Paris in 1614, and his brother James Lee along with William's apprentice, Aston, adopted the petition to patent the knitting machine in England. By 1620, frame knitting was an established mode of production of knitted garments.\nWith the invention of the stocking frame, knitting \"by hand\" became a craft used by country people with easy access to fiber. Similar to quilting, spinning, and needlepoint, hand knitting became a leisure activity for the wealthy. English Roman Catholic priest and former Anglican bishop, Richard Rutt, authored a history of the craft in \"A History of Hand Knitting\" (Batsford, 1987). His collection of books about knitting is now housed at the Winchester School of Art (University of Southampton).\nDifferences and similarities between knitting and crocheting.\nWhile creating knitting by hand, usually two needles are used to hold the live stitches. While crochet uses a single hook, usually creating one stitch at a time, finishing one stitch before creating the next. Knitted fabric tends to be flexible and flowing, the stitches forming a shape that is similar to a \"V\". Crochet fabric has a more structured feel, each stitch consisting of several loops entwined. Each textile has its specialties and methods. Because of the different nature of each stitch, crochet fabric uses more yarn per stitch, is more structured, and is more flexible in the structures that can be created, not being restrained to create a stitch in the following stitch. Knitted fabric tends to be thinner, more flexible, and usually has easier-to-understand patterns because each new stitch must go into the next stitch. Because of the differences in how the fabrics are created, the first knitting machine was invented in Victorian times, while a machine that can stitch a crochet fabric has yet to be produced. Although different methods, they can create similar projects using the same fibers and yarns.\nStructure.\nCourses and wales.\nLike weaving, knitting is a technique for producing a two-dimensional fabric made from a one-dimensional yarn or thread. In weaving, threads are usually straight, running parallel either lengthwise (warp threads) or crosswise (weft threads). By contrast, the yarn in knitted fabrics follows a meandering path (a \"course\"), forming symmetric loops (also called bights) symmetrically above and below the mean path of the yarn. These meandering loops can be easily stretched in different directions giving knit fabrics much more elasticity than woven fabrics. Depending on the yarn and knitting pattern, knitted garments can stretch as much as 500%. For this reason, knitting was initially developed for garments that must be elastic or stretch in response to the wearer's motions, such as socks and hosiery. For comparison, woven garments stretch mainly along one or other of a related pair of directions that lie roughly diagonally between the warp and the weft, while contracting in the other direction of the pair (stretching and contracting with the \"bias\"), and are not very elastic, unless they are woven from stretchable material such as spandex. Knitted garments are often more form-fitting than woven garments, since their elasticity allows them to contour to the body's outline more closely; by contrast, curvature is introduced into most woven garments only with sewn darts, flares, gussets and gores, the seams of which lower the elasticity of the woven fabric still further. Extra curvature can be introduced into knitted garments without seams, as in the heel of a sock; the effect of darts, flares, etc. can be obtained with short rows or by increasing or decreasing the number of stitches. Thread used in weaving is usually much finer than the yarn used in knitting, which can give the knitted fabric more bulk and less drape than a woven fabric.\nIf they are not secured, the loops of a knitted course will come undone when their yarn is pulled; this is known as \"ripping out\", \"unravelling\" knitting, or humorously, \"frogging\" (because the knitter will 'rip it', this sounds like a frog croaking: 'rib-bit'). To secure a stitch, at least one new loop is passed through it. Although the new stitch is itself unsecured (\"active\" or \"live\"), it secures the stitch(es) suspended from it. A sequence of stitches in which each stitch is suspended from the next is called a \"wale\". To secure the initial stitches of a knitted fabric, a method for casting on is used; to secure the final stitches in a wale, one uses a method of binding/casting off. During knitting, the active stitches are secured mechanically, either from individual hooks (in knitting machines) or from a knitting needle or frame in hand-knitting.\nWeft and warp knitting.\nThere are two major varieties of knitting: weft knitting and warp knitting. In the more common \"weft knitting\", the wales are perpendicular to the course of the yarn. In warp knitting, the wales and courses run roughly parallel. In weft knitting, the entire fabric may be produced from a single yarn, by adding stitches to each wale in turn, moving across the fabric as in a raster scan. By contrast, in warp knitting, one yarn is required for every wale. Since a typical piece of knitted fabric may have hundreds of wales, warp knitting is typically done by machine, whereas weft knitting is done by both hand and machine. Warp-knitted fabrics such as tricot and milanese are resistant to runs, and are commonly used in lingerie.\nWeft-knit fabrics may also be knit with multiple yarns, usually to produce interesting color patterns. The two most common approaches are intarsia and stranded colorwork. In intarsia, the yarns are used in well-segregated regions, e.g., a red apple on a field of green; in that case, the yarns are kept on separate spools and only one is knitted at any time. In the more complex stranded approach, two or more yarns alternate repeatedly within one row and all the yarns must be carried along the row, as seen in Fair Isle sweaters. Double knitting can produce two separate knitted fabrics simultaneously (e.g., two socks). However, the two fabrics are usually integrated into one, giving it great warmth and excellent drape.\nKnit and purl stitches.\nIn securing the previous stitch in a wale, the next stitch can pass through the previous loop from either below or above. If the former, the stitch is denoted as a 'knit stitch' or a 'plain stitch;' if the latter, as a 'purl stitch'. The two stitches are related in that a knit stitch seen from one side of the fabric appears as a purl stitch on the other side.\nThe two types of stitches have a different visual effect; the knit stitches look like 'V's stacked vertically, whereas the purl stitches look like a wavy horizontal line across the fabric. Patterns and pictures can be created in knitted fabrics by using knit and purl stitches as \"pixels\"; however, such pixels are usually rectangular, rather than square, depending on the gauge/tension of the knitting. Individual stitches, or rows of stitches, may be made taller by drawing more yarn into the new loop (an elongated stitch), which is the basis for uneven knitting: a row of tall stitches may alternate with one or more rows of short stitches for an interesting visual effect. Short and tall stitches may also alternate within a row, forming a fish-like oval pattern.\nIn the simplest of hand-knitted fabrics, every row of stitches are all knit (or all purl); this creates a garter stitch fabric. Alternating rows of all knit stitches and all purl stitches creates a stockinette stitch/stocking stitch pattern. Vertical stripes (ribbing) are possible by having alternating wales of knit and purl stitches. For example, a common choice is 2x2 ribbing, in which two wales of knit stitches are followed by two wales of purl stitches, etc. Horizontal striping (welting) is also possible, by alternating \"rows\" of knit and purl stitches. Checkerboard patterns (basketweave) are also possible, the smallest of which is known as \"seed/moss stitch\": the stitches alternate between knit and purl in every wale and along every row.\nFabrics in which each knitted row is followed by a purled row, such as in stockinette/stocking stitch, have a tendency to curl\u2014top and bottom curl toward the front (or knitted side) while the sides curl toward the back (or purled side); by contrast, those in which knit and purl stitches are arranged symmetrically (such as ribbing, garter stitch or seed/moss stitch) have more texture and tend to lie flat. Wales of purl stitches have a tendency to recede, whereas those of knit stitches tend to come forward, giving the fabric more stretchability. Thus, the purl wales in ribbing tend to be invisible, since the neighboring knit wales come forward. Conversely, rows of purl stitches tend to form an embossed ridge relative to a row of knit stitches. This is the basis of shadow knitting, in which the appearance of a knitted fabric changes when viewed from different directions.\nTypically, a new stitch is passed through a single unsecured ('active') loop, thus lengthening that wale by one stitch. However, this need not be so; the new loop may be passed through an already secured stitch lower down on the fabric, or even between secured stitches (a dip stitch). Depending on the distance between where the loop is drawn through the fabric and where it is knitted, dip stitches can produce a subtle stippling or long lines across the surface of the fabric, e.g., the lower leaves of a flower. The new loop may also be passed between two stitches in the 'present' row, thus clustering the intervening stitches; this approach is often used to produce a smocking effect in the fabric. The new loop may also be passed through 'two or more' previous stitches, producing a decrease and merging wales together. The merged stitches need not be from the same row; for example, a tuck can be formed by knitting stitches together from two different rows, producing a raised horizontal welt on the fabric.\nNot every stitch in a row need be knitted; some may be 'missed' (unknitted and passed to the active needle) and knitted on a subsequent row. This is known as slip-stitch knitting. The slipped stitches are naturally longer than the knitted ones. For example, a stitch slipped for one row before knitting would be roughly twice as tall as its knitted counterparts. This can produce interesting visual effects, although the resulting fabric is more rigid because the slipped stitch 'pulls' on its neighbours and is less deformable. Mosaic knitting is a form of slip-stitch knitting that knits alternate colored rows and uses slip stitches to form patterns; mosaic-knit fabrics tend to be stiffer than patterned fabrics produced by other methods such as Fair-Isle knitting.\nIn some cases, a stitch may be deliberately left unsecured by a new stitch, and its wale allowed to disassemble. This is known as drop-stitch knitting, and produces a vertical ladder of see-through holes in the fabric, corresponding to where the wale had been.\nRight- and left-plaited stitches.\nBoth knit and purl stitches may be twisted: usually once if at all, but sometimes twice and (very rarely) thrice. When seen from above, the twist can be clockwise (right yarn over left) or counterclockwise (left yarn over right); these are denoted as right- and left-plaited stitches, respectively. Hand-knitters generally produce right-plaited stitches by knitting or purling through the back loops, i.e., passing the needle through the initial stitch in an unusual way, but wrapping the yarn as usual. By contrast, the left-plaited stitch is generally formed by hand-knitters by wrapping the yarn in the opposite way, rather than by any change in the needle. Although they are mirror images in form, right- and left-plaited stitches are functionally equivalent. Both types of plaited stitches give a subtle but interesting visual texture, and tend to draw the fabric inwards, making it stiffer. Plaited stitches are a common method for knitting jewelry from fine metal wire.\nEdges and joins between fabrics.\nThe initial and final edges of a knitted fabric are known as the \"cast-on\" and \"bound/cast-off\" edges. The side edges are known as the \"selvages\"; the word derives from \"self-edges\", meaning that the stitches do not need to be secured by anything else. Many types of selvages have been developed, with different elastic and ornamental properties.\nVertical and horizontal edges can be introduced within a knitted fabric, e.g., for button holes, by binding/casting off and re-casting on again (horizontal) or by knitting the fabrics on either side of a vertical edge separately.\nTwo knitted fabrics can be joined by embroidery-based grafting methods, most commonly the Kitchener stitch. New wales can be begun from any of the edges of a knitted fabric; this is known as picking up stitches and is the basis for entrelac, in which the wales run perpendicular to one another in a checkerboard pattern.\nCables, increases, and lace.\nOrdinarily, stitches are knitted in the same order in every row, and the wales of the fabric run parallel and vertically along the fabric. However, this need not be so, since the order in which stitches are knitted may be permuted so that wales cross over one another, forming a cable pattern. Cable patterns tend to draw the fabric together, making it denser and less elastic; Aran sweaters are a common form of knitted cabling. Arbitrarily complex braid patterns can be done in cable knitting, with the proviso that the wales must move ever upwards; it is generally impossible for a wale to move up and then down the fabric. Knitters have developed methods for giving the illusion of a circular wale, such as appear in Celtic knots, but these are inexact approximations. However, such circular wales are possible using Swiss darning, a form of embroidery, or by knitting a tube separately and attaching it to the knitted fabric.\nA wale can split into two or more wales using increases, most commonly involving a yarn over. Depending on how the increase is done, there is often a hole in the fabric at the point of the increase. This is used to great effect in lace knitting, which consists of making patterns and pictures using such holes, rather than with the stitches themselves. The large and many holes in lacy knitting makes it extremely elastic; for example, some Shetland \"wedding-ring\" shawls are so fine that they may be drawn through a wedding ring.\nBy combining increases and decreases, it is possible to make the direction of a wale slant away from vertical, even in weft knitting. This is the basis for bias knitting, and can be used for visual effect, similar to the direction of a brush-stroke in oil painting.\nOrnamentations and additions.\nVarious point-like ornaments may be added to knitting for their look or to improve the wear of the fabric. Examples include various types of bobbles, sequins and beads. Long loops can also be drawn out and secured, forming a \"shaggy\" texture to the fabric; this is known as loop knitting. Additional patterns can be made on the surface of the knitted fabric using embroidery; if the embroidery resembles knitting, it is often called Swiss darning. Various closures for the garments, such as frogs and buttons can be added; usually buttonholes are knitted into the garment, rather than cut.\nOrnamental pieces may also be knitted separately and then attached using applique. For example, differently colored leaves and petals of a flower could be knit separately and attached to form the final picture. Separately knitted tubes can be applied to a knitted fabric to form complex Celtic knots and other patterns that would be difficult to knit.\nUnknitted yarns may be worked into knitted fabrics for warmth, as is done in tufting and \"weaving\" (also known as \"couching\").\nProperties of fabrics.\nThe topology of a knitted fabric is relatively complex. Unlike woven fabrics, where strands usually run straight horizontally and vertically, yarn that has been knitted follows a looped path along its row, as with the red strand in the diagram in this section, in which the loops of one row have all been pulled through the loops of the row below it.\nBecause there is no single straight line of yarn anywhere in the pattern, a knitted piece of fabric can stretch in all directions. This elasticity is all but unavailable in woven fabrics which only stretch along the bias. Many modern stretchy garments, even as they rely on elastic synthetic materials for some stretch, also achieve at least some of their stretch through knitted patterns.\nThe basic knitted fabric (as in the diagram, and usually called a \"stocking\" or \"stockinette\" pattern) has a definite \"right side\" and \"wrong side\". On the right side, the visible portions of the loops are the verticals connecting two rows which are arranged in a grid of \"V\" shapes. On the wrong side, the ends of the loops are visible, both the tops and bottoms, creating a much more bumpy texture sometimes called \"reverse stockinette\". Despite being the \"wrong side\", reverse stockinette is frequently used as a pattern in its own right. Because the yarn holding rows together is all on the front, and the yarn holding side-by-side stitches together is all on the back, stockinette fabric has a strong tendency to curl toward the front on the top and bottom, and toward the back on the left and right side.\nStitches can be worked from either side, and various patterns are created by mixing regular knit stitches with the \"wrong side\" stitches, known as purl stitches, either in columns (ribbing), rows (garter, welting), or more complex patterns. Each fabric has different properties: a garter stitch has much more vertical stretch, while ribbing stretches much more horizontally. Because of their front-back symmetry, these two fabrics have little curl, making them popular as edging, even when their stretch properties are not desired.\nThe basic knitted fabrics are referred to by different names in the setting of industrial manufacture. The fabric known by hand knitters as stockinette is called plain knit or jersey, and the fabric known by hand knitters as garter is called purl knitting or links-and-links.\nDifferent stitch combinations produce varied fabrics. \nTexture.\nThe most common texture for a knitted garment is that generated by the flat stockinette stitch\u2014as seen, though very small, in machine-made stockings and T-shirts\u2014which is worked in the round as nothing but knit stitches, and worked flat as alternating rows of knit and purl. Other simple textures can be made with nothing but knit and purl stitches, including garter stitch, ribbing, and moss and seed stitches. Adding a \"slip stitch\" (where a loop is passed from one needle to the other) allows for a wide range of textures, including heel and linen stitches as well as a number of more complicated patterns.\nSome more advanced knitting techniques create a surprising variety of complex textures. Combining certain increases, which can create small eyelet holes in the resulting fabric, with assorted decreases is key to creating knitted lace, a very open fabric resembling needle or bobbin lace. Open vertical stripes can be created using the drop-stitch knitting technique. Changing the order of stitches from one row to the next, usually with the help of a cable needle or stitch holder, is key to cable knitting, producing an endless variety of cables, honeycombs, ropes, and Aran sweater patterning. Entrelac forms a rich checkerboard texture by knitting small squares, picking up their side edges, and knitting more squares to continue the piece.\nFair Isle knitting uses two or more colored yarns to create patterns and forms a thicker and less flexible fabric.\nThe appearance of a garment is also affected by the \"weight\" of the yarn, which describes the thickness of the spun fibre. The thicker the yarn, the more visible and apparent stitches will be; the thinner the yarn, the finer the texture.\nColor.\nPlenty of finished knitting projects never use more than a single color of yarn, but there are many ways to work in multiple colors. Some yarns are dyed to be either \"variegated\" (changing color every few stitches in a random fashion) or \"self-striping\" (changing every few rows). More complicated techniques permit large fields of color (intarsia, for example), busy small-scale patterns of color (such as Fair Isle), or both (double knitting and slip-stitch color, for example).\nYarn with multiple shades of the same hue are called \"ombre\", while a yarn with multiple hues may be known as a given \"colorway\"; a green, red and yellow yarn might be dubbed the \"Parrot Colorway\" by its manufacturer, for example. \"Heathered\" yarns contain small amounts of fibre of different colours, while \"tweed\" yarns may have greater amounts of different colored fibres.\nHand knitting process.\nThere are many hundreds of different knitting stitches used by hand knitters. A piece of hand knitting begins with the process of \"casting on\", which involves the initial creation of the stitches on the needle. Different methods of casting on are used for different effects: one may be stretchy enough for lace, while another provides a decorative edging. \"Provisional\" cast-ons are used when the knitting will continue in both directions from the cast-on. There are various methods employed to cast on, such as the \"thumb method\" (also known as \"slingshot\" or \"long-tail\" cast-ons), where the stitches are created by a series of loops that will, when knitted, give a very loose edge ideal for \"picking up stitches\" and knitting a border; the \"double needle method\" (also known as \"knit-on\" or \"cable cast-on\"), whereby each loop placed on the needle is then \"knitted on\", which produces a firmer edge ideal on its own as a border; and many more. The number of active stitches remains the same as when cast on unless stitches are added (an increase) or removed (a decrease).\nMost Western-style hand knitters follow either the English style (in which the yarn is held in the right hand) or the Continental style (in which the yarn is held in the left hand).\nThere are also different ways to insert the needle into the stitch. Knitting through the front of a stitch is called Western knitting. Going through the back of a stitch is called Eastern knitting. A third method, called combination knitting, goes through the front of a purl stitch and the back of a knit stitch.\nOnce the hand knitted piece is finished, the remaining live stitches are \"cast off\". Casting (or \"binding\") off loops the stitches across each other so they can be removed from the needle without unravelling the item. Although the mechanics are different from casting on, there is a similar variety of methods.\nIn hand knitting certain articles of clothing, especially larger ones like sweaters, the final knitted garment will be made of several knitted pieces, with individual sections of the garment hand knitted separately and then sewn together. Seamless knitting, where a whole garment is hand knit as a single piece, is also possible. Elizabeth Zimmermann is probably the best-known proponent of seamless or circular hand knitting techniques. Smaller items, such as socks and hats, are usually knit in one piece on double-pointed needles or circular needles. Hats in particular can be started \"top down\" on double pointed needles with the increases added until the preferred size is achieved, switching to an appropriate circular needle when enough stitches have been added. Care must be taken to bind off at a tension that will allow the \"give\" needed to comfortably fit on the head. (See \"Circular knitting\".)\nMachine knitting.\nKnitting can also be performed by machines.\u00a0The first knitting machine, known as the stocking frame, was invented in England in 1589. Modern knitting machines, both domestic and industrial, are either flat-bed or circular. Flat-bed knitting machines knit back and forth, producing a flat piece of fabric.\u00a0Flat-bed machines can produce uniform-width fabric which can be cut and sewn into garments, or they can produce shaped pieces which can be seamed to make garments without cutting. The latter is known as full-fashioned knitting. Circular knitting machines knit in a continuous circle, producing a tubular piece of fabric.\u00a0Similarly to knitted fabrics manufactured on flat-bed machines, a tube of uniform-width fabric may be cut along one side to produce flat fabric which can be cut and sewn into garments.\u00a0Fabric produced in this way can be cheaper than fabric produced on a flat-bed machine, as circular machines can operate at higher speed.\u00a0Circular knitting machines can also be used to create shaped, finished articles, such as socks.\nMaterials.\nYarn.\nYarn for hand-knitting is usually sold as balls or skeins (hanks), and it may also be wound on spools or cones. Skeins and balls are generally sold with a \"yarn-band\", a label that describes the yarn's weight, length, dye lot, fiber content, washing instructions, suggested needle size, likely gauge/tension, etc. It is common practice to save the yarn band for future reference, especially if additional skeins must be purchased. Knitters generally ensure that the yarn for a project comes from a single dye lot. The dye lot specifies a group of skeins that were dyed together and thus have precisely the same color; skeins from different dye-lots, even if very similar in color, are usually slightly different and may produce a visible horizontal stripe when knitted together. If a knitter buys insufficient yarn of a single dye lot to complete a project, additional skeins of the same dye lot can sometimes be obtained from other yarn stores or online. Otherwise, knitters can alternate skeins every few rows to help the dye lots blend together easier.\nThe thickness or weight of the yarn is a significant factor in determining the gauge/tension, i.e., how many stitches and rows are required to cover a given area for a given stitch pattern. Thicker yarns generally require thicker knitting needles, whereas thinner yarns may be knit with thick or thin needles. Hence, thicker yarns generally require fewer stitches, and therefore less time, to knit up a given garment. Patterns and motifs are coarser with thicker yarns; thicker yarns produce bold visual effects, whereas thinner yarns are best for refined patterns. Yarns are grouped by thickness into the following categories: lace, superfine (fingering or sock), fine (sport), light (double knit or DK), medium (worsted and aran), bulky, superbulky, and jumbo; quantitatively, thickness is measured by the number of wraps per inch (WPI). In the British Commonwealth (outside North America) yarns are measured as 1ply, 2ply, 3ply, 4ply, 5ply, 8ply (or double knit),10ply and 12ply (triple knit). The related \"weight per unit length\" is usually measured in tex or denier.\nBefore knitting, the knitter will typically transform a hank/skein into a ball where the yarn emerges from the center of the ball; this making the knitting easier by preventing the yarn from becoming easily tangled. This transformation may be done by hand, or with a device known as a ballwinder. When knitting, some knitters enclose their balls in jars to keep them clean and untangled with other yarns; the free yarn passes through a small hole in the jar-lid.\nA yarn's usefulness for a knitting project is judged by several factors, such as its \"loft\" (its ability to trap air), its \"resilience\" (elasticity under tension), its washability and colorfastness, its \"hand\" (its feel, particularly softness vs. scratchiness), its durability against abrasion, its resistance to pilling, its \"hairiness\" (fuzziness), its tendency to twist or untwist, its overall weight and drape, its blocking and felting qualities, its comfort (breathability, moisture absorption, wicking properties) and of course its look, which includes its color, sheen, smoothness and ornamental features. Other factors include allergenicity; speed of drying; resistance to chemicals, moths, and mildew; melting point and flammability; retention of static electricity; and the propensity to become stained and to accept dyes. Different factors may be more significant than others for different knitting projects, so there is no one \"best\" yarn. The resilience and propensity to (un)twist are general properties that affect the ease of hand-knitting. More resilient yarns are more forgiving of irregularities in tension; highly twisted yarns are sometimes difficult to knit, whereas untwisting yarns can lead to split stitches, in which not all the yarn is knitted into a stitch. A key factor in knitting is \"stitch definition\", corresponding to how well complicated stitch patterns can be seen when made from a given yarn. Smooth, highly spun yarns are best for showing off stitch patterns; at the other extreme, very fuzzy yarns or eyelash yarns have poor stitch definition, and any complicated stitch pattern would be invisible.\nAlthough knitting may be done with ribbons, metal wire or more exotic filaments, most yarns are made by spinning fibers. In spinning, the fibers are twisted so that the yarn resists breaking under tension; the twisting may be done in either direction, resulting in a Z-twist or S-twist yarn. If the fibers are first aligned by combing them, the yarn is smoother and called a \"worsted\"; by contrast, if the fibers are carded but not combed, the yarn is fuzzier and called \"woolen-spun\". The fibers making up a yarn may be continuous \"filament\" fibers such as silk and many synthetics, or they may be \"staples\" (fibers of an average length, typically a few inches); naturally filament fibers are sometimes cut up into staples before spinning. The strength of the spun yarn against breaking is determined by the amount of twist, the length of the fibers and the thickness of the yarn. In general, yarns become stronger with more twist (also called \"worst\"), longer fibers and thicker yarns (more fibers); for example, thinner yarns require more twist than do thicker yarns to resist breaking under tension. The thickness of the yarn may vary along its length; a \"slub\" is a much thicker section in which a mass of fibers is incorporated into the yarn.\nThe spun fibers are generally divided into animal fibers, plant and synthetic fibers. These fiber types are chemically different, corresponding to proteins, carbohydrates and synthetic polymers, respectively. Animal fibers include silk, but generally are long hairs of animals such as sheep (wool), goat (angora, or cashmere goat), rabbit (angora), llama, alpaca, dog, cat, camel, yak, and muskox (qiviut). Plants used for fibers include cotton, flax (for linen), bamboo, ramie, hemp, jute, nettle, raffia, yucca, coconut husk, banana fiber, soy and corn. Rayon and acetate fibers are also produced from cellulose mainly derived from trees. Common synthetic fibers include acrylics, polyesters such as dacron and ingeo, nylon and other polyamides, and olefins such as polypropylene. Of these types, wool is generally favored for knitting, chiefly owing to its superior elasticity, warmth and (sometimes) felting. It is also common to blend different fibers in the yarn, e.g., 85% alpaca and 15% silk. Even within a type of fiber, there can be great variety in the length and thickness of the fibers; for example, Merino wool and Egyptian cotton are favored because they produce exceptionally long, thin (fine) fibers for their type.\nA single spun yarn may be knitted as is, or braided or plied with another. In plying, two or more yarns are spun together, almost always in the opposite sense from which they were spun individually; for example, two Z-twist yarns are usually plied with an S-twist. The opposing twist relieves some of the yarns' tendency to curl up and produces a thicker, \"balanced\" yarn. Plied yarns may themselves be plied together, producing \"cabled yarns\" or \"multi-stranded yarns\". Sometimes, the yarns being plied are fed at different rates, so that one yarn loops around the other, as in boucl\u00e9. The single yarns may be dyed separately before plying, or afterwards to give the yarn a uniform look.\nThe dyeing of yarns is a complex art that has a long history. However, yarns need not be dyed. They may be dyed just one color, or a great variety of colors. Dyeing may be done industrially, by hand or even hand-painted onto the yarn. A great variety of synthetic dyes have been developed since the synthesis of indigo dye in the mid-19th century; however, natural dyes are also possible, although they are generally less brilliant. The color-scheme of a yarn is sometimes called its colorway. Variegated yarns can produce interesting visual effects, such as diagonal stripes; conversely, a variegated yarn may obscure a detailed knitting design, such as a cable or lace pattern.\nMetal wire.\nThere are multiple commercial applications for knit fabric made of metal wire by knitting machines. Steel wire of various sizes may be used for electric and magnetic shielding due to its conductivity. Stainless steel may be used in a coffee press for its rust resistance.\nMetal wire is suitable for knitting and used as jewelry. This may incorporate beads of various materials and ornaments such as seashells.\nGlass and wax.\nKnitted glass combines knitting with wax strands, lost-wax casting, mold-making, and kiln-casting.\nTools.\nThe process of knitting has three basic tasks:\nIn very simple cases, knitting can be done without tools, using only the fingers to do these tasks; however, knitting is usually carried out using tools such as knitting needles, knitting machines or rigid frames. Depending on their size and shape, the rigid frames are called stocking frames, knitting boards, knitting rings (also called knitting looms) or knitting spools (also known as knitting knobbies, knitting nancies, or corkers). There is also a technique called knooking of knitting with a crochet hook that has a cord attached to the end, to hold the stitches while they're being worked. Other tools are used to prepare yarn for knitting, to measure and design knitted garments, or to make knitting easier or more comfortable.\nNeedles.\nThere are three basic types of knitting needles (also called \"knitting pins\"). The first and most common type consists of two slender, straight sticks tapered to a point at one end, and with a knob at the other end to prevent stitches from slipping off. Such needles are usually long but, due to the compressibility of knitted fabrics, may be used to knit pieces significantly wider. The most important property of needles is their diameter, which ranges from below 2 to 25\u00a0mm (roughly 1\u00a0inch). The diameter affects the size of stitches, which affects the gauge/tension of the knitting and the elasticity of the fabric. Thus, a simple way to change gauge/tension is to use different needles, which is the basis of uneven knitting. Although the diameter of the knitting needle is often measured in millimeters, there are several measurement systems, particularly those specific to the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan; a conversion table is given at knitting needle. Such knitting needles may be made out of any materials, but the most common materials are metals, wood, bamboo, and plastic. Different materials have different frictions and grip the yarn differently; slick needles such as metallic needles are useful for swift knitting, whereas rougher needles such as bamboo offer more friction and are therefore less prone to dropping stitches. The knitting of new stitches occurs only at the tapered ends. Needles with lighted tips have been sold to allow knitters to knit in the dark.\nThe second type of knitting needles are straight, double-pointed knitting needles (also called \"DPNs\"). Double-pointed needles are tapered at both ends, which allows them to be knit from either end. DPNs are typically used for circular knitting, especially smaller tube-shaped pieces such as sleeves, collars, and socks; usually one needle is active while the others hold the remaining active stitches. DPNs are somewhat shorter (typically 7 inches) and are usually sold in sets of four or five.\nThe third needle type consists of circular needles, which are long, flexible double-pointed needles. The two tapered ends (typically long) are rigid and straight, allowing for easy knitting; however, the two ends are connected by a flexible strand (usually nylon) that allows the two ends to be brought together. Circular needles are typically 24-60\u00a0inches long, and are usually used singly or in pairs; again, the width of the knitted piece may be significantly longer than the length of the circular needle. Interchangeable needles are a subset of circular needles. They are kits consist of pairs of needles with usually nylon cables or cords. The cables/cords are screwed into the needles, allowing the knitter to have both flexible straight needles or circular needles. This also allows the knitter to change the diameter and length of the needles as needed. The needles must be screwed on tightly, otherwise yarn can snag and become damaged.\nThe ability to work from either end of one needle is convenient in several types of knitting, such as slip-stitch versions of double knitting. Circular needles may be used for flat or circular knitting.\nCable needles are a special case of DPNs, although they are usually not straight, but dimpled in the middle. Often, they have the form of a hook. When cabling a knitted piece, a hook is easier to grab and hold the yarn. Cable needles are typically very short (a few inches), and are used to hold stitches temporarily while others are being knitted. When in use, the cable needle is used at the same time as two regular needles. At specific points indicated by the knitting pattern, the cable needle is moved, the stitches on it are worked by the other needles, then the cable needle is turned around to a different position to create the cable twist.\nCable needles are a specific design, and are used to create the twisting motif of a knitted cable. They are made in different sizes, which produces cables of different widths.\nAncillary tools.\nVarious tools have been developed to make hand-knitting easier. Tools for measuring needle diameter and yarn properties have been discussed above, as well as the yarn swift, ballwinder and \"yarntainers\". Crochet hooks and a darning needle are often useful in binding/casting off or in joining two knitted pieces edge-to-edge. The darning needle is used in duplicate stitch (also known as Swiss darning). The crochet hook is also essential for repairing dropped stitches and some specialty stitches such as tufting. Other tools such as knitting spools or pom-pom makers are used to prepare specific ornaments. For large or complex knitting patterns, it is sometimes difficult to keep track of which stitch should be knit in a particular way; therefore, several tools have been developed to identify the number of a particular row or stitch, including circular stitch markers, hanging markers, extra yarn and row counters. A second potential difficulty is that the knitted piece will slide off the tapered end of the needles when unattended; this is prevented by \"point protectors\" that cap the tapered ends. Another problem is that too much knitting may lead to hand and wrist troubles; for this, special stress-relieving gloves are available. In traditional Shetland knitting a special belt is often used to support the end of one needle allowing the knitting greater speed. Finally, there are sundry bags and containers for holding knitting, yarns and needles.\nKnitting styles/holds.\nContinental/German style.\nContinental knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in the left hand for both knitting and purling. Patterns are created on the outside (public-facing) side of the piece.\nNorwegian style.\nWhile knit stitches are worked as in the classic Continental style, the purl is worked by leaving the yarn at back and moving the needle.\nRussian style.\nAnother variation on Continental knitting, this style is achieved by \"picking\" up the yarn by moving the needle head into it. Then, the yarn is wrapped around the index finger on the left hand so it is coming over the top of the finger, back around underneath, and then on top of the middle finger. The knitter will wind up with their index finger very close to the back of the left-hand needle. In Russian knitting, it is common to slip the first stitch of every row.\nEnglish style.\nEnglish-style knitting is achieved by holding the yarn in the right hand. Patterns are created on the outside (public-facing) side of the piece.\nPortuguese/Greek/Incan/Turkish style.\nThis style is achieved by carrying the yarn around the neck or from a necklace-style hook, allowing the knitter to knit on the reverse (purl) side, e.g. \"inside out\" compared to Western knitting techniques. Patterns are typically created by stranding the yarn on the outside of the piece. This is an ancient style of knitting, which spread from Arabic culture to the Iberian peninsula, during its occupation by Muslims. Hence this style was taught to Indigenous South Americans, during conquest by Spanish/Portuguese colonists.\nKnitting techniques.\nArmenian.\nThe Armenian knitting technique tacks the non-working yarn to the piece regularly to limit floats. The non-working yarn is tacked down approximately every 3 stitches.\nDouble knitting.\nA technique used to create a flat, smooth, reversible fabric that looks like stockinette or jersey on both sides, rather than having a knit face and a purl reverse side.\nFair Isle.\nA method by which many different yarns are used throughout the row and when not being used are floated on the wrong side of the piece.\nMega knitting.\nMega knitting is a term recently coined and relates to the use of knitting needles greater than or equal to half an inch in diameter.\nMega knitting uses the same stitches and techniques as conventional knitting, except that hooks are carved into the ends of the needles. The hooked needles greatly enhance control of the work, catching the stitches and preventing them from slipping off.\nIt was the development of the knitting machine that introduced hooked needles and enabled faultless, automated knitting. The hook catches the loop of yarn as each stitch is knitted, meaning that wrists and fingers do not have to work so hard and there is less chance of stitches slipping off the needle. The position of the hook is most important. The left (non-working) hook is turned to face away at all times; the right (working) hook is turned toward the knitter whilst knitting (plain stitch) and away whilst purling.\nMega knitting produces a chunky, bulky fabric or an open lacy weave, depending on the weight and type of yarn used.\nMicro knitting.\nMicro knitting or miniature knitting uses extremely fine threads and needles. Althea Crome created 14 tiny sweaters used in the stop motion animated film \"Coraline\" and has made objects at 60 or 80 stitches per inch, making her own needles from fine surgical steel wire. She has published \"Bugknits: Extreme knitting for hobbyists, artists and knitters\" (2009, Blurb: ). Annelies de Kort has knitted on an even smaller scale and has used needles of 0.4 mm.\nShort row.\nIn short row knitting, the work is turned before a row is fully knitted. There are several ways to achieve this.\nWrap and turn.\nJust before the work is turned, the working yarn is passed around the next unknitted stitch, forming a \u201cwrap.\u201d Later, this \u201cwrap\u201d is picked up and knitted into a stitch, concealing it from view.\nGerman short row.\nIn German short rows, the work is turned and the last stitch worked is slipped purlwise with yarn in front to the right needle. Finally, the working yarn is pulled over the top of the needle to the back, which rotates the stitch on the needle so that it tips backwards, forming what appears to be a double-stitch, sometimes referred to as a \u201cGerman double stitch\u201d. The working yarn stays to the back for the next stitch if it is to be knitted, or rotated below the right needle and pulled to the front, if it is to be purled, both of which maintain the proper (\u201ctipped back\u201d) orientation of the German double stitch. Eventually, this German double stitch is worked like a single stitch, which masks its appearance as viewed from the right side to look like a regular stitch.\nJapanese short row.\nIn Japanese short rows, a locking stitch marker is used to hold the loop of the working yarn at the turning point. Eventually, the loop is picked up (and stitch marker removed) and worked together with the stitch on the other side of the gap. Japanese short rows usually result in tidier turning points with less extraneous yarn bulk compared to German short rows and the Wrap and Turn technique.\nTwined knitting.\nThe technique, also known as two-end knitting, is a traditional Scandinavian knitting technique. It refers to knitting where two strands of yarn are knitted into the fabric alternatively and twisted once and always in the same direction before every stitch. This produces a firmer and more durable fabric with greater thermal insulation than conventional one-end knitting.\nCommercial applications.\nIndustrially, metal wire is also knitted into a metal fabric for a wide range of uses including the filter material in cafetieres, catalytic converters for cars and many other uses. These fabrics are usually manufactured on circular knitting machines that would be recognized by conventional knitters as sock machines.\nKnitting mills are factories that produce knitted fabrics or knitted apparel.\u00a0Knitted fabrics are used in the manufacture of highly-fitted garments such as athleticwear and athleisure.\u00a0The stretch properties of knitted fabrics may be enhanced by the inclusion of fibers such as spandex. In addition to athletic-type garments, knitted fabric may be used in fashion garments.\nMany fashion designers make heavy use of knitted fabric in their fashion collections. Gordana Gelhausen, who appeared in season six of the television show \"Project Runway\", is primarily a knit designer. Other designers and labels that make heavy use of knitting include Michael Kors, Fendi, and Marc Jacobs.\nKnitting mills can also produce completed knitted apparel, such as sweaters, socks, T-shirts, and underwear. Beginning in the 1990s, seamless 3-dimensional whole-garment knitting machines have increased the options of finished garments that can be produced in knitting mills. These machines have also enabled the production of knitted shoe uppers.\nFor individual hobbyists, websites such as Etsy, Big Cartel and Ravelry have made it easy to sell knitting patterns on a small scale, in a way similar to eBay.\nGraffiti.\nIn the 2000s, a practice called knitting graffiti, guerilla knitting, or yarn bombing\u2014the use of knitted or crocheted cloth to modify and beautify one's (usually outdoor) surroundings\u2014emerged in the U.S. and spread worldwide. Magda Sayeg is credited with starting the movement in the US and Knit the City are a prominent group of graffiti knitters in the United Kingdom. Yarn bombers sometimes target existing pieces of graffiti for beautification. For instance, Dave Cole is a contemporary sculpture artist who practiced knitting as graffiti for a large-scale public art installation in Melbourne, Australia for the Big West Arts Festival in 2009. The work was vandalized the night of its completion. A new movie, shot by a Tasmanian filmmaker on a set made almost entirely out of yarn, was partially inspired by \"knitted graffiti\".\nYarn crawl.\nMany major metropolitan cities across the US and Europe host annual yarn crawls. The event is typically a multi-day event that caters to all knitters, crochet and yarn enthusiasts that supports the local crafting community. Over the multi-day period, multiple local yarn and knit shops participate in the yarn crawl and offer up store discounts, give away free exclusive patterns, provide classes, trunk shows and conduct raffles for prizes. Participants of the crawl receive a passport and get their passport stamped at each store they visit along the crawl. Traditionally those that get their passports fully stamped are eligible to win a larger gift basket filled with yarn, knitting and crochet goodies. Some local crawls also provide a Knit-Along (KAL) or Crochet-Along (CAL) where attendees follow a specific pattern prior to the crawl and then proudly wear it during the crawl for others to see.\nCraftivism and charity.\nHand knitting garments for free distribution to others have become a common practice among hand knitting groups. Girls and women hand-knitted socks, sweaters, scarves, mittens, gloves, and hats for soldiers in Crimea, the American Civil War, and the Boer Wars; this practice continued in World War I, World War II and the Korean War, and continues for soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Australian charity \"Wrap with Love\" continues to provide blankets hand knitted by volunteers to people most in need around the world who have been affected by war.\nIn the historical projects, yarn companies provided knitting patterns approved by the various branches of the armed services; often they were distributed by local chapters of the American Red Cross. Modern projects usually entail the hand knitting of hats or helmet liners; the liners provided for soldiers must be of 100% worsted-weight wool and be crafted using specific colors.\nClothing and afghans are frequently made for children, the elderly, and the economically disadvantaged in various countries. Pine Ridge Indian Reservation accepts donations for the Lakota people in the United States. Prayer shawls, or shawls in which the crafter meditates or says prayers of their faith while hand knitting with the intent on comforting the recipient, are donated to those experiencing loss or stress. Many knitters today hand knit and donate \"chemo caps\", soft caps for cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy. Yarn companies offer free knitting patterns for these caps.\nPenguin sweaters were hand knitted by volunteers for the rehabilitation of penguins contaminated by exposure to oil slicks. The project is now complete.\nChicken sweaters were also hand knitted to aid battery hens that had lost their feathers. The organization is not currently accepting donations, but maintains a list of volunteers.\nOriginally started after the 2004 Indonesian tsunami, Knitters Without Borders is a charity challenge issued by knitting personality Stephanie Pearl-McPhee that encourages hand knitters to donate to M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res (Doctors Without Borders). Instead of hand knitting for charity, knitters are encouraged to donate a week's worth of disposable income, including money that otherwise might have been spent on yarn. Knitted items are occasional offered as prizes to donors. As of September 2011, Knitters Without Borders donors have contributed CAD$1,062,217.\nSecurity blankets can also be made through the Project Linus organization which helps needy children.\nThere are organizations that help reach other countries in need such as afghans for Afghans. This outreach is described as, \"afghans for Afghans is a humanitarian and educational people-to-people project that sends hand-knit and crocheted blankets and sweaters, vests, hats, mittens, and socks to the beleaguered people of Afghanistan.\"\nThe knitters of the Little Yellow Duck Project craft small yellow ducks which are left for others to find, as a random act of kindness and to raise awareness of blood donation and organ donation. The project was started in memory of a young woman who had collected plastic toy ducks and who died from cystic fibrosis while waiting for a lung transplant. Finders of the ducks are encouraged to log them on a website, which as of May 2020[ [update]] shows that 12,265 ducks have been found in 106 countries.\nHealth benefits.\nStudies have shown that hand knitting, along with other forms of needlework, provide several significant health benefits. These studies have found the rhythmic and repetitive action of hand knitting can help prevent and manage stress, pain and depression, which in turn strengthens the body's immune system, as well as create a relaxation response in the body which can decrease blood pressure, heart rate, help prevent illness, and have a calming effect. Pain specialists have also found that hand knitting changes brain chemistry, resulting in an increase in \"feel good\" hormones (i.e. serotonin and dopamine) and a decrease in stress hormones.\nKnitting can improve dexterity in the hands and fingers. This keeps the fingers limber and can be especially helpful for those with arthritis. Knitting can reduce the pain of arthritis if people make it a daily habit.\nHand knitting, along with other leisure activities, has been linked to reducing the risk of developing dementia by preventing memory loss. Much like physical activity strengthens the body, mental exercise makes the human brain more resilient. Knitting can be done anywhere and requires that minimal materials and props be carried around easily, making it a very pleasurable and simple hobby that gives wonderful benefits.\nKnitting also helps in the area of social interaction; knitting provides people with opportunities to socialize with others and build community. One way to increase social interaction with knitting is inviting friends over to knit and chat with each other. Many public libraries and yarn stores host knitting groups where knitters can meet locally to engage with others interested in hand crafts.\nKnitting has been shown to be an effective form of art therapy for coping with trauma or grief. Whether the knitting is done individually or in a knitting group, the creativity and creation process along with the repetitive physical motion has been shown to be effective.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16623", "revid": "20814475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16623", "title": "Karl Popper", "text": "Austrian\u2013British philosopher of science (1902\u20131994)\nSir Karl Raimund Popper (28 July 1902 \u2013 17 September 1994) was an Austrian\u2013British philosopher, academic and social commentator. One of the 20th century's most influential philosophers of science, Popper is known for his rejection of the classical inductivist views on the scientific method in favour of empirical falsification made possible by his falsifiability criterion, and for founding the Department of Philosophy at the London School of Economics and Political Science. According to Popper, a theory in the empirical sciences can never be proven, but it can be falsified, meaning that it can (and should) be scrutinised with decisive experiments. Popper was opposed to the classical justificationist account of knowledge, which he replaced with \"the first non-justificational philosophy of criticism in the history of philosophy\", namely critical rationalism.\nIn political discourse, he is known for his vigorous defence of liberal democracy and the principles of social criticism that he believed made a flourishing open society possible. His political thought resides within the camp of Enlightenment rationalism and humanism. He was a dogged opponent of totalitarianism, communism, nationalism, fascism, and other kinds of (in Popper's view) reactionary and irrational ideas, and identified modern liberal democracies as the best-to-date embodiment of an open society.\nLife and career.\nFamily and training.\nKarl Popper was born in Vienna (then in Austria-Hungary) in 1902 to upper-middle-class parents. All of Popper's grandparents were assimilated Jews; the Popper family converted to Lutheranism before he was born and so he received a Lutheran baptism. His father, Simon Siegmund Carl Popper (1856\u20131932), was a lawyer from Bohemia and a doctor of law at the Vienna University. His mother, Jenny Schiff (1864\u20131938), was an accomplished pianist of Silesian and Hungarian descent. Popper's uncle was the Austrian philosopher Josef Popper-Lynkeus. After establishing themselves in Vienna, the Poppers made a rapid social climb in Viennese society, as Popper's father became a partner in the law firm of Vienna's liberal mayor Raimund Gr\u00fcbl, and after Gr\u00fcbl's death in 1898 took over the business. Popper received his middle name after Raimund Gr\u00fcbl. (In his autobiography, Popper erroneously recalls that Gr\u00fcbl's first name was Carl). His parents were close friends of Sigmund Freud's sister Rosa Graf. His father was a bibliophile who had 12,000\u201314,000 volumes in his personal library and took an interest in philosophy, the classics, and social and political issues. Popper inherited both the library and the disposition from him. Later, he would describe the atmosphere of his upbringing as having been \"decidedly bookish\".\nPopper left school at the age of 16 and attended lectures in mathematics, physics, philosophy, psychology and the history of music as a guest student at the University of Vienna. In 1919, Popper became attracted by Marxism and subsequently joined the Association of Socialist School Students. He also became a member of the Social Democratic Workers' Party of Austria, which was at that time a party that fully adopted Marxism. After the street battle in the H\u00f6rlgasse on 15 June 1919, when police shot eight of his unarmed party comrades, he turned away from what he saw as the philosopher Karl Marx's historical materialism, abandoned the ideology, and remained a supporter of social liberalism throughout his life.\nPopper worked in street construction for a short time but was unable to cope with the heavy labour. Continuing to attend university as a guest student, he started an apprenticeship as a cabinetmaker, which he completed as a journeyman. He was dreaming at that time of starting a daycare facility for children, for which he assumed the ability to make furniture might be useful. After that, he did voluntary service in one of psychoanalyst Alfred Adler's clinics for children. In 1922, he did his matura by way of a second chance education and finally joined the university as an ordinary student. He completed his examination as a primary school teacher in 1924 and started working at an after-school care club for socially endangered children. In 1925, he went to the newly founded \"P\u00e4dagogisches Institut\" and continued studying philosophy and psychology. Around that time he started courting Josefine Anna Henninger, who later became his wife.\nPopper and his wife had chosen not to have children because of the circumstances of war in the early years of their marriage. Popper commented that this \"was perhaps a cowardly but in a way a right decision\".\nIn 1928, Popper earned a doctorate in psychology, under the supervision of Karl B\u00fchler\u2014with Moritz Schlick being the second chair of the thesis committee. His dissertation was titled \"Zur Methodenfrage der Denkpsychologie\" (\"On Questions of Method in the Psychology of Thinking\"). In 1929, he obtained an authorisation to teach mathematics and physics in secondary school and began doing so. He married his colleague Josefine Anna Henninger (1906\u20131985) in 1930. Fearing the rise of Nazism and the threat of the \"Anschluss\", he started to use the evenings and the nights to write his first book \"Die beiden Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie\" (\"The Two Fundamental Problems of the Theory of Knowledge\"). He needed to publish a book to get an academic position in a country that was safe for people of Jewish descent. In the end, he did not publish the two-volume work; but instead, a condensed version with some new material, as \"Logik der Forschung\" (\"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\") in 1934. Here, he criticised psychologism, naturalism, inductivism, and logical positivism, and put forth his theory of potential falsifiability as the criterion demarcating science from non-science. In 1935 and 1936, he took unpaid leave to go to the United Kingdom for a study visit.\nAcademic life.\nIn 1937, Popper finally managed to get a position that allowed him to emigrate to New Zealand, where he became lecturer in philosophy at Canterbury University College of the University of New Zealand in Christchurch. It was here that he wrote his influential work \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\". In Dunedin he met the Professor of Physiology John Carew Eccles and formed a lifelong friendship with him. In 1946, after the Second World War, he moved to the United Kingdom to become a reader in logic and scientific method at the London School of Economics (LSE), a constituent School of the University of London, where, three years later, in 1949, he was appointed professor of logic and scientific method. Popper was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1958 to 1959. He resided in Penn, Buckinghamshire.\nPopper retired from academic life in 1969, though he remained intellectually active for the rest of his life. In 1985, he returned to Austria so that his wife could have her relatives around her during the last months of her life; she died in November that year. After the Ludwig Boltzmann Gesellschaft failed to establish him as the director of a newly founded branch researching the philosophy of science, he went back again to the United Kingdom in 1986, settling in Kenley, Surrey.\nDeath.\nPopper died of \"complications of cancer, pneumonia and kidney failure\" in Kenley at the age of 92 on 17 September 1994. He had been working continuously on his philosophy until two weeks before when he suddenly fell terminally ill, writing his last letter two weeks before his death as well.\nAfter cremation, his ashes were taken to Vienna and buried at Lainzer cemetery adjacent to the ORF Centre, where his wife Josefine Anna Popper (called \"Hennie\") had already been buried. Popper's estate is managed by his secretary and personal assistant Melitta Mew and her husband Raymond. Popper's manuscripts went to the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, partly during his lifetime and partly as supplementary material after his death. The University of Klagenfurt acquired Popper's library in 1995. The Karl Popper Archives was established within the Klagenfurt University Library, holding Popper's library of approximately 6,000 books, including his precious bibliophilia, as well as hard copies of the original Hoover material and microfilms of the incremental material. The library as well as various other partial collections are open for researcher purposes. The remaining parts of the estate were mostly transferred to The Karl Popper Charitable Trust. In October 2008, the University of Klagenfurt acquired the copyrights from the estate.\nHonours and awards.\nPopper won many awards and honours in his field, including the Lippincott Award of the American Political Science Association, the Sonning Prize, the Otto Hahn Peace Medal of the United Nations Association of Germany in Berlin and fellowships in the Royal Society, British Academy, London School of Economics, King's College London, Darwin College, Cambridge, Austrian Academy of Sciences and Charles University, Prague. Austria awarded him the Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold for Services to the Republic of Austria in 1986, and the Federal Republic of Germany its Grand Cross with Star and Sash of the Order of Merit, and the peace class of the Order Pour le M\u00e9rite. He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1965, and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1976. He was invested with the insignia of a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour in 1982.\nOther awards and recognition for Popper included the City of Vienna Prize for the Humanities (1965), Karl Renner Prize (1978), Austrian Decoration for Science and Art (1980), Dr. Leopold Lucas Prize of the University of T\u00fcbingen (1980), Ring of Honour of the City of Vienna (1983) and the Premio Internazionale of the Italian Federico Nietzsche Society (1988). In 1989, he was the first awarded the Prize International Catalonia for \"his work to develop cultural, scientific and human values all around the world\". In 1992, he was awarded the Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy for \"symbolising the open spirit of the 20th century\" and for his \"enormous influence on the formation of the modern intellectual climate\".\nPhilosophy.\nBackground to Popper's ideas.\nPopper's rejection of Marxism during his teenage years left a profound mark on his thought. He had at one point joined a socialist association, and for a few months in 1919 considered himself a communist. Although it is known that Popper worked as an office boy at the communist headquarters, whether or not he ever became a member of the Communist Party is unclear. During this time he became familiar with the Marxist view of economics, class conflict, and history. Although he quickly became disillusioned with the views expounded by Marxists, his flirtation with the ideology led him to distance himself from those who believed that spilling blood for the sake of a revolution was necessary. He then took the view that when it came to sacrificing human lives, one was to think and act with extreme prudence.\nThe failure of democratic parties to prevent fascism from taking over Austrian politics in the 1920s and 1930s traumatised Popper. He suffered from the direct consequences of this failure since events after the \"Anschluss\" (the annexation of Austria by the German Reich in 1938) forced him into permanent exile. His most important works in the field of social science\u2014\"The Poverty of Historicism\" (1944) and \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\" (1945)\u2014were inspired by his reflection on the events of his time and represented, in a sense, a reaction to the prevalent totalitarian ideologies that then dominated Central European politics. His books defended democratic liberalism as a social and political philosophy. They also represented extensive critiques of the philosophical presuppositions underpinning all forms of totalitarianism.\nPopper believed that there was a contrast between the theories of Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler, which he considered non-scientific, and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity which set off the revolution in physics in the early 20th century. Popper thought that Einstein's theory, as a theory properly grounded in scientific thought and method, was highly \"risky\", in the sense that it was possible to deduce consequences from it which differed considerably from those of the then-dominant Newtonian physics; one such prediction, that gravity could deflect light, was verified by Eddington's experiments in 1919. In contrast he thought that nothing could, even in principle, falsify psychoanalytic theories. He thus came to the conclusion that they had more in common with primitive myths than with genuine science.\nThis led Popper to conclude that what was regarded as the remarkable strengths of psychoanalytical theories were actually their weaknesses. Psychoanalytical theories were crafted in a way that made them able to refute any criticism and to give an explanation for every possible form of human behaviour. The nature of such theories made it impossible for any criticism or experiment\u2014even in principle\u2014to show them to be false. When Popper tackled the problem of demarcation in the philosophy of science, this conclusion led him to posit that the strength of a scientific theory lies in its being susceptible to falsification. He considered that if a theory cannot, in principle, be falsified by criticism, it is not a scientific theory.\nPhilosophy of science.\nFalsifiability and the problem of demarcation.\nPopper coined the term \"critical rationalism\" to describe his philosophy. Popper rejected the empiricist view (following from Kant) that basic statements are infallible; rather, according to Popper, they are descriptions in relation to a theoretical framework. Concerning the method of science, the term \"critical rationalism\" indicates his rejection of classical empiricism, and the classical observationalist-inductivist account of science that had grown out of it. Popper argued strongly against the latter, holding that scientific theories are abstract in nature and can be tested only indirectly, by reference to their implications. He also held that scientific theory, and human knowledge generally, is irreducibly conjectural or hypothetical, and is generated by the creative imagination to solve problems that have arisen in specific historico-cultural settings.\nLogically, no number of positive outcomes at the level of experimental testing can confirm a scientific theory, but a single counterexample is logically decisive; it shows the theory, from which the implication is derived, to be false. Popper's account of the logical asymmetry between verification and falsifiability lies at the heart of his philosophy of science. It also inspired him to take falsifiability as his criterion of demarcation between metaphysics and science: a law should be considered scientific if, and only if, it makes predictions, irrespective of their validity or of our capacity to show them false. This led him to attack the claims of both psychoanalysis and contemporary Marxism to scientific status, on the basis that they do not make predictions, but instead are compatible with any possible observations.\nIn \"All Life is Problem Solving\", Popper sought to explain the apparent progress of scientific knowledge\u2014that is, how it is that our understanding of the universe seems to improve over time. This problem arises from his position that the truth content of our theories, even the best of them, cannot be verified by scientific testing, but can only be falsified. With only falsifications being possible logically, how can we explain the growth of knowledge? In Popper's view, the advance of scientific knowledge is an \"evolutionary\" process characterised by his formula:\nformula_1\nIn response to a given problem situation (formula_2), a number of competing conjectures, or tentative theories (formula_3), are systematically subjected to the most rigorous attempts at falsification possible. This process, error elimination (formula_4), performs a similar function for science that natural selection performs for biological evolution. Theories that better survive the process of refutation are not more true, but rather, more \"fit\"\u2014in other words, more applicable to the problem situation at hand (formula_2). Consequently, just as a species' biological fitness does not ensure continued survival, neither does rigorous testing protect a scientific theory from refutation in the future. Yet, as it appears that the engine of biological evolution has, over many generations, produced adaptive traits equipped to deal with more and more complex problems of survival, likewise, the evolution of theories through the scientific method may, in Popper's view, reflect a certain type of progress: toward more and more interesting problems (formula_6). For Popper, it is in the interplay between the tentative theories (conjectures) and error elimination (refutation) that scientific knowledge advances toward greater and greater problems; in a process very much akin to the interplay between genetic variation and natural selection.\nPopper also wrote extensively against the famous Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. He strongly disagreed with Niels Bohr's instrumentalism and supported Albert Einstein's scientific realist approach to scientific theories about the universe. He found that Bohr's interpretation introduced subjectivity into physics, claiming later in his life that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bohr was \"a marvelous physicist, one of the greatest of all time, but he was a miserable philosopher, and one couldn't talk to him. He was talking all the time, allowing practically only one or two words to you and then at once cutting in.\"This Popper's falsifiability resembles Charles Peirce's nineteenth-century fallibilism. In \"Of Clocks and Clouds\" (1966), Popper remarked that he wished he had known of Peirce's work earlier.\nFalsification and the problem of induction.\nAmong his contributions to philosophy is his claim to have solved the philosophical problem of induction. He states that while there is no way to prove that the sun will rise, it is possible to formulate the theory that every day the sun will rise; if it does not rise on some particular day, the theory will be falsified and will have to be replaced by a different one. Until such a falsifying instance occurs, there is, for Popper, no need to reject the tentative acceptance of the theory, even though it is never justified in an inductive sense. Nor is it rational according to Popper to make instead the more complex assumption that the sun will rise until a given day, but will stop doing so the day after, or similar statements with additional conditions. Such a theory would be true with higher probability because it cannot be attacked so easily:\nPopper held that it is the least likely, or most easily falsifiable, or simplest theory (attributes which he identified as all the same thing) that explains known facts that one should rationally prefer. His opposition to positivism, which held that it is the theory most likely to be true that one should prefer, here becomes very apparent. It is impossible, Popper argues, to ensure a theory to be true; it is more important that it is falsifiable.\nPopper agreed with David Hume that there is often a psychological belief that the sun will rise tomorrow and that there is no logical justification for the supposition that it will, simply because it always has in the past. Popper writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I approached the problem of induction through Hume. Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that induction cannot be logically justified.\nRationality.\nPopper held that rationality is not restricted to the realm of empirical or scientific theories, but that it is merely a special case of the general method of criticism, the method of finding and eliminating contradictions in knowledge without ad-hoc measures. According to this view, rational discussion about metaphysical ideas, about moral values and even about purposes is possible. Popper's student W.W. Bartley III tried to radicalise this idea and made the controversial claim that not only can criticism go beyond empirical knowledge but that everything can be rationally criticised.\nTo Popper, who was an anti-justificationist, traditional philosophy is misled by the false principle of sufficient reason. He thinks that no assumption can ever be or needs ever to be justified, so a lack of justification is not a justification for doubt. Instead, theories should be tested and scrutinised. It is not the goal to bless theories with claims of certainty or justification, but to eliminate errors in them. He writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]here \"are\" no such things as good positive reasons; nor do we need such things [...] But [philosophers] obviously cannot quite bring [themselves] to believe that this is my opinion, let alone that it is right. (\"The Philosophy of Karl Popper\", p.\u00a01043)\nPhilosophy of arithmetic.\nPopper's principle of falsifiability runs into \"prima facie\" difficulties when the epistemological status of mathematics is considered. It is difficult to conceive how simple statements of arithmetic, such as \"2 + 2 = 4\", could ever be shown to be false. If they are not open to falsification they can not be scientific. If they are not scientific, it needs to be explained how they can be informative about real world objects and events.\nPopper's solution was an original contribution in the philosophy of mathematics. His idea was that a number statement such as \"2 apples + 2 apples = 4 apples\" can be taken in two senses. In its pure mathematics sense, \"2 + 2 = 4\" is logically true and cannot be refuted. Contrastingly, in its applied mathematics sense of it describing the physical behaviour of apples, it can be falsified. This can be done by placing two apples in a container, then proceeding to place another two apples in the same container. If there are five, three, or a number of apples that is not four in said container, the theory that \"2 apples + 2 apples = 4 apples\" is shown to be false. On the contrary, if there are four apples in the container, the theory of numbers is shown to be applicable to reality.\nPolitical philosophy.\nIn \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\" and \"The Poverty of Historicism\", Popper developed a critique of historicism and a defence of the \"Open Society\". Popper considered historicism to be the theory that history develops inexorably and necessarily according to knowable general laws towards a determinate end. He argued that this view is the principal theoretical presupposition underpinning most forms of authoritarianism and totalitarianism. He argued that historicism is founded upon mistaken assumptions regarding the nature of scientific law and prediction. Since the growth of human knowledge is a causal factor in the evolution of human history, and since \"no society can predict, scientifically, its own future states of knowledge\", it follows, he argued, that there can be no predictive science of human history. For Popper, metaphysical and historical indeterminism go hand in hand.\nIn his early years Popper was impressed by Marxism, whether of Communists or socialists. An event that happened in 1919 had a profound effect on him: During a riot, caused by the Communists, the police shot several unarmed people, including some of Popper's friends, when they tried to free party comrades from prison. The riot had, in fact, been part of a plan by which leaders of the Communist party with connections to B\u00e9la Kun tried to take power by a coup; Popper did not know about this at that time. However, he knew that the riot instigators were swayed by the Marxist doctrine that class struggle would produce vastly more dead men than the inevitable revolution brought about as quickly as possible, and so had no scruples to put the life of the rioters at risk to achieve their selfish goal of becoming the future leaders of the working class. This was the start of his later criticism of historicism. Popper began to reject Marxist historicism, which he associated with questionable means, and later socialism, which he associated with placing equality before freedom (to the possible disadvantage of equality).\nPopper said that he was a socialist for \"several years\", and maintained an interest in egalitarianism, but abandoned it as a whole because socialism was a \"beautiful dream\", but, just like egalitarianism, it was incompatible with individual liberty. Popper initially saw totalitarianism as exclusively right-wing in nature, although as early as 1945 in \"The Open Society\" he was describing Communist parties as giving a weak opposition to fascism due to shared historicism with fascism.730 Over time, primarily in defence of liberal democracy, Popper began to see Soviet-type communism as a form of totalitarianism, and viewed the main issue of the Cold War as not capitalism versus socialism, but democracy versus totalitarianism.732 In 1957, Popper would dedicate \"The Poverty of Historicism\" to \"memory of the countless men, women and children of all creeds or nations or races who fell victims to the fascist and communist belief in Inexorable Laws of Historical Destiny.\"\nIn 1947, Popper co-founded the Mont Pelerin Society, with Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises and others, although he did not fully agree with the think tank's charter and ideology. Specifically, he unsuccessfully recommended that socialists should be invited to participate, and that emphasis should be put on a hierarchy of humanitarian values rather than advocacy of a free market as envisioned by classical liberalism.\nThe paradox of tolerance.\nAlthough Popper was an advocate of toleration, he also warned against unlimited tolerance. In \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", he argued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Unlimited tolerance must lead to the disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. In this formulation, I do not imply, for instance, that we should always suppress the utterance of intolerant philosophies; as long as we can counter them by rational argument and keep them in check by public opinion, suppression would certainly be most unwise. But we should claim the \"right\" to suppress them if necessary even by force; for it may easily turn out that they are not prepared to meet us on the level of rational argument, but begin by denouncing all argument; they may forbid their followers to listen to rational argument, because it is deceptive, and teach them to answer arguments by the use of their fists or pistols. We should therefore claim, in the name of tolerance, the right not to tolerate the intolerant. We should claim that any movement preaching intolerance places itself outside the law, and we should consider incitement to intolerance and persecution as criminal, in the same way as we should consider incitement to murder, or to kidnapping, or to the revival of the slave trade, as criminal.\nThe \"conspiracy theory of society\".\nPopper criticized what he termed the \"conspiracy theory of society\", the view that powerful people or groups, godlike in their efficacy, are responsible for purposely bringing about all the ills of society. This view cannot be right, Popper argued, because \"nothing ever comes off exactly as intended.\" According to philosopher David Coady, \"Popper has often been cited by critics of conspiracy theories, and his views on the topic continue to constitute an orthodoxy in some circles.\" However, philosopher Charles Pigden has pointed out that Popper's argument only applies to a very extreme kind of conspiracy theory, not to conspiracy theories generally.\nMetaphysics.\nTruth.\nAs early as 1934, Popper wrote of the search for truth as \"one of the strongest motives for scientific discovery.\" Still, he describes in \"Objective Knowledge\" (1972) early concerns about the much-criticised notion of truth as correspondence. Then came the semantic theory of truth formulated by the logician Alfred Tarski and published in 1933. Popper wrote of learning in 1935 of the consequences of Tarski's theory, to his intense joy. The theory met critical objections to truth as correspondence and thereby rehabilitated it. The theory also seemed, in Popper's eyes, to support metaphysical realism and the regulative idea of a search for truth.\nAccording to this theory, the conditions for the truth of a sentence as well as the sentences themselves are part of a metalanguage. So, for example, the sentence \"Snow is white\" is true if and only if snow is white. Although many philosophers have interpreted, and continue to interpret, Tarski's theory as a deflationary theory, Popper refers to it as a theory in which \"is true\" is replaced with \"corresponds to the facts\". He bases this interpretation on the fact that examples such as the one described above refer to two things: assertions and the facts to which they refer. He identifies Tarski's formulation of the truth conditions of sentences as the introduction of a \"metalinguistic predicate\" and distinguishes the following cases:\nThe first case belongs to the metalanguage whereas the second is more likely to belong to the object language. Hence, \"it is true that\" possesses the logical status of a redundancy. \"Is true\", on the other hand, is a predicate necessary for making general observations such as \"John was telling the truth about Phillip.\"\nUpon this basis, along with that of the logical content of assertions (where logical content is inversely proportional to probability), Popper went on to develop his important notion of verisimilitude or \"truthlikeness\". The intuitive idea behind verisimilitude is that the assertions or hypotheses of scientific theories can be objectively measured with respect to the amount of truth and falsity that they imply. And, in this way, one theory can be evaluated as more or less true than another on a quantitative basis which, Popper emphasises forcefully, has nothing to do with \"subjective probabilities\" or other merely \"epistemic\" considerations.\nThe simplest mathematical formulation that Popper gives of this concept can be found in the tenth chapter of \"Conjectures and Refutations\". Here he defines it as:\n formula_7\nwhere formula_8 is the verisimilitude of \"a\", formula_9 is a measure of the content of the truth of \"a\", and formula_10 is a measure of the content of the falsity of \"a\".\nPopper's original attempt to define not just verisimilitude, but an actual measure of it, turned out to be inadequate. However, it inspired a wealth of new attempts.\nPopper's three worlds.\nKnowledge, for Popper, was objective, both in the sense that it is objectively true (or truthlike), and also in the sense that knowledge has an ontological status (i.e., knowledge as object) independent of the knowing subject (\"Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach\", 1972). He proposed three worlds: World One, being the physical world, or physical states; World Two, being the world of mind, or individuals' private mental states, ideas and perceptions; and World Three, being the \"public\" body of human knowledge expressed in its manifold forms (e.g., \"scientific theories, ethical principles, characters in novels, philosophy, art, poetry, in short our entire cultural heritage\"), or the products of World Two made manifest in the materials of World One (e.g., books, papers, paintings, symphonies, cathedrals, particle accelerators). World Three, Popper argued, was the product of individual human beings in exactly the same sense that an animal path in the jungle is the creation of many individual animals but not planned or intended by any of them. World Three thus has an existence and an evolution independent of any individually known subjects. The influence of World Three on the individual human mind (World Two) is in Popper's view at least as strong as the influence of World One. In other words, the knowledge held by a given individual mind owes at least as much to the total, accumulated wealth of human knowledge made manifest as to the world of direct experience. As such, the growth of human knowledge could be said to be a function of the independent evolution of World Three.\nMany contemporary philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett, have not embraced Popper's Three World conjecture, mostly due to what they see as its resemblance to mind\u2013body dualism.\nOrigin and evolution of life.\nThe creation\u2013evolution controversy raised the issue of whether creationistic ideas may be legitimately called science. In the debate, both sides and even courts in their decisions have invoked Popper's criterion of falsifiability (see Daubert standard). In this context, passages written by Popper are frequently quoted in which he speaks about such issues himself. For example, he famously stated \"Darwinism is not a testable scientific theory, but a metaphysical research program\u2014a possible framework for testable scientific theories.\" He continued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And yet, the theory is invaluable. I do not see how, without it, our knowledge could have grown as it has done since Darwin. In trying to explain experiments with bacteria which become adapted to, say, penicillin, it is quite clear that we are greatly helped by the theory of natural selection. Although it is metaphysical, it sheds much light upon very concrete and very practical researches. It allows us to study adaptation to a new environment (such as a penicillin-infested environment) in a rational way: it suggests the existence of a mechanism of adaptation, and it allows us even to study in detail the mechanism at work.\nHe noted that theism, presented as explaining adaptation, \"was worse than an open admission of failure, for it created the impression that an ultimate explanation had been reached\". Popper later said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe explained that the difficulty of testing had led some people to describe natural selection as a tautology, and that he too had in the past described the theory as \"almost tautological\", and had tried to explain how the theory could be untestable (as is a tautology) and yet of great scientific interest:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPopper summarised his new view as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The theory of natural selection may be so formulated that it is far from tautological. In this case it is not only testable, but it turns out to be not strictly universally true. There seem to be exceptions, as with so many biological theories; and considering the random character of the variations on which natural selection operates, the occurrence of exceptions is not surprising. Thus not all phenomena of evolution are explained by natural selection alone. Yet in every particular case it is a challenging research program to show how far natural selection can possibly be held responsible for the evolution of a particular organ or behavioural program.\nThese frequently quoted passages are only a small part of what Popper wrote on evolution, however, and may give the wrong impression that he mainly discussed questions of its falsifiability. Popper never invented this criterion to give justifiable use of words like science. In fact, Popper stressed that \"the last thing I wish to do, however, is to advocate another dogma\" and that \"what is to be called a 'science' and who is to be called a 'scientist' must always remain a matter of convention or decision.\" He quotes Menger's dictum that \"Definitions are dogmas; only the conclusions drawn from them can afford us any new insight\" and notes that different definitions of science can be rationally debated and compared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I do not try to justify [the aims of science which I have in mind], however, by representing them as the true or the essential aims of science. This would only distort the issue, and it would mean a relapse into positivist dogmatism. There is only \"one\" way, as far as I can see, of arguing rationally in support of my proposals. This is to analyse their logical consequences: to point out their fertility\u2014their power to elucidate the problems of the theory of knowledge.\nPopper had his own sophisticated views on evolution that go much beyond what the frequently-quoted passages say. In effect, Popper agreed with some points of both creationists and naturalists, but disagreed with both on crucial aspects. Popper understood the universe as a creative entity that invents new things, including life, but without the necessity of something like a god, especially not one who is pulling strings from behind the curtain. He said that evolution of the genotype must, as the creationists say, work in a goal-directed way but disagreed with their view that it must necessarily be the hand of god that imposes these goals onto the stage of life.\nInstead, he formulated the spearhead model of evolution, a version of genetic pluralism. According to this, living organisms have goals, and act according to these goals, each guided by a central control. In its most sophisticated form, this is the brain of humans, but controls also exist in much less sophisticated ways for species of lower complexity, such as the amoeba. This control organ plays a special role in evolution\u2014it is the \"spearhead of evolution\". The goals bring the purpose into the world. Mutations in the genes that determine the structure of the control may then cause drastic changes in behaviour, preferences and goals, without having an impact on the organism's phenotype. Popper postulates that such purely behavioural changes are less likely to be lethal for the organism compared to drastic changes of the phenotype.\nPopper contrasts his views with the notion of the \"hopeful monster\" that has large phenotype mutations and calls it the \"hopeful behavioural monster\". After behaviour has changed radically, small but quick changes of the phenotype follow to make the organism fitter to its changed goals. This way it looks as if the phenotype were changing guided by some invisible hand, while it is merely natural selection working in combination with the new behaviour. For example, according to this hypothesis, the eating habits of the giraffe must have changed before its elongated neck evolved. Popper contrasted this view as \"evolution from within\" or \"active Darwinism\" (the organism actively trying to discover new ways of life and being on a quest for conquering new ecological niches), with the naturalistic \"evolution from without\" (which has the picture of a hostile environment only trying to kill the mostly passive organism, or perhaps segregate some of its groups).\nPopper was a key figure encouraging patent lawyer G\u00fcnter W\u00e4chtersh\u00e4user to publish his iron\u2013sulfur world hypothesis on abiogenesis and his criticism of \"soup\" theory.\nOn the creation-evolution controversy, Popper initially wrote that he considered it\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a somewhat sensational clash between a brilliant scientific hypothesis concerning the history of the various species of animals and plants on earth, and an older metaphysical theory which, incidentally, happened to be part of an established religious belief\nwith a footnote to the effect that he\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;agree[s] with Professor C.E. Raven when...he calls this conflict 'a storm in a Victorian tea-cup'... In his later work, however, when he had developed his own \"spearhead model\" and \"active Darwinism\" theories, Popper revised this view and found some validity in the controversy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have to confess that this cup of tea has become, after all, \"my\" cup of tea; and with it I have to eat humble pie.\nFree will.\nPopper and John Eccles speculated on the problem of free will for many years, generally agreeing on an interactionist dualist theory of mind. However, although Popper was a body-mind dualist, he did not think that the mind is a substance separate from the body: he thought that mental or psychological properties or aspects of people are distinct from physical ones.\nWhen he gave the second Arthur Holly Compton Memorial Lecture in 1965, Popper revisited the idea of quantum indeterminacy as a source of human freedom. Eccles had suggested that \"critically poised neurons\" might be influenced by the mind to assist in a decision. Popper criticised Compton's idea of amplified quantum events affecting the decision. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The idea that the only alternative to determinism is just sheer chance was taken over by Schlick, together with many of his views on the subject, from Hume, who asserted that \"the removal\" of what he called \"physical necessity\" must always result in \"the same thing with \"chance\". As objects must either be conjoin'd or not... 'tis impossible to admit of any medium betwixt chance and an absolute necessity\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I shall later argue against this important doctrine according to which the alternative to determinism is sheer chance. Yet I must admit that the doctrine seems to hold good for the quantum-theoretical models which have been designed to explain, or at least to illustrate, the possibility of human freedom. This seems to be the reason why these models are so very unsatisfactory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hume's and Schlick's ontological thesis that there cannot exist anything intermediate between chance and determinism seems to me not only highly dogmatic (not to say doctrinaire) but clearly absurd; and it is understandable only on the assumption that they believed in a complete determinism in which chance has no status except as a symptom of our ignorance.\nPopper called not for something between chance and necessity but for a combination of randomness and control to explain freedom, though not yet explicitly in two stages with random chance before the controlled decision, saying, \"freedom is not just chance but, rather, the result of a subtle interplay between something almost random or haphazard, and something like a restrictive or selective control.\"\nThen in his 1977 book with John Eccles, \"The Self and its Brain\", Popper finally formulates the two-stage model in a temporal sequence. And he compares free will to Darwinian evolution and natural selection:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;New ideas have a striking similarity to genetic mutations. Now, let us look for a moment at genetic mutations. Mutations are, it seems, brought about by quantum theoretical indeterminacy (including radiation effects). Accordingly, they are also probabilistic and not in themselves originally selected or adequate, but on them there subsequently operates natural selection which eliminates inappropriate mutations. Now we could conceive of a similar process with respect to new ideas and to free-will decisions, and similar things.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That is to say, a range of possibilities is brought about by a probabilistic and quantum mechanically characterised set of proposals, as it were\u2014of possibilities brought forward by the brain. On these there then operates a kind of selective procedure which eliminates those proposals and those possibilities which are not acceptable to the mind.\nReligion and God.\nPopper was not a religious man in the formal sense of the word. He neither maintained any link with his Jewish ancestry nor was he an observant Lutheran. However, he did consider that every person including himself, was religious in the sense of believing in something more important and beyond us through which we can transcend ourselves. Popper called this something a Third World. In an interview that Popper gave in 1969 with the condition that it should be kept secret until after his death, he summarised his position on God as follows: \"I don't know whether God exists or not (...) Some forms of atheism are arrogant and ignorant and should be rejected, but agnosticism\u2014to admit that we don't know and to search\u2014is all right. (...) When I look at what I call the gift of life, I feel a gratitude which is in tune with some religious ideas of God. However, the moment I even speak of it, I am embarrassed that I may do something wrong to God in talking about God.\" Aged fifteen, after reading Spinoza (at the suggestion of his father), Popper recounts that \"it gave me a lifetime's dislike of theorizing about God\".\nIn 1936, applying to the Academic Assistance Council to leave Austria, he described himself as \"Protestant, namely evangelical but of Jewish origin.\" Responding to the question of whether he wanted religious communities\napproached on his behalf, opposite the Jewish Orthodox\nsection he wrote \"NO\", underlining it twice.\nPopper objected to organised religion, saying \"it tends to use the name of God in vain\", noting the danger of fanaticism because of religious conflicts: \"The whole thing goes back to myths which, though they may have a kernel of truth, are untrue. Why then should the Jewish myth be true and the Indian and Egyptian myths not be true?\"\nEthical issues always constituted an important part of the background to Popper's philosophy. He was a Patron and Honorary Advisor of the Humanist Society of New Zealand and affiliated with the British Humanist Association in the UK (later known as Humanists UK) as a member of the organisation Advisory Council; his concept of the open society provided the \"ideological backbone\" of humanist campaigning across the 1960s and 1970s. In this capacity, he also contributed an essay to the 1968 collection \"The Humanist Outlook\". In later life he discussed ethics rarely, and religious questions hardly at all. While he maintained his affiliation with the British Humanist Association, he later shied away from an active campaigning role, commenting that he could not routinely endorse specific \"humanist and secular offensives\". \nIn a letter unrelated to the interview, he stressed his tolerant attitude: \"Although I am not for religion, I do think that we should show respect for anybody who believes honestly.\" While he did not believe that religious convictions could be rationally justified, he recognised that religions were a source of comfort for their adherents: \"because something isn't science, however, does not mean it is meaningless\".\nCriticism.\nMost criticisms of Popper's philosophy are of the falsification, or error elimination, element in his account of problem solving. Popper presents falsifiability as both an ideal and as an important principle in a practical method of effective human problem solving; as such, the current conclusions of science are stronger than pseudo-sciences or non-sciences, insofar as they have survived this particularly vigorous selection method.\nHe does not argue that any such conclusions are therefore true, or that this describes the actual methods of any particular scientist. Rather, it is recommended as an essential principle of methodology that, if enacted by a system or community, will lead to slow but steady progress of a sort (relative to how well the system or community enacts the method). It has been suggested that Popper's ideas are often mistaken for a hard logical account of truth because of the historical co-incidence of their appearing at the same time as logical positivism, the followers of which mistook his aims for their own.\nThe Quine\u2013Duhem thesis argues that it is impossible to test a single hypothesis on its own, since each one comes as part of an environment of theories. Thus we can only say that the whole package of relevant theories has been collectively falsified, but cannot conclusively say which element of the package must be replaced. An example of this is given by the discovery of the planet Neptune: when the motion of Uranus was found not to match the predictions of Newton's laws, the theory \"There are seven planets in the solar system\" was rejected, and not Newton's laws themselves. Popper discussed this critique of naive falsificationism in Chapters 3 and 4 of \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\".\nThe philosopher Thomas Kuhn writes in \"The Structure of Scientific Revolutions\" (1962) that he places an emphasis on anomalous experiences similar to that which Popper places on falsification. However, he adds that anomalous experiences cannot be identified with falsification, and questions whether theories could be falsified in the manner suggested by Popper. Kuhn argues in \"The Essential Tension\" (1977) that while Popper was correct that psychoanalysis cannot be considered a science, there are better reasons for drawing that conclusion than those Popper provided. Popper's student Imre Lakatos attempted to reconcile Kuhn's work with falsificationism by arguing that science progresses by the falsification of \"research programs\" rather than the more specific universal statements of naive falsificationism.\nPopper claimed to have recognised already in the 1934 version of his \"Logic of Discovery\" a fact later stressed by Kuhn, \"that scientists necessarily develop their ideas within a definite theoretical framework\", and to that extent to have anticipated Kuhn's central point about \"normal science\". However, Popper criticised what he saw as Kuhn's relativism, this criticism being at the heart of the Kuhn-Popper debate. Also, in his collection \"Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge\" (Harper &amp; Row, 1963), Popper writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Science must begin with myths, and with the criticism of myths; neither with the collection of observations, nor with the invention of experiments, but with the critical discussion of myths, and of magical techniques and practices. The scientific tradition is distinguished from the pre-scientific tradition in having two layers. Like the latter, it passes on its theories; but it also passes on a critical attitude towards them. The theories are passed on, not as dogmas, but rather with the challenge to discuss them and improve upon them.\nAnother objection is that it is not always possible to demonstrate falsehood definitively, especially if one is using statistical criteria to evaluate a null hypothesis. More generally it is not always clear, if evidence contradicts a hypothesis, that this is a sign of flaws in the hypothesis rather than of flaws in the evidence. However, this is a misunderstanding of what Popper's philosophy of science sets out to do. Rather than offering a set of instructions that merely need to be followed diligently to achieve science, Popper makes it clear in \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\" that his belief is that the resolution of conflicts between hypotheses and observations can only be a matter of the collective judgment of scientists, in each individual case.\nIn \"Science Versus Crime\", Houck writes that Popper's falsificationism can be questioned logically: it is not clear how Popper would deal with a statement like \"for every metal, there is a temperature at which it will melt\". The hypothesis cannot be falsified by any possible observation, for there will always be a higher temperature than tested at which the metal may in fact melt, yet it seems to be a valid scientific hypothesis. These examples were pointed out by Carl Gustav Hempel. Hempel came to acknowledge that logical positivism's verificationism was untenable, but argued that falsificationism was equally untenable on logical grounds alone. The simplest response to this is that, because Popper describes how theories attain, maintain and lose scientific status, individual consequences of currently accepted scientific theories are scientific in the sense of being part of tentative scientific knowledge, and both of Hempel's examples fall under this category. For instance, atomic theory implies that all metals melt at some temperature.\nAn early adversary of Popper's critical rationalism, Karl-Otto Apel attempted a comprehensive refutation of Popper's philosophy. In \"Transformation der Philosophie\" (1973), Apel charged Popper with being guilty of, amongst other things, a pragmatic contradiction.\nThe philosopher Adolf Gr\u00fcnbaum argues in \"The Foundations of Psychoanalysis\" (1984) that Popper's view that psychoanalytic theories, even in principle, cannot be falsified is incorrect. The philosopher Roger Scruton argues in \"Sexual Desire\" (1986) that Popper was mistaken to claim that Freudian theory implies no testable observation and therefore does not have genuine predictive power. Scruton maintains that Freudian theory has both \"theoretical terms\" and \"empirical content\". He points to the example of Freud's theory of repression, which in his view has \"strong empirical content\" and implies testable consequences. Nevertheless, Scruton also concluded that Freudian theory is not genuinely scientific. The philosopher Charles Taylor accuses Popper of exploiting his worldwide fame as an epistemologist to diminish the importance of philosophers of the 20th-century continental tradition. According to Taylor, Popper's criticisms are completely baseless, but they are received with an attention and respect that Popper's \"intrinsic worth hardly merits\".\nThe philosopher John Gray argues that Popper's account of scientific method would have prevented the theories of Charles Darwin and Albert Einstein from being accepted. However, Gray's criticism with regards to Einstein is at odds with the fact that Popper frequently used Einstein's theory of general relativity as a case study of how the principle of falsifiability works in practice.\nThe philosopher and psychologist Michel ter Hark writes in \"Popper, Otto Selz and the Rise of Evolutionary Epistemology\" (2004) that Popper took some of his ideas from his tutor, the German psychologist Otto Selz. Selz never published his ideas, partly because of the rise of Nazism, which forced him to quit his work in 1933 and prohibited any reference to his ideas. Popper, the historian of ideas and his scholarship, is criticised in some academic quarters for his treatment of Plato and Hegel.\nInfluence.\nPopper helped to establish the philosophy of science as an autonomous discipline within philosophy, both through his own prolific and influential works and through his influence on his contemporaries and students. In 1946, Popper founded the Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method at the London School of Economics (LSE) and there lectured and influenced both Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend, two of the foremost philosophers of science in the next generation. (Lakatos significantly modified Popper's position, and Feyerabend repudiated it entirely, but the work of both was deeply influenced by Popper and engaged with many of the problems that Popper set.)\nAlthough there is some dispute as to the matter of influence, Popper had a longstanding and close friendship with economist Friedrich Hayek, who was also brought to LSE from Vienna. Each found support and similarities in the other's work, citing each other often, though not without qualification. In a letter to Hayek in 1944, Popper stated, \"I think I have learnt more from you than from any other living thinker, except perhaps Alfred Tarski.\" Popper dedicated his \"Conjectures and Refutations\" to Hayek. For his part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, \"Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics\", to Popper, and in 1982 said, \"ever since his \"Logik der Forschung\" first came out in 1934, I have been a complete adherent to his general theory of methodology.\"\nPopper also had long and mutually influential friendships with art historian Ernst Gombrich, biologist Peter Medawar, and neuroscientist John Carew Eccles. The German jurist Reinhold Zippelius uses Popper's method of \"trial and error\" in his legal philosophy. Peter Medawar called him \"incomparably the greatest philosopher of science that has ever been\".\nPopper's influence, both through his work in philosophy of science and through his political philosophy, has also extended beyond the academy. One of Popper's students at LSE was George Soros, who later became a billionaire investor and among whose philanthropic foundations is the Open Society Institute, a think-tank named in honour of Popper's \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\". Soros revised his own philosophy, differing from some of Popper's epistemological assumptions, in a lecture entitled \"Open Society\" given at Central European University on 28 October 2009:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Popper was mainly concerned with the problems of understanding of reality [...] He argued that and I quote \"only democracy provides an institutional framework that permits reform without violence, and so the use of reason in politics matters.\" But his approach was based on a hidden assumption, namely, that the main purpose of thinking is to gain a better understanding of reality. And that was not necessarily the case. The manipulative function could take precedence over the cognitive function [...] How could Popper take it for granted that free political discourse is aimed at understanding reality? And even more intriguingly, how could I, who gave the manipulative function pride of place in the concept of reflexivity, follow him so blindly? [...] Let me spell out my conclusion more clearly, an open society is a desirable form of social organization, both as a means to an end, and an end in itself [...] provided it gives precedence to the cognitive over the manipulative function and people are willing to confront harsh realities. [...] The value of individual freedom is likely to assume increasing importance in the immediate future.\nPublished works.\nA complete list of Popper's writings is available as https:// of the \"International personal bibliography of Karl R. Popper\" on the website of Karl Popper Archives at the University of Klagenfurt (see also External links).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVolume I: \"Life and Times, and Values in a World of Facts\". https:// &amp; https://\nVolume II: \"Metaphysics and Epistemology\" https:// &amp; https://\nVolume III: \"Science\". https:// &amp; https://"}
{"id": "16624", "revid": "94871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16624", "title": "Kamakazi", "text": ""}
{"id": "16625", "revid": "86524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16625", "title": "Kamikaze", "text": "1944\u20131945 Japanese suicidal aircraft attacks\n, officially , were a part of the Japanese Special Attack Units of military aviators who flew suicide attacks for the Empire of Japan against Allied naval vessels in the closing stages of the Pacific campaign of World War II, intending to destroy warships more effectively than with conventional air attacks. About 3,800 \"kamikaze\" pilots died during the war in attacks that killed more than 7,000 Allied naval personnel, sank several dozen warships, and damaged scores more. The term is used generically in modern warfare for an attacking vehicle, often unmanned, which is itself destroyed when attacking a target; for example, a kamikaze drone.\n\"Kamikaze\" aircraft were pilot-guided explosive cruise missiles, either purpose-built or converted from conventional aircraft. Pilots would attempt to crash their aircraft into enemy ships in what was called a \"body attack\" (\"tai-atari\") in aircraft loaded with bombs, torpedoes or other explosives. About 19 percent of \"kamikaze\" attacks were successful. The Japanese considered the goal of damaging or sinking large numbers of Allied ships to be a just reason for suicide attacks. By late 1944, Allied qualitative and quantitative superiority over the Japanese in both aircrew and aircraft meant that \"kamikaze\" attacks were more accurate than conventional airstrikes, and often caused more damage. Some \"kamikazes\" hit their targets even after their aircraft had been crippled.\nThe attacks began in October 1944, at a time when the war was looking increasingly bleak for the Japanese. They had lost several decisive battles; many of their best pilots had been killed, and skilled replacements could not be trained fast enough; their aircraft were becoming outdated; and they had lost command of the air and sea. These factors, along with Japan's unwillingness to surrender, led to the institutionalization of \"kamikaze\" tactics as a core aspect of Japanese air warfare strategy as Allied forces advanced towards the home islands.\nA tradition of death instead of defeat, capture, and shame was deeply entrenched in Japanese military culture; one of the primary values in the samurai way of life and the \"Bushido\" code was loyalty and honor until death. In addition to \"kamikazes\", the Japanese military also used or made plans for non-aerial Japanese Special Attack Units, including those involving Kairyu (submarines), Kaiten (human torpedoes), Shinyo speedboats, Smertnik infantrymen, and Fukuryu divers.\nDefinition and origin.\nThe Japanese word \"kamikaze\" is usually translated as \"divine wind\" (\"kami\" is the word for \"god\", \"spirit\", or \"divinity\", and \"kaze\" for \"wind\"). The word originated from \"Makurakotoba\" of waka poetry modifying \"Ise\" and has been used since August 1281 to refer to the major typhoons that dispersed Mongol-Koryo fleets which invaded Japan under Kublai Khan in 1274 and 1281.\nA Japanese monoplane that made a record-breaking flight from Tokyo to London in 1937 for the Asahi newspaper group was named \"Kamikaze\". She was a prototype for the Mitsubishi Ki-15 (\"Babs\").\nIn Japanese, the formal term used for units carrying out suicide attacks during 1944\u20131945 is \"tokubetsu k\u014dgekitai\" (), which literally means \"special attack unit\". This is usually abbreviated to \"tokk\u014dtai\" (\u7279\u653b\u968a). More specifically, air suicide attack units from the Imperial Japanese Navy were officially called \"shinp\u016b tokubetsu k\u014dgeki tai\" (\u795e\u98a8\u7279\u5225\u653b\u6483\u968a, \"divine wind special attack units\"). \"Shinp\u016b\" is the on-reading (\"on'yomi\" or Chinese-derived pronunciation) of the same characters as the kun-reading (\"kun'yomi\" or Japanese pronunciation) \"kamikaze\" in Japanese. During World War II, the pronunciation \"kamikaze\" was used only informally in the Japanese press in relation to suicide attacks, but after the war, this usage gained acceptance worldwide and was re-imported into Japan.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nBefore the official formation of \"kamikaze\" units, pilots had made deliberate crashes as a last resort when their aircraft had suffered severe damage and they did not want to risk being captured or wanted to do as much damage to the enemy as possible, since they were crashing anyway. Such situations occurred in both the Axis and Allied air forces. Axell and Kase see these suicides as \"individual, impromptu decisions by men who were mentally prepared to die\".\nOne example of this may have occurred on 7 December 1941 during the attack on Pearl Harbor. First Lieutenant Fusata Iida's aircraft had taken a hit and had started leaking fuel when he apparently used it to make a suicide attack on Naval Air Station Kaneohe. Before taking off, he had told his men that if his aircraft was badly damaged he would crash it into a \"worthy enemy target\". In late February 1942, Imperial Japanese Headquarters mentioned, for the first time, that a \"human bomb\" or \"Taiatari\", had destroyed a US aircraft carrier. It was explained that the term, which meant \"thrust of body,\" was the practice of Japanese airmen to dive with the full load of bombs on to their target. Another possible example occurred at the Battle of Midway when a damaged American bomber flew at the 's bridge but missed. During the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal the US flagship, , was heavily damaged during a Japanese bombing raid when a large twin-engined Japanese Mitsubishi G4M \"Betty\" medium bomber, which was in flames from anti-aircraft fire, most likely intentionally crashed into her backup conning tower, destroying almost all of the backup command equipment for the flagship. Most of the officers and men stationed there, including the executive officer, were killed or wounded. This de facto \"kamikaze\" strike greatly changed the course of what was to happen during the infamous \"Friday the 13th\" battle 12 hours later.\nThe carrier battles in 1942, particularly the Battle of Midway, inflicted irreparable damage on the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service (IJNAS), such that it could no longer field a large number of fleet carriers with well-trained aircrews. Japanese planners had based their assumptions on a quick war and lacked comprehensive programs to replace mounting losses to ships, pilots, and sailors. Prior to the war, Japanese carrier pilots were carefully selected after undergoing years of training in specialized schools, which produced high-quality aircrew but at low volume; the Japanese military never meaningfully expanded or restructured this training pipeline. The Battle of Midway, the Solomon Islands campaign (1942\u20131945) and the New Guinea campaign (1942\u20131945)\u00a0\u2013 notably the naval battles of the Eastern Solomons (August 1942) and Santa Cruz Islands (October 1942)\u00a0\u2013 decimated the IJNAS veteran aircrews, and replacing their combat experience proved impossible. \nDuring 1943\u20131944, US forces steadily advanced toward Japan. Newer US-made aircraft, especially the Grumman F6F Hellcat and Vought F4U Corsair, outclassed and soon outnumbered Japan's fighters. Tropical diseases, as well as shortages of spare parts and fuel, made operations more and more difficult for the IJNAS. By the Battle of the Philippine Sea (June 1944), the Japanese had to make do with obsolete aircraft and inexperienced aviators in the fight against better-trained and more experienced US Navy airmen who flew radar-directed combat air patrols. The Japanese lost over 400 carrier-based aircraft and pilots in the Battle of the Philippine Sea, effectively destroying the IJN's carrier air arm. Allied aviators called the action the \"Great Marianas Turkey Shoot\".\nOn 19 June 1944, aircraft from the carrier approached a US task group. According to some accounts, two made suicide attacks, one of which hit .\nThe important Japanese base of Saipan fell to the Allied forces on 15 July 1944. Its capture provided adequate forward bases that enabled US air forces using the Boeing B-29 Superfortress to strike at the Japanese home islands. After the fall of Saipan, the Japanese High Command predicted that the Allies would try to capture the Philippines, strategically important to Tokyo because of the islands' location between the oilfields of Southeast Asia and Japan.\nBeginnings.\nCaptain Motoharu Okamura, in charge of the Tateyama Base in Tokyo, as well as the 341st Air Group Home, was, according to some sources, the first officer to officially propose \"kamikaze\" attack tactics. With his superiors, he arranged the first investigations into the plausibility and mechanisms of intentional suicide attacks on 15 June 1944. In August 1944, it was announced by the Domei news agency that a flight instructor named Takeo Tagata was training pilots in Taiwan for suicide missions.\nOne source claims that the first \"kamikaze\" mission occurred on 13 September 1944. A group of pilots from the army's 31st Fighter Squadron on Negros Island decided to launch a suicide attack the following morning. First Lieutenant Takeshi Kosai and a sergeant were selected. Two bombs were attached to two fighters, and the pilots took off before dawn, planning to crash into carriers. They never returned, but there is no record of a \"kamikaze\" hitting an Allied ship that day. According to some sources, on 14 October 1944, was hit by a deliberately crashed Japanese aircraft.\nRear Admiral Masafumi Arima, the commander of the 26th Air Flotilla (part of the 11th Air Fleet), is sometimes credited with inventing the \"kamikaze\" tactic. Arima personally led an attack by a Mitsubishi G4M \"Betty\" twin-engined bomber against a large , , near Leyte Gulf, on or about 15 October 1944. Arima was killed and part of an aircraft hit \"Franklin\". The Japanese high command and propagandas seized on Arima's example. He was promoted posthumously to vice admiral and was given official credit for making the first \"kamikaze\" attack. \nOn 17 October 1944, Allied forces assaulted Suluan Island, beginning the Battle of Leyte Gulf. The Imperial Japanese Navy's 1st Air Fleet, based at Manila, was assigned the task of assisting the Japanese ships that would attempt to destroy Allied forces in Leyte Gulf. That unit had only 41 aircraft: 34 Mitsubishi A6M Zero (\"Zeke\") carrier-based fighters, three Nakajima B6N \"Tenzan\" (\"Jill\") torpedo bombers, one Mitsubishi G4M (\"Betty\") and two Yokosuka P1Y \"Ginga\" (\"Frances\") land-based bombers, and one reconnaissance aircraft. The task facing the Japanese air forces seemed impossible. The 1st Air Fleet commandant, Vice Admiral Takijir\u014d \u014cnishi, decided to form a suicide offensive force, the Special Attack Unit. In a meeting on 19 October at Mabalacat Airfield (known to the US military as Clark Air Base) near Manila, Onishi told officers of the 201st Flying Group headquarters: \"I don't think there would be any other certain way to carry out the operation [to hold the Philippines] than to put a 250\u00a0kg bomb on a Zero and let it crash into a US carrier, in order to disable her for a week.\"\nFirst unit.\nCommander Asaichi Tamai asked a group of 23 talented student pilots, all of whom he had trained, to volunteer for the special attack force. All of the pilots raised both of their hands, volunteering to join the operation. Later, Tamai asked Lieutenant Yukio Seki to command the special attack force. Seki is said to have closed his eyes, lowered his head, and thought for ten seconds before saying: \"Please do appoint me to the post.\" Seki became the 24th \"kamikaze\" pilot to be chosen. He later said: \"Japan's future is bleak if it is forced to kill one of its best pilots\" and \"I am not going on this mission for the Emperor or for the Empire\u00a0... I am going because I was ordered to.\"\nThe names of the four subunits within the \"Kamikaze\" Special Attack Force were \"Unit Shikishima\", \"Unit Yamato\", \"Unit Asahi\" and \"Unit Yamazakura\". These names were taken from a patriotic death poem, \"Shikishima no Yamato-gokoro wo hito towaba, asahi ni niou yamazakura bana\" by the Japanese classical scholar, Motoori Norinaga. The poem reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If someone asks about the \"Yamato spirit\" [Spirit of Old/True Japan] of \"Shikishima\" [a poetic name for Japan]\u00a0\u2013 it is the flowers of \"yamazakura\" [mountain cherry blossom] that are fragrant in the \"Asahi\" [rising sun].\nA less literal translation is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u014cnishi, addressing this unit, told them that their nobility of spirit would keep the homeland from ruin even in defeat.\nLeyte Gulf: the first attacks.\nSeveral suicide attacks, carried out during the invasion of Leyte by Japanese pilots from units other than the Special Attack Force, have been described as the first \"kamikaze\" attacks. Early on 21 October 1944, a Japanese aircraft deliberately crashed into the foremast of the heavy cruiser . This aircraft was possibly either an Aichi D3A dive\u00a0bomber, from an unidentified unit of the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service, or a Mitsubishi Ki-51 of the 6th Flying Brigade, Imperial Japanese Army Air Force. The attack killed 30 personnel, including the cruiser's captain, Emile Dechaineux, and wounded 64, including the Australian force commander, Commodore John Collins. The Australian official history of the war claimed that this was the first \"kamikaze\" attack on an Allied ship. Other sources disagree because it was not a planned attack by a member of the Special Attack Force and was most likely undertaken on the pilot's own initiative.\nThe sinking of the ocean tug on 24 October is listed in some sources as the first ship lost to a \"kamikaze\" strike, but the attack occurred before the first mission of the Special Attack Force (on 25 October) and the aircraft used, a Mitsubishi G4M, was not flown by the original four Special Attack Squadrons.\nOn 25 October 1944, during the Battle of Leyte Gulf, the \"Kamikaze\" Special Attack Force carried out its first mission. Five A6M Zeros, led by Lieutenant Seki, were escorted to the target by leading Japanese ace Hiroyoshi Nishizawa where they attacked several escort carriers. One Zero attempted to hit the bridge of but instead exploded on the port catwalk and cartwheeled into the sea. Two others dived at but were destroyed by anti-aircraft fire. The last two, Seki among them, ran at . Seki however, under heavy fire and trailing smoke, aborted the attack on \"White Plains\" and instead banked toward , diving into the flight deck, where his bomb caused fires that resulted in the bomb magazine exploding, sinking the carrier.\nBy 26 October day's end, 55 \"kamikazes\" from the Special Attack Force had also damaged three large escort carriers: , , and (which had\ntaken a \"kamikaze\" strike forward of its aft elevator the day before); and three smaller escorts: USS \"White Plains\", , and \"Kitkun Bay\". In total, seven carriers were hit, as well as 40 other ships (5 sunk, 23 heavily damaged and 12 moderately damaged).\nMain wave of attacks.\nEarly successes\u2014such as the sinking of \u2014were followed by an immediate expansion of the program, and over the next few months over 2,000 aircraft made such attacks.\nWhen Japan began to suffer intense strategic bombing by Boeing B-29 Superfortresses, the Japanese military attempted to use suicide attacks against this threat. During the northern hemisphere winter of 1944\u201345, the IJAAF formed the 47th Air Regiment, also known as the \"Shinten\" Special Unit (\"Shinten Seiku Tai\") at Narimasu Airfield, Nerima, Tokyo, to defend the Tokyo Metropolitan Area. The unit was equipped with Nakajima Ki-44 \"Shoki\" (\"Tojo\") fighters, whose pilots were instructed to collide with United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) B-29s approaching Japan. Targeting the aircraft proved to be much less successful and practical than attacks against warships, as the bombers made for much faster, more maneuverable, and smaller targets. The B-29 also had formidable defensive weaponry, so suicide attacks against B-29s demanded considerable piloting skill to be successful, which worked against the very purpose of using expendable pilots. Even encouraging capable pilots to bail out before impact was ineffective because vital personnel were often lost when they mistimed their exits and were killed as a result.\nOn 11 March, the US carrier was hit and moderately damaged at Ulithi Atoll, in the Caroline Islands, by a \"kamikaze\" that had flown almost from Japan, in a mission called Operation Tan No. 2. On 20 March, the submarine survived a hit from an aircraft just off Japan.\nPurpose-built \"kamikazes\", opposed to converted fighters and dive-bombers, were also being constructed. Ensign Mitsuo Ohta had suggested that piloted glider bombs, carried within range of targets by a mother aircraft, should be developed. The First Naval Air Technical Bureau (\"Kugisho\") in Yokosuka refined Ohta's idea. Yokosuka MXY-7 \"Ohka\" rocket-powered aircraft, launched from bombers, were first deployed in \"kamikaze\" attacks from March 1945. US personnel gave them the derisive nickname \"\"Baka\" Bombs\" (\"baka\" is Japanese for \"idiot\" or \"stupid\"). The Nakajima Ki-115 \"Tsurugi\" was a simple, easily built propeller aircraft with a wooden airframe that used engines from existing stocks. Its non-retractable landing gear was jettisoned shortly after takeoff for a suicide mission, recovered, and reused. Obsolete aircraft such as Yokosuka K5Y biplane trainers were also converted to \"kamikazes\". During 1945, the Japanese military began stockpiling \"Tsurugi\", Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka, other aircraft and suicide boats for use against Allied forces expected to invade Japan. The invasion never happened, and few were ever used.\nAllied defensive tactics.\nIn early 1945, US Navy aviator Commander John Thach, already famous for developing effective aerial tactics against the Japanese such as the Thach Weave, developed a defensive strategy against \"kamikazes\" called the \"big blue blanket\" to establish Allied air supremacy well away from the carrier force. This recommended combat air patrols (CAP) that were larger and operated farther from the carriers than before, a line of picket destroyers and destroyer escorts at least from the main body of the fleet to provide earlier radar interception and improved coordination between fighter direction officers on carriers. This plan also called for around-the-clock fighter patrols over Allied fleets. A final element included intensive fighter sweeps over Japanese airfields, and bombing Japanese runways, using delayed-action bombs making repairs more difficult.\nLate in 1944, the British Pacific Fleet (BPF) used the high-altitude performance of its Supermarine Seafires (the naval version of the Spitfire) on combat air patrol duties. Seafires were involved in countering the \"kamikaze\" attacks during the Iwo Jima landings and beyond. The Seafires' best day was 15 August 1945, shooting down eight attacking aircraft with a single loss.\nAllied pilots were more experienced, better trained and flying superior aircraft, making the poorly trained \"kamikaze\" pilots easy targets. The US Fast Carrier Task Force alone could bring over 1,000 fighter aircraft into play. Allied pilots became adept at destroying enemy aircraft before they struck ships.\nAllied gunners had begun to develop techniques to negate \"kamikaze\" attacks. Light rapid-fire anti-aircraft weapons such as the 20\u00a0mm Oerlikon autocannons were still useful though the 40\u00a0mm Bofors was preferred; their high rate of fire and quick training remained advantageous, but they lacked the punch to take down a kamikaze bearing down on the ship they defended. It was found that heavy anti-aircraft guns such as the 5\"/38 caliber gun (127\u00a0mm) were the most effective as they had sufficient firepower to destroy aircraft at a safe range from the ship, which was preferable since even a heavily damaged \"kamikaze\" could reach its target. The speedy \"Ohkas\" presented a very difficult problem for anti-aircraft fire, since their velocity made fire control extremely difficult. By 1945, large numbers of anti-aircraft shells with radiofrequency proximity fuzes, on average seven times more effective than regular shells, became available, and the US Navy recommended their use against \"kamikaze\" attacks.\nFinal phase.\nThe peak period of \"kamikaze\" attack frequency came during April\u2013June 1945 at the Battle of Okinawa. On 6 April 1945, waves of aircraft made hundreds of attacks in Operation Kikusui (\"floating chrysanthemums\"). At Okinawa, \"kamikaze\" attacks focused at first on Allied destroyers on picket duty, and then on the carriers in the middle of the fleet. Suicide attacks by aircraft or boats at Okinawa sank or put out of action at least 30 US warships and at least three US merchant ships, along with some from other Allied forces. The attacks expended 1,465 aircraft. Many warships of all classes were damaged, some severely, but no aircraft carriers, battleships or cruisers were sunk by \"kamikaze\" at Okinawa. Most of the ships lost were destroyers or smaller vessels, especially those on picket duty. The destroyer earned the nickname \"The Ship That Would Not Die\" after surviving six \"kamikaze\" attacks and four bomb hits during this battle.\nAmerican carriers, with their wooden flight decks, appeared to suffer more damage from \"kamikaze\" hits than the armored-decked carriers of the British Pacific Fleet. American carriers also suffered considerably heavier casualties from \"kamikaze\" strikes; for instance, 389 men were killed in one attack on , greater than the combined number of fatalities suffered on all six Royal Navy armored carriers from all forms of attack during the entire war. \"Bunker Hill\" and \"Franklin\" were both hit (in \"Franklin's\" case, by a dive bomber, not a \"kamikaze\") while conducting operations with fully fueled and armed aircraft spotted on deck for takeoff, an extremely vulnerable state for any carrier. Eight \"kamikaze\" hits on five British carriers resulted in only 20 deaths while a combined total of 15 bomb hits, most of weight or greater, and one torpedo hit on four carriers caused 193 fatal casualties earlier in the war\u2014striking proof of the protective value of the armored flight deck.\nThe resilience of well-armored vessels was shown on 4 May, just after 11:30, when there was a wave of suicide attacks against the British Pacific Fleet. One Japanese aircraft made a steep dive from \"a great height\" at the carrier and was engaged by anti-aircraft guns. Although the \"kamikaze\" was hit by gunfire, it managed to drop a bomb that detonated on the flight deck, making a crater long, wide and deep. A long steel splinter speared down through the hangar deck and the main boiler room (where it ruptured a steam line) before coming to rest in a fuel tank near the aircraft park, where it started a major fire. Eight personnel were killed and 47 were wounded. One Corsair and ten Grumman Avengers were destroyed. The fires were gradually brought under control, and the crater in the deck was repaired with concrete and steel plate. By 17:00, Corsairs were able to land. On 9 May, \"Formidable\" was again damaged by a \"kamikaze\", as were the carrier and the battleship . The British were able to clear the flight deck and resume flight operations in just hours, while their American counterparts took a few days or even months, as observed by a US Navy liaison officer on who commented: \"When a \"kamikaze\" hits a US carrier it means six months of repair at Pearl Harbor. When a \"kamikaze\" hits a Limey carrier it's just a case of 'Sweepers, man your brooms'.\"\nTwin-engine aircraft were occasionally used in \"kamikaze\" attacks. For example, Mitsubishi Ki-67 \"Hiry\u016b\" (\"Peggy\") medium bombers, based on Formosa, undertook \"kamikaze\" attacks on Allied forces off Okinawa, while a pair of Kawasaki Ki-45 \"Toryu\" (\"Nick\") heavy fighters caused enough damage for the destroyer to be scuttled. The last ship in the war to be sunk, the , was on a radar picket line off Okinawa when she was struck by an obsolete wood-and-fabric Yokosuka K5Y biplane.\nDuring the final stage of World War II, the Imperial Japanese Army aviation employed numbers of kamikaze airstrikes against the Red Army during the Soviet\u2013Japanese War in 1945. Between 9 August and 2 September 1945, several airstrikes involving kamikaze pilots were recorded. On 18 August, a Japanese Ki-45 flown by Lieutenant Yoshira Tsiohara attacked a tanker in the port of Vladivostok. The plane was shot down and the pilot was killed. He was found to have orders to attack the largest tanker in Vladivostok, and if he failed, to ram the biggest house in the city. On the same day, the Soviet minesweeper \"KT-152\" was sunk during the Battle of Shumshu. It is believed to have been attacked by a \"kamikaze\". In the middle of August the Japanese military planned to dispatch a group of 30 \"kamikaze\" pilots from Japan to Korea to attack Soviet warships, but the Japanese leadership decided to surrender and the operation was cancelled.\n\"Kamikazes\" also operated against Red Army ground units. On August 10, three \"kamikazes\" attacked a tank column of the 20th Guards Tank Brigade. The paratroopers succeeded in shooting down two of the attacking aircraft, while the third crashed into a tank. During 12\u201313 August, 14 Japanese planes, including \"kamikazes\", targeted tanks of the 5th Guards Tank Corps. Soviet fighter aviation, which managed to destroy three enemy aircraft and an anti-aircraft artillery which lost two planes participated in repulsing the air raids. Nine \"kamikazes\" crashed without hitting their targets. Damage from these attacks was negligible.\nOn 17 August, the Kwantung Army command ordered its units to surrender, but some of the pilots disobeyed and the Japanese air attacks continued. On 18 August, convoys of the 20th and 21st Armored Brigade were attacked. The kamikazes traded six of their aircraft for a tank and a couple of cars. The \"kamikazes\" also flew solo. On 18 August, several ammunition resupply vehicles carrying ammunition for BM-13 were destroyed by a \"kamikaze\" in the Tao'an area. The personnel were unharmed, as they managed to evade the raid. On 19 August, nine aircraft raided the tanks of the 21st Guards Tank Brigade. Seven were shot down, but two planes broke through; one tank was destroyed and the other damaged. About the raid, the author of the book \"Tanker on a foreign vehicle\" D. Loza recalls six Japanese aircraft attacked the convoy, which damaged one Sherman tank and destroyed a medical vehicle. Japanese commanders ordered weapons depots to be secured and the propellers of aircraft on airfields to be removed to stop these sorties. Supposedly, the \"kamikazes\" carried out more than 50 suicide attacks against the Soviet Red Army in August 1945. That is the number of aircraft the Japanese attributed to \"other losses\". Overall, the \"kamikaze\" airstrikes proved ineffective and had little or no effect on the Red Army during the Soviet\u2013Japanese War.\nVice Admiral Matome Ugaki, the commander of the IJN 5th Air Fleet based in Kyushu, participated in one of the final \"kamikaze\" attacks on American ships on 15 August 1945, hours after Japan's announced surrender.\nOn 19 August 1945, 11 young officers under Second Lieutenant Hitoshi Imada, attached to the 675th Manchuria Detachment, accompanied by two women of their engagement, left the Daikosan airfield and made a final aerial suicide attack against one of the Soviet armored units that had invaded Manchuria known as the Shinshu Fumetsu Special Attack Corps (Japanese: \u795e\u5dde\u4e0d\u6ec5\u7279\u5225\u653b\u6483\u968a), The last \"kamikaze\" attacks were recorded on 20 August 1945.\nShortly afterward, the main strength of the Japanese Army began to lay down its arms in surrender per the Emperor's broadcast. The Soviet\u2013Japanese War, and World War II, had come to an end.\nAt the time of the surrender, the Japanese had more than 9,000 aircraft in the home islands available for \"kamikaze\" attacks, and more than 5,000 had already been specially fitted for suicide attack to resist the planned either American or Soviet invasion.\nEffects.\nAs the end of the war approached, the Allies did not suffer more serious significant losses, despite having far more ships and facing a greater intensity of \"kamikaze\" attacks. Although causing some of the heaviest casualties on US carriers in 1945 (particularly as \"Bunker Hill\" was unlucky to be hit with fueled and armed aircraft on deck), the IJN had sacrificed 2,525 \"kamikaze\" pilots and the IJAAF 1,387\u00a0\u2013 without successfully sinking any fleet carriers, cruisers, or battleships. This was far more than the IJN had lost in 1942 when it sank or crippled three US fleet carriers (albeit without inflicting significant casualties). In 1942, when US Navy vessels were scarce, the temporary absence of key warships from the combat zone would tie up operational initiatives. By 1945, however, the US Navy was large enough that damaged ships could be detached back home for repair without much hampering the fleet's operational capability. The only US surface losses were escort carriers, destroyers, and smaller ships, all of which lacked the armor protection or capability to sustain heavy damage. Overall, the \"kamikazes\" were unable to turn the tide of the war and stop the Allied invasion.\nWhile on paper it may appear that \"kamikaze\" and \"kamikaze\"-assisted attacks at Okinawa only managed to sink smaller ships like destroyers, the reality is different. \"Kamikaze\" raids often included escort fighters and conventional bombers piloted by skilled aviators who were not intended to execute suicide strikes. These coordinated groups, such as the one that paved the way for conventional bombers to successfully strike the fleet carrier \"Franklin\", were crucial. In fact, three large fleet carriers\u2014\"Franklin\", \"Bunker Hill\", and \u2014were so heavily damaged by \"kamikaze\"-related attacks that they were knocked out for the remainder of the war.\nFor the Japanese this was not much different than sinking them, operationally speaking. For each of the heavily damaged aircraft carriers dozens of aircraft were destroyed that would have been impossible to be shot down by any Japanese forces via dogfights or anti-aircraft weapons at this stage of the war. \"Franklin\" lost 59 planes, \"Bunker Hill\" lost 78 planes, and \"Enterprise\" lost 25 planes in the Japanese attacks that ended the war for them. There were more lost planes on these three carriers alone (not including the numerous other successful strikes on other Allied carriers during the Battle of Okinawa) than the United States lost in the entire Battle of Midway. \"Franklin\" and \"Bunker Hill\" also both had the first and third largest fatalities on sunken or damaged US aircraft carriers in World War II and were the only \"Essex\"-class carriers to never serve on active duty after World War II while \"Enterprise\" was mothballed soon after World War II despite all three of them receiving repairs back in the United States. Numerous other larger-than-destroyer warships were so heavily damaged that they also were knocked out for the rest of the war and decommissioned shortly after World War II.\nThe Japanese \"kamikazes\" were so relentless at Okinawa that United States Fifth Fleet commander Admiral Raymond A. Spruance's flagships were struck two separate times ( was hit in March and had to retire for repairs which forced him to transfer to which was also hit in May). Fast Carrier Task Force commander Vice Admiral Marc Mitscher and his chief of staff Commodore Arleigh Burke were yards away from getting killed or wounded by \"kamikazes\" on his flagship \"Bunker Hill\", which killed three of Mitscher's staff officers and eleven of his enlisted staff members and also destroyed his flag cabin along with all of his uniforms, personal papers, and possessions. Just three days later Mitscher's new flagship \"Enterprise\" was also struck by a \"kamikaze\", forcing him to have to change his flagship yet again.\nSpruance later wrote about the effectiveness of \"kamikazes\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is my second experience with a suicide plane making a hit on board my own ship, and I have seen four other ships hit near me. The suicide plane is a very effective weapon, which we must not underestimate. I do not believe anyone who has not been around within its area of operations can realize its potentialities against ships. It is the opposite extreme of a lot of our Army heavy bombers who bomb safely and ineffectively from the upper atmosphere.\nIn the immediate aftermath of \"kamikaze\" strikes, British fleet carriers with their armoured flight decks recovered more quickly compared to their US counterparts. Post-war analysis showed that some British carriers such as HMS \"Formidable\" suffered structural damage that led to them being scrapped, as being beyond economic repair. played a role in the decision to not repair damaged carriers, while even seriously damaged American carriers such as USS \"Bunker Hill\" were repaired, although they were then mothballed or sold off as surplus after World War II without re-entering service.\nThe exact number of ships sunk is a matter of debate. According to a wartime Japanese propaganda announcement, the missions sank 81 ships and damaged 195, and according to a Japanese tally, \"kamikaze\" attacks accounted for up to 80% of the US losses in the final phase of the war in the Pacific. In a 2004 book, \"World War II\", the historians Willmott, Cross, and Messenger stated that more than 70 US vessels were \"sunk or damaged beyond repair\" by \"kamikazes\".\nAccording to the United States Strategic Bombing Survey, from October 1944 until the end of the war, 2,550 Kamikaze missions were flown with only 475 (or 18.6%) achieving a hit or a damaging near miss. Warships of all types were damaged including 12 aircraft carriers, 15 battleships, and 16 light and escort carriers. However, no ship larger than an escort carrier was sunk. Approximately 45 ships were sunk, the bulk of which were destroyers. To the United States, the losses were of such concern that more than 2,000 B-29 sorties were diverted from attacking Japanese cities and industries to striking Kamikaze air fields in Kyushu.\nAccording to a US Air Force webpage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Approximately 2,800 \"Kamikaze\" attackers sank 34 Navy ships, damaged 368 others, killed 4,900 sailors, and wounded over 4,800. Despite radar detection and cuing, airborne interception, attrition, and massive anti-aircraft barrages, 14 per cent of \"Kamikazes\" survived to score a hit on a ship; nearly 8.5 percent of all ships hit by \"Kamikazes\" sank.\nAustralian journalists Denis and Peggy Warner, in a 1982 book with Japanese naval historian Sadao Seno (\"The Sacred Warriors: Japan's Suicide Legions\"), arrived at a total of 57 ships sunk by \"kamikazes\". Bill Gordon, an American Japanologist who specializes in \"kamikazes\", lists in a 2007 article 47 ships known to have been sunk by \"kamikaze\" aircraft. Gordon says that the Warners and Seno included ten ships that did not sink. He lists:\nRecruitment.\nIt was claimed by the Japanese forces at the time that there were many volunteers for the suicidal forces. Captain Motoharu Okamura commented that \"there were so many volunteers for suicide missions that he referred to them as a swarm of bees\", explaining: \"Bees die after they have stung.\" Okamura is credited with being the first to propose the \"kamikaze\" attacks. He had expressed his desire to lead a volunteer group of suicide attacks some four months before Admiral Takijiro Ohnishi, commander of the Japanese naval air forces in the Philippines, presented the idea to his staff. While Vice-Admiral Shigeru Fukudome, commander of the second air fleet, was inspecting the 341st Air Group, Captain Okamura took the chance to express his ideas on crash-dive tactics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In our present situation, I firmly believe that the only way to swing the war in our favor is to resort to crash-dive attacks with our aircraft. There is no other way. There will be more than enough volunteers for this chance to save our country, and I would like to command such an operation. Provide me with 300 aircraft and I will turn the tide of war.\nWhen the volunteers arrived for duty in the corps, there were twice as many persons as aircraft available. \"After the war, some commanders would express regret for allowing superfluous crews to accompany sorties, sometimes squeezing themselves aboard bombers and fighters so as to encourage the suicide pilots and, it seems, join in the exultation of sinking a large enemy vessel.\" Many of the \"kamikaze\" pilots believed their death would pay the debt they owed and show the love they had for their families, friends, and emperor. \"So eager were many minimally trained pilots to take part in suicide missions that when their sorties were delayed or aborted, the pilots became deeply despondent. Many of those who were selected for a body crashing mission were described as being extraordinarily blissful immediately before their final sortie.\"\nHowever, an evidence-based study of 2,000 pilots' uncensored letters revealed that the pilots candidly expressed myriad emotions in private. Typically, they declared their determination to die to protect the homeland and thanked their school teachers, parents, siblings, and friends for their selfless devotion. Although most pilots were unmarried (the average age was 19), some young fathers left loving instructions for their young wives and children to live well, and others expressed memories of unrequited love or the sorrow of dying young.\nAs time wore on, modern critics questioned the nationalist portrayal of \"kamikaze\" pilots as noble soldiers willing to sacrifice their lives for the country. In 2006, Tsuneo Watanabe, editor-in-chief of the \"Yomiuri Shimbun\", criticized Japanese nationalists' glorification of \"kamikaze\" attacks:\nIt's all a lie that they left filled with braveness and joy, crying, \"Long live the emperor!\" They were sheep at a slaughterhouse. Everybody was looking down and tottering. Some were unable to stand up and were carried and pushed into their aircraft by maintenance soldiers.\nTraining.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When you eliminate all thoughts about life and death, you will be able to totally disregard your earthly life. This will also enable you to concentrate your attention on eradicating the enemy with unwavering determination, meanwhile reinforcing your excellence in flight skills.\u2014\u200a\n\"Tokk\u014dtai\" pilot training, as described by Takeo Kasuga, generally \"consisted of incredibly strenuous training, coupled with cruel and torturous corporal punishment as a daily routine\". The training, in theory, lasted for thirty days, but because of American raids and shortage of fuel it could last up to two months.\nDaikichi Irokawa, who trained at Tsuchiura Naval Air Base, recalled that he \"was struck on the face so hard and frequently that [his] face was no longer recognizable\". He also wrote: \"I was hit so hard that I could no longer see and fell on the floor. The minute I got up, I was hit again by a club so that I would confess.\" This brutal \"training\" was justified by the idea that it would instil a \"soldier's fighting spirit\", but daily beatings and corporal punishment eliminated patriotism among many pilots.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe tried to live with 120 per cent intensity, rather than waiting for death. We read and read, trying to understand why we had to die in our early twenties. We felt the clock ticking away towards our death, every sound of the clock shortening our lives.\nIrokawa Daikichi, \"Kamikaze Diaries: Reflections of Japanese Student Soldiers\"\nPilots were given a manual that detailed how they were supposed to think, prepare, and attack. From this manual, pilots were told to \"attain a high level of spiritual training\", and to \"keep [their] health in the very best condition\". These instructions, among others, were meant to make pilots mentally ready to die.\nThe \"tokk\u014dtai\" pilot's manual also explained how a pilot may turn back if he could not locate a target, and that a pilot \"should not waste [his] life lightly\". One pilot, a graduate from Waseda University, who continually came back to base was shot after his ninth return.\nThe manual was very detailed in how a pilot should attack. A pilot would dive towards his target and \"aim for a point between the bridge tower and the smokestacks\". Entering a smokestack was also said to be \"effective\". Pilots were told not to aim at a carrier's bridge tower but instead to target the elevators or the flight deck. For horizontal attacks, the pilot was to \"aim at the middle of the vessel, slightly higher than the waterline\" or to \"aim at the entrance to the aircraft hangar, or the bottom of the stack\" if the former was too difficult.\nThe \"tokk\u014dtai\" pilot's manual told pilots to never close their eyes, as this would lower the chances of hitting their targets. In the final moments before the crash, the pilot was to yell \"hissatsu\" (\u5fc5\u6bba) at the top of his lungs, which translates to \"certain kill\" or \"sink without fail\".\nCultural background.\nIn 1944\u201345, US military leaders invented the term \"State Shinto\" as part of the Shinto Directive to differentiate the Japanese state's ideology from traditional Shinto practices. As time went on, Americans claimed, Shinto was used increasingly in the promotion of nationalist sentiment. In 1890, the Imperial Rescript on Education was passed, under which students were required to ritually recite its oath to offer themselves \"courageously to the state\" as well as protect the Imperial family. The ultimate offering was to give up one's life. It was an honour to die for Japan and the Emperor. Axell and Kase pointed out: \"The fact is that innumerable soldiers, sailors and pilots were determined to die, to become \"eirei\", that is 'guardian spirits' of the country. ... Many Japanese felt that to be enshrined at Yasukuni was a special honour because the Emperor visited the shrine to pay homage twice a year. Yasukuni is the only shrine deifying common men which the Emperor would visit to pay his respects.\" Young Japanese people were indoctrinated from an early age with these ideals.\nFollowing the commencement of the \"kamikaze\" tactic, newspapers and books ran advertisements, articles and stories regarding the suicide bombers to aid in recruiting and support. In October 1944, the \"Nippon Times\" quoted Lieutenant Sekio Nishina: \"The spirit of the Special Attack Corps is the great spirit that runs in the blood of every Japanese ... The crashing action which simultaneously kills the enemy and oneself without fail is called the Special Attack ... Every Japanese is capable of becoming a member of the Special Attack Corps.\" Publishers also played up the idea that the \"kamikaze\" were enshrined at Yasukuni and ran exaggerated stories of \"kamikaze\" bravery \u2013 there were even fairy tales for little children that promoted the \"kamikaze\". A Foreign Office official named Toshikazu Kase said: \"It was customary for GHQ [in Tokyo] to make false announcements of victory in utter disregard of facts, and for the elated and complacent public to believe them.\"\nWhile many stories were falsified, some were true, such as that of Kiyu Ishikawa, who saved a Japanese ship when he crashed his aircraft into a torpedo that an American submarine had launched. The sergeant-major was posthumously promoted to second lieutenant by the emperor and was enshrined at Yasukuni. Stories like these, which showed the kind of praise and honour death produced, encouraged young Japanese to volunteer for the Special Attack Corps and instilled a desire in the youth to die as a \"kamikaze\".\nCeremonies were carried out before \"kamikaze\" pilots departed on their final mission. The \"kamikaze\" shared ceremonial cups of sake or water known as \"mizu no sakazuki\". Many \"kamikaze\" Army officers took their swords along, while the Navy pilots (as a general rule) did not. The \"kamikaze\", along with all Japanese aviators flying over unfriendly territory, were issued (or purchased, if they were officers) a Nambu pistol with which to end their lives if they risked being captured. Like all Army and Navy servicemen, the \"kamikaze\" would wear their \"senninbari\", a \"belt of a thousand stitches\" given to them by their mothers. They also composed and read a death poem, a tradition stemming from the samurai, who did so before committing \"seppuku\". Pilots carried prayers from their families and were given military decorations. The \"kamikaze\" were escorted by other pilots whose function was to protect them en route to their destination and report on the results. Some of these escort pilots, such as Zero pilot Toshimitsu Imaizumi, were later sent out on their own \"kamikaze\" missions.\nWhile it is commonly perceived that volunteers signed up in droves for \"kamikaze\" missions, it has also been contended that there was extensive coercion and peer pressure involved in recruiting soldiers for the sacrifice. Their motivations in \"volunteering\" were complex and not simply about patriotism or bringing honour to their families. Firsthand interviews with surviving \"kamikaze\" and escort pilots has revealed that they were motivated by a desire to protect their families from perceived atrocities and possible extinction at the hands of the Allies. They viewed themselves as the last defense.\nAt least one of these pilots was a conscripted Korean with a Japanese name, adopted under the pre-war \"Soshi-kaimei\" ordinance that compelled Koreans to take Japanese personal names. Eleven of the 1,036 IJA \"kamikaze\" pilots who died in sorties from Chiran and other Japanese air bases during the Battle of Okinawa were Koreans.\nIt is said that young pilots on \"kamikaze\" missions often flew southwest from Japan over the Mount Kaimon. The mountain is also called \"Satsuma Fuji\" (meaning a mountain like Mount Fuji but located in the Satsuma Province region). Suicide-mission pilots looked over their shoulders to see the mountain, the southernmost on the Japanese mainland, said farewell to their country and saluted the mountain. Residents on Kikaishima Island, east of Amami \u014cshima, say that pilots from suicide-mission units dropped flowers from the air as they departed on their final missions.\n\"Kamikaze\" pilots who were unable to complete their missions (because of mechanical failure, interception, etc.) were stigmatized in the years following the war. This stigma began to diminish some 50 years after the war as scholars and publishers began to distribute the survivors' stories.\nSome Japanese military personnel were critical of the policy. Officers such as Minoru Genda, Tadashi Minobe and Yoshio Shiga, refused to obey the policy. They said that the commander of a \"kamikaze\" attack should engage in the task first. Some persons who obeyed the policy, such as Kiyokuma Okajima, Saburo Shindo and Iyozo Fujita, were also critical of the policy. Sabur\u014d Sakai said: \"We never dared to question orders, to doubt authority, to do anything but immediately carry out all the commands of our superiors. We were automatons who obeyed without thinking.\" Tetsuz\u014d Iwamoto refused to engage in a \"kamikaze\" attack because he thought the task of fighter pilots was to shoot down aircraft.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16629", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16629", "title": "KDE", "text": "Free software community\nKDE is an international free software community that develops free and open-source software. As a central development hub, it provides tools and resources that enable collaborative work on its projects. Its products include the KDE Plasma graphical shell, KDE Frameworks, and the KDE Gear range of applications including Kate, digiKam, and Krita. Many KDE applications are cross-platform and can run on Unix and Unix-like operating systems as well as Microsoft Windows. KDE is legally represented by KDE e.V. based in Germany, which also owns the KDE trademarks and funds the project.\nOrigins.\nKDE was founded in 1996 by Matthias Ettrich, a student at the University of T\u00fcbingen. At the time, he was troubled by certain aspects of the Unix desktop. Among his concerns was that none of the applications looked or behaved alike. In his opinion, desktop applications of the time were too complicated for end users. In order to solve the issue, he proposed the creation of a desktop environment in which users could expect the applications to be consistent and easy to use. His initial Usenet post spurred significant interest, and the KDE project was born.\nThe name \"KDE\" was intended as a wordplay on the existing Common Desktop Environment, available for Unix systems. CDE was an X11-based user environment jointly developed by HP, IBM, and Sun through the X/Open consortium, with an interface and productivity tools based on the Motif graphical widget toolkit. It was supposed to be an intuitively easy-to-use desktop computer environment. The \"K\" was originally suggested to stand for \"Kool\", but it was quickly decided that the \"K\" should stand for nothing in particular. Therefore, the \"KDE\" initialism expanded to \"K Desktop Environment\" before it was dropped altogether in favor of simply \"KDE\" in a rebranding in 2009.\nIn the beginning Matthias Ettrich chose to use Trolltech's Qt framework for the KDE project. Other programmers quickly started developing KDE/Qt applications, and by early 1997, a few applications were being released. On 12 July 1998 the first version of the desktop environment, called KDE 1.0, was released. The original GNU General Public Licensed version of this toolkit only existed for platforms that used the X11 display server, but as of the release of Qt 4, GNU Lesser General Public Licensed versions are available for more platforms. This allowed KDE software based on Qt 4 or newer versions to be distributed to Microsoft Windows and OS X.\nThe KDE Marketing Team announced a rebranding of the KDE project components on 24 November 2009. Motivated by the perceived shift in objectives, the rebranding focused on emphasizing both the community of software creators and the various tools supplied by the KDE, rather than just the desktop environment. KDE 4 was split into KDE Plasma Workspaces, KDE Applications, and KDE Frameworks (KDE Platform 4 at the time), bundled as KDE Software Compilation 4. Since 2009, the name \"KDE\" no longer stands for \"K Desktop Environment\", but for the community that produces the software.\nKDE Projects.\nThe KDE community maintains multiple free-software projects. The project formerly referred to as \"KDE\" (or \"KDE SC (Software Compilation)\") nowadays consists of three parts:\nOther projects.\nKDE neon.\nKDE neon is a software repository that uses Ubuntu LTS as a core. It aims to provide the users with rapidly updated Qt and KDE software, while updating the rest of the OS components from the Ubuntu repositories at the normal pace. KDE maintains that it is not a \"KDE distribution\", but rather an up-to-date archive of KDE and Qt packages.\nSubtitle Composer.\nSubtitle Composer is an open-source subtitle editor for the Linux and Microsoft Windows operating systems, based on Qt and KDE Frameworks. The project became part of KDE starting in December 2019. It supports the most common text and bitmap-based subtitle formats, video previewing, audio waveform, speech recognition, timings synchronization, subtitle translation, OCR and JavaScript macros/scripting. Subtitle Composer is free software released under the GNU General Public License.\nContributors.\nDeveloping KDE software is primarily a volunteer effort, although various companies, such as Novell, Nokia, or Blue Systems employ or employed developers to work on various parts of the project. Since a large number of individuals contribute to KDE in various ways (e.g. code, translation, artwork), organization of such a project is complex. A mentor program helps beginners to get started with developing and communicating within KDE projects and communities.\nCommunication within the community takes place via mailing lists, IRC, blogs, forums, news announcements, wikis and conferences. The community has a Code of Conduct for acceptable behavior within the community.\nDevelopment.\nCurrently the KDE community uses the Git version control system. The KDE GitLab Instance (named Invent) gives an overview of all projects hosted by KDE's Git repository system. Phabricator is used for task management.\nOn 20 July 2009, KDE announced that the one millionth commit has been made to its Subversion repository. On 11 October 2009, Cornelius Schumacher, a main developer within KDE, wrote about the estimated cost (using the COCOMO model with SLOCCount) to develop KDE software package with 4,273,291 LoC, which would be about US$175,364,716. This estimation does not include Qt, Calligra Suite, Amarok, digiKam, and other applications that are not part of KDE core.\nCore team.\nThe overall direction is set by the \"KDE Core Team\". These are developers who have made significant contributions within KDE over a long period of time. This team communicates using the \"kde-core-devel\" mailing list, which is publicly archived and readable, but joining requires approval. KDE does not have a single central leader who can veto important decisions. Instead, the KDE core team consists of several dozens of contributors who make decisions not by a formal vote, but through discussions.\nThe developers also organize alongside topical teams. For example, the \"KDE Edu team\" develops free educational software. While these teams work mostly independent and do not all follow a common release schedule. Each team has its own messaging channels, both on IRC and on the mailing lists.\nKDE Patrons.\nA KDE Patron is an individual or organization supporting the KDE community by donating at least 5000 Euro (depending on the company's size) to the KDE e.V.\nAs of February 2024, there are nine such patrons: Blue Systems, Canonical Ltd., Google, GnuPG, Kubuntu Focus, Slimbook, SUSE, The Qt Company, and TUXEDO Computers.\nCommunity structure.\nMascot.\nThe KDE community's mascot is a green dragon named Konqi. Konqi's appearance was officially redesigned with the coming of Plasma 5, with Tyson Tan's entry (seen in the images) winning the redesign competition on the KDE Forums.\nKatie is a female dragon. She was presented in 2010 and is appointed as a mascot for the KDE women's community.\nOther dragons with different colors and professions were added to Konqi as part of the Tyson Tan redesign concept. Each dragon has a pair of letter-shaped antlers that reflect their role in the KDE community.\nKandalf the wizard was the former mascot for the KDE community during its 1.x and 2.x versions. Kandalf's similarity to the character of Gandalf led to speculation that the mascot was switched to Konqi due to copyright infringement concerns, but this has never been confirmed by KDE.\nKDE e.V. organization.\nThe financial and legal matters of KDE are handled by KDE e.V., a German non-profit organization. Among others, it owns the \"KDE\" trademark and the corresponding logo. It also accepts donations on behalf of the KDE community, helps to run the servers, assists in organizing and financing conferences and meetings, but does not influence software development directly.\nLocal communities.\nIn many countries, KDE has local branches. These are either informal organizations (KDE India) or like the KDE e.V., given a legal form (KDE France). The local organizations host and maintain regional websites, and organize local events, such as tradeshows, contributor meetings and social community meetings.\nIdentity.\nKDE has community identity guidelines (CIG) for definitions and recommendations which help the community to establish a unique, characteristic, and appealing design. The KDE official logo displays the white trademarked K-Gear shape on a blue square with mitred corners. Copying of the KDE Logo is subject to the LGPL. Some local community logos are derivations of the official logo.\nMany KDE applications have a \"K\" in the name, mostly as an initial letter. The \"K\" in many KDE applications is obtained by spelling a word which originally begins with \"C\" or \"Q\" differently, for example Konsole and Kaffeine, while some others prefix a commonly used word with a \"K\", for instance KGet. However, some apps do not to have a \"K\" in the name at all, such as with Stage, Spectacle, Discover and Dolphin.\nCollaborations with other organizations.\nWikimedia.\nOn 23 June 2005, chairman of the Wikimedia Foundation announced that the KDE community and the Wikimedia Foundation have begun efforts towards cooperation. Fruits of that cooperation are MediaWiki syntax highlighting in Kate and accessing Wikipedia content within KDE applications, such as Amarok and Marble.\nOn 4 April 2008, the KDE e.V. and opened shared offices in Frankfurt.\nFree Software Foundation Europe.\nIn May 2006, KDE e.V. became an Associate Member of the Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE).\nOn 22 August 2008, KDE e.V. and FSFE jointly announced that after working with FSFE's Freedom Task Force for one and a half years KDE adopts FSFE's Fiduciary Licence Agreement. Using that, KDE developers can \u2013 on a voluntary basis \u2013 assign their copyrights to KDE e.V.\nIn September 2009, KDE e.V. and FSFE moved into shared offices in Berlin.\nCommercial enterprises.\nSeveral companies actively contribute to KDE, like Collabora, Erfrakon, Intevation GmbH, Kolab Konsortium, Klar\u00e4lvdalens Datakonsult AB (KDAB), Blue Systems, and KO GmbH.\nNokia used Calligra Suite as base for their \"Office Viewer\" application for Maemo/MeeGo. They have also been contracting KO GmbH to bring MS Office 2007 file format filters to Calligra. Nokia also employed several KDE developers directly \u2013 either to use KDE software for MeeGo (e.g. \"KCal\") or as sponsorship.\nThe software development and consulting companies Intevation GmbH of Germany and the Swedish KDAB use Qt and KDE software \u2013 especially Kontact and Akonadi for Kolab \u2013 for their services and products, therefore both employ KDE developers.\nOthers.\nKDE participates in freedesktop.org, an effort to standardize Unix desktop interoperability.\nIn 2009 and 2011, GNOME and KDE co-hosted their conferences Akademy and GUADEC under the \"Desktop Summit\" label.\nIn December 2010 KDE e.V. became a licensee of the Open Invention Network.\nMany Linux distributions and other free operating systems are involved in the development and distribution of the software, and are therefore also active in the KDE community. These include commercial distributors such as SUSE/Novell or Red Hat but also government-funded non-commercial organizations such as the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey with its Linux distribution Pardus.\nIn October 2018, Red Hat declared that KDE Plasma was no longer supported in future updates of Red Hat Enterprise Linux, though it continues to be part of Fedora. The announcement came shortly after the announcement of the business acquisition of Red Hat by IBM for close to US$43 billion. As a result, Fedora now makes KDE Plasma and other KDE software available also to Red Hat Enterprise Linux users through their Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux (EPEL) project.\nActivities.\nThe two most important conferences of KDE are \"Akademy\" and \"Camp KDE\". Each event is on a large scale, both thematically and geographically. \"Akademy-BR\" and \"Akademy-es\" are local community events.\nAkademy.\n\"Akademy\" is the annual world summit, held each summer at varying venues in Europe. The primary goals of Akademy are to act as a community building event, to communicate the achievements of community, and to provide a platform for collaboration with community and industry partners. Secondary goals are to engage local people, and to provide space for getting together to write code. KDE e.V. assist with procedures, advice and organization. Akademy including conference, KDE e.V. general assembly, marathon coding sessions, BOFs (birds of a feather sessions) and social program. BOFs meet to discuss specific sub-projects or issues.\nThe first conference that the KDE community held was KDE One, in Arnsberg, Germany, in 1997 to discuss the first KDE release. Initially, each conference was numbered after the release, and not regular held. Since 2003 the conferences were held once a year. And they were named Akademy since 2004.\nThe yearly Akademy conference gives \"Akademy Awards\", are awards that the KDE community gives to KDE contributors. Their purpose is to recognize outstanding contribution to KDE. There are three awards, best application, best non-application and jury's award. As always the winners are chosen by the winners from the previous year. First winners received a framed picture of Konqi signed by all attending KDE developers.\nCamp KDE.\n\"Camp KDE\" is another annual contributor's conference of the KDE community. The event provides a regional opportunity for contributors and enthusiasts to gather and share their experiences. It is free to all participants. It is intended to ensure that KDE in the world is not simply seen as being Euro-centric. The KDE e.V. helps travel and accommodation subsidies for presenters, BoF leaders, organizers or core contributor. It is held in the North America since 2009.\nIn January 2008, KDE 4.0 Release Event was held at the Google headquarters in Mountain View, California, US, to celebrate the release of KDE SC 4.0. The community realized that there was a strong demand for KDE events in the Americas, therefore Camp KDE was produced.\nCamp KDE 2009 was the premiere meeting of the KDE Americas, was held at the Travellers Beach Resort in Negril, Jamaica, sponsored by Google, Intel, iXsystem, KDE e.V. and Kitware. The event included 1\u20132 days of presentations, BoF meetings and hackathon sessions. Camp KDE 2010 took place at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) in La Jolla, US. The schedule included presentations, BoFs, hackathons and a day trip. It started with a short introduction by Jeff Mitchell, who was the principal organizer of the conference, talked a bit of history about Camp KDE and some statistics about the KDE community. With around 70 participants, the talks of the event were relatively well attended. On 1/19, the social event was a tour of a local brewery. Camp KDE 2011 was held at Hotel Kabuki in San Francisco, US. It was co-located with the Linux Foundation Collaboration Summit. The schedule included presentations, hackathons and a party at Noisebridge. The conference opened with an introduction by Celeste Lyn Paul.\nSoK (Season of KDE).\nSeason of KDE is an outreach program hosted by the KDE community. Students are appointed mentors from the KDE community that help bring their project to fruition.\nOther community events.\nhttp:// was the first KDE and Qt conference in India. The conference, organized by KDE India, was held at R.V. College of Engineering in Bangalore, India. The first three days of the event had talks, tutorials, and interactive sessions. The last two days were a focused code sprint. The conference was opened by its main organizer, Pradeepto Bhattacharya. Over 300 people were at the opening talks. The Lighting of the Auspicious Lamp ceremony was performed to open the conference. The first session was by Lydia Pintscher, who spoke on \"So much to do\u00a0\u2013 so little time\". At the event, the return of Project Neon was announced on March 11, 2011, with the project providing nightly builds of the KDE Software Compilation. Closing the conference was keynote speaker and old-time KDE developer Sirtaj.\n\"D\u00eda KDE\" (KDE Day) is an Argentinian event focused on KDE. It gives talks and workshops. The purposes of the event are to: spread the free software movement among the population of Argentina, bringing to it the KDE community and environment developed by it; know and strengthen KDE-AR; and generally bring the community together to have fun. The event is free.\nA \"Release party\" is a party, which celebrates the release of a new version of the KDE SC (twice a year). KDE also participates in other conferences that revolve around free software.\nNotable uses.\nBrazil's primary school education system operates computers running KDE software, with more than 42,000 schools in 4,000 cities, thus serving nearly 52 million children. The base distribution is called Educational Linux, which is based on Kubuntu. Besides this, thousands more students in Brazil use KDE products in their universities. KDE software is also running on computers in Portuguese and Venezuelan schools, with respectively 700,000 and one million systems reached.\nThrough Pardus, a local Linux distribution, many sections of the Turkish government make use of KDE software, including the Turkish Armed Forces, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of National Defence, Turkish Police, and the SGK (Social Security Institution of Turkey), although these departments often do not exclusively use Pardus as their operating system.\nCERN (European Organization for Nuclear Research) uses KDE software.\nGermany uses KDE software in its embassies around the world, representing around 11,000 systems. \nNASA used the Plasma Desktop during the Mars Mission.\nValve Corporation's handheld gaming computer, the Steam Deck, uses the KDE Plasma desktop environment when in desktop mode.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16634", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16634", "title": "Konrad Adenauer", "text": "Chancellor of West Germany from 1949 to 1963\nKonrad Hermann Joseph Adenauer (5 January 1876 \u2013 19 April 1967) was a German statesman and politician who served as the first chancellor of West Germany from 1949 to 1963. From 1946 to 1966, he was the first leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), a newly founded Christian democratic party, which became the dominant force in the country under his leadership.\nAs a devout Catholic, Adenauer was a leading politician of the Catholic Centre Party in the Weimar Republic, serving as Mayor of Cologne (1917\u20131933) and as president of the Prussian State Council. In the early years of the Federal Republic, he switched focus from denazification to recovery, and led his country to close relations with France, the United Kingdom, and the United States. During his years in power, he worked to restore the West German economy from the destruction of World War II to a central position in Europe with a market-based liberal democracy, stability, international respect and economic prosperity.\nAdenauer belied his age by his intense work habits and his uncanny political instinct. A strong anti-communist, he was deeply committed to an Atlanticist foreign policy and restoring the position of West Germany on the world stage. Adenauer was a driving force in reestablishing national military forces (the ) and intelligence services (the Bundesnachrichtendienst) in West Germany in 1955 and 1956. He refused the diplomatic recognition of the German Democratic Republic as an East-German state and the Oder\u2013Neisse line as a postwar frontier to Poland. Under Adenauer, West Germany joined NATO. A proponent of European unity, he signed the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Adenauer is considered as one of the \"Founding fathers of the European Union\".\nCologne years.\nEarly life and education.\nKonrad Adenauer was born on 5 January 1876 in Cologne, Rhenish Prussia, as the third of five children of Johann Konrad Adenauer (1833\u20131906) and his wife Helene (n\u00e9e Scharfenberg; 1849\u20131919). His siblings were August (1872\u20131952), Johannes (1873\u20131937), Lilli (1879\u20131950) and Elisabeth, who died shortly after birth c.\u20091880. One of the formative influences of Adenauer's youth was the so-called Kulturkampf, the struggle of the Prussian state with the Catholic church, an experience that as related to him by his parents left him with a lifelong dislike for \"Prussianism\", and led him like many other Catholic Rhinelanders of the 19th century to deeply resent the Rhineland's inclusion in Prussia.\nHaving a passion for inventing, Adenauer started experimenting with plants in the back garden as a child, which was not welcomed by his father who told him \"One should not try to meddle with the Lord's hand\", then in 1904 he invented a reaction steam engine which was supposed to filter out dust produced by cars. However, as his hobby of inventing grew ever more costly, Adenauer's activities in this area slowly diminished.\nAfter final school examination (Abitur) in 1894, Adenauer studied law and politics at the universities of Freiburg, Munich and Bonn, demonstrating competent but not exceptional academic ability. In 1896, he was mustered for the Prussian army, but did not pass the physical exam due to chronic respiratory problems he had experienced since childhood. He was a member of several Catholic students' associations. He graduated in 1900, and afterwards worked as a lawyer at the court in Cologne for four years.\nLeader in Cologne.\nAs a devout Catholic, he joined the Centre Party ( or just ) in 1906 and was elected to Cologne's city government in the same year. In 1909, he became Vice-Mayor of Cologne, an industrial metropolis with a population of 635,000 in 1914. Avoiding the extreme political movements that attracted so many of his generation, Adenauer was committed to bourgeois decency, diligence, order, Christian morals and values, and was dedicated to rooting out disorder, inefficiency, irrationality and political immorality. In 1917, he was unanimously elected as Mayor of Cologne for a 12-year period, and re-elected in 1929.\nBy 1931 and whilst Mayor of Cologne, he was also acting Vice President of the German Colonial Society from 1931 to 1933 and said: \"The German Empire must strive for the acquisition of colonies. There is too little room in the Empire itself for its large population.\"\nDuring World War I, he worked closely with the army to maximize the city's role as a rear base of supply and transportation for the Western Front. He paid special attention to the civilian food supply, enabling the residents to avoid the worst of the severe shortages that beset most German cities during 1918\u20131919. In 1918, he invented a soy-based sausage called the \"Cologne sausage\" to help feed the city. In the face of the collapse of the old regime and the threat of revolution and widespread disorder in late 1918, Adenauer maintained control in Cologne using his good working relationship with the Social Democrats. In a speech on 1 February 1919 Adenauer called for the dissolution of Prussia, and for the Prussian Rhineland to become a new autonomous ('state') in the . Adenauer claimed this was the only way to prevent France from annexing the Rhineland. Both the \"Reich\" and Prussian governments were completely against Adenauer's plans for breaking up Prussia. When the terms of the Treaty of Versailles were presented to Germany in June 1919, Adenauer again suggested to Berlin his plan for an autonomous Rhineland state and again his plans were rejected by the \"Reich\" government.\nHe established a good working relationship with the postwar British military authorities, using them to neutralize the workers' and soldiers' council that had become an alternative base of power for the city's left wing. During the Weimar Republic, he was president of the Prussian State Council from 1921 to 1933, which was the representation of the provinces of Prussia in its legislature.\nA major debate had occurred within his Centre Party since 1906 regarding the question of whether it should \"leave the tower\" (i.e. allow Protestants to join, becoming a multi-faith party) or \"stay in the tower\" (i.e. continue to be a Catholic-only party). Adenauer was one of the leading advocates of \"leaving the tower\", which led to a dramatic clash at the 1922 \"Katholikentag\", the annual meeting of German Catholics under the presidency of Adenauer. Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber publicly admonished Adenauer for wanting to take the \"Zentrum\" \"out of the tower\".\nIn mid-October 1923, the Chancellor Gustav Stresemann announced that Berlin would cease all financial payments to the Rhineland and that the new currency \"Rentenmark\", which had replaced the now worthless \"Mark\", would not circulate in the Rhineland. To save the Rhineland economy, Adenauer opened talks with the French High Commissioner Paul Tirard in late October 1923 for a Rhenish republic in a sort of economic union with France which would achieve Franco-German reconciliation, which Adenauer called a \"grand design\". At the same time, Adenauer clung to the hope that the \"Rentenmark\" might still circulate in the Rhineland. Adenauer's plans came to naught when Stresemann, who was resolutely opposed to Adenauer's \"grand design\", which he viewed as borderline treason, was able to negotiate an end to the crisis on his own.\nIn 1926, the \"Zentrum\" suggested Adenauer becoming Chancellor, an offer that he was interested in but ultimately rejected when the German People's Party insisted that one of the conditions for entering into a coalition under Adenauer's leadership was that Gustav Stresemann stay on as Foreign Minister. Adenauer, who disliked Stresemann as \"too Prussian,\" rejected that condition.\nYears under the Nazi government.\nWhen the Nazi Party won several municipal, state and national elections in between 1930 and 1932, Adenauer, a strong opponent of Adolf Hitler and the Nazis, still believed that improvements in the national economy would make his strategy work: ignore the Nazis and concentrate on the Communist threat. He thought that based on election returns, the Nazis should become part of the Prussian and \"Reich\" governments, even when he was already the target of intense personal attacks. Political maneuverings around the ageing President Paul Von Hindenburg then brought the Nazis to power on 30 January 1933.\nBy early February, Adenauer finally realized the futility of all discussions and any attempts at compromise with the Nazis. Cologne's city council and the Prussian parliament had been dissolved; on 4 April 1933, he was officially dismissed as mayor and his bank accounts were frozen. \"He had no money, no home and no job.\" After arranging for the safety of his family, he appealed to the abbot of the Benedictine monastery at Maria Laach for a stay of several months. According to Albert Speer in his book \"\", Hitler expressed admiration for Adenauer, noting his civic projects, the building of a road circling the city as a bypass, and a \"green belt\" of parks. However, both Hitler and Speer concluded that Adenauer's political views and principles made it impossible for him to play any role in Nazi Germany.\nAdenauer was imprisoned for two days after the Night of the Long Knives on 30 June 1934; however, on 10 August 1934, maneuvering for his pension, he wrote a ten-page letter to Hermann G\u00f6ring, the Prussian interior minister. He stated that as Mayor he had violated Prussian laws in order to allow Nazi events in public buildings and Nazi flags to be flown from city flagpoles, and that in 1932 he had declared publicly that the Nazis should join the Reich government in a leading role. At the end of 1932, Adenauer had indeed demanded a joint government by his Zentrum party and the Nazis for Prussia.\nDuring the next two years, Adenauer changed residences often for fear of reprisals against him, while living on the benevolence of friends. With the help of lawyers in August 1937 he was successful in claiming a pension. He received a cash settlement for his house, which had been taken over by the city of Cologne; his unpaid mortgage, penalties and taxes were waived. With reasonable financial security he managed to live in seclusion for some years. After the failed assassination attempt on Hitler of July 1944, he was imprisoned for a second time as an opponent of the regime. He fell ill and credited Eugen Zander, a former municipal worker in Cologne and a communist, with saving his life. Zander, then a section Kapo of a labor camp near Bonn, discovered Adenauer's name on a deportation list to the east and managed to get him admitted to a hospital. Adenauer was subsequently rearrested (as was his wife), but was released from prison at Brauweiler in November 1944.\nAfter World War II and the founding of the CDU.\nProhibited from returning to Cologne, Adenauer settled in Rh\u00f6ndorf hoping to survive the war in peace. While the American army did not avoid the town during the Allied invasion of Germany, it again installed him as Mayor of Cologne, secretly for the first two months because of his sons in the German army. The city had been heavily bombed. After the city was transferred into the British zone of occupation, however, the Director of its military government, General Gerald Templer, dismissed Adenauer for incompetence in December 1945. Adenauer considered the Germans the political equals of the occupying Allies, which angered Templer. Adenauer's dismissal by the British contributed much to his subsequent political success and allowed him to pursue a policy of alliance with the occupying Allies in the 1950s without facing charges of being a \"sell-out\".\nAfter being dismissed, Adenauer devoted himself to building a new political party, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which he hoped would embrace both Protestants and Catholics in a single party. According to Adenauer, a Catholic-only party would lead to German politics being dominated by anti-democratic parties yet again. In January 1946, Adenauer initiated a political meeting of the future CDU in the British zone in his role as doyen (the oldest man in attendance, ) and was informally confirmed as its leader. During the Weimar Republic, Adenauer had often been considered a future Chancellor and after 1945, his claims for leadership were even stronger. The other surviving \"Zentrum\" leaders were considered unsuitable for the tasks that lay ahead.\nReflecting his background as a Catholic Rhinelander who had long chafed under Prussian rule, Adenauer believed that Prussianism was the root cause of National Socialism, and that only by driving out Prussianism could Germany become a democracy. In a December 1946 letter, Adenauer wrote that the Prussian state in the early 19th century had become an \"almost God-like entity\" that valued state power over the rights of individuals. Adenauer's dislike of Prussia even led him to oppose Berlin as a future capital.\nAdenauer viewed the most important battle in the postwar world as between the forces of Christianity and Marxism, especially Communism. Marxism meant both the Communists and the Social Democrats as the latter were officially a Marxist party until the Bad Godesberg conference of 1959. The same anti-Marxist viewpoints led Adenauer to denounce the Social Democrats as the heirs to Prussianism and National Socialism. Adenauer's ideology was at odds with parts of the CDU, who wished to unite socialism and Christianity. Adenauer worked diligently at building up contacts and support in the CDU over the following years, and he sought with varying success to impose his particular ideology on the party.\nAdenauer's leading role in the CDU of the British zone won him a position at the Parliamentary Council of 1948, which had been called into existence by the Western Allies to draft a constitution for the three western zones of Germany. He was the chairman of this constitutional convention and vaulted from this position to being chosen as the first head of government once the new \"Basic Law\" had been promulgated in May 1949.\nChancellor of West Germany (1949\u20131963).\nFirst government.\nThe first election to the Bundestag of West Germany was held on 15 August 1949, with the Christian Democrats emerging as the strongest party. There were two clashing visions of a future Germany held by Adenauer and his main rival, the Social Democrat Kurt Schumacher. Adenauer favored integrating the Federal Republic with other Western states, especially France and the United States in order to fight the Cold War, even if the price of this was the continued division of Germany. Schumacher by contrast, though an anti-communist, wanted to see a united, socialist and neutral Germany. As such, Adenauer was in favor of joining NATO, something that Schumacher strongly opposed.\nThe Free Democrat Theodor Heuss was elected the first President of the Republic, and Adenauer was elected Chancellor (head of government) on 15 September 1949 with the support of his own CDU, the Christian Social Union, the liberal Free Democratic Party, and the right-wing German Party. It was said that Adenauer was elected Chancellor by the new German parliament by \"a majority of one vote \u2013 his own\". At age 73, it was thought that Adenauer would only be a caretaker Chancellor. However, he would go on to hold this post for 14 years, a period spanning most of the preliminary phase of the Cold War. During this period, the post-war division of Germany was consolidated with the establishment of two separate German states, the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany).\nIn the controversial selection for a \"provisional capital\" of the Federal Republic of Germany, Adenauer championed Bonn over Frankfurt am Main. The British had agreed to detach Bonn from their zone of occupation and convert the area to an autonomous region wholly under German sovereignty; the Americans were not prepared to grant the same for Frankfurt. He also resisted the claims of Heidelberg, which had better communications and had survived the war in better condition; partly because the Nazis had been popular there before they came to power and partly, as he said, because the world would not take them seriously if they set up their state in a city that was the setting for \"The Student Prince\", at the time a popular American operetta based on the drinking culture of German student fraternities.\nAs chancellor, Adenauer tended to make most major decisions himself, treating his ministers as mere extensions of his authority. While this tendency decreased under his successors, it established the image of West Germany (and later reunified Germany) as a \"chancellor democracy\".\nEnding denazification.\nIn a speech on 20 September 1949, Adenauer denounced the entire denazification process pursued by the Allied military governments, announcing in the same speech that he was planning to bring in an amnesty law for the Nazi war criminals and he planned to apply to \"the High Commissioners for a corresponding amnesty for punishments imposed by the Allied military courts\". Adenauer argued the continuation of denazification would \"foster a growing and extreme nationalism\" as the millions who supported the Nazi regime would find themselves excluded from German life forever. He also demanded an \"end to this sniffing out of Nazis.\" By 31 January 1951, the amnesty legislation had benefited 792,176 people. They included 3,000 functionaries of the SA, the SS, and the Nazi Party who participated in dragging victims to jails and camps; 20,000 Nazis sentenced for \"deeds against life\" (presumably murder); 30,000 sentenced for causing bodily injury, and about 5,200 charged with \"crimes and misdemeanors in office.\nOpposition to the Oder\u2013Neisse Line.\nThe Adenauer government refused to accept the Oder\u2013Neisse line as Germany's eastern frontier. This refusal was in large part motivated by his desire to win the votes of expellees and right-wing nationalists to the CDU, which is why he supported , i.e. the right of expellees to return to their former homes. It was also intended to be a deal-breaker if negotiations ever began to reunite Germany on terms that Adenauer considered unfavorable such as the neutralization of Germany as Adenauer knew well that the Soviets would never revise the Oder\u2013Neisse line. Privately, Adenauer considered Germany's eastern provinces to be lost forever.\nAdvocacy for European Coal and Steel Community.\nAt the Petersberg Agreement in November 1949 he achieved some of the first concessions granted by the Allies, such as a decrease in the number of factories to be dismantled, but in particular his agreement to join the International Authority for the Ruhr led to heavy criticism. In the following debate in parliament Adenauer stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Allies have told me that dismantling would be stopped only if I satisfy the Allied desire for security, does the Socialist Party want dismantling to go on to the bitter end?\nThe opposition leader Kurt Schumacher responded by labelling Adenauer \"Chancellor of the Allies\", accusing Adenauer of putting good relations with the West for the sake of the Cold War ahead of German national interests.\nAfter a year of negotiations, the Treaty of Paris was signed on 18 April 1951 establishing the European Coal and Steel Community. The treaty was unpopular in Germany where it was seen as a French attempt to take over German industry. The treaty conditions were favorable to the French, but for Adenauer, the only thing that mattered was European integration. Adenauer was keen to see Britain join the European Coal and Steel Community as he believed the more free-market British would counterbalance the influence of the more \"dirigiste\" French, and to achieve that purpose he visited London in November 1951 to meet with Prime Minister Winston Churchill. Churchill said Britain would not join the European Coal and Steel Community because doing so would mean sacrificing relations with the U.S. and Commonwealth.\nGerman rearmament.\nFrom the beginning of his chancellorship, Adenauer had been pressing for German rearmament. After the outbreak of the Korean War on 25 June 1950, the U.S. and Britain agreed that West Germany had to be rearmed to strengthen the defenses of Western Europe against a possible Soviet invasion. Further contributing to the crisis atmosphere of 1950 was the bellicose rhetoric of the East German leader Walter Ulbricht, who proclaimed the reunification of Germany under communist rule to be imminent. To soothe French fears of German rearmament, the French Premier Ren\u00e9 Pleven suggested the so-called \"Pleven plan\" in October 1950 under which the Federal Republic would have its military forces function as part of the armed wing of the multinational European Defense Community (EDC). Adenauer deeply disliked the Pleven plan, but was forced to support it when it became clear that this plan was the only way the French would agree to German rearmament.\nAmnesty and employment of Nazis.\nIn 1950, a major controversy broke out when it emerged that Adenauer's State Secretary Hans Globke had played a major role in drafting anti-semitic Nuremberg Race Laws in Nazi Germany. Adenauer kept Globke on as State Secretary as part of his strategy of integration. Starting in August 1950, Adenauer began to pressure the Western Allies to free all of the war criminals in their custody, especially those from the Wehrmacht, whose continued imprisonment he claimed made West German rearmament impossible. Adenauer had been opposed to the Nuremberg Trials in 1945\u201346, and after becoming Chancellor, he demanded the release of the so-called \"Spandau Seven\", as the seven war criminals convicted at Nuremberg and imprisoned at Spandau Prison were known.\nIn October 1950, Adenauer received the so-called \"Himmerod memorandum\" drafted by four former Wehrmacht generals at the Himmerod Abbey that linked freedom for German war criminals as the price of German rearmament, along with public statements from the Allies that the Wehrmacht committed no war crimes in World War II. The Allies were willing to do whatever necessary to get the much-needed German rearmament underway, and in January 1951, General Dwight Eisenhower, commander of NATO forces, issued a statement which declared the great majority of the Wehrmacht had acted honorably.\nOn 2 January 1951, Adenauer met with the American High Commissioner, John J. McCloy, to argue that executing the Landsberg prisoners would ruin forever any effort at having the Federal Republic play its role in the Cold War. At the time, American occupation authorities had 28 Nazi war criminals left on death row in their custody. In response to Adenauer's demands and pressure from the German public, McCloy and Thomas T. Handy on 31 January 1951 reduced the death sentences of all but the 7 worst offenders.\nBy 1951 laws were passed by the Bundestag ending denazification. Denazification was viewed by the United States as counterproductive and ineffective, and its demise was not opposed. Adenauer's intention was to switch government policy to reparations and compensation for the victims of Nazi rule ().\nOfficials were allowed to retake jobs in civil service, with the exception of people assigned to Group I (Major Offenders) and II (Offenders) during the denazification review process. Adenauer pressured his rehabilitated ex-Nazis by threatening that stepping out of line could trigger the reopening of individual de-Nazification prosecutions. The construction of a \"competent Federal Government effectively from a standing start was one of the greatest of Adenauer's formidable achievements\".\nContemporary critics accused Adenauer of cementing the division of Germany, sacrificing reunification and the recovery of territories lost in the westward shift of Poland and the Soviet Union with his determination to secure the Federal Republic to the West. Adenauer's German policy was based upon ('Policy of Strength'), and upon the so-called \"magnet theory\", in which a prosperous, democratic West Germany integrated with the west would act as a \"magnet\" that would eventually bring down the East German regime.\nRejecting the reunification offer.\nIn 1952, the Stalin Note, as it became known, \"caught everybody in the West by surprise\". It offered to unify the two German entities into a single, neutral state with its own, non-aligned national army to effect superpower disengagement from Central Europe. Adenauer and his cabinet were unanimous in their rejection of the Stalin overture; they shared the Western Allies' suspicion about the genuineness of that offer and supported the Allies in their cautious replies. Adenauer's flat rejection was, however, still out of step with public opinion; he then realized his mistake and he started to ask questions. Critics denounced him for having missed an opportunity for German reunification. The Soviets sent a second note, courteous in tone. Adenauer by then understood that \"all opportunity for initiative had passed out of his hands,\" and the matter was put to rest by the Allies. Given the realities of the Cold War, German reunification and recovery of lost territories in the east were not realistic goals as both of Stalin's notes specified the retention of the existing \"Potsdam\"-decreed boundaries of Germany.\nReparation to victims of Nazi Germany.\nAdenauer recognized the obligation of the West German government to compensate Israel for The Holocaust. West Germany started negotiations with Israel for restitution of lost property and the payment of damages to victims of Nazi persecution. In the , West Germany agreed to pay compensation to Israel. Jewish claims were bundled in the Jewish Claims Conference, which represented the Jewish victims of Nazi Germany. West Germany then \nAssassination attempt.\nOn 27 March 1952, a package addressed to Chancellor Adenauer exploded in the Munich Police Headquarters, killing one Bavarian police officer, Karl Reichert. Investigations revealed the mastermind behind the assassination attempt to be Menachem Begin, who would later become the Prime Minister of Israel. Begin had been the commander of Irgun and at that time headed Herut and was a member of the Knesset. His goal was to put pressure on the German government and prevent the signing of the Reparations Agreement between Israel and West Germany, which he vehemently opposed. The West German government kept all proof under seal in order to prevent antisemitic responses from the German public.\nSecond government.\nInterior affairs.\nWhen the East German uprising of 1953 was harshly suppressed by the Red Army in June 1953, Adenauer took political advantage of the situation and was handily re-elected to a second term as Chancellor. The CDU/CSU came up one seat short of an outright majority. Adenauer could thus have governed in a coalition with only one other party, but retained/gained the support of nearly all of the parties in the Bundestag that were to the right of the SPD.\nThe German Restitution Laws () were passed in 1953 that allowed some victims of Nazi prosecution to claim restitution. Under the 1953 restitution law, those who had suffered for \"racial, religious or political reasons\" could collect compensation, which were defined in such a way as to sharply limit the number of people entitled to collect compensation.\nIn November 1954, Adenauer's lobbying efforts on behalf of the Spandau Seven finally bore fruit with the release of Konstantin von Neurath. Adenauer congratulated Neurath on his release, sparking controversy all over the world. At the same time, Adenauer's efforts to win freedom for Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz ran into staunch opposition from the British Permanent Secretary at the Foreign Office, Ivone Kirkpatrick, who argued D\u00f6nitz would be an active danger to German democracy. Adenauer then traded with Kirkpatrick no early release for Admiral D\u00f6nitz with an early release for Admiral Erich Raeder on medical grounds.\nAdenauer is closely linked to the implementation of an enhanced pension system, which ensured unparalleled prosperity for retired people. Along with his Minister for Economic Affairs and successor Ludwig Erhard, the West German model of a \"social market economy\" (a mixed economy with capitalism moderated by elements of social welfare and Catholic social teaching) allowed for the boom period known as the ('economic miracle') that produced broad prosperity, but Adenauer acted more leniently towards the trade unions and employers' associations than Erhard. The Adenauer era witnessed a dramatic rise in the standard of living of average Germans, with real wages doubling between 1950 and 1963. This rising affluence was accompanied by a 20% fall in working hours during that same period, together with a fall in the unemployment rate from 8% in 1950 to 0.4% in 1965. In addition, an advanced welfare state was established.\nMilitary affairs.\nIn the spring of 1954, opposition to the Pleven plan grew within the French National Assembly, and in August 1954, it died when an alliance of conservatives and Communists in the National Assembly joined forces to reject the EDC treaty under the grounds that West German rearmament in any form was an unacceptable danger to France.\nThe British Prime Minister Winston Churchill told Adenauer that Britain would ensure that West German rearmament would happen, regardless if the National Assembly ratified the EDC treaty or not, and Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden used the failure of the EDC to argue for independent West German rearmament and West German NATO membership. Thanks in part to Adenauer's success in rebuilding West Germany's image, the British proposal met with considerable approval. In the ensuing London conference, Eden assisted Adenauer by promising the French that Britain would always maintain at least four divisions in the British Army of the Rhine as long as there was a Soviet threat, with the strengthened British forces also aimed implicitly against any German revanchism. Adenauer then promised that Germany would never seek to have nuclear, chemical and biological weapons as well as capital ships, strategic bombers, long-range artillery, and guided missiles, although these promises were non-binding. The French had been assuaged that West German rearmament would be no threat to France. Additionally, Adenauer promised that the West German military would be under the operational control of NATO general staff, though ultimate control would rest with the West German government; and that above all he would never violate the strictly defensive NATO charter and invade East Germany to achieve German reunification.\nIn May 1955, West Germany joined NATO and in November a West German military, the , was founded. Though Adenauer made use of a number of former generals and admirals in the , he saw the as a new force with no links to the past, and wanted it to be kept under civilian control at all times. To achieve these aims, Adenauer gave a great deal of power to the military reformer Wolf Graf von Baudissin.\nAdenauer reached an agreement for his \"nuclear ambitions\" with a NATO Military Committee in December 1956 that stipulated West German forces were to be \"equipped for nuclear warfare\". Concluding that the United States would eventually pull out of Western Europe, Adenauer pursued nuclear cooperation with other countries. The French government then proposed that France, West Germany and Italy jointly develop and produce nuclear weapons and delivery systems, and an agreement was signed in April 1958. With the ascendancy of Charles de Gaulle, the agreement for joint production and control was shelved indefinitely. President John F. Kennedy, an ardent foe of nuclear proliferation, considered sales of such weapons moot since \"in the event of war the United States would, from the outset, be prepared to defend the Federal Republic.\" The physicists of the Max Planck Institute for Theoretical Physics at G\u00f6ttingen and other renowned universities would have had the scientific capability for in-house development, but the will was absent, nor was there public support. With Adenauer's fourth-term election in November 1961 and the end of his chancellorship in sight, his \"nuclear ambitions\" began to taper off.\nForeign policy.\nIn return for the release of the last German prisoners of war in 1955, the Federal Republic established diplomatic relations with the USSR, but refused to recognize East Germany and broke off diplomatic relations with countries (e.g., Yugoslavia) that established relations with the East German r\u00e9gime. Adenauer was also ready to consider the Oder\u2013Neisse line as the German border in order to pursue a more flexible policy with Poland but he did not command sufficient domestic support for this, and opposition to the Oder\u2013Neisse line continued, causing considerable disappointment among Adenauer's Western allies.\nIn 1956, during the Suez Crisis, Adenauer fully supported the Anglo-French-Israeli attack on Egypt, arguing to his Cabinet that Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser was a pro-Soviet force that needed to be cut down to size. Adenauer was appalled that the Americans had come out against the attack on Egypt alongside the Soviets, which led Adenauer to fear that the United States and Soviet Union would \"carve up the world\" with no thought for European interests.\nAt the height of the Suez crisis, Adenauer visited Paris to meet the French Premier Guy Mollet in a show of moral support for France. The day before Adenauer arrived in Paris, the Soviet Premier Nikolai Bulganin sent the so-called \"Bulganin letters\" to the leaders of Britain, France, and Israel threatening nuclear strikes if they did not end the war against Egypt. The news of the \"Bulganin letters\" reached Adenauer mid-way on the train trip to Paris. The threat of a Soviet nuclear strike that could destroy Paris at any moment added considerably to the tension of the summit. The Paris summit helped to strengthen the bond between Adenauer and the French, who saw themselves as fellow European powers living in a world dominated by Washington and Moscow.\nAdenauer was deeply shocked by the Soviet threat of nuclear strikes against Britain and France, and even more so by the apparent quiescent American response to the Soviet threat of nuclear annihilation against two of NATO's key members. As a result, Adenauer became more interested in the French idea of a European \"Third Force\" in the Cold War as an alternative security policy. This helped to lead to the formation of the European Economic Community in 1957, which was intended to be the foundation stone of the European \"Third Force\".\nAdenauer's achievements include the establishment of a stable democracy in West Germany and a lasting reconciliation with France, culminating in the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Treaty. His political commitment to the Western powers achieved full sovereignty for West Germany, which was formally laid down in the General Treaty, although there remained Allied restrictions concerning the status of a potentially reunited Germany and the state of emergency in West Germany. Adenauer firmly integrated the country with the emerging Euro-Atlantic community (NATO and the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation).\nThird government.\nIn 1957 the Saarland was reintegrated into Germany as a federal state of the Federal Republic. The election of 1957 essentially dealt with national matters. His re-election campaign centered around the slogan \"\" ('No Experiments') in response to the democratic experimentalism reform proposed by his opponents. Riding a wave of popularity from the return of the last POWs from Soviet labor camps, as well as an extensive pension reform, Adenauer led the CDU/CSU to an outright majority, something never previously achieved in a free German election. In 1957, the Federal Republic signed the Treaty of Rome and became a founding member of the European Economic Community. In September 1958, Adenauer first met President Charles de Gaulle of France, who was to become a close friend and ally in pursuing Franco-German rapprochement. Adenauer saw de Gaulle as a \"rock\" and the only foreign leader whom he could completely trust.\nIn response to the Ulm Einsatzkommando trial in 1958, Adenauer set up the Central Office of the State Justice Administrations for the Investigation of National Socialist Crimes.\nOn 27 November 1958 another Berlin crisis broke out when Khrushchev submitted an ultimatum with a six-month expiry date to Washington, London and Paris, where he demanded that the Allies pull all their forces out of West Berlin and agree that West Berlin become a \"free city\", or else he would sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany. Adenauer was opposed to any sort of negotiations with the Soviets, arguing if only the West were to hang tough long enough, Khrushchev would back down. As the 27 May deadline approached, the crisis was defused by the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, who visited Moscow to meet with Khrushchev and managed to extend the deadline while not committing himself or the other Western powers to concessions. Adenauer believed Macmillan to be a spineless \"appeaser\", who had made a secret deal with Khrushchev at the expense of the Federal Republic.\nAdenauer tarnished his image when he announced he would run for the office of federal president in 1959, only to pull out when he discovered that he did not have political backing to strengthen the office of president and change the balance of power. After his reversal he supported the nomination of Heinrich L\u00fcbke as the CDU presidential candidate whom he believed weak enough not to interfere with his actions as Federal Chancellor. One of Adenauer's reasons for not pursuing the presidency was his fear that Ludwig Erhard, whom Adenauer thought little of, would become the new chancellor.\nBy early 1959, Adenauer came under renewed pressure from his Western allies to recognize the Oder\u2013Neisse line, with the Americans being especially insistent. Adenauer gave his \"explicit and unconditional approval\" to the idea of non-aggression pacts in late January 1959, which effectively meant recognising the Oder\u2013Neisse line, since realistically speaking Germany could only regain the lost territories through force. After Adenauer's intention to sign non-aggression pacts with Poland and Czechoslovakia became clear, the German expellee lobby swung into action and organized protests all over the Federal Republic while bombarding the offices of Adenauer and other members of the cabinet with thousands of letters, telegrams and telephone calls promising never to vote CDU again if the non-aggression pacts were signed. Faced with this pressure, Adenauer promptly capitulated to the expellee lobby.\nIn late 1959, a controversy broke out when it emerged that Theodor Oberl\u00e4nder, the Minister of Refugees since 1953 and one of the most powerful leaders of the expellee lobby, had committed war crimes against Jews and Poles during World War II. Despite his past, on 10 December 1959, a statement was released to the press declaring that \"Dr. Oberl\u00e4nder has the full confidence of the Adenauer cabinet\". Other Christian Democrats made it clear to Adenauer that they would like to see Oberl\u00e4nder out of the cabinet, and finally in May 1960 Oberl\u00e4nder resigned.\nFourth government.\nIn 1961, Adenauer had his concerns about both the status of Berlin and US leadership confirmed, as the Soviets and East Germans built the Berlin Wall. Adenauer had come into the year distrusting the new US president, John F. Kennedy. He doubted Kennedy's commitment to a free Berlin and a unified Germany and considered him undisciplined and na\u00efve. For his part, Kennedy thought that Adenauer was a relic of the past. Their strained relationship impeded effective Western action on Berlin during 1961.\nThe construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 and the sealing of borders by the East Germans made Adenauer's government look weak. Adenauer continued his campaign trail and made a disastrous misjudgement in a speech on 14 August 1961 in Regensburg with a personal attack on the SPD lead candidate Willy Brandt, Lord Mayor of West-Berlin, saying that Brandt's illegitimate birth had disqualified him from holding any sort of office. After failing to keep their majority in the general election on 17 September, the CDU/CSU again needed to include the FDP in a coalition government. Adenauer was forced to make two concessions: to relinquish the chancellorship before the end of the new term, his fourth, and to replace his foreign minister. In his last years in office, Adenauer used to take a nap after lunch and, when he was traveling abroad and had a public function to attend, he sometimes asked for a bed in a room close to where he was supposed to be speaking, so that he could rest briefly before he appeared.\nDuring this time, Adenauer came into conflict with the Economics Minister Ludwig Erhard over the depth of German integration to the West. Erhard was in favor of allowing Britain to join to create a trans-Atlantic free trade zone, while Adenauer was for strengthening ties amongst the original founding six nations of West Germany, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg and Italy. In Adenauer's viewpoint, the Cold War meant that the NATO alliance with the United States and Britain was essential, but there could be no deeper integration into a trans-Atlantic community beyond the existing military ties as that would lead to a \"mishmash\" between different cultural systems that would be doomed to failure. Though Adenauer had tried to get Britain to join the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951\u201352, by the early 1960s Adenauer had come to share General de Gaulle's belief that Britain simply did not belong in the EEC. The \u00c9lys\u00e9e Treaty was signed in January 1963 to solidify relations with France.\nIn October 1962, a scandal erupted when police arrested five \"Der Spiegel\" journalists, charging them with espionage for publishing a memo detailing weaknesses in the West German armed forces. Adenauer had not initiated the arrests, but initially defended the person responsible, Defense Minister Franz Josef Strauss, and called the Spiegel memo \"abyss of treason\". After public outrage and heavy protests from the coalition partner FDP he dismissed Strauss, but the reputation of Adenauer and his party had already suffered.\nAdenauer managed to remain in office for almost another year, but the scandal increased the pressure already on him to fulfill his promise to resign before the end of the term. Adenauer was not on good terms in his last years of power with his economics minister Ludwig Erhard and tried to block him from the chancellorship. In January 1963, Adenauer privately supported General Charles de Gaulle's veto of Britain's attempt to join the European Economic Community, and was only prevented from saying so openly by the need to preserve unity in his cabinet as most of his ministers led by Erhard supported Britain's application. A Francophile, Adenauer saw a Franco-German partnership as the key for European peace and prosperity and shared de Gaulle's view that Britain would be a disputative force in the EEC. Adenauer failed in his efforts to block Erhard as his successor, and in October 1963 he turned the office over to Erhard. He remained chairman of the CDU until his resignation in December 1966.\nAdenauer ensured a generally free and democratic society, and laid the groundwork for Germany to re-enter the community of nations and to evolve as a dependable member of the Western world. The British historian Frederick Taylor argued that in many ways the Adenauer era was a transition period in values and viewpoints from the authoritarianism that characterized Germany in the first half of the 20th century to the more democratic values that characterized the western half of Germany in the second half of the 20th century.\nSocial policies.\nAdenauer's years in the Chancellorship saw the realization of a number of important initiatives in the domestic field, such as in housing, pension rights, and unemployment provision. A major housebuilding programme was launched, while measures introduced to assist war victims and expellees. A savings scheme for homeownership was set up in 1952, while the Housebuilding Act of 1956 reinforced incentives for owner-occupation. Employer-funded child allowances for three or more children were established in 1954, and in 1957 the indexation of pension schemes was introduced, together with an old age assistance scheme for agricultural workers. The 1952 Maternity Leave Law foresaw 12 weeks of paid leave for working mothers, who were also safeguarded from unfair dismissal, and improvements in unemployment benefits were carried out. The Soldiers' Law of 1956 laid down that soldiers had the same rights as other citizens, \"limited only by the demands of military service.\" Following a Federal Act of 1961, social assistance provided a safety net of minimum income \"for those not adequately catered for by social insurance.\" Controversially, however, a school lunch programme was abolished in 1950.\nIntelligence services and spying.\nBy the early 1960s, connections between the CDU under Adenauer and the German intelligence services (called \"\", abbreviated to \"BND\") had become significantly closer than would be generally known until more than 50 years later. Thanks to the BND, information on the internal machinations of the opposition SPD party were available to the entire CDU leadership, and not merely to Adenauer in his capacity as chancellor. It was Adenauer himself who personally instructed the BND to spy on his SPD rival, the future chancellor Willy Brandt.\nLate years.\nAdenauer, who resigned as Chancellor at the age of 87 and remained head of the governing CDU until his retirement at 90, was often dubbed \"\" ('the old one'). He also remained a member of the Bundestag for the constituency of Bonn until his death.\nIn May 1966, the former Chancellor made a private visit to the new state of Israel and was awarded an honorary doctorate from the Weizmann Institute. The friendship with France was particularly close to the ex-Chancellor's heart: he visited the neighbouring country three times in 1964, 1966 and 1967. On his last trip abroad in February 1967, Adenauer met with General Franco and, as the art lover he had been all his life, took advantage of the stay to visit the Prado. His last major speech in Madrid's Ateneo Palace was marked by the admonition not to let up, to continue the process of European unification.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], Adenauer remains the oldest-ever European head of government and one of the oldest elected European statesmen (paralleled only by Sandro Pertini and Giorgio Napolitano); however, the governments of Tunisia and Malaysia had older heads of government during the 2010s.\nDeath and legacy.\nAdenauer died on 19 April 1967 in his family home at Rh\u00f6ndorf. According to his daughter, his last words were (, Cologne dialect for 'There's nothin' to weep about!'). Adenauer's requiem mass in Cologne Cathedral was attended by a large number of international guests which represented over one hundred countries and organizations:\nThereafter his remains were taken upstream to Rh\u00f6ndorf on the Rhine aboard the \"Kondor\" of the German Navy, with two more, \"Seeadler\" and \"Sperber\", as escorts, \"past the thousands who stood in silence on both banks of the river\". He is interred at the (lit.\u2009'forest cemetery') at Rh\u00f6ndorf.\nWhen after his death, Germans were asked what they admired most about Adenauer, the majority responded that he had brought home the last German prisoners of war from the USSR, which had become known as the \"Return of the 10,000\".\nIn 2003, Adenauer was voted the 'greatest German of all time' in a contest called \"\" (lit.\u2009'Our Best') run on German public-service television broadcaster ZDF in which more than three million votes were cast.\nAdenauer was the main motive for the Belgian 3 pioneers of the European unification commemorative coin, minted in 2002. The obverse side shows a portrait with the names Robert Schuman, Paul-Henri Spaak, and Konrad Adenauer.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "16635", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16635", "title": "Khazars", "text": "Historical semi-nomadic Turkic ethnic group\nThe Khazars () were a semi-nomadic Turkic people who established a major commercial empire in the late 6th century CE spanning modern southeastern Russia, southern Ukraine, and western Kazakhstan. It was the most powerful polity to emerge from the break-up of the Western Turkic Khaganate. Astride a major artery of commerce between Eastern Europe and Southwestern Asia, Khazaria became one of the foremost trading empires of the early medieval world, commanding the western marches of the Silk Road and playing a key commercial role as a crossroad between China, the Middle East, and Kievan Rus'. For some three centuries (c.\u2009650\u2013965), the Khazars dominated the vast area extending from the Volga-Don steppes to the eastern Crimea and the northern Caucasus.\nAlthough they were likely a confederation of different Turkic-speaking peoples, the precise origins and nature of the Khazars are uncertain, since there is no surviving record in the Khazar language and the state was multilingual and polyethnic. Their native religion is thought to have been Tengrism, like that of the North Caucasian Huns and other Turkic peoples, although their multiethnic population seems to have included pagans, Jews, Christians, and Muslims. Although there is evidence that the ruling elite of the Khazars had converted to Rabbinic Judaism in the 8th century, the scope of the conversion to Judaism within the khanate remains uncertain.\nEffects.\nThe Khazars are variably believed to have contributed to the ethnogenesis of numerous peoples, including the Hazaras, Hungarians, Kazakhs, the Don and Zaporozhian Cossacks, Kumyks, Krymchaks, Crimean Karaites, Cs\u00e1ng\u00f3s, Mountain Jews, and Subbotniks. The late 19th century saw the emergence of a theory that the core of today's Ashkenazi Jews are descended from a hypothetical Khazarian Jewish diaspora that migrated westward into modern France and Germany. Linguistic and genetic studies have not supported the theory, and despite occasional support, most scholars view it with considerable scepticism. The theory is sometimes associated with antisemitism.\nIn Oghuz Turkic languages, the Caspian Sea is still named the \"Khazar Sea\", reflecting the enduring legacy of the medieval Khazar state.\nEtymology.\nGyula N\u00e9meth, following Zolt\u00e1n Gombocz, derived \"Khazar\" from a hypothetical *Qasar reflecting a Turkic root \"qaz-\" (\"to ramble, to roam\") being an hypothetical retracted variant of Common Turkic \"kez-\"; however, Andr\u00e1s R\u00f3na-Tas objected that *\"qaz-\" is a ghost word. In the fragmentary Tes and Terkhin inscriptions of the Uy\u011fur empire (744\u2013840) the form \"Qasar\" is attested, although uncertainty remains whether this represents a personal or tribal name, gradually other hypotheses emerged. Louis Bazin derived it from Turkic \"qas-\" (\"tyrannize, oppress, terrorize\") on the basis of its phonetic similarity to the Uy\u011fur tribal name, Qasar. R\u00f3na-Tas connects \"qasar\" with \"Kesar\", the Pahlavi transcription of the Roman title Caesar.\nD. M. Dunlop tried to link the Chinese term for \"Khazars\" to one of the tribal names of the Uy\u011fur, or Toquz O\u011fuz, namely the \"Qasar\" (Ch. \u845b\u85a9 \"G\u00e9s\u00e0\"). The objections are that Uy\u011fur \u845b\u85a9 \"G\u00e9s\u00e0\"/\"Qasar\" was not a tribal name but rather the surname of the chief of the \u601d\u7ed3 \"Sijie\" tribe (Sogdian: \"Sikari\") of the Toquz O\u011fuz (Ch. \u4e5d\u59d3 \"j\u012du x\u00ecng\"), and that in Middle Chinese the ethnonym \"Khazars\" was always prefaced with \"T\u016bju\u00e9\", then still reserved for G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and their splinter groups, (\"T\u016bju\u00e9 K\u011bs\u00e0 b\u00f9\":\u7a81\u53a5\u53ef\u85a9\u90e8; \"T\u016bju\u00e9 H\u00e9s\u00e0\":\u7a81\u53a5\u66f7\u85a9) and \"Khazar's\" first syllable is transcribed with different characters (\u53ef and \u66f7) than \u845b, which is used to render the syllable \"Qa-\" in the Uy\u011fur word \"Qasar\". While it is far from given that the Khazars are not signifying a multi-ethnic and multi-lingual cluster of peoples and clans, some more nomadic, some less, it doesn't exclude that some clans, or splintergroups, or even rulers has identified with the name(s) of the Khazars, in the variety of ways it has been expressed.\nAfter their conversion it is reported that they adopted the Hebrew script, and it is likely that, although speaking a Turkic language, the Khazar chancellery under Judaism probably corresponded in Hebrew.\nLinguistics.\nDetermining the origins and nature of the Khazars is closely bound with theories of their languages, but analysis of their languages' origins is difficult, since no indigenous records in the Khazar language survive, and the state was polyglot and polyethnic. Whereas the royal or ruling elite probably spoke an eastern variety of the Common Turkic, the subject tribes appear to have spoken varieties of Oghuric languages, a language variously identified with the Bulgar, Chuvash, and the Hunnic language.\nThe latter based upon the assertion of the Persian historian Istakhri, the Khazar language was different from any other known tongue. Alano-As was also widely spoken. Eastern Common Turkic, the language of the royal house and its core tribes, in all likelihood remained the language of the ruling elite in the same way that Mongol continued to be used by the rulers of the Golden Horde, alongside of the Kipchak languages spoken by the bulk of the Turkic tribesmen that constituted the military force of this part of the \u010cinggisid empire. Similarity, O\u011furic, like Qip\u010daq Turkic in the Jo\u010did realm, functioned as one of the languages of government. One method for tracing their origins consists in the analysis of the possible etymologies behind the ethnonym \"Khazar\".\nHistory.\nFor most of its history, Khazaria served as a buffer state between the Byzantine Empire, the nomads of the northern steppes, and the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates, having previously been Byzantium's proxy against the rival Sasanian Empire. Around 900, the Byzantines began encouraging the Alans to attack Khazaria; this move aimed to weaken Khazar control over Crimea and the Caucasus and facilitate imperial diplomacy and proselytizing towards the powerful Kievan Rus' in the north. By 969, Sviatoslav I of Kiev, the ruler of Kievan Rus', along with his allies, conquered the Khazar capital of Atil, ushering the decline and disintegration of Khazaria by the mid 11th century.\nTribal origins and early history.\nThe tribes that were to comprise the Khazar empire were not an ethnic union, but a congeries of steppe nomads and peoples who came to be subordinated, and subscribed to a core Turkic leadership. Many Turkic groups, such as Oghuric speakers, including the Saragurs, O\u011furs, Onogurs, and Bulgars, who earlier formed part of the Tiele (Ti\u011bl\u00e8) confederation, are attested quite early, having been driven west by the Sabirs, who in turn fled the Pannonian Avars, and began to flow into the Volga\u2013Caspian\u2013Pontic zone from as early as the 4th century and are recorded by Priscus to reside in the western Eurasian Steppe as early as 463. They appear to stem from Mongolia and South Siberia in the aftermath of the fall of the Hunnic-Xi\u014dngn\u00fa nomadic polities. A variegated tribal federation led by these Turks, probably comprising a complex assortment of Iranian peoples, proto-Mongols, Uralic speakers, and Paleosiberian peoples vanquished the Rouran Khaganate of the hegemonic Pannonian Avars in 552 who swept westwards, taking in their train other steppe nomads and peoples from Sogdia.\nThe ruling family of this confederation may have hailed from the Ashina tribe of the Western Turkic Khaganate, although Constantin Zuckerman regards Ashina and their pivotal role in the formation of the Khazars with scepticism. Golden notes that Chinese and Arabic reports are almost identical, making the connection a strong one, and conjectures that their leader may have been Irbis Seguy, who lost power or was killed around 651. Moving west, the confederation reached the land of the Akatziri, who had been important allies of Byzantium in fighting off Attila's army.\nRise of the Khazar state.\nAn embryonic state of Khazaria began to form sometime after 630, when it emerged from the breakdown of the larger G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Khaganate. G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk armies had penetrated the Volga by 549, ejecting the Avars, who were then forced to flee to the sanctuary of the Hungarian plain. The Ashina clan appeared on the scene by 552, when they overthrew the Rourans and established the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Qa\u011fanate, whose self designation was \"T\u00fcr(\u00fc)k\". By 568, these G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks were probing for an alliance with Byzantium to attack Persia. An internecine war broke out between the senior eastern G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and the junior West Turkic Khaganate some decades later, when on the death of Taspar Qa\u011fan, a succession dispute led to a dynastic crisis between Taspar's chosen heir, the Apa Qa\u011fan, and the ruler appointed by the tribal high council, \u0100sh\u01d0n\u00e0 Sh\u00e8t\u00fa, the Ishbara Qa\u011fan.\nBy the first decades of the 7th century, the Ashina yabgu Tong managed to stabilise the Western division, but upon his death, after providing crucial military assistance to Byzantium in routing the Sasanian army in the Persian heartland, the Western Turkic Qa\u011fanate dissolved under pressure from the encroaching Tang dynasty armies and split into two competing federations, each consisting of five tribes, collectively known as the \"Ten Arrows\" (\"On Oq\"). Both briefly challenged Tang hegemony in eastern Turkestan. To the West, two new nomadic states arose in the meantime, Old Great Bulgaria under Kubrat, the Du\u014dl\u00f9 clan leader, and the N\u01d4sh\u012bb\u00ec subconfederation, also consisting of five tribes. The Du\u014dl\u00f9 challenged the Avars in the Kuban River-Sea of Azov area while the Khazar Qa\u011fanate consolidated further westwards, led apparently by an Ashina dynasty. With a resounding victory over the tribes in 657, engineered by General Su Dingfang, Chinese overlordship was imposed to their East after a final mop-up operation in 659, but the two confederations of Bul\u011fars and Khazars fought for supremacy on the western steppeland, and with the ascendency of the latter, the former either succumbed to Khazar rule or, as under Asparukh, Kubrat's son, shifted even further west across the Danube to lay the foundations of the First Bulgarian Empire in the Balkans (c.\u2009679).\nThe Qa\u011fanate of the Khazars thus took shape out of the ruins of this nomadic empire as it broke up under pressure from the Tang dynasty armies to the east sometime between 630 and 650. After their conquest of the lower Volga region to the East and an area westwards between the Danube and the Dniepr, and their subjugation of the Ono\u011fur-Bul\u011far union, sometime around 670, a properly constituted Khazar Qa\u011fanate emerges, becoming the westernmost successor state of the formidable G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Qa\u011fanate after its disintegration. According to Omeljan Pritsak, the language of the Ono\u011fur-Bul\u011far federation was to become the lingua franca of Khazaria as it developed into what Lev Gumilev called a \"steppe Atlantis\" (\"stepnaja Atlantida\"/ \u0421\u0442\u0435\u043f\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0410\u0442\u043b\u0430\u043d\u0442\u0438\u0434\u0430). Historians have often referred to this period of Khazar domination as the Pax Khazarica since the state became an international trading hub permitting Western Eurasian merchants safe transit across it to pursue their business without interference. The high status soon to be accorded this empire to the north is attested by Ibn al-Bal\u1e2b\u00ee's \"F\u00e2rsn\u00e2ma\" (c. 1100), which relates that the Sasanian Shah, \u1e2ausraw 1, An\u00fbs\u00eerv\u00e2n, placed three thrones by his own, one for the King of China, a second for the King of Byzantium, and a third for the king of the Khazars. Although anachronistic in retrodating the Khazars to this period, the legend, in placing the Khazar qa\u011fan on a throne with equal status to kings of the other two superpowers, bears witness to the reputation won by the Khazars from early times.\nKhazar state: culture and institutions.\nRoyal Diarchy with sacral Qa\u011fanate.\nKhazaria developed a diarchy (dual leadership) typical among Turkic nomads, consisting of a khagan-bek and a khagan. The emergence of this system may be deeply entwined with the conversion to Judaism. According to Arabic sources, the khagan-bek was called an \u02be\u012b\u0161\u0101 and the greater a khagan (); the former managed and commanded the military, while the greater king's role was primarily sacral, less concerned with daily affairs.\nThe greater king was recruited from the Khazar house of notables (\"ahl bayt ma\u02bfr\u016bf\u012bn\") and, in an initiation ritual, was nearly strangled until he declared the number of years he wished to reign, on the expiration of which he would be ritually killed by the nobles. Similarly, Ahmad ibn Fadlan wrote that there was a maximum limit on the number of years of a king's reign. If a khagan had reigned for at least forty years, his courtiers and subjects felt his ability to reason would become impaired by old age. They would then execute him. The deputy ruler would enter the presence of the reclusive greater king only with great ceremony, approaching him barefoot to prostrate himself in the dust and then light a piece of wood as a purifying fire, while waiting humbly and calmly to be summoned.\nParticularly elaborate rituals accompanied a royal burial. At one period, travellers had to dismount, bow before the ruler's tomb, and then walk away on foot. Subsequently, the charismatic sovereign's burial place was hidden from view, with a palatial structure (\"Paradise\") constructed and then hidden under rerouted riverwater to avoid disturbance by evil spirits and later generations. Such a \"qoruq\" 'taboo' royal burial ground is typical of inner Asian peoples.\nBoth the \u02be\u012b\u0161\u0101 and the \u1e2b\u0101q\u0101n converted to Rabbinic Judaism sometime in the 8th century, while the rest, according to the Persian traveller Ahmad ibn Rustah, probably continued to follow traditional religion.\nRuling elite.\nThe ruling stratum, like that of the later \u010cinggisids within the Golden Horde, was a relatively small group that differed ethnically and linguistically from its subject peoples, meaning the Alano-As and O\u011furic Turkic tribes, who were numerically superior within Khazaria. The Khazar Qa\u011fans, while taking wives and concubines from the subject populations, were protected by a Khwarazmian guard corps, or \"comitatus\" 'warband' called the Arsiyah. But unlike many other local polities, they hired mercenary soldiers (the \"jun\u016bd murtaz\u012bqa\" in al-Masudi).\nAt the peak of their empire, the Khazars ran a centralised fiscal administration, with a standing army of some 7\u201312,000 men, which could, at need, be multiplied two or three times that number by inducting reserves from noble retinues. Other figures for the permanent standing army indicate that it numbered as many as one hundred thousand. They controlled and exacted tribute from 25 to 30 different nations and tribes inhabiting the vast territories between the Caucasus, the Aral Sea, the Ural Mountains, and the Ukrainian steppes. Khazar armies were led by the khagan-bek and commanded by subordinate officers known as tarkhans. When the bek sent out a body of troops, they would not retreat under any circumstances. If they were defeated, survivors were executed.\nSettlements were governed by administrative officials known as tuduns. In some cases, such as the Byzantine settlements in southern Crimea, a \"tudun\" would be appointed for a town nominally within another polity's sphere of influence. Other officials in the Khazar government included dignitaries referred to by ibn Fadlan as j\u0101wash\u012bghar and k\u00fcnd\u00fcr, but their responsibilities are unknown.\nDemographics.\nIt has been estimated that 25 to 28 distinct ethnic groups made up the population of the Khazar Qa\u011fanate, aside from the ethnic elite. The ruling elite seems to have been constituted out of nine tribes/clans, themselves ethnically heterogeneous, spread over perhaps nine provinces or principalities, each of which would have been allocated to a clan. In terms of caste or class, some evidence suggests that there was a distinction, whether racial or social is unclear, between \"White Khazars\" (ak-Khazars) and \"Black Khazars\" (qara-Khazars). The 10th-century Muslim geographer al-I\u1e63\u1e6dakhr\u012b claimed that the White Khazars were strikingly handsome with reddish hair, white skin, and blue eyes, while the Black Khazars were swarthy, verging on deep black as if they were \"some kind of Indian\". Many Turkic nations had a similar (political, not racial) division between a \"white\" ruling warrior caste and a \"black\" class of commoners; the consensus among mainstream scholars is that Istakhri was confused by the names given to the two groups. However, Khazars are generally described by early Arab sources as having a white complexion, blue eyes, and reddish hair. The ethnonym in the Tang Chinese annals, Ashina, often accorded a key role in the Khazar leadership, may reflect an Eastern Iranian or Tokharian word (Khotanese Saka \"\u00e2\u015f\u015feina-\u0101\u0161\u0161sena\" \"blue\"): Middle Persian \"ax\u0161a\u00eana\" (\"dark-coloured\"): Tokharian A \"\u00e2\u015bna\" (\"blue\", \"dark\"). The distinction appears to have survived the collapse of the Khazarian empire. Later Russian chronicles, commenting on the role of the Khazars in the magyarisation of Hungary, refer to them as \"White Oghurs\" and Magyars as \"Black Oghurs\". Studies of the physical remains, such as skulls at Sarkel, have revealed individuals belonging to the Slavic, other European, and a few Mongolian types.\nEconomy.\nThe import and export of foreign wares, and the revenues derived from taxing their transit, was a hallmark of the Khazar economy, although it is said also to have produced isinglass. Distinctively among the nomadic steppe polities, the Khazar Qa\u011fanate developed a self-sufficient domestic Saltovo economy, a combination of traditional pastoralism \u2013 allowing sheep and cattle to be exported \u2013 extensive agriculture, abundant use of the Volga's rich fishing stocks, together with craft manufacture, with diversification in lucrative returns from taxing international trade given its pivotal control of major trade routes.\nThe Khazar slave trade constituted one of the two great furnishers of slaves to the Muslim market to slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate (the other being the Iranian S\u00e2m\u00e2nid am\u00eers), supplying it with captured Slavs and tribesmen from the Eurasian northlands. It profited from the latter which enabled it to maintain a standing army of Khwarezm Muslim troops. The capital Atil reflected the division: Kharaz\u0101n on the western bank where the king and his Khazar elite, with a retinue of some 4,000 attendants, dwelt, and Itil proper to the East, inhabited by Jews, Christians, Muslims and slaves and by craftsmen and foreign merchants.\nThe Khazar Khaghanate played a key role in the trade between Europe and the Muslim world in the early Middle Ages. People taken captive during the Viking raids in Europe, such as Ireland, could be transported to Hedeby or Br\u00e4nn\u00f6 in Scandinavia and from there via the Volga trade route to Russia, where slaves and furs were sold to Muslim merchants in exchange for Arab silver \"dirham\" and silk, which have been found in Birka, Wollin and Dublin; during the 8th- and 9th-century this trade route between Europe and the Abbasid Caliphate passed via the Khazar Kaghanate, until it was supplanted in the 10th-century by the route of Volga Bulgaria, Khwarazm, and the Samanid slave trade.\nThe ruling elite wintered in the city and spent from spring to late autumn in their fields. A large irrigated greenbelt, drawing on channels from the Volga river, lay outside the capital, where meadows and vineyards extended for some 20 \"farsakhs\" (c. 60 miles). While customs duties were imposed on traders, and tribute and tithes were exacted from 25 to 30 tribes, with a levy of one sable skin, squirrel pelt, sword, dirham per hearth or ploughshare, or hides, wax, honey and livestock, depending on the zone. Trade disputes were handled by a commercial tribunal in Atil consisting of seven judges, two for each of the monotheistic inhabitants (Jews, Muslims, Christians) and one for the pagans.\nKhazars and Byzantium.\nByzantine diplomatic policy towards the steppe peoples generally consisted of encouraging them to fight among themselves. The Pechenegs provided great assistance to the Byzantines in the 9th century in exchange for regular payments. Byzantium also sought alliances with the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks against common enemies: in the early 7th century, one such alliance was brokered with the Western T\u0171rks against the Persian Sasanians in the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628. The Byzantines called Khazaria \"Tourk\u00eda\", and by the 9th century referred to the Khazars as \"Turks\". During the period leading up to and after the siege of Constantinople in 626, Heraclius sought help via emissaries, and eventually personally, from a G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk chieftain of the Western Turkic Khaganate, Tong Yabghu Qa\u011fan, in Tiflis, plying him with gifts and the promise of marriage to his daughter, Epiphania. Tong Yabghu responded by sending a large force to ravage the Persian empire, marking the start of the Third Perso-Turkic War. A joint Byzantine-T\u0171rk operation breached the Caspian gates and sacked Derbent in 627. Together they then besieged Tiflis, where the Byzantines may have deployed an early variety of traction trebuchets (\u1f11\u03bb\u03ad\u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2) to breach the walls. After the campaign, Tong Yabghu is reported, perhaps with some exaggeration, to have left some 40,000 troops behind with Heraclius. Although occasionally identified with Khazars, the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk identification is more probable since the Khazars only emerged from that group after the fragmentation of the former sometime after 630. Some scholars argued that Sasanian Persia never recovered from the devastating defeat wrought by this invasion.\nOnce the Khazars emerged as a power, the Byzantines also began to form alliances with them, dynastic and military. In 695, the last Heraclian emperor, Justinian II, nicknamed \"the slit-nosed\" (\u1f41 \u1fe5\u03b9\u03bd\u03cc\u03c4\u03bc\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) after he was mutilated and deposed, was exiled to Cherson in the Crimea, where a Khazar governor (\"tudun\") presided. He escaped into Khazar territory in 704 or 705 and was given asylum by qa\u011fan Busir Glavan (\u1f38\u03b2\u03bf\u03c5\u03b6\u1fc6\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \u0393\u03bb\u03b9\u03b1\u03b2\u03ac\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2), who gave him his sister in marriage, perhaps in response to an offer by Justinian, who may have thought a dynastic marriage would seal by kinship a powerful tribal support for his attempts to regain the throne. The Khazarian spouse thereupon changed her name to Theodora. Busir was offered a bribe by the Byzantine usurper, Tiberius III, to kill Justinian. Warned by Theodora, Justinian escaped, murdering two Khazar officials in the process. He fled to Bulgaria, whose Khan Tervel helped him regain the throne. Upon his reinstalment, and despite Busir's treachery during his exile, he sent for Theodora; Busir complied, and she was crowned as Augusta, suggesting that both prized the alliance.\nDecades later, Leo III (ruled 717\u2013741) made a similar alliance to co-ordinate strategy against a common enemy, the Muslim Arabs. He sent an embassy to the Khazar qa\u011fan Bihar and married his son, the future Constantine V (ruled 741\u2013775), to Bihar's daughter, a princess referred to as Tzitzak, in 732. On converting to Christianity, she took the name Irene. Constantine and Irene had a son, the future Leo IV (775\u2013780), who thereafter bore the sobriquet, \"the Khazar\". Leo died in mysterious circumstances after his Athenian wife bore him a son, Constantine VI, who on his majority co-ruled with his mother, the dowager. He proved unpopular, and his death ended the dynastic link of the Khazars to the Byzantine throne. By the 8th century, Khazars dominated the Crimea (650\u2013c. 950), and even extended their influence into the Byzantine peninsula of Cherson until it was wrested back in the 10th century. Khazar and Fargh\u00e2nian (\u03a6\u03ac\u03c1\u03b3\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9) mercenaries constituted part of the imperial Byzantine \"Hetaireia\" bodyguard after its formation in 840, a position that could openly be purchased by a payment of seven pounds of gold.\nArab\u2013Khazar wars.\nDuring the 7th and 8th centuries, the Khazars fought a series of wars against the Umayyad Caliphate and its Abbasid successor. The First Arab-Khazar War began during the first phase of Muslim expansion. By 640, Muslim forces had reached Armenia; in 642 they launched their first raid across the Caucasus under Abd ar-Rahman ibn Rabiah. In 652 Arab forces advanced on the Khazar capital, Balanjar, but were defeated, suffering heavy losses; according to Persian historians such as al-Tabari, both sides in the battle used catapults against the opposing troops. A number of Russian sources give the name of a Khazar khagan from this period as Irbis and describe him as a scion of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk royal house, the Ashina. Whether Irbis ever existed is open to debate, as is whether he can be identified with one of the many G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk rulers of the same name.\nDue to the outbreak of the First Muslim Civil War and other priorities, the Arabs refrained from repeating an attack on the Khazars until the early 8th century. The Khazars launched a few raids into Transcaucasian principalities under Muslim dominion, including a large-scale raid in 683\u2013685 during the Second Muslim Civil War that rendered much booty and many prisoners. There is evidence from the account of al-Tabari that the Khazars formed a united front with the remnants of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks in Transoxiana.\nThe Second Arab-Khazar War began with a series of raids across the Caucasus in the early 8th century. The Umayyads tightened their grip on Armenia in 705 after suppressing a large-scale rebellion. In 713 or 714, the Umayyad general Maslamah conquered Derbent and drove deeper into Khazar territory. The Khazars launched raids in response into Albania and Iranian Azerbaijan but were driven back by the Arabs under Hasan ibn al-Nu'man. The conflict escalated in 722 with an invasion by 30,000 Khazars into Armenia inflicting a crushing defeat. Caliph Yazid II responded, sending 25,000 Arab troops north, swiftly driving the Khazars back across the Caucasus, recovering Derbent, and advancing on Balanjar. The Arabs broke through the Khazar defence and stormed the city; most of its inhabitants were killed or enslaved, but a few of them managed to flee north. Despite their success, the Arabs had not yet defeated the Khazar army, and they retreated south of the Caucasus.\nIn 724, the Arab general al-Jarrah ibn Abdallah al-Hakami inflicted a crushing defeat on the Khazars in a long battle between the rivers Cyrus and Araxes, then moved on to capture Tiflis, bringing Caucasian Iberia under Muslim suzerainty. The Khazars struck back in 726, led by a prince named Barjik, launching a major invasion of Albania and Azerbaijan; by 729, the Arabs had lost control of northeastern Transcaucasia and were thrust again into the defensive. In 730, Barjik invaded Iranian Azerbaijan and defeated Arab forces at Ardabil, killing the general al-Djarrah al-Hakami and briefly occupying the town. Barjik was defeated and killed the next year at Mosul, where he directed Khazar forces from a throne mounted with al-Djarrah's severed head . In 737, Marwan Ibn Muhammad entered Khazar territory under the guise of seeking a truce. He then launched a surprise attack in which The Qaghan fled north and the Khazars surrendered. The Arabs did not have enough resources to influence the affairs of Transcaucasia. The Qa\u011fan was forced to accept terms involving his conversion to Islam, and subject himself to the rule of the Caliphate, but the accommodation was short-lived because a combination of internal instability among the Umayyads and Byzantine support undid the agreement within three years, and the Khazars re-asserted their independence. The suggestion that the Khazars adopted Judaism as early as 740 is based on the idea that, in part, it was, a re-assertion of their independence from the rule of both regional powers, Byzantium and the Caliphate, while it also conformed to a general Eurasian trend to embrace a world religion.\nWhatever the impact of Marwan's campaigns was, warfare between the Khazars and the Arabs ceased for more than two decades after 737. Arab raids continued to occur until 741, but their control of the region was limited because maintaining a large garrison at Derbent further depleted their already overstretched army. A third Muslim civil war soon broke out, leading to the Abbasid Revolution and the fall of the Umayyad dynasty in 750.\nIn 758, the Abbasid Caliph al-Mansur attempted to strengthen diplomatic ties with the Khazars, ordering Yazid ibn Usayd al-Sulami, one of his nobles and the military governor of Armenia, to take a royal Khazar bride. Yazid married a daughter of Khazar Khagan Baghatur, but she died inexplicably, possibly during childbirth. Her attendants returned home, convinced that some members of another Arab faction had poisoned her, and her father was enraged. The Khazar general Ras Tarkhan invaded regions which were located south of the Caucasus in 762\u2013764, devastating Albania, Armenia, and Iberia, and capturing Tiflis. Thereafter, relations between the Khazars and the Abbasids became increasingly cordial, because the foreign policies of the Abbasids were generally less expansionist than the foreign policies of the Umayyads, relations between the Khazars and the Abbasids were ultimately broken by a series of raids which occurred in 799, the raids occurred after another marriage alliance failed.\nAfter the Khazars assumed control of Transcaucasia, at some time they set up towns including Samiran, Samsakly, Sambalut, Samakha, and Samkalak - with the common fragment \"Sam\" meaning \"top\" or \"high\" or \"main\".\nKhazars and Hungarians.\nAround 830, a rebellion broke out in the Khazar khaganate. As a result, three Kabar tribes of the Khazars (probably the majority of ethnic Khazars) joined the Hungarians and moved through Levedia to what the Hungarians call the Etelk\u00f6z, the territory between the Carpathians and the Dnieper River. The Hungarians faced their first attack by the Pechenegs around 854, though other sources state that an attack by Pechenegs was the reason for their departure to Etelk\u00f6z. The new neighbours of the Hungarians were the Varangians and the eastern Slavs. From 862 onwards, the Hungarians (already referred to as the \"Ungri\") along with their allies, the Kabars, started a series of raids from the Etelk\u00f6z into the Carpathian Basin, mostly against the Eastern Frankish Empire (Germany) and Great Moravia, but also against the Lower Pannonian principality and Bulgaria. Then they together ended up at the outer slopes of Carpathians, and settled there.\nRise of the Rus' and the collapse of the Khazarian state.\nBy the 9th century, groups of Varangian Rus', developing a powerful warrior-merchant system, began probing south down the waterways controlled by the Khazars and their protectorate, the Volga Bulgarians, partially in pursuit of the Arab silver that flowed north for hoarding through the Khazarian-Volga Bulgarian trading zones, partially to trade in furs and ironwork. Northern mercantile fleets passing Atil were tithed, as they were at Byzantine Cherson. Their presence may have prompted the formation of a Rus' state by convincing the Slavs, Merja and the Chud' to unite to protect common interests against Khazarian exactions of tribute. It is often argued that a Rus' Khaganate modelled on the Khazarian state had formed to the east and that the Varangian chieftain of the coalition appropriated the title of qa\u011fan (\"khagan\") as early as the 830s: the title survived to denote the princes of Kievan Rus', whose capital, Kiev, is often associated with a Khazarian foundation. The construction of the Sarkel fortress, with technical assistance from Khazaria's Byzantine ally at the time, together with the minting of an autonomous Khazar coinage around the 830s, may have been a defensive measure against emerging threats from Varangians to the north and from the Magyars on the eastern steppe. By 860, the Rus' had penetrated as far as Kiev and, via the Dnieper, Constantinople.\nAlliances often shifted. Byzantium, threatened by Varangian Rus' raiders, would assist Khazaria, and Khazaria at times allowed the northerners to pass through their territory in exchange for a portion of the booty. From the beginning of the 10th century, the Khazars found themselves fighting on multiple fronts as nomadic incursions were exacerbated by uprisings by former clients and invasions from former allies. The pax Khazarica was caught in a pincer movement between steppe Pechenegs and the strengthening of an emergent Rus' power to the north, both undermining Khazaria's tributary empire. According to the Schechter Text, the Khazar ruler King Benjamin (ca.880\u2013890) fought a battle against the allied forces of five lands whose moves were perhaps encouraged by Byzantium. Although Benjamin was victorious, his son Aaron II faced another invasion, this time led by the Alans, whose leader had converted to Christianity and entered into an alliance with Byzantium, which, under Leo VI the Wise, encouraged them to fight against the Khazars.\nBy the 880s, Khazar control of the Middle Dnieper from Kiev, where they collected tribute from Eastern Slavic tribes, began to wane as Oleg of Novgorod wrested control of the city from the Varangian warlords Askold and Dir, and embarked on what was to prove to be the foundation of a Rus' empire. The Khazars had initially allowed the Rus' to use the trade route along the Volga River, and raid southwards. See Caspian expeditions of the Rus'. According to Al-Mas'udi, the qa\u011fan is said to have given his assent on the condition that the Rus' give him half of the booty. In 913, however, two years after Byzantium concluded a peace treaty with the Rus' in 911, a Varangian foray, with Khazar connivance, through Arab lands led to a request to the Khazar throne by the Khw\u00e2razmian Islamic guard for permission to retaliate against the large Rus' contingent on its return. The purpose was to revenge the violence the Rus' razzias had inflicted on their fellow Muslim believers. The Rus' force was thoroughly routed and massacred. The Khazar rulers closed the passage down the Volga to the Rus', sparking a war. In the early 960s, Khazar ruler Joseph wrote to Hasdai ibn Shaprut about the deterioration of Khazar relations with the Rus': \"I protect the mouth of the river (Itil-Volga) and prevent the Rus arriving in their ships from setting off by sea against the Ishmaelites and (equally) all (their) enemies from setting off by land to Bab.\"\nThe Rus' warlords launched several wars against the Khazar Qa\u011fanate, and raided down to the Caspian sea. The Schechter Letter relates the story of a campaign against Khazaria by \"HLGW\" (recently identified as Oleg of Chernigov) around 941 in which Oleg was defeated by the Khazar general Pesakh. The Khazar alliance with the Byzantine empire began to collapse in the early 10th century. Byzantine and Khazar forces may have clashed in the Crimea, and by the 940s emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus was speculating in \"De Administrando Imperio\" about ways in which the Khazars could be isolated and attacked. The Byzantines during the same period began to attempt alliances with the Pechenegs and the Rus', with varying degrees of success. A further factor undermining the Khazar Qa\u011fanate was a shift in Islamic routes at this time, as Muslims in Khwarazmia forged trade links with the recently converted Volga Bulgarian Muslims, a move which may have caused a drastic drop, perhaps up to 80%, in the revenue base of Khazaria, and consequently, a crisis in its ability to pay for its defence.\nSviatoslav I finally succeeded in destroying Khazar imperial power in the 960s, in a circular sweep that overwhelmed Khazar fortresses like Sarkel and Tamatarkha, and reached as far as the Caucasian Kassogians/Circassians and then back to Kiev. Sarkel fell in 965, with the capital city of Atil following, c. 968 or 969.\nIn the Russian chronicle, the vanquishing of the Khazar traditions is associated with Vladimir's conversion in 986. According to the \"Primary Chronicle\", in 986, Khazar Jews were present at Vladimir's disputation to decide on the prospective religion of the Kievan Rus'. Whether these were Jews who had settled in Kiev or emissaries from some Jewish Khazar remnant state is unclear. Conversion to one of the faiths of the people of Scripture was a precondition to any peace treaty with the Arabs, whose Bulgar envoys had arrived in Kiev after 985.\nA visitor to Atil wrote soon after the sacking of the city that its vineyards and garden had been razed, that not a grape or raisin remained in the land, and not even alms for the poor were available. An attempt to rebuild may have been undertaken, since Ibn Hawqal and al-Muqaddasi refer to it after that date, but by Al-Biruni's time (1048) it was in ruins.\nAftermath: impact, decline and dispersion.\nAlthough Poliak argued that the Khazar kingdom did not wholly succumb to Sviatoslav's campaign, but lingered on until 1224, when the Mongols invaded Rus', by most accounts, the Rus'-Oghuz campaigns left Khazaria devastated, with perhaps many Khazarian Jews in flight, and leaving behind at best a minor rump state. It left little trace, except for some placenames, and much of its population was undoubtedly absorbed in successor hordes. Al-Muqaddasi, writing ca.985, mentions Khazar beyond the Caspian sea as a district of \"woe and squalor\", with honey, many sheep and Jews. Kedrenos mentions a joint Rus'-Byzantine attack on Khazaria in 1016, which defeated its ruler Georgius Tzul. The name suggests Christian affiliations. The account concludes by saying, that after Tzul's defeat, the Khazar ruler of \"upper Media\", Senaccherib, had to sue for peace and submission. In 1024 Mstislav of Chernigov (one of Vladimir's sons) marched against his brother Yaroslav with an army that included \"Khazars and Kassogians\" in a repulsed attempt to restore a kind of \"Khazarian\"-type dominion over Kiev. Ibn al-Athir's mention of a \"raid of Fa\u1e0dl\u016bn the Kurd against the Khazars\" in 1030\u00a0CE, in which 10,000 of his men were vanquished by the latter, has been taken as a reference to such a Khazar remnant, but Barthold identified this Fa\u1e0dl\u016bn as Fa\u1e0dl ibn Mu\u1e25ammad and the \"Khazars\" as either Georgians or Abkhazians. A Kievian prince named Oleg, grandson of Jaroslav was reportedly kidnapped by \"Khazars\" in 1079 and shipped off to Constantinople, although most scholars believe that this is a reference to the Cumans-Kipchaks or other steppe peoples then dominant in the Pontic region. Upon his conquest of Tmutarakan in the 1080s Oleg gave himself the title \"archon of Khazaria\". In 1083 Oleg is said to have exacted revenge on the Khazars after his brother Roman was killed by their allies, the Polovtsi. After one more conflict with these Polovtsi in 1106, the Khazars fade from history. By the 13th century they survived in Russian folklore only as \"Jewish heroes\" in the \"land of the Jews\". (\"zemlya Jidovskaya\").\nBy the end of the 12th century, Petachiah of Ratisbon reported travelling through what he called \"Khazaria\", and had little to remark on other than describing its \"minim\" (sectaries) living amidst desolation in perpetual mourning. The reference seems to be to Karaites. The Franciscan missionary William of Rubruck likewise found only impoverished pastures in the lower Volga area where Ital once lay. Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, the papal legate to the court of the Mongol Khan Guyuk at that time, mentioned an otherwise unattested Jewish tribe, the Brutakhi, perhaps in the Volga region. Although connections are made to the Khazars, the link is based merely on a common attribution of Judaism.\nThe 10th century Zoroastrian D\u00eankart registered the collapse of Khazar power in attributing its eclipse to the enfeebling effects of \"false\" religion. The decline was contemporary to that suffered by the Transoxiana S\u0101m\u0101nid empire to the east, both events paving the way for the rise of the Great Seljuq Empire, whose founding traditions mention Khazar connections. Whatever successor entity survived, it could no longer function as a bulwark against the pressure east and south of nomad expansions. By 1043, Kimeks and Qipchaqs, thrusting westwards, pressured the O\u011fuz, who in turn pushed the Pechenegs west towards Byzantium's Balkan provinces.\nKhazaria nonetheless left its mark on the rising states and some of their traditions and institutions. Much earlier, Tzitzak, the Khazar wife of Leo III, introduced into the Byzantine court the distinctive kaftan or riding habit of the nomadic Khazars, the tzitzakion (\u03c4\u03b6\u03b9\u03c4\u03b6\u03ac\u03ba\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd), and this was adopted as a solemn element of imperial dress. The orderly hierarchical system of succession by \"scales\" (\"lestvichnaia sistema\":\u043b\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0438\u0447\u043d\u0430\u044f \u0441\u0438\u0441\u0442\u0435\u043c\u0430) to the Grand Principate of Kiev was arguably modelled on Khazar institutions, via the example of the Rus' Khaganate.\nThe proto-Hungarian Pontic tribe, while perhaps threatening Khazaria as early as 839 (Sarkel), practiced their institutional model, such as the dual rule of a ceremonial \"kende-k\u00fcnd\u00fc\" and a \"gyula\" administering practical and military administration, as tributaries of the Khazars. A dissident group of Khazars, the Qabars, joined the Hungarians in their migration westwards as they moved into Pannonia. Elements within the Hungarian population can be viewed as perpetuating Khazar traditions as a successor state. Byzantine sources refer to Hungary as Western Tourkia in contrast to Khazaria, Eastern Tourkia. The gyula line produced the kings of medieval Hungary through descent from \u00c1rp\u00e1d, while the Qabars retained their traditions longer, and were known as \"black Hungarians\" (\"fekete magyars\u00e1g\"). Some archaeological evidence from \u010celarevo suggests the Qabars practised Judaism since warrior graves with Jewish symbols were found there, including menorahs, shofars, etrogs, lulavs, candlesnuffers, ash collectors, inscriptions in Hebrew, and a six-pointed star identical to the Star of David.\nThe Khazar state was not the only Jewish state to rise between the fall of the Second Temple (67\u201370\u00a0CE) and the establishment of Israel (1948). A state in Yemen also adopted Judaism in the 4th century, lasting until the rise of Islam.\nThe Khazar kingdom is said to have stimulated messianic aspirations for a return to Israel as early as Judah Halevi. In the time of the Egyptian vizier Al-Afdal Shahanshah (d. 1121), one Solomon ben Duji, often identified as a Khazarian Jew, attempted to advocate for a messianic effort for the liberation of, and return of all Jews to, Palestine. He wrote to many Jewish communities to enlist support. He eventually moved to Kurdistan where his son Menachem some decades later assumed the title of Messiah and, raising an army for this purpose, took the fortress of Amadiya north of Mosul. His project was opposed by the rabbinical authorities and he was poisoned in his sleep. One theory maintains that the Star of David, until then a decorative motif or magical emblem, began to assume its national value in late Jewish tradition from its earlier symbolic use by Menachem.\nThe word Khazar, as an ethnonym, was last used in the 13th century by people in the North Caucasus believed to practice Judaism. The nature of a hypothetical Khazar diaspora, Jewish or otherwise, is disputed. Avraham ibn Daud mentions encountering rabbinical students descended from Khazars as far away as Toledo, Spain in the 1160s. Khazar communities persisted here and there. Many Khazar mercenaries served in the armies of the Islamic Caliphates and other states. Documents from medieval Constantinople attest to a Khazar community mingled with the Jews of the suburb of Pera. Khazar merchants were active in both Constantinople and Alexandria in the 12th century.\nReligion.\nTengrism.\nDirect sources for the Khazar religion are not many, but in all likelihood they originally engaged in a traditional Turkic form of religious practices known as Tengrism, which focused on the sky god Tengri. Something of its nature may be deduced from what we know of the rites and beliefs of contiguous tribes, such as the North Caucasian Huns. Horse sacrifices were made to this supreme deity. Rites involved offerings to fire, water, and the moon, to remarkable creatures, and to \"gods of the road\" (cf. Old T\u00fcrk \"yol tengri\", perhaps a god of fortune). Sun amulets were widespread as cultic ornaments. A tree cult was also maintained. Whatever was struck by lightning, man or object, was considered a sacrifice to the high god of heaven. The afterlife, to judge from excavations of aristocratic tumuli, was much a continuation of life on earth, warriors being interred with their weapons, horses, and sometimes with human sacrifices: the funeral of one \"tudrun\" in 711-12 saw 300 soldiers killed to accompany him to the otherworld. Ancestor worship was observed. The key religious figure appears to have been a shaman-like \"qam\", and it was these (\"qozm\u00edm\") that were, according to the Khazar Hebrew conversion stories, driven out.\nMany sources suggest, and a notable number of scholars have argued, that the charismatic Ashina clan played a germinal role in the early Khazar state, although Zuckerman dismisses the widespread notion of their pivotal role as a \"phantom\". The Ashina were closely associated with the Tengri cult, whose practices involved rites performed to assure a tribe of heaven's protective providence. The qa\u011fan was deemed to rule by virtue of \"qut\", \"the heavenly mandate/good fortune to rule.\"\nChristianity.\nKhazaria long served as a buffer state between the Byzantine empire and both the nomads of the northern steppes and the Umayyad empire, after serving as Byzantium's proxy against the Sasanian Persian empire. The alliance was dropped around 900. Byzantium began to encourage the Alans to attack Khazaria and weaken its hold on Crimea and the Caucasus, while seeking to obtain an entente with the rising Rus' power to the north, which it aspired to convert to Christianity.\nOn Khazaria's southern flank, both Islam and Byzantine Christianity were proselytising great powers. Byzantine success in the north was sporadic, although Armenian and Albanian missions from Derbend built churches extensively in maritime Daghestan, then a Khazar district. Buddhism also had exercised an attraction on leaders of both the Eastern (552\u2013742) and Western Qa\u011fanates (552\u2013659), the latter being the progenitor of the Khazar state. In 682, according to the Armenian chronicle of Movs\u00eas Dasxuranc'i, the king of Caucasian Albania, Varaz Trdat, dispatched a bishop, Isray\u00eal, to convert Caucasian \"Huns\" who were subject to the Khazars, and managed to convince Alp Ilut'u\u00ear, a son-in-law of the Khazar qa\u011fan, and his army, to abandon their shamanising cults and join the Christian fold.\nThe Arab Georgian martyr St Abo, who converted to Christianity within the Khazar kingdom around 779\u201380, describes local Khazars as irreligious. Some reports register a Christian majority at Samandar, or Muslim majorities.\nJudaism.\nConversion to Judaism is mentioned in the Khazar Correspondence and medieval external sources. The authenticity of the former was long doubted and challenged, but the documents are now widely accepted by specialists as either authentic or as reflecting internal Khazar traditions. Archaeological evidence for conversion, on the other hand, remains elusive, and may reflect either the incompleteness of excavations, or that the stratum of actual adherents was thin. Conversion of steppe or peripheral tribes to a universal religion is a fairly well attested phenomenon, and the Khazar conversion to Judaism, although unusual, would not have been without precedent.\nJews from both the Islamic world and Byzantium are known to have migrated to Khazaria during periods of persecution under Heraclius, Justinian II, Leo III, and Romanus Lakap\u0113nos. For Simon Schama, Jewish communities from the Balkans and the Bosphoran Crimea, especially from Panticapaeum, began migrating to the more hospitable climate of pagan Khazaria in the wake of these persecutions, and were joined there by Jews from Armenia. The Geniza fragments, he argues, make it clear the Judaising reforms sent roots down into the whole of the population. The pattern is one of an elite conversion preceding large-scale adoption of the new religion by the general population, which often resisted the imposition. One important condition for mass conversion was a settled urban state, where churches, synagogues or mosques provided a focus for religion, as opposed to the free nomadic lifestyle of life on the open steppes. A tradition of the Iranian Judeo-Tats claims that their ancestors were responsible for the Khazar conversion. A legend traceable to the 16th-century Italian rabbi Judah Moscato attributed it to Yitzhak ha-Sangari.\nBoth the date of the conversion, and the extent of its influence beyond the elite, often minimised in some scholarship, are a matter of dispute, but at some point between 740 and 920\u00a0CE, the Khazar royalty and nobility appear to have converted to Judaism, in part, it is argued, perhaps to deflect competing pressures from Arabs and Byzantines to accept either Islam or Christianity.\nThe conversion of the Khazars to Judaism is an emotionally charged topic in Israel, and two scholars, Moshe Gil (2011) and Shaul Stampfer, (2013) have challenged the authenticity of the medieval Hebrew documents and argue that the conversion of the Khazar elite to Judaism never happened. Alex M. Feldman is critical of Stampfer and Gil's dismissal of \"overwhelming textual and archaeological evidence\" of Khazarian Judaism, though agrees it is unlikely that Ashkenazim are descended from Khazarian Jews, he posits \"a middle ground which can simultaneously accept Khazarian Judaism and doubt the Khazar-Ashkenazi descent theory advanced in dubious genetic studies.\"\nHistory of discussions about Khazar Jewishness.\nThe earliest surviving Arabic text that refers to Khazar Jewishness appears to be that which was written by ibn Rustah, a Persian scholar who wrote an encyclopedic work on geography in the early tenth century. It is believed that ibn Rustah derived much of his information from the works of his contemporary Abu al Jayhani based in Central Asia.\nChristian of Stavelot in his Expositio in Matthaeum Evangelistam (c. 860\u2013870s) refers to \"Gazari\", presumably Khazars, as living in the lands of Gog and Magog, who were circumcised and \"omnem Judaismum observat\"\u2014observing all the laws of Judaism. New numismatic evidence of coins dated 837/8 bearing the inscriptions \"ar\u1e0d al-\u1e2bazar\" (Land of the Khazars), or \"M\u00fbs\u00e2 ras\u00fbl All\u00e2h\" (Moses is the messenger of God, in imitation of the Islamic coin phrase: \"Mu\u1e25ammad ras\u00fbl All\u00e2h\") suggest to many the conversion took place in that decade. Olsson argues that the 837/8 evidence marks only the beginning of a long and difficult official Judaization that concluded some decades later. A 9th-century Jewish traveller, Eldad ha-Dani, is said to have informed Spanish Jews in 883 that there was a Jewish polity in the East, and that fragments of the legendary Ten Lost Tribes, part of the line of Simeon and half-line of Manasseh, dwelt in \"the land of the Khazars\", receiving tribute from some 25 to 28 kingdoms. Another view holds that by the 10th century, while the royal clan officially claimed Judaism, a non-normative variety of Islamisation took place among the majority of Khazars.\nBy the 10th century, the letter of King Joseph asserts that, after the royal conversion, \"Israel returned (\"yashuvu yisra'el\") with the people of Qazaria (to Judaism) in complete repentance (\"bi-teshuvah shelemah\").\" Persian historian Ibn al-Faq\u00eeh wrote that \"all the Khazars are Jews, but they have been Judaized recently\". Ibn Fadl\u00e2n, based on his Caliphal mission (921\u2013922) to the Volga Bul\u011fars, also reported that \"the core element of the state, the Khazars, were Judaized\", something underwritten by the Qaraite scholar Ya'kub Qirqis\u00e2n\u00ee around 937. The conversion appears to have occurred against a background of frictions arising from both an intensification of Byzantine missionary activity from the Crimea to the Caucasus, and Arab attempts to wrest control over the latter in the 8th century CE, and a revolt, put down, by the Khavars around the mid-9th century is often invoked as in part influenced by their refusal to accept Judaism. Modern scholars generally see the conversion as a slow process through three stages, which accords with Richard Eaton's model of syncretic \"inclusion\", gradual \"identification\" and, finally, \"displacement\" of the older tradition.\nSometime between 954 and 961, \u1e24asdai ibn Shapr\u016b\u1e6d, from al-Andalus (Muslim Spain), wrote a letter of inquiry addressed to the ruler of Khazaria, and received a reply from Joseph of Khazaria. The exchanges of this Khazar Correspondence, together with the Schechter Letter discovered in the Cairo Geniza and the famous plato nizing dialogue by Judah Halevi, \"Sefer ha-Kuzari\" (\"Book (of) The Khazari\"), which plausibly drew on such sources, provide us with the only direct evidence of the indigenous traditions concerning the conversion. King Bulan is said to have driven out the sorcerers, and to have received angelic visitations exhorting him to find the true religion, upon which, accompanied by his vizier, he travelled to desert mountains of Wars\u0101n on a seashore, where he came across a cave rising from the plain of Tiyul in which Jews used to celebrate the Sabbath. Here he was circumcised. Bulan is then said to have convened a royal debate between exponents of the three Abrahamic religions. He decided to convert when he was convinced of Judaism's superiority. Many scholars situate this c. 740, a date supported by Halevi's own account. The details are both Judaic and T\u00fcrkic: a T\u00fcrkic ethnogonic myth speaks of an ancestral cave in which the Ashina were conceived from the mating of their human ancestor and a wolf ancestress. These accounts suggest that there was a rationalising syncretism of native pagan traditions with Jewish law, by melding through the motif of the cave, a site of ancestral ritual and repository of forgotten sacred texts, T\u00fcrkic myths of origin and Jewish notions of redemption of Israel's fallen people. It is generally agreed they adopted Rabbinical rather than Qaraite Judaism.\nIbn Fadlan reports that the settlement of disputes in Khazaria was adjudicated by judges hailing each from his community, be it Christian, Jewish, Muslim, or Pagan. Some evidence suggests that the Khazar king saw himself as a defender of Jews even beyond the kingdom's frontiers, retaliating against Muslim or Christian interests in Khazaria in the wake of Islamic and Byzantine persecutions of Jews abroad. Ibn Fadlan recounts specifically an incident in which the king of Khazaria destroyed the minaret of a mosque in Atil as revenge for the destruction of a synagogue in D\u00e2r al-B\u00e2b\u00fbnaj, and allegedly said he would have done worse were it not for a fear that the Muslims might retaliate in turn against Jews. \u1e24asdai ibn Shapr\u016b\u1e6d sought information on Khazaria in the hope he might discover \"a place on this earth where harassed Israel can rule itself\" and wrote that, were it to prove true that Khazaria had such a king, he would not hesitate to forsake his high office and his family in order to emigrate there.\nAlbert Harkavy noted in 1877 that an Arabic commentary on Isaiah 48:14\nascribed to Saadia Gaon or to the Karaite scholar Benjamin Nah\u00e2wand\u00ee, interpreted \"The Lord hath loved him\" as a reference \"to the Khazars, who will go and destroy Babel\" (i.e., Babylonia), a name used to designate the country of the Arabs. This has been taken as an indication of hopes by Jews that the Khazars might succeed in destroying the Caliphate.\nIslam.\nIn 965, as the Qa\u011fanate was struggling against the victorious campaign of the Rus' prince Sviatoslav, the Islamic historian Ibn al-Ath\u00eer mentions that Khazaria, attacked by the O\u011fuz, sought help from Khwarezm, but their appeal was rejected because they were regarded as \"infidels\" (\"al-kuff\u00e2r\"; pagans). Save for the king, the Khazarians are said to have converted to Islam in order to secure an alliance, and the Turks were, with Khwarezm's military assistance, repelled. It was this that, according to Ibn al-Ath\u00eer, led the Jewish king of Khazar to convert to Islam.\nGenetics.\nNine skeletons dating to the 7th\u20139th centuries excavated from elite military burial mounds of the Khazar Khaganate (in the modern Rostov region) were analyzed in two genetic studies (from 2019 and 2021). According to the 2019 study, the results \"confirm the Turkic roots of the Khazars, but also highlight their ethnic diversity and some integration of conquered populations\". The samples did not show a genetic connection to Ashkenazi Jews, and the results do not support the hypothesis of Ashkenazi Jews being descendants of the Khazars. In the 2021 study the results showed both European and East Asian paternal haplogroups in the samples: three individuals carried R1a Y-haplogroup, two had C2b, and the rest carried haplogroups G2a, N1a, Q, and R1b, respectively. According to the authors, \"The Y-chromosome data are consistent with the results of the craniological study and genome-wide analysis of the same individuals in the sense that they show mixed genetic origins for the early medieval Khazar nobility\". Their facial features were of mix of East Asian and European, with East Asian type dominating (70%) in the early Khazars.\nClaims of Khazar ancestry.\nClaims of Khazar origins of peoples, or suggestions that the Khazars were absorbed by them, have been made with regard to the Kazakhs, the Hungarians, the Judaizing Slavic Subbotniks, the Muslim Karachays, the Kumyks, the Avars, the Cossacks of the Don and the Ukrainian Cossacks (see Khazar hypothesis of Cossack ancestry), the Turkic-speaking Krymchaks and their Crimean neighbours the Karaites, Mishar Tatars, the Moldavian Cs\u00e1ng\u00f3s and others. Turkic-speaking Crimean Karaites (known in the Crimean Tatar language as \"Qaraylar\"), some of whom migrated in the 19th century from the Crimea to Poland and Lithuania have claimed Khazar origins. Specialists in Khazar history question the connection. Scholarship is likewise sceptical of claims that the Tatar-speaking Krymchak Jews of the Crimea descend from Khazars.\nCrimean Karaites and Krymchaks.\nIn 1839, the Karaim scholar Abraham Firkovich was appointed by the Russian government as a researcher into the origins of the Jewish sect known as the Karaites. In 1846, one of his acquaintances, the Russian orientalist Vasilii Vasil'evich Grigor'ev (1816\u20131881), theorised that the Crimean Karaites were of Khazar stock. Firkovich vehemently rejected the idea, a position seconded by Firkovich, who hoped that by \"proving\" his people were of Turkic origin, he would secure them exception from Russian anti-Jewish laws, since they bore no responsibility for Christ's crucifixion. This idea has a notable impact in Crimean Karaite circles. It is now believed that he forged much of this material on Khazars and Karaites. Specialists in Khazar history also question the connection. A genetic study of European Karaites by Kevin Alan Brook found no evidence of a Khazar or Turkic origin for any uniparental lineage but did reveal the European Karaites' links to Egyptian Karaites and to Rabbinical Jewish communities.\nAnother Turkic Crimean group, the Krymchaks had retained very simple Jewish traditions, mostly devoid of halakhic content, and very much taken with magical superstitions which, in the wake of the enduring educational efforts of the great Sephardi scholar Chaim Hezekiah Medini, came to conform with traditional Judaism.\nThough the assertion they were not of Jewish stock enabled many Crimean Karaites to survive the Holocaust, which led to the murder of 6,000 Krymchaks, after the war, many of the latter, somewhat indifferent to their Jewish heritage, took a cue from the Crimean Karaites, and denied this connection in order to avoid the antisemitic effects of the stigma attached to Jews.\nAshkenazi-Khazar theories.\nSeveral scholars have suggested that instead of disappearing after the dissolution of their Empire, the Khazars migrated westward and eventually, they formed part of the core of the later Ashkenazi Jewish population of Europe. This hypothesis is greeted with scepticism or caution by most scholars.\nThe German Orientalist Karl Neumann, in the context of an earlier controversy about possible connections between the Khazars and the ancestors of the Slavic peoples, suggested as early as 1847 that emigrant Khazars might have influenced the core population of Eastern European Jews.\nThe theory was then taken up by Albert Harkavi in 1869, when he also claimed that a possible link existed between the Khazars and the Ashkenazim, but the theory that Khazar converts formed a major proportion of the Ashkenazim was first proposed to the Western public in a lecture which was delivered by Ernest Renan in 1883. Occasional suggestions that there was a small Khazar component in East European Jews emerged in works by Joseph Jacobs (1886), Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, a critic of antisemitism (1893), Maksymilian Ernest Gumplowicz, and by the Russian-Jewish anthropologist Samuel Weissenberg. In 1909, Hugo von Kutschera developed the notion into a book-length study, arguing that the Khazars formed the foundational core of the modern Ashkenazim. Maurice Fishberg introduced the notion to American audiences in 1911. The idea was also taken up by the Polish-Jewish economic historian and General Zionist Yitzhak Schipper in 1918. Israel Bartal has suggested that from the Haskalah onwards, polemical pamphlets against the Khazars were inspired by Sephardi organizations which opposed the Khazaro-Ashkenazim.\nScholarly anthropologists, such as Roland B. Dixon (1923), and writers such as H. G. Wells (1920) used it to argue that \"The main part of Jewry never was in Judea\", a thesis that was to have a political echo in later opinion.\nIn 1932, Samuel Krauss ventured the theory that the biblical Ashkenaz referred to northern Asia Minor, and he identified it as the ancestral homeland of the Khazars, a position which was immediately disputed by Jacob Mann. Ten years later, in 1942, Abraham N. Polak (sometimes referred to as \"Poliak\"), later professor for the history of the Middle Ages at Tel Aviv University, published a Hebrew monograph in which he concluded that the East European Jews came from Khazaria. D.M. Dunlop, writing in 1954, thought that very little evidence supported what he considered a mere assumption, and he also argued that the Ashkenazi-Khazar descent theory went far beyond what \"our imperfect records\" permit. In 1955, L\u00e9on Poliakov, who assumed that the Jews of Western Europe resulted from a \"panmixia\" in the first millennium, asserted that it was widely assumed that Europe's Eastern Jews were descended from a mixture of Khazarian and German Jews. Poliak's work found some support in Salo Wittmayer Baron and Ben-Zion Dinur, but was dismissed by Bernard Weinryb as a fiction (1962). Bernard Lewis was of the opinion that the word in Cairo Geniza interpreted as Khazaria is actually Hakkari and therefore it relates to the Kurds of the Hakkari mountains in southeast Turkey.\nThe Khazar-Ashkenazi hypothesis came to the attention of a much wider public with the publication of Arthur Koestler's \"The Thirteenth Tribe\" in 1976, which was both positively reviewed and dismissed as a fantasy, and a somewhat dangerous one. Israeli historian Zvi Ankori argued that Koestler had allowed his literary imagination to espouse Poliak's thesis, which most historians dismissed as speculative. Israel's ambassador to Britain branded it \"an anti-Semitic action financed by the Palestinians\", while Bernard Lewis claimed that the idea was not supported by any evidence whatsoever, and it had been abandoned by all serious scholars. Raphael Patai, however, registered some support for the idea that Khazar remnants had played a role in the growth of Eastern European Jewish communities, and several amateur researchers, such as Boris Altsch\u00fcler (1994), kept the thesis in the public eye. The theory has been occasionally manipulated to deny Jewish nationhood. Recently, a variety of approaches, from linguistics (Paul Wexler) to historiography (Shlomo Sand) and population genetics (Eran Elhaik, a geneticist from the University of Sheffield) have emerged to keep the theory alive. In a broad academic perspective, both the idea that the Khazars converted \"en masse\" to Judaism and the suggestion they emigrated to form the core population of Ashkenazi Jewry, remain highly polemical issues. One thesis held that the Khazar Jewish population went into a northern diaspora and had a significant impact on the rise of Ashkenazi Jews. Connected to this thesis is the theory, expounded by Paul Wexler, dissenting from the majority of Yiddish linguists, that the grammar of Yiddish contains a Khazar substrate.\nUse in antisemitic polemic.\nAccording to Michael Barkun, while the Khazar hypothesis generally never played any major role in the development of anti-Semitism, it has exercised a noticeable influence on American antisemites since the restrictions on immigration were imposed in the 1920s. Maurice Fishberg and Roland B. Dixon's works were later exploited in racist and religious polemical literature, particularly in literature which advocated British Israelism, both in Britain and the United States. Particularly after the publication of Burton J. Hendrick's \"The Jews in America\", (1923) it began to enjoy a vogue among advocates of immigration restriction in the 1920s; racial theorists such as Lothrop Stoddard; antisemitic conspiracy-theorists such as the Ku Klux Klan's Hiram Wesley Evans; and some anti-communist polemicists such as John O. Beaty and Wilmot Robertson, whose views influenced David Duke.\nAccording to Yehoshafat Harkabi (1968) and others, it played a role in Arab anti-Zionist polemics, and took on an antisemitic edge. Bernard Lewis, noting in 1987 that Arab scholars had dropped it, remarked that it only occasionally emerged in Arab political discourse. It has also played some role in Soviet antisemitic chauvinism and Slavic Eurasian historiography; particularly, in the works of scholars like Lev Gumilev, it came to be exploited by the white supremacist Christian Identity movement and even by terrorist esoteric cults like Aum Shinriky\u014d. The Kazar hypothesis was further exploited by esoteric fascists such as Miguel Serrano, referring to a lost \"Palestinabuch\" by the German Nazi-scholar Herman Wirth, who claimed to have proven that the Jews descended from a prehistoric migrant group parasiting on the Great Civilizations. The phrase \"Khazar kaghanate\" gained new traction in 2000s among antisemitic nationalists in Russia, such as Yan Petrovsky. In online conspiracy videos, Khazarians are often portrayed connected with Rothschild family.\nGenetic studies.\nThe hypothesis of Khazarian ancestry in Ashkenazi has also been a subject of vehement disagreements in the field of population genetics, wherein claims have been made concerning evidence both for and against it. Eran Elhaik argued in 2012 for a significant Khazar component in the admixture of Ashkenazi Jews using Caucasian populations\u2014Georgians, Armenians and Azerbaijani Jews\u2014as proxies. The evidence from historians he used has been criticised by Shaul Stampfer and the technical response to such a position from geneticists is mostly dismissive, arguing that, if traces of descent from Khazars exist in the Ashkenazi gene pool, the contribution would be quite minor, or insignificant. One geneticist, Raphael Falk, has argued that \"national and ethnic prejudices play a central role in the controversy.\"\nAccording to Nadia Abu El-Haj, the issues of origins are generally complicated by the difficulties of writing history via genome studies and the biases of emotional investments in different narratives, depending on whether the emphasis lies on direct descent or on conversion within Jewish history. At the time of her writing, the lack of Khazar DNA samples that might allow verification also presented difficulties.\nIn literature.\nThe \"Kuzari\" is an influential work written by the medieval Spanish Jewish philosopher and poet Rabbi Yehuda Halevi (c. 1075\u20131141). Divided into five essays (\"ma'amarim\"), it takes the form of a fictional dialogue between the pagan king of the Khazars and a Jew who was invited to instruct him in the tenets of the Jewish religion. The intent of the work, although based on \u1e24asdai ibn Shapr\u016b\u1e6d's correspondence with the Khazar king, was not historical, but rather to defend Judaism as a revealed religion, written in the context, firstly of Karaite challenges to the Spanish rabbinical intelligentsia, and then against temptations to adapt Aristotelianism and Islamic philosophy to the Jewish faith. Originally written in Arabic, it was translated into Hebrew by Judah ibn Tibbon.\nBenjamin Disraeli's early novel \"Alroy\" (1833) draws on Menachem ben Solomon's story. The question of mass religious conversion and the indeterminability of the truth of stories about identity and conversion are central themes of Milorad Pavi\u0107's best-selling mystery story \"Dictionary of the Khazars\".\nH.N. Turteltaub's \"Justinian\", Marek Halter's \"Book of Abraham\" and \"Wind of the Khazars\", and Michael Chabon's \"Gentlemen of the Road\" allude to or feature elements of Khazar history or create fictional Khazar characters.\nCities associated with the Khazars.\nCities associated with the Khazars include Atil, Khazaran, Samandar; in the Caucasus, Balanjar and Kazarki; in Crimea and the Taman region, Kerch, Theodosia, Yevpatoria (G\u00fczliev), Samkarsh (also called Tmutarakan, Tamatarkha), and Sudak; and in the Don valley, Sarkel. A number of Khazar settlements have been discovered in the Mayaki-Saltovo region. Some scholars suppose that the Khazar settlement of Sambat on the Dnieper refers to the later Kiev.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nResource notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16637", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16637", "title": "Khazaria", "text": ""}
{"id": "16639", "revid": "17562066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16639", "title": "Frost (rapper)", "text": "Mexican-American rapper\nArturo R. Molina Jr. (born May 31, 1964), better known as Frost (originally Kid Frost), is an American rapper, songwriter and record producer. He charted in the 1990s with his first four albums: \"Hispanic Causing Panic\", \"East Side Story\", \"Smile Now, Die Later\" and \"When Hell.A. Freezes Over\". His most successful single is \"La Raza\" which hit number 6 on the rap songs chart in August 1990. His 1990 debut album is credited as the first Latin hip-hop album.\nFrost's music entered the Billboard 200 again in 2002 with the album \"Still Up in This Shit!\". He is the father of record producer Scoop DeVille.\nEarly life.\nMolina was born and raised by his Grandma Lola Molina in Windsor California &amp; later moved with his mom to Los Angeles, California, and occasionally lived with his family in military bases in Guam and Germany. He is of Mexican descent. He began his music career in 1982 as Kid Frost as a tribute to his rival Ice-T, whom he often battled in the music industry. In an interview Frost stated that his first actual DJ was in fact Dr. Dre and DJ Yella. He soon became a breakdancer for Uncle Jamms Army.\nCareer.\nIn the mid-1980s, Frost released several pre-gangsta 12\" singles on Los Angeles-based labels Electrobeat and Baja. In the late 1980s, Kid Frost moved to Virgin Records. His biggest hit, \"La Raza\", from his debut album \"Hispanic Causing Panic\" (1990), combined East L.A. elements and became an \"East L.A. anthem.\" \"Hispanic Causing Panic\" is credited as the first Chicano rap album, and brought attention to Latin rappers on the West Coast.\nFrost also established a Latin rap supergroup called Latin Alliance, which released their only album, \"Latin Alliance\", in 1991. His second album, \"East Side Story\" was released in 1992.\nIn 1995, Frost dropped the \"Kid\" from his nickname and signed with Ruthless Records, Eazy-E's label (distributed by Relativity). \"Smile Now, Die Later\" was released that year. Above The Law were featured as guest rappers, alongside A.L.T., O.G.Enius and Kokane. Rick James also appeared on Frost's version of \"Mary Jane\". His second album for Ruthless, \"When Hell.A.Freezes Over\", was released in 1997. Ice-T, Scoop, O.G.Enius and Domino also appeared as guest rappers. In 1998, Frost collaborated with South Park Mexican in \"El Jugador\" music video along with Low-G released by Dope House Records in the album. Frost was also featured in the songs: Cali-Tex Connect, and West Coast, Gulf Coast, East Coast also from the album.\nIn 1999, Frost moved to a small independent label called Celeb Entertainment Inc. His first album for Celeb Entertainment titled \"This Was Then This Is Now Vol. I\" was released in 1999. Kurupt, King T, Baby Bash, Jay Tee, Jayo Felony, Xzibit, B-Legit and Cameo were featured on the CD. \"That Was Then This Is Now Vol. II\" was released in 2000. Frank V., Clika One, Jay Tee, Baby Bash and other guest rappers were also featured on the CD.\n2002's \"Still Up In This Shit!\", released by Hit-A-Lick and Koch Records, featured more Latin rap style and g-funk tracks as well as a hidden bonus rock track titled \"Cannabis\". Mellow Man Ace, Daz Dillinger, Baby Bash, A.L.T., Nino Brown, Don Cisco and other guest rappers appeared, and one track featured the group Tierra.\nIn 2004 \"Welcome to Frost Angeles\" was released on Thump Records, which was produced almost entirely by Frost and his son Scoop DeVille. Only the Intro is produced by Binky Womack, and Philly Blunt co-produced one track. Guest rappers included Cameosis, Genovese and Jay Tee. Frost again signed to Low Profile Records and released his album \"Till The Wheels Fall Off\" in 2006. It had various guest appearances which included Baby Bash, Scoop DeVille and Mr. Sancho.\nFrost also performed music for films including \"Bite the Bullet (Theme from Gunmen)\" in the 1993 film \"Gunmen\" and \"Tears Of A Mother\" in the film \"No Mothers Crying, No Babies Dying\", which featured Ice-T.\nFrost is also an actor, having his feature film debut in the movie Platinum Illusions. He also provided the voice of fictional character T-Bone Mendez from \"\" and contributed his song \"La Raza\" to the soundtrack.\nHe was named vice president of the Music Division of Goldmark Industries on August 30, 2006. Frost also appeared in a cameo role in Snoop Dogg's \"Vato\" music video. In 2009 Frost collaborated with Serio on the song In L.A. from the album N.T.I.R. Part 2 The Revenge of Serio. He was also featured on the Frost and Serio Skit on the album.\nIn 2016, Frost announced he has been diagnosed with cancer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16640", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16640", "title": "Karl XV", "text": ""}
{"id": "16641", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16641", "title": "Kurtis Blow", "text": "American rapper (born 1959)\nKurtis Walker (born August 9, 1959), known professionally by his stage name Kurtis Blow, is an American rapper, songwriter, and record producer. Walker is the first commercially successful rapper and the first to sign with a major record label. \"The Breaks\", a single from his 1980 self-titled debut album, is the first certified gold record rap song. Over his career he released 17 albums. He is an ordained minister.\nEarly life, family and education.\nWalker was raised in Harlem, Manhattan, New York City. He attended CCNY and Nyack College, studying communications/film and ministry.\nCareer.\nIn 1979, at the age of twenty, Blow became the first rapper to be signed by a major label, Mercury, which released \"Christmas Rappin'\". It sold over 400,000 copies, becoming one of the first commercially successful hip hop singles. Its follow-up, \"The Breaks\", sold over 840,000 copies. He released ten albums over the next eleven years. His first album was \"Kurtis Blow\", then his second was the top 40 R&amp;B album \"Deuce\". \"Party Time\" featured a fusion of rap and go-go. \"Ego Trip\" included the hits: \"8 Million Stories\", \"AJ Scratch\", and \"Basketball\". His 1985 album, \"America\", garnered praise for its title track's music video. From this album, the song \"If I Ruled the World\" became a top 5 hit on \"Billboard\"'s Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs R&amp;B chart. By 1983, he moved into production.\nHe lived in Co-op City in the Bronx in the mid-1980s.\nBesides his own work, Blow has been responsible for hits by The Fat Boys and Run DMC. Run began his career billed as \"The Son of Kurtis Blow\". Lovebug Starski, Full Force, Russell Simmons and Wyclef Jean all have been produced by, or collaborated with, Walker. Former label mates Ren\u00e9 &amp; Angela had their R&amp;B chart topping debut \"Save Your Love (For #1)\" was gift rapped by Blow. Walker produced, with Phillip Jones as co-producer and Dexter Scott King as executive producer, the song \"King Holiday\", celebrating the first Martin Luther King Jr. Day, a U.S. federal holiday inaugurated in January 1986.\nHe performed as an actor and in music coordination in several feature films including Leon Kennedy's \"Knights of the City\" and the hip hop film \"Krush Groove.\" He was host and co-producer for \"Das Leben Amerikanischer Gangs\" (1995), an international film production focusing on the West Coast gang scene. As host and associate producer for Miramax's \"Rhyme and Reason\", he gave an informative account of the status of hip hop, while he participated in the three volume record release \"The History of Rap\" for Rhino Records in 1998. Blow also co-produced \"Slippin, Ten Years with the Bloods\" and won praises from Showtime for being the most viewed documentary in 2003. Blow was recently a producer for the Netflix show \"The Get Down\".\nBlow has spoken out emphatically against racism. He was an active participant in the Artists United Against Apartheid record \"Sun City\". He worked with Rev. Jesse Jackson's Operation Push and National Rainbow Coalition in Chicago and with Rev. Al Sharpton's Action Network in New York City. In 1995, he started working on-air in radio, Power 106, the No. 1 CHR radio station in Southern California. He hosted \"The Old School Show\" on Sunday nights, featuring hits from the past. He also worked for Sirius Satellite Radio on the Classic Old School Hip Hop station Backspin (Channel 46) from 2000 to 2004.\nBeginning in 1996, Kurtis Blow was featured in a hip hop display at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In the same year, rapper Nas debuted at No. 53 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 with his version of Blow's \"If I Ruled the World\". The song went on to double platinum. In 1998, the group Next released \"Too Close\", in which the music of \"Christmas Rappin'\" was sampled. ASCAP honored Blow and Next at a gala affair on May 26, 1999 for having the number one song for 8 months. In 2002, he traveled to the Middle East to tour the Armed Forces bases performing seventeen shows for the troops.\nIn December 2014, Blow was the Guest MC for the world premiere of \"The Hip Hop Nutcracker\" at New Jersey Performing Arts Center, a well received update of Tchaikovsky's holiday classic. A national tour of the show was scheduled to launch in November 2015 with Kurtis Blow reprising his role as Guest MC opening the show. The show has presently been up and running with 50\u201360 sold-out performances during the holidays.\nIn 2016 Blow was unanimously elected as Chairman of the Universal Hip Hop Museum. The museum is slated to open in 2023 in the Bronx point section of NYC. In 2017, Blow formed \"The Bboy Committee\", a group of 1st generation Bboys/Girls, who created the style of dance called Bboying, Rocking, and Break Dancing. The members of the Bboy Committee are as follows: Trixie (Lauree Myers), RIP Wallace D, Dancing Doug (Douglas Colon), A1 Bboy Sasa, DJ Clark Kent (Tyrone Smith), the Legendary Smith Twins, the Zulu Kings and Cholly Rock (Anthony G. Horne), OG BGirl \u2013 Darlene Rivers, \"Puppet\" (William \"Billy Bill\" Waring), Darryl Solomon (The Mad Hatter), Kurtis Blow, Lil Cesar Rivas, and Shabba-Doo. The committee is dedicated to the facilitation of the Bboy section of the Universal Hip Hop Museum.\nBlow became an ordained minister on August 16, 2009. As the founder of the Hip Hop Church in Harlem, Blow serves as rapper, DJ, worship leader and licensed minister.\nIn 2016, Kurtis Blow appeared in a documentary on the evolution of hip hop, \"Hip-Hop Evolution\". Hosted by Canadian rapper and broadcaster Shad, the series profiled the history of hip-hop music through interviews with many of the genre's leading cultural figures. The series was produced by Russell Peters, Scot McFadyen, Sam Dunn and Nelson George. It won the 2016 Peabody Award, and the 2017 International Emmy Award for Best Arts Programming. The series has been broadcast on Netflix.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16642", "revid": "31135838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16642", "title": "Kazakhstan", "text": "Country in Central Asia and Eastern Europe\nKazakhstan, officially the Republic of Kazakhstan, is a landlocked country primarily in Central Asia, with a small portion in Eastern Europe. It borders Russia to the north and west, China to the east, Kyrgyzstan to the southeast, Uzbekistan to the south, and Turkmenistan to the southwest, with a coastline along the Caspian Sea. Its capital is Astana, while the largest city and leading cultural and commercial hub is Almaty (which had been the capital city until 1997).\nKazakhstan is the world's ninth-largest country by land area and the largest landlocked country. Hilly plateaus and plains account for nearly half its vast territory, with lowlands composing another third; its southern and eastern frontiers are composed of mountainous regions. Kazakhstan has a population of 20 million and one of the lowest population densities in the world, with fewer than . Ethnic Kazakhs constitute a majority, while ethnic Russians form a significant minority. Officially secular, Kazakhstan is a Muslim-majority country with a sizeable Christian community.\nKazakhstan has been inhabited since the Paleolithic era. In antiquity, various nomadic Iranian peoples such as the Saka, Massagetae, and Scythians dominated the territory, with the Achaemenid Persian Empire expanding towards the south. Turkic nomads entered the region from the sixth century. In the 13th century, the area was subjugated by the Mongol Empire under Genghis Khan. Following the disintegration of the Golden Horde in the 15th century, the Kazakh Khanate was established over an area roughly corresponding with modern Kazakhstan. By the 18th century, the Kazakh Khanate had fragmented into three (tribal divisions), which were gradually absorbed and conquered by the Russian Empire; by the mid-19th century, all of Kazakhstan was nominally under Russian rule. Following the 1917 Russian Revolution and subsequent Russian Civil War, it became an autonomous republic of the Russian SFSR within the Soviet Union. Its status was elevated to that of a union republic in 1936. The Soviet government settled Russians and other ethnicities in the republic, which resulted in ethnic Kazakhs being a minority during the Soviet era. Kazakhstan was the last constituent republic of the Soviet Union to declare independence in 1991 during its dissolution.\nKazakhstan dominates Central Asia both economically and politically, accounting for 60% of the region's GDP, primarily through its oil and gas industry; it also has vast mineral resources, ranking among the highest producers of iron and silver in the world. Kazakhstan also has the highest Human Development Index ranking in the region. It is a unitary constitutional republic; however, its government is authoritarian. Nevertheless, there have been incremental efforts at democratization and political reform since the resignation of Nursultan Nazarbayev in 2019, who had led the country since independence. Kazakhstan is a member state of the United Nations, World Trade Organization, Commonwealth of Independent States, Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, Eurasian Economic Union, Collective Security Treaty Organization, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Organization of Islamic Cooperation, Organization of Turkic States, International Organization of Turkic Culture and Special Guest status with the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the most widely accepted theory, the word qazaq (Kazakh) derives from a Turkic root meaning \"free\", \"independent\", or \"wanderer\".\nThe Turkic word qazaq (\u0642\u0627\u0632\u0627\u0642) was reliably recorded in 13th\u201314th century dictionaries, including the Codex Cumanicus and a Mamluk-Kipchak Arabic dictionary published by Martin Houtsma. In these sources, the word meant \"unattached\", \"homeless\", \"loner\", or \"exile\", and later acquired the meaning \"free man\".\nThe English word \"Kazakh\", meaning a member of the Kazakh people, derives from . The native name is \"\". It might originate from the Turkic word verb \"qaz-\", 'to wander', reflecting the Kazakhs' nomadic culture. The term \"Cossack\" is of the same origin.\nIn Turko-Persian sources, the term \"\u00d6zbek-Qazaq\" first appeared during the mid-16th century, in the \"Tarikh-i-Rashidi\" by Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat, a Chagatayid prince of Kashmir, which locates Kazakh in the eastern part of \"Desht-i Qipchaq\". According to Vasily Bartold, the Kazakhs likely began using that name during the 15th century.\nThough \"Kazakh\" traditionally referred only to ethnic Kazakhs, including those living in China, Russia, Turkey, Uzbekistan, and other neighbouring countries, the term is increasingly being used to refer to any inhabitant of Kazakhstan, including residents of other ethnicities. In the Kazakh language, the country is called \"Qazaqstan\" in the Latin script.\nHistory.\nKazakhstan has been inhabited since the Paleolithic era. The Botai culture (3700\u20133100 BC) is credited with the first domestication of horses. The Botai population derived most of their ancestry from a deeply European-related population known as Ancient North Eurasians, while also displaying some Ancient East Asian admixture. Pastoralism developed during the Neolithic. The population was Caucasoid during the Bronze and Iron Age period.\nThe Kazakh territory was a key constituent of the Eurasian trading Steppe Route, the ancestor of the terrestrial Silk Roads. Archaeologists believe that humans first domesticated the horse in the region's vast steppes. During recent prehistoric times, Central Asia was inhabited by groups such as the possibly Indo-European Afanasievo culture, later early Indo-Iranian cultures such as Andronovo, and later Indo-Iranians such as the Saka and Massagetae. Other groups included the nomadic Scythians and the Persian Achaemenid Empire in the southern territory of the modern country. The Andronovo and Srubnaya cultures, precursors to the peoples of the Scythian cultures, were found to harbor mixed ancestry from the Yamnaya Steppe herders and peoples of the Central European Middle Neolithic.\nIn 329 BC, Alexander the Great and his Macedonian army fought in the Battle of Jaxartes against the Scythians along the Jaxartes River, now known as the Syr Darya along the southern border of modern Kazakhstan.\nTurkic Khaganate.\nThe main migration of Turkic peoples occurred between the 5th and 11th centuries when they spread across most of Central Asia. The Turkic peoples slowly replaced and assimilated the previous Iranian-speaking locals, turning the population of Central Asia from largely Iranian, into primarily of East Asian descent.\nThe First Turkic Khaganate was founded by Bumin in 552 on the Mongolian Plateau and quickly spread west toward the Caspian Sea. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks drove before them various peoples: Xionites, Uar, Oghurs, and others. These seem to have merged into the Avars and Bulgars. Within 35 years, the eastern half and the Western Turkic Khaganate were independent. The Western Khaganate reached its peak in the early 7th century.\nCuman-Kipchak and the Golden Horde.\nThe Cumans entered the steppes of modern-day Kazakhstan around the early 11th century, where they later joined with the Kipchak and established the vast Cuman-Kipchak confederation. While ancient cities Taraz (Aulie-Ata) and Hazrat-e Turkestan had long served as important way-stations along the Silk Road connecting Asia and Europe, true political consolidation began only with the Mongol rule of the early 13th century. Under the Mongol Empire, the first strictly structured administrative districts (Ulus) were established. After the division of the Mongol Empire in 1259, the land that would become modern-day Kazakhstan was ruled by the Golden Horde, also known as the Ulus of Jochi. During the Golden Horde period, a Turco-Mongol tradition emerged among the ruling elite wherein Turkicised descendants of Genghis Khan followed Islam and continued to reign over the lands.\nKazakh Khanate.\nIn 15th century, the Kazakh Khanate emerged as a result of the dissolution of the Golden Horde. Established by Janibek Khan and Kerei Khan, it continued to be ruled by the Chingissid clan of Tore (Jochid dynasty). The Kazakh Khanate was a successor state of the left (eastern) wing of Ulus Of Jochi.\nIn the early 16th century, Kazakhs transformed the Khanate into a nomadic empire stretching across the steppes east of the Caspian Sea and north of the Aral Sea as far as the upper Irtysh River and the western approaches to the Altai Mountains. During the reigns of Burunduk Khan (ruled 1488\u20131509) and Kasym Khan (1509\u201318), the Kazakhs were the masters of virtually the entire steppe region, reportedly able to bring 200,000 cavalry into the field and feared by all their neighbours. Many historians consider Kasym Khan's leadership the starting point of a distinct and sovereign Kazakh state. His influence extended Kazakh authority from the southeastern regions of modern Kazakhstan to the Ural Mountains. Mirza Muhammad Haidar wrote in his \"Tarikh-i-Rashidi\" that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;K\u00e1sim Kh\u00e1n became the absolute ruler over all of Dasht-i-Kipch\u00e1k. His army numbered more than a million men, gaining such fame and power as no one had since Juji Kh\u00e1n.\u2014\u200a\nDuring the reign of the three sons of Kasym Khan, the authority of the khan weakened somewhat, leading to the eventual fragmentation of the Kazakh Khanate into three distinct \"hordes\": the Great Horde in southeastern Kazakhstan north of the Tien Shan, the Middle Horde in the central steppe near the Aral Sea, and the Little Horde between the Aral Sea and the Ural River. In these regions, the khan\u2019s power was often constrained by tribal leaders, known as sultans, and even more so by the beys and batyrs, heads of the clan-based communities. Although the khans nominally commanded a formidable military, their authority relied heavily on the loyalty of these local leaders.\nThe final son of Kasym Khan to rule, Haqnazar, overcame these challenges, reunited the three hordes, and expanded his power beyond the steppes. He brought under his control not only the Kazakh hordes but also the Bashkirs, Kyrgyzes and Nogais, as well as territories such as the Kazan, Siberian, and Astrakhan khanates, and cities like Bukhara, Khiva, and Tashkent. According to Rychkov, Haqnazar\u2019s reign was marked by a brutal consolidation of power, where he exploited the instability of neighboring peoples, imposed heavy tributes, and severely restricted their movements and resources. He limited them to a single cooking pot per three households, confiscated livestock, goods, and even children, and prohibited land ownership and movement across certain rivers. These actions rendered these peoples impoverished and submissive, but they also strengthened his dominion across the region.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHe initiated regular raids into Transoxiana, a pattern continued by his successors, including Tauekel Khan, who briefly occupied Samarkand. However, by the early 17th century, the unity that had been restored began to unravel once again, leading to the fragmentation of the khanate. As a result, central power weakened significantly, and numerous smaller, local rulers emerged across the region.\nAfter Tauke\u2019s death in 1715/1718, the Kazakh Khanate lost its unity, and the three hordes effectively became separate khanates.\nDuring the 17th century, the Kazakhs fought the Oirats, a federation of western Mongol tribes, including the Dzungar. The beginning of the 18th century marked the zenith of the Kazakh Khanate. During this period the Little Horde participated in the 1723\u20131730 war against the Dzungar Khanate, following their \"Great Disaster\" invasion of Kazakh territory. Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakhs won major victories over the Dzungar at the Bulanty River in 1726 and at the Battle of A\u00f1yraqai in 1729.\nAblai Khan participated in the most significant battles against the Dzungars from the 1720s to the 1750s, for which he was declared a \"batyr\" (\"hero\") by the people. He later became the last khan whose authority was recognised across the Kazakh steppe, ruling the Middle Zhuz from 1771 to 1781. In 1740, Ablai had accepted Russian suzerainty, while pursuing a policy of balancing between Russian Empire and Qing dynasty, which for a time allowed the Kazakh Khanate to preserve relative autonomy. After his death, his son Vali Khan (1781\u20131819) abandoned an independent policy and acknowledged Russian authority.\nIn 1822, the Khanate institution among the Kazakh Hordes was abolished, sparking the uprising of Sultan Qasym in 1824\u20131827. The final attempt to restore the Khanate was led by Sultan Kenesary Qasymov, who proclaimed himself khan in 1837 and conducted an armed struggle against Russian authorities until his death in 1847.\nRussian Kazakhstan.\nIn the first half of the 18th century, the Russian Empire constructed the Irtysh line, a series of forty-six forts and ninety-six redoubts, including Omsk (1716), Semipalatinsk (1718), Pavlodar (1720), Orenburg (1743) and Petropavlovsk (1752), to prevent Kazakh and Oirat raids into Russian territory. In the late 18th century the Kazakhs took advantage of Pugachev's Rebellion, which was centred on the Volga area, to raid Russian and Volga German settlements. In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand its influence into Central Asia. The \"Great Game\" period is generally regarded as running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907. The tsars effectively ruled over most of the territory belonging to what is now the Republic of Kazakhstan.\nThe Russian Empire introduced an administrative system and built military garrisons and barracks in its effort to establish a presence in Central Asia in the so-called \"Great Game\" for dominance in the area against the British Empire, which was extending its influence from the south in India and Southeast Asia. Russia built its first outpost, Orsk, in 1735. Russia introduced the Russian language in all schools and governmental organisations.\nRussia's efforts to impose its system aroused the resentment of the Kazakhs, and, by the 1860s, some Kazakhs resisted its rule. Russia had disrupted the traditional nomadic lifestyle and livestock-based economy, and people were suffering from starvation, with some Kazakh tribes being decimated. The Kazakh national movement, which began in the late 19th century, sought to preserve the native language and identity by resisting the attempts of the Russian Empire to assimilate and stifle Kazakh culture.\nDue to its incorporation into the Russian Empire, Kazakh intellectuals led a cultural renaissance that surpassed those of other Central Asian peoples. Russian schooling brought modern ideas to the steppe, and figures like Shoqan Walikhanov and Abay Kunanbayev adapted these ideas to the specific needs of Kazakh society, creating a secular culture unparalleled in other parts of Asian Russia.\nFrom the 1890s onward, ever-larger numbers of settlers from the Russian Empire began colonizing the territory of present-day Kazakhstan, in particular, the province of Semirechye. The number of settlers rose still further once the Trans-Aral Railway from Orenburg to Tashkent was completed in 1906. A specially created Migration Department (\u041f\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0447\u0435\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0435 \u0423\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435) in St. Petersburg oversaw and encouraged the migration to expand Russian influence in the area. During the 19th century, about 400,000 Russians immigrated to Kazakhstan, and about one million Slavs, Germans, Jews, and others immigrated to the region during the first third of the 20th century. Vasile Balabanov was the administrator responsible for the resettlement during much of this time.\nThe competition for land and water that ensued between the Kazakhs and the newcomers caused great resentment against colonial rule during the final years of the Russian Empire. The most serious uprising, the Central Asian revolt, occurred in 1916. The Kazakhs attacked Russian and Cossack settlers and military garrisons. The revolt resulted in a series of clashes and in brutal massacres committed by both sides. Both sides resisted the communist government until late 1919.\nIn the wake of the Russian Revolution, the Alash Orda government was formed in 1917 as an attempt to secure Kazakh autonomy. Although it existed only in name, Alash Orda represented the Kazakh push for self-rule. The Bolshevik Red Army eventually defeated White Russian forces in the region by 1920, and Kazakhstan was incorporated into the Soviet Union.\nKazakh SSR.\nFollowing the collapse of central government in Petrograd in November 1917, the Kazakhs (then in Russia officially referred to as \"Kirghiz\") experienced a brief period of autonomy (the Alash Autonomy) before eventually succumbing to the Bolsheviks' rule. On 26 August 1920, the Kirghiz Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic within the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) was established. The Kirghiz ASSR included the territory of present-day Kazakhstan, but its administrative centre was the mainly Russian-populated town of Orenburg. In June 1925, the Kirghiz ASSR was renamed the Kazak ASSR and its administrative centre was transferred to the town of Kyzylorda, and in April 1927 to Alma-Ata.\nDespite their traditionally nomadic lifestyle, the Kazakhs were among the most literate groups in Central Asia, which set them apart in the region. However, Soviet policies, including forced collectivization and repression of the traditional elite in the late 1920s and 1930s, led to devastating consequences for the Kazakh population. These policies caused widespread famine and high fatalities, with an estimated 1.5 million deaths between 1926 and 1939, mostly due to starvation and related diseases, as well as violence (see also: Famine in Kazakhstan of 1932\u201333). Thousands of Kazakhs fled to China, but many did not survive the journey. During the 1930s, some members of the Kazakh intelligentsia were executed \u2013 as part of the policies of political reprisals pursued by the Soviet government in Moscow.\nOn 5 December 1936, the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (whose territory by then corresponded to that of modern Kazakhstan) was detached from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) and made the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, a full union republic of the USSR, one of eleven such republics at the time, along with the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic.\nThe republic was one of the destinations for exiled and convicted persons, as well as for mass resettlements, or deportations affected by the central USSR authorities during the 1930s and 1940s, such as approximately 400,000 Volga Germans deported from the Volga German Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in September\u2013October 1941, and then later the Greeks and Crimean Tatars. Deportees and prisoners were interned in some of the biggest Soviet labour camps (the Gulag), including ALZhIR camp outside Astana, which was reserved for the wives of men considered \"enemies of the people\". Many moved due to the policy of population transfer in the Soviet Union and others were forced into involuntary settlements in the Soviet Union.\nThe Soviet-German War (1941\u20131945) led to an increase in industrialisation and mineral extraction in support of the war effort. At the time of Joseph Stalin's death in 1953, however, Kazakhstan still had an overwhelmingly agricultural economy. In 1953, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev initiated the Virgin Lands Campaign designed to turn the traditional pasturelands of Kazakhstan into a major grain-producing region for the Soviet Union. The Virgin Lands policy brought mixed results. However, along with later modernisations under Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev (in power 1964\u20131982), it accelerated the development of the agricultural sector, which remains the source of livelihood for a large percentage of Kazakhstan's population. Because of the decades of privation, war and resettlement, by 1959 the Kazakhs had become a minority, making up 30% of the population. Ethnic Russians accounted for 43%.\nIn 1947, the USSR, as part of its atomic bomb project, founded an atomic bomb test site near the north-eastern town of Semipalatinsk, where the first Soviet nuclear bomb test was conducted in 1949. Hundreds of nuclear tests were conducted until 1989 with adverse consequences for the nation's environment and population. The Anti-nuclear movement in Kazakhstan became a major political force in the late 1980s.\nIn April 1961, Baikonur became the springboard of Vostok 1, a spacecraft with Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin being the first human to enter space.\nIn December 1986, mass demonstrations by young ethnic Kazakhs, later called the Jeltoqsan riot, took place in Almaty to protest the replacement of the First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR Dinmukhamed Konayev with Gennady Kolbin from the Russian SFSR. Governmental troops suppressed the unrest, several people were killed, and many demonstrators were jailed. In the waning days of Soviet rule, discontent continued to grow and found expression under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of \"glasnost\" (\"openness\").\nIndependence.\nKazakhstan declared its sovereignty within the Soviet Union on 25 October 1990. Following the failed August 1991 coup attempt in Moscow, the country proclaimed full independence on 16 December 1991, becoming the last Soviet republic to do so. Ten days after Kazakhstan's declaration, the Soviet Union itself dissolved. This period marked a significant turning point in Kazakhstan's history, as it embarked on a new political and economic path separate from Moscow's control.\nNursultan Nazarbayev, the communist-era leader of Kazakhstan, became the country's first president. Under his leadership, Kazakhstan transitioned from a Soviet-era planned economy to a market economy, focusing on privatization and foreign investments. The emphasis on economic reform, particularly in the oil sector, helped Kazakhstan become one of Central Asia's most economically powerful nations. By 2006, Kazakhstan contributed around 60% of the region's GDP, primarily through its oil exports. However, political reforms lagged behind these economic strides, and Nazarbayev maintained an authoritarian rule throughout his presidency.\nIn 1997, Nazarbayev moved the capital from Almaty, the country's largest city, to Astana (later renamed Nur-Sultan in 2019), a decision that symbolized the government's desire to modernize and assert control over the country's vast territories. The capital city change was part of broader efforts to establish a new national identity and shift the political center from former Soviet-era heartlands.\nKazakhstan's political landscape during Nazarbayev's rule was characterized by limited political pluralism. In the 2004 parliamentary elections, the pro-government Otan Party, led by Nazarbayev, dominated the Majilis (the lower house of parliament). Other parties sympathetic to the president, such as the agrarian-industrial bloc AIST and the Asar party (founded by Nazarbayev's daughter), secured most of the remaining seats, while opposition parties struggled to gain representation. International observers, including the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, criticized the elections for not meeting democratic standards.\nDespite claims of progress toward democracy, Kazakhstan's political system remained authoritarian well into the 21st century. In 2010, the country was still ranked as an authoritarian regime on \"The Economist\"'s Democracy Index. Nazarbayev, who had ruled since independence, announced his resignation on 19 March 2019, after nearly three decades in power. His successor, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, won the 2019 presidential election and took office on 12 June 2019. Tokayev's first official act was to rename the capital city to Nur-Sultan, in honor of Nazarbayev's legacy.\nHowever, Tokayev's presidency faced significant challenges. In January 2022, Kazakhstan was gripped by large-scale protests following a sharp rise in fuel prices. The unrest quickly escalated, and Tokayev responded decisively by assuming control of the country's Security Council, removing Nazarbayev from the post and consolidating his own power. This marked a dramatic shift in Kazakhstan's political dynamics, with Tokayev signaling a departure from the old Nazarbayev-era system. In September 2022, the capital's name was reverted back to Astana, a move seen as part of the broader efforts to distance the country from the former president's influence.\nGeography.\nAs it extends across both sides of the Ural River, considered the dividing line separating Europe and Asia, Kazakhstan is one of only two landlocked countries in the world that has territory in two continents (the other is Azerbaijan).\nWith an area of \u2014equivalent in size to Western Europe\u2014Kazakhstan is the ninth-largest country and largest landlocked country in the world. While it was part of the Russian Empire, Kazakhstan lost some of its territory to China's Xinjiang province, and some to Uzbekistan's Karakalpakstan autonomous republic during Soviet years.\nIt shares borders of with Russia, with Uzbekistan, with China, with Kyrgyzstan, and with Turkmenistan. Major cities include Almaty, Astana, Shymkent, Akt\u00f6be and Karagandy. It lies between latitudes 40\u00b0 and 56\u00b0 N, and longitudes 46\u00b0 and 88\u00b0 E. While located primarily in Asia, a small portion of Kazakhstan is also located west of the Urals in Eastern Europe.\nKazakhstan's terrain extends west to east from the Caspian Sea to the Altai Mountains and the Tian Shan, and north to south from the plains of Western Siberia to the oases and deserts of Central Asia. The Kazakh Steppe (plain), with an area of around , occupies one-third of the country and is the world's largest dry steppe region. The steppe is characterised by large areas of grasslands and sandy regions. Major seas, lakes and rivers include Lake Balkhash, Lake Zaysan, the Charyn River and gorge, the Ili, Irtysh, Ishim, Ural and Syr Darya rivers, and the Aral Sea until it largely dried up in one of the world's worst environmental disasters.\nThe Charyn Canyon is long, cutting through a red sandstone plateau and stretching along the Charyn River gorge in northern Tian Shan (\"Heavenly Mountains\", east of Almaty) at . The steep canyon slopes, columns and arches rise to heights of between . The inaccessibility of the canyon provided a safe haven for a rare ash tree, \"Fraxinus sogdiana\", which survived the Ice Age there and has now also grown in some other areas. Bigach crater, at , is a Pliocene or Miocene asteroid impact crater, in diameter and estimated to be 5\u00b13\u00a0million years old.\nKazakhstan's Almaty region is also home to the Mynzhylky mountain plateau.\nNatural resources.\nKazakhstan has an abundant supply of accessible mineral and fossil fuel resources. Development of petroleum, natural gas, and mineral extractions has attracted most of the over $40\u00a0billion in foreign investment in Kazakhstan since 1993 and accounts for some 57% of the nation's industrial output (or approximately 13% of gross domestic product). According to some estimates, Kazakhstan has the second largest uranium, chromium, lead, and zinc reserves; the third largest manganese reserves; the fifth largest copper reserves; and ranks in the top ten for coal, iron, and gold. In 2015, Kazakhstan's gold production is 64 metric tonnes. It is also an exporter of diamonds. Perhaps most significant for economic development, Kazakhstan also has the 11th largest proven reserves of both petroleum and natural gas. One such location is the Tokarevskoye gas condensate field.\nIn total, there are 160 deposits with over of petroleum. Oil explorations have shown that the deposits on the Caspian shore are only a small part of a much larger deposit. It is said that of oil and of gas could be found in that area. Overall the estimate of Kazakhstan's oil deposits is . However, there are only three refineries within the country, situated in Atyrau, Pavlodar, and \u015eymkent. These are not capable of processing the total crude output, so much of it is exported to Russia. According to the US Energy Information Administration, Kazakhstan was producing approximately of oil per day in 2009.\nThere are several large navigable rivers in Kazakhstan. All of them flow along the edges of the country, mainly in the north, while the southern and central parts of the river are mostly steppe, often drying up completely in the height of summer.\nKazakhstan also possesses large deposits of phosphorite. Two of the largest deposits include the Karatau basin with 650 million tonnes of P2O5 and the Chilisai deposit of the located in northwestern Kazakhstan, with resources of 500\u2013800million tonnes of 9% ore.\nOn 17 October 2013, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) accepted Kazakhstan as \"EITI Compliant\", meaning that the country has a basic and functional process to ensure the regular disclosure of natural resource revenues.\nClimate.\nKazakhstan has an \"extreme\" continental and cold steppe climate, and sits solidly inside the Eurasian steppe, featuring the Kazakh steppe, with hot summers and cold winters. Indeed, Astana is the second coldest capital city in the world, after Ulaanbaatar. Precipitation varies between arid and semi-arid conditions, the winter being particularly dry.\nWildlife.\nThere are ten nature reserves and ten national parks in Kazakhstan that provide safe haven for many rare and endangered plants and animals. In total there are twenty five areas of conservancy. Common plants are \"Astragalus\", \"Gagea\", \"Allium\", \"Carex\" and \"Oxytropis\"; endangered plant species include native wild apple (\"Malus sieversii\"), wild grape (\"Vitis vinifera\") and several wild tulip species (e.g., \"Tulipa greigii\") and rare onion species \"Allium karataviense\", also \"Iris willmottiana\" and \"Tulipa kaufmanniana\". Kazakhstan had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.23/10, ranking it 26th globally out of 172 countries.\nCommon mammals include the wolf, red fox, corsac fox, moose, argali (the largest species of sheep), Eurasian lynx, Pallas's cat, and snow leopards, several of which are protected.\nKazakhstan's Red Book of Protected Species lists 125 vertebrates including many birds and mammals, and 404 plants including fungi, algae and lichens.\nPrzewalski's horse has been reintroduced to the steppes after nearly 200 years.\nGovernment and politics.\nPolitical system.\nOfficially, Kazakhstan is a democratic, secular, constitutional unitary republic; Nursultan Nazarbayev led the country from 1991 to 2019. He was succeeded by Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. The president may veto legislation that has been passed by the parliament and is also the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The prime minister chairs the cabinet of ministers and serves as Kazakhstan's head of government. There are three deputy prime ministers and sixteen ministers in the cabinet.\nKazakhstan has a bicameral parliament composed of the \"Majilis\" (the lower house) and senate (the upper house). Single-mandate districts popularly elect 107 seats in the \"Majilis\"; there also are ten members elected by party-list vote. The senate has 48 members. Two senators are selected by each of the elected assemblies (m\u00e4slihats) of Kazakhstan's twenty principal administrative divisions (seventeen regions and three nationally significant cities). The president appoints the remaining fifteen senators. \"Majilis\" deputies and the government both have the right of legislative initiative, though the government proposes most legislation considered by the parliament.\nIn 2020, Freedom House rated Kazakhstan as a \"consolidated authoritarian regime\", stating that freedom of speech in Kazakhstan is not respected and \"Kazakhstan's electoral laws do not provide for free and fair elections.\" \nThe Economist Intelligence Unit has consistently ranked Kazakhstan as an \"authoritarian regime\" in its Democracy Index, ranking it 128th out of 167 countries for 2020. The V-Dem Democracy Indices described Kazakhstan an electoral autocracy in 2024.\nPolitical reforms.\nReforms have begun to be implemented after the election of Kassym-Jomart Tokayev in June 2019. Tokayev supports a culture of opposition, public assembly, and loosening rules on forming political parties. In June 2019, Tokayev established the National Council of Public Trust as a public platform for national conversation regarding government policies and reforms. In July 2019, the President of Kazakhstan announced a concept of a 'listening state' that quickly and efficiently responds to all constructive requests of the country's citizens. A law will be passed to allow representatives from other parties to hold chair positions on some Parliamentary committees, to foster alternative views and opinions. The minimum membership threshold needed to register a political party will be reduced from 40,000 to 20,000 members. Special places for peaceful rallies in central areas will be allocated and a new draft law outlining the rights and obligations of organisers, participants and observers will be passed. In an effort to increase public safety, President Tokayev has strengthened the penalties for those who commit crimes against individuals.\nOn 17 September 2022, Tokayev signed a decree that limits presidential tenure to one term of seven years. He furthermore announced the preparation of a new reform package to \"decentralise\" and \"distribute\" power between government institutions. The reform package also seeks to modify the electoral system and increase the decision-making authorities of Kazakhstan's regions. The powers of the parliament were expanded at the expense of those of the president, relatives of whom are now also barred from holding government positions, while the Constitutional Court was restored and the death penalty abolished.\nAdministrative divisions.\nKazakhstan is divided into seventeen regions (, ; , ), as well as four cities which are administered separately from their surrounding geographic regions. The regions are subdivided into 177 districts (, ; , ). The districts are further subdivided into rural districts at the lowest level of administration, which include all rural settlements and villages without an associated municipal government.\nThe cities of Almaty, Astana and Shymkent have official status as cities of republican significance and do not belong to their surrounding regions. The city of Baikonur also has special status because it is being leased to Russia until 2050 for the Baikonur cosmodrome. Shymkent gained its status as a \"city of republican significance\" in June 2018.\nEach region is headed by an \"\u00e4kim\" (regional governor) appointed by the president. District \"\u00e4kimi\" are appointed by regional \"\u00e4kim\"s. On 10 December 1997, Kazakhstan's government relocated its capital from Almaty, established under the Soviet Union, to Astana.\nMunicipal divisions.\nMunicipalities exist at each level of administrative division in Kazakhstan. Cities of republican, regional, and district significance are designated as urban inhabited localities; all others are designated rural. At the highest level are the cities of Almaty and Astana, which are classified as \"cities of republican significance\" on the administrative level equal to that of a region. At the intermediate level are \"cities of regional significance\" on the administrative level equal to that of a district. Cities of these two levels may be divided into city districts. At the lowest level are \"cities of district significance\", and over two-thousand \"villages and rural settlements\" () on the administrative level equal to that of rural districts.\nUrban centres.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForeign relations.\nKazakhstan is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Economic Cooperation Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation. The nations of Kazakhstan, Russia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan established the Eurasian Economic Community in 2000, to revive earlier efforts to harmonise trade tariffs and to create a free trade zone under a customs union. On 1 December 2007, it was announced that Kazakhstan had been chosen to chair the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe for the year 2010. Kazakhstan was elected a member of the UN Human Rights Council for the first time on 12 November 2012.\nKazakhstan is also a member of the United Nations, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, Turkic Council, and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). It is an active participant in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Partnership for Peace program.\nIn 1999, Kazakhstan had applied for observer status at the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. The official response of the Assembly was that because Kazakhstan is partially located in Europe, it could apply for full membership, but that it would not be granted any status whatsoever at the council until its democracy and human rights records improved.\nSince independence in 1991, Kazakhstan has pursued what is known as the \"multi-vector foreign policy\" (), seeking equally good relations with its two large neighbours, Russia and China, as well as with the United States and the rest of the Western world. Russia leases approximately of territory enclosing the Baikonur Cosmodrome space launch site in south central Kazakhstan, where the first man was launched into space as well as Soviet space shuttle Buran and the well-known space station Mir.\nOn 11 April 2010, presidents Nazarbayev and Obama met at the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C., and discussed strengthening the strategic partnership between the United States and Kazakhstan. They pledged to intensify bilateral co-operation to promote nuclear safety and non-proliferation, regional stability in Central Asia, economic prosperity, and universal values.\nSince 2014, the Kazakhstani government has been bidding for a non-permanent member seat on the UN Security Council for 2017\u20132018. On 28 June 2016 Kazakhstan was elected as a non-permanent member to serve on the UN Security Council for a two-year term.\nKazakhstan has supported UN peacekeeping missions in Haiti, Western Sahara, and C\u00f4te d'Ivoire. In March 2014, the Ministry of Defense chose 20 Kazakhstani military men as observers for the UN peacekeeping missions. The military personnel, ranking from captain to colonel, had to go through specialised UN training; they had to be fluent in English and skilled in using specialised military vehicles.\nIn 2014, Kazakhstan gave Ukraine humanitarian aid during the conflict with Russian-backed rebels. In October 2014, Kazakhstan donated $30,000 to the International Committee of the Red Cross's humanitarian effort in Ukraine. In January 2015, to help the humanitarian crisis, Kazakhstan sent $400,000 of aid to Ukraine's southeastern regions. President Nazarbayev said of the war in Ukraine, \"The fratricidal war has brought true devastation to eastern Ukraine, and it is a common task to stop the war there, strengthen Ukraine's independence and secure territorial integrity of Ukraine.\" Experts believe that no matter how the Ukraine crisis develops, Kazakhstan's relations with the European Union will remain normal. It is believed that Nazarbayev's mediation is positively received by both Russia and Ukraine.\nKazakhstan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs released a statement on 26 January 2015: \"We are firmly convinced that there is no alternative to peace negotiations as a way to resolve the crisis in south-eastern Ukraine.\" In 2018, Kazakhstan signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nOn 6 March 2020, the Concept of the Foreign Policy of Kazakhstan for 2020\u20132030 was announced. The document outlines the following main points:\nKazakhstan's memberships of international organisations include:\nBased on these principles, following Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, Kazakhstan has increasingly pursued an independent foreign policy, defined by its own foreign policy objectives and ambitions through which the country attempts to balance its relations with \"all the major powers and an equally principled aversion towards excessive dependence in any field upon any one of them, while also opening the country up economically to all who are willing to invest there.\"\nKazakhstan is the 59th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nIn November 2025, after establishing diplomatic relations with Israel, the Kazakh Foreign Ministry issued a statement indicating that the nation had become a participant in the Abraham Accords to safeguard its interests, consistent with the balanced, constructive, and peaceful foreign policy of the Republic of Kazakhstan.\nMilitary.\nMost of Kazakhstan's military was inherited from the Soviet Armed Forces' Turkestan Military District. These units became the core of Kazakhstan's new military. It acquired all the units of the 40th Army (the former 32nd Army) and part of the 17th Army Corps, including six land-force divisions, storage bases, the 14th and 35th air-landing brigades, two rocket brigades, two artillery regiments, and a large amount of equipment that had been withdrawn from over the Urals after the signing of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe. Since the late 20th century, the Kazakhstan Army has focused on expanding the number of its armoured units. Since 1990, armoured units have expanded from 500 to 1,613 in 2005.\nThe Kazakh air force is composed mostly of Soviet-era planes, including 41 MiG-29s, 44 MiG-31s, 37 Su-24s and 60 Su-27s. A small naval force is maintained on the Caspian Sea.\nKazakhstan sent 29 military engineers to Iraq to assist the US post-invasion mission in Iraq. During the second Iraq War, Kazakhstani troops dismantled 4 million mines and other explosives, helped provide medical care to more than 5,000 coalition members and civilians, and purified of water.\nKazakhstan's National Security Committee (UQK) was established on 13 June 1992. It includes the Service of Internal Security, Military Counterintelligence, Border Guard, several Commando units, and Foreign Intelligence (Barlau). The latter is considered the most important part of KNB. Its director is Nurtai Abykayev.\nSince 2002, the joint tactical peacekeeping exercise \"Steppe Eagle\" has been hosted by the Kazakhstan government. \"Steppe Eagle\" focuses on building coalitions and gives participating nations the opportunity to work together. During the Steppe Eagle exercises, the KAZBAT peacekeeping battalion operates within a multinational force under a unified command within peacekeeping operations, with NATO and the U.S. Military.\nIn December 2013, Kazakhstan announced it will send officers to support United Nations Peacekeeping forces in Haiti, Western Sahara, Ivory Coast and Liberia.\nHuman rights.\nKazakhstan was ranked 142nd out of 180 countries in Reporters Without Borders' Press Freedom Index for 2024; previously it ranked 134th for 2023.\nKazakhstan's human rights situation has been described as poor by independent observers. In its 2015 report of human rights in the country, Human Rights Watch said that \"Kazakhstan heavily restricts freedom of assembly, speech, and religion.\" It has also described the government as authoritarian. In 2014, authorities closed newspapers, jailed or fined dozens of people after peaceful but unsanctioned protests, and fined or detained worshipers for practising religion outside state controls. Government critics, including opposition leader Vladimir Kozlov, remained in detention after unfair trials. In mid-2014, Kazakhstan adopted new criminal, criminal executive, criminal procedural, and administrative codes, and a new law on trade unions, which contain articles restricting fundamental freedoms and are incompatible with international standards. Torture remains common in places of detention.\" However, Kazakhstan has achieved significant progress in reducing the prison population. The 2016 Human Rights Watch report commented that Kazakhstan \"took few meaningful steps to tackle a worsening human rights record in 2015, maintaining a focus on economic development over political reform.\" Some critics of the government have been arrested for allegedly spreading false information about the COVID-19 pandemic in Kazakhstan. Various police reforms, like creation of local police service and zero-tolerance policing, aimed at bringing police closer to local communities, have not improved cooperation between policemen and ordinary citizens.\nAccording to a U.S. government report released in 2014, in Kazakhstan:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The law does not require police to inform detainees that they have the right to an attorney, and police did not do so. Human rights observers alleged that law enforcement officials dissuaded detainees from seeing an attorney, gathered evidence through preliminary questioning before a detainee's attorney arrived, and in some cases used corrupt defense attorneys to gather evidence.\n[...]The law does not provide for an independent judiciary. The executive branch sharply limited judicial independence. Prosecutors enjoyed a quasi-judicial role and had the authority to suspend court decisions.\nCorruption was evident at every stage of the judicial process. Although judges were among the most highly paid government employees, lawyers and human rights monitors alleged that judges, prosecutors, and other officials solicited bribes in exchange for favorable rulings in the majority of criminal cases.\nKazakhstan's global rank in the World Justice Project's 2015 Rule of Law Index was 65 out of 102; the country scored well on \"Order and Security\" (global rank 32/102), and poorly on \"Constraints on Government Powers\" (global rank 93/102), \"Open Government\" (85/102) and \"Fundamental Rights\" (84/102, with a downward trend marking a deterioration in conditions).\nThe ABA Rule of Law Initiative of the American Bar Association has programs to train justice sector professionals in Kazakhstan.\nKazakhstan's Supreme Court has taken steps to modernise and to increase transparency and oversight over the country's legal system. With funding from the US Agency for International Development, the ABA Rule of Law Initiative began a new program in April 2012 to strengthen the independence and accountability of Kazakhstan's judiciary.\nIn an effort to increase transparency in the criminal justice and court system, and improve human rights, Kazakhstan intended to digitise all investigative, prosecutorial and court records by 2018. Many criminal cases are closed before trial on the basis of reconciliation between the defendant and the victim because they simplify the work of the law-enforcement officers, release the defendant from punishment, and pay little regard to the victim's rights.\nHomosexuality has been legal in Kazakhstan since 1997, although it is still socially unacceptable in most areas. Discrimination against LGBT people in Kazakhstan is widespread.\nEconomy.\nIn 2018, Kazakhstan had a GDP of $179.332\u00a0billion and an annual growth rate of 4.5%. Per capita, Kazakhstan's GDP stood at $9,686. Buoyed by high world crude oil prices, GDP growth figures were between 8.9% and 13.5% from 2000 to 2007 before decreasing to 1% to 3% during the 2008 financial crisis, and then rising again from 2010. Other major exports of Kazakhstan include wheat, textiles, and livestock. Kazakhstan is a leading exporter of uranium.\nKazakhstan's economy grew by 4.6% in 2014. The country experienced a slowdown in economic growth from 2014 sparked by a falling price of oil and the effects of the Russo-Ukrainian War. The country devalued its currency by 19% in February 2014. Another 22% devaluation occurred in August 2015. Kazakhstan was the first former Soviet Republic to repay all of its debt to the International Monetary Fund, 7 years ahead of schedule.\nKazakhstan weathered the 2008 financial crisis by combining fiscal relaxation with monetary stabilisation. In 2009, the government introduced large-scale support measures such as the recapitalisation of banks and support for the real estate and agricultural sectors, as well as for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The total value of the stimulus programs amounted to $21\u00a0billion, or 20% of the country's GDP, with $4\u00a0billion going to stabilise the financial sector. During the Great Recession, Kazakhstan's economy contracted by 1.2% in 2009, but increased to 7.5% and 5% in 2011 and 2012, respectively. Kazakhstan's government continued to follow a conservative fiscal policy by controlling budget spending and accumulating oil revenue savings in its Oil Fund \u2013 Samruk-Kazyna. The 2008 financial crisis forced Kazakhstan to increase its public borrowing to support the economy. Public debt increased to 13.4% in 2013 from 8.7% in 2008. Between 2012 and 2013, the government achieved an overall fiscal surplus of 4.5%.\nIn March 2002, the U.S. Department of Commerce granted Kazakhstan market economy status under US trade law. This change in status recognised substantive market economy reforms in the areas of currency convertibility, wage rate determination, openness to foreign investment, and government control over the means of production and allocation of resources. In September 2002, Kazakhstan became the first country in the CIS to receive an investment grade credit rating from a major international credit rating agency. By late December 2003, Kazakhstan's gross foreign debt was about $22.9\u00a0billion. Total governmental debt was $4.2\u00a0billion, 14% of GDP. There has been a reduction in the ratio of debt to GDP. The ratio of total governmental debt to GDP was 21.7% in 2000, 17.5% in 2001, and 15.4% in 2002. In 2019, it rose to 19.2%.\nOn 29 November 2003, the Law on Changes to Tax Code which reduced tax rates was adopted. The value added tax fell from 16% to 15%, the social tax, payable by all employers, from 21% to 20%, and the personal income tax from 30% to 20%. On 7 July 2006, the personal income tax was reduced even further to a flat rate of 5% for personal income in the form of dividends and 10% for other personal income. Kazakhstan furthered its reforms by adopting a new land code on 20 June 2003, and a new customs code on 5 April 2003.\nKazakhstan instituted a pension reform program in 1998. By January 2012, the pension assets were about $17\u00a0billion (KZT 2.5\u00a0trillion). There are 11 saving pension funds in the country. The State Accumulating Pension Fund, the only state-owned fund, was privatised in 2006. The country's unified financial regulatory agency oversees and regulates pension funds. The growing demand of pension funds for investment outlets triggered the development of the debt securities market. Pension fund capital is being invested almost exclusively in corporate and government bonds, including the government of Kazakhstan Eurobonds. The government of Kazakhstan was studying a project to create a unified national pension fund and transfer all the accounts from the private pension funds into it.\nKazakhstan climbed to 41st on the 2018 Economic Freedom Index published by \"The Wall Street Journal\" and The Heritage Foundation.\nForeign trade.\nKazakhstan's increased role in global trade and central positioning on the new Silk Road gave the country the potential to open its markets to billions of people. Kazakhstan joined the World Trade Organization in 2015.\nKazakhstan's foreign trade turnover in 2018 was $93.5 billion, which is 19.7% more than in 2017. Export in 2018 reached $67 billion (up 25.7% in comparison to 2017) and import was $32.5 billion (up 9.9% in comparison to 2017). Exports accounted for 40.1% of Kazakhstan's gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018. Kazakhstan exports 800 products to 120 countries.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture accounts for approximately 5% of Kazakhstan's GDP. Grain, potatoes, grapes, vegetables, melons and livestock are the most important agricultural commodities. Agricultural land occupies more than . The available agricultural land consists of of arable land and of pasture and hay land. Over 80% of the country's total area is classified as agricultural land, including almost 70% occupied by pasture. Its arable land has the second highest availability per inhabitant (1.5 hectares).\nChief livestock products are dairy products, leather, meat, and wool. The country's major crops include wheat, barley, cotton, and rice. Wheat exports, a major source of hard currency, rank among the leading commodities in Kazakhstan's export trade. In 2003 Kazakhstan harvested 17.6\u00a0million tons of grain in gross, 2.8% higher compared to 2002. Kazakhstani agriculture still has many environmental problems from mismanagement during its years in the Soviet Union. Some Kazakh wine is produced in the mountains to the east of Almaty.\nEnergy.\nEnergy has been the leading economic sector. Production of crude oil and natural gas condensate from the oil and gas basins of Kazakhstan amounted to in 2012 up from in 2003. Kazakhstan raised oil and gas condensate exports to 44.3\u00a0million tons in 2003, 13% higher than in 2002. Gas production in Kazakhstan in 2003, amounted to , up 22.7% compared to 2002, including natural gas production of . Kazakhstan holds about of proven recoverable oil reserves and of gas. Kazakhstan is the 19th largest oil-producing nation in the world. Kazakhstan's oil exports in 2003, were valued at more than $7\u00a0billion, representing 65% of overall exports and 24% of the GDP. \nMajor oil and gas fields and recoverable oil reserves are Tengiz with ; Karachaganak with and of natural gas; and Kashagan with 7 to .\nKazMunayGas (KMG), the national oil and gas company, was created in 2002 to represent the interests of the state in the oil and gas industry. The Tengiz Field was jointly developed in 1993 as a 40-year Tengizchevroil venture between Chevron Texaco (50%), US ExxonMobil (25%), KazMunayGas (20%), and LukArco (5%). The Karachaganak natural gas and gas condensate field is being developed by BG, Agip, ChevronTexaco, and Lukoil. Also Chinese oil companies are involved in Kazakhstan's oil industry.\nKazakhstan launched the Green Economy Plan in 2013. It committed Kazakhstan to meet 50% of its energy needs from alternative and renewable sources by 2050. The green economy was projected to increase GDP by 3% and create some 500,000 jobs. The government set prices for energy produced from renewable sources. The price of 1 kilowatt-hour for energy produced by wind power plants was set at 22.68 tenge ($0.12), for 1 kilowatt-hour produced by small hydro-power plants 16.71 tenges ($0.09), and from biogas plants 32.23 tenges ($0.18).\nInfrastructure.\nRailways provide 68% of all cargo and passenger traffic to over 57% of the country. There are in common carrier service, excluding industrial lines. of gauge, electrified, in 2012. Most cities are connected by railroad; high-speed trains go from Almaty (the southernmost city) to Petropavl (the northernmost city) in about 18 hours.\nKazakhstan Temir Zholy (KTZ) is the national railway company. KTZ cooperates with French locomotive manufacturer Alstom in developing Kazakhstan's railway infrastructure. As of 2018, Alstom has more than 600 staff and two joint ventures with KTZ and its subsidiary in Kazakhstan. In July 2017, Alstom opened its first locomotive repairing centre in Kazakhstan. It is the only repairing centre in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Astana Nurly Zhol railway station, the most modern railway station in Kazakhstan, was opened in Astana on 31 May 2017. According to Kazakhstan Railways (KTZ), the 120,000m2 station was expected to be used by 54 trains and would have the capacity to handle 35,000 passengers a day.\nThere is a small metro system in Almaty. Second and third metro lines were planned for the future. The second line would intersect with the first line at Alatau and Zhibek Zholy stations. The Astana Metro system has been under construction, but was abandoned at one point in 2013. In May 2015, an agreement was signed for the project to be resumed. There is an tram network, which began service in 1965 with, as of 2012, 20 regular and three special routes.\nThe Khorgos Gateway dry port is one of Kazakhstan's primary dry ports for handling trans-Eurasian trains, which travel more than between China and Europe. The Khorgos Gateway dry port is surrounded by Khorgos Eastern Gate SEZ which officially commenced operations in December 2016.\nIn 2009, the European Commission blacklisted all Kazakh air carriers with a sole exception of Air Astana. Thereafter, Kazakhstan took measures to modernise and revamp its air safety oversight. In 2016 the European air safety authorities removed all Kazakh airlines from the blacklist, saying there was \"sufficient evidence of compliance\" with international standards by Kazakh Airlines and the Civil Aviation Committee.\nTourism.\nKazakhstan is the ninth-largest country by area and the largest landlocked country in the world. As of 2014, tourism accounted for 0.3% of Kazakhstan's GDP, but the government had plans to increase it to 3% by 2020. According to the World Economic Forum's Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report of 2017, travel and tourism industry GDP in Kazakhstan was $3.08\u00a0billion or only 1.6% of total GDP. The WEF ranked Kazakhstan 80th in its 2019 report.\nIn 2017, Kazakhstan ranked 43rd in the number of tourist arrivals. In 2014, \"The Guardian\" described tourism in Kazakhstan as \"hugely underdeveloped,\" despite the country's mountain, lake, and desert landscapes. Factors hampering an increase in tourism were said to include high prices, \"shabby infrastructure,\" \"poor service,\" and the difficulties of travel in a large underdeveloped country. Even for Kazakhs, going for a holiday abroad may cost only half the price of taking a holiday in Kazakhstan.\nThe Kazakh government, long characterised as authoritarian with a history of human rights abuses and suppression of political opposition, in 2015 issued a \"Tourism Industry Development Plan 2020.\" It aimed to establish five tourism clusters in Kazakhstan: Astana city, Almaty city, East Kazakhstan, South Kazakhstan, and West Kazakhstan Oblasts. It also sought investment of $4\u00a0billion and the creation of 300,000 new jobs in the tourism industry by 2020.\nKazakhstan has offered a permanent visa-free regime for up to 90 days to citizens of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Russia and Ukraine, and for up to 30 days to citizens of Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Serbia, South Korea, Tajikistan, Turkey, UAE and Uzbekistan. It also established a visa-free regime for citizens of 54 countries, including the European Union and OECD member states, the U.S., Japan, Mexico, Australia and New Zealand.\nForeign direct investment.\nKazakhstan has attracted $330\u00a0billion in foreign direct investment (FDI) from more than 120 countries since its independence (1991). In 2015, the U.S. State Department said Kazakhstan was widely considered to have the best investment climate in the region. In 2014, President Nazarbayev signed into law tax concessions to promote foreign direct investment which included a 10-year exemption from corporation tax, an eight-year exemption from property tax, and a 10-year freeze on most other taxes. Other incentives include a refund on capital investments of up to 30% once a production facility is in operation.\nIn 2012, Kazakhstan attracted $14\u00a0billion of foreign direct investment inflows into the country at a 7% growth rate. In 2018, $24\u00a0billion of FDI was directed into Kazakhstan, a significant increase since 2012.\nIn 2014, the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and Kazakhstan created the partnership for Re-Energizing the Reform Process in Kazakhstan to work with international financial institutions to channel US$2.7\u00a0billion provided by the Kazakh government into important sectors of Kazakhstan's economy.\nAs of May 2014, Kazakhstan had attracted $190\u00a0billion in gross foreign investments since its independence in 1991 and it led the CIS countries in terms of FDI attracted per capita. The OECD 2017 Investment Policy Review noted that \"great strides\" had been made to open up opportunities to foreign investors and improve policy to attract FDI.\nChina is one of the main economic and trade partners of Kazakhstan. In 2013, China launched the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) in which Kazakhstan functions as a transit hub.\nBanking.\nThe banking sector in Kazakhstan experienced a boom-and-bust cycle in the early 21st century. Following a period of rapid growth during the mid-2000s, the industry collapsed in 2008 due to the 2008 financial crisis. Several major banks, including BTA Bank J.S.C. and Alliance Bank, defaulted shortly thereafter. In the aftermath, the sector underwent significant contraction and restructuring, with total system-wide loans declining from 59% of GDP in 2007 to 39% by 2011. To stabilise the sector, the National Bank of Kazakhstan introduced a deposit insurance scheme as part of broader reforms. During this period, several international banks operated in Kazakhstan, including RBS, Citibank, and HSBC. Additionally, foreign institutions such as South Korea's Kookmin Bank and Italy's UniCredit entered the Kazakh market through acquisitions and equity investments. \nEconomic competitiveness.\nAccording to the 2010\u201311 World Economic Forum in Global Competitiveness Report, Kazakhstan was ranked 72nd in the world in economic competitiveness. One year later, the Global Competitiveness Report ranked Kazakhstan 50th in most competitive markets.\nIn the 2020 Doing Business Report by the World Bank, Kazakhstan ranked 25th globally and as the number one best country globally for protecting minority investors' rights. Kazakhstan achieved its goal of entering the top 50 most competitive countries in 2013 and has maintained its position in the 2014\u20132015 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report that was published at the beginning of September 2014. Kazakhstan is ahead of other states in the CIS in almost all of the report's pillars of competitiveness, including institutions, infrastructure, macroeconomic environment, higher education and training, goods market efficiency, labour market development, financial market development, technological readiness, market size, business sophistication and innovation, lagging behind only in the category of health and primary education. The Global Competitiveness Index gives a score from 1 to 7 in each of these pillars, and Kazakhstan earned an overall score of 4.4.\nCorruption.\nIn 2005, the World Bank listed Kazakhstan as a corruption hotspot, on a par with Angola, Bolivia, Kenya, Libya and Pakistan. In 2012, Kazakhstan ranked low in an index of the least corrupt countries and the World Economic Forum listed corruption as the biggest problem in doing business in the country. A 2017 OECD report on Kazakhstan indicated that Kazakhstan has reformed laws with regard to the civil service, judiciary, instruments to prevent corruption, access to information, and prosecuting corruption. Kazakhstan has implemented anticorruption reforms that have been recognised by organisations like Transparency International.\nIn 2011, Switzerland confiscated US$48\u00a0million in Kazakhstani assets from Swiss bank accounts, as a result of a bribery investigation in the United States. \nUS officials believed the funds represented bribes paid by American officials to Kazakhstani officials in exchange for oil or prospecting rights in Kazakhstan. Proceedings eventually involved US$84\u00a0million in the US and another US$60\u00a0million in Switzerland.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Kazakh Anti-Corruption Agency signed a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in February 2015.\nTransparency International's 2024 Corruption Perceptions Index, which scored 180 countries on a scale from 0 (\"highly corrupt\") to 100 (\"very clean\"), gave Kazakhstan a score of 40. When ranked by score, Kazakhstan ranked 80th among the 180 countries in the Index, where the country ranked first is perceived to have the most honest public sector. For comparison with regional scores, the highest score among Eastern European and Central Asian countries was 53, the average score was 35 and the lowest score was 17. For comparison with worldwide scores, the best score was 90 (ranked 1), the average score was 43, and the worst score was 8 (ranked 180).\nScience and technology.\nResearch remains largely concentrated in Kazakhstan's largest city and former capital, Almaty, home to 52% of research personnel. Public research is largely confined to institutes, with universities making only a token contribution. Research institutes receive their funding from national research councils under the umbrella of the Ministry of Education and Science. Their output, however, tends to be disconnected from market needs. In the business sector, few industrial enterprises conduct research themselves.\nOne of the most ambitious targets of the State Programme for Accelerated Industrial and Innovative Development adopted in 2010 is to raise the country's level of expenditure on research and development to 1% of GDP by 2015. By 2013, this ratio stood at 0.18% of GDP. It will be difficult to reach the target as long as economic growth remains strong. Since 2005, the economy has grown faster (by 6% in 2013) than gross domestic expenditure on research and development, which only progressed from PPP$598\u00a0million to PPP$714\u00a0million between 2005 and 2013.\nInnovation expenditure more than doubled in Kazakhstan between 2010 and 2011, representing KZT 235\u00a0billion (c. US$1.6\u00a0billion), or around 1.1% of GDP. Some 11% of the total was spent on research and development. This compares with about 40 to 70% of innovation expenditure in developed countries. This augmentation was due to a sharp rise in product design and the introduction of new services and production methods over this period, to the detriment of the acquisition of machinery and equipment, which has traditionally made up the bulk of Kazakhstan's innovation expenditure. Training costs represented just 2% of innovation expenditure, a much lower share than in developed countries. Kazakhstan was ranked 81st in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nIn December 2012, President\u00a0Nursultan Nazarbayev\u00a0announced the\u00a0\"Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy\"\u00a0with the slogan \"Strong Business, Strong State.\" This pragmatic strategy proposes sweeping socio-economic and political reforms to hoist Kazakhstan among the top 30 economies by 2050. In this document, Kazakhstan gives itself 15 years to evolve into a knowledge economy. New sectors are to be created during each five-year plan. The first of these, covering the years 2010\u20132014, focused on developing industrial capacity in car manufacturing, aircraft engineering and the production of locomotives, passenger and cargo railroad cars. During the second five-year plan to 2019, the goal is to develop export markets for these products. To enable Kazakhstan to enter the world market of geological exploration, the country intends to increase the efficiency of traditional extractive sectors such as oil and gas. It also intends to develop rare earth metals, given their importance for electronics, laser technology, communication and medical equipment. The second five-year plan coincides with the development of the \"Business 2020\" roadmap for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which makes provision for the allocation of grants to SMEs in the regions and for microcredit. The government and the National Chamber of Entrepreneurs also plan to develop an effective mechanism to help start-ups.\nDuring subsequent five-year plans to 2050, new industries will be established in fields such as mobile, multi-media, nano- and space technologies, robotics, genetic engineering and alternative energy. Food processing enterprises will be developed with an eye to turning the country into a major regional exporter of beef, dairy, and other agricultural products. Low-return, water-intensive crop varieties will be replaced with vegetable, oil and fodder products. As part of the shift to a \"green economy\" by 2030, 15% of acreage will be cultivated with water-saving technologies. Experimental agrarian and innovational clusters will be established and drought-resistant genetically modified crops developed.\nThe Kazakhstan 2050 Strategy fixes a target of devoting 3% of GDP to research and development by 2050 to allow for the development of new high-tech sectors.\nThe Digital Kazakhstan program was launched in 2018 to boost the country's economic growth through the implementation of digital technologies. Kazakhstan's digitization efforts generated 800 billion tenges (US$1.97 billion) in two years. The program helped create 120,000 jobs and attracted 32.8 billion tenges (US$80.7 million) of investment into the country.\nAround 82% of all public services became automated as part of the Digital Kazakhstan program.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Kazakhstan ranks 25th out of 127 countries with sufficient data. Kazakhstan's GHI score is 5.3, which indicates a low level of hunger. \nThe US Census Bureau International Database lists the population of Kazakhstan as 18.9\u00a0million (May 2019), while United Nations sources such as the 2022 revision of the World Population Prospects give an estimate of 19,196,465. Official estimates put the population of Kazakhstan at 20\u00a0million as of November 2023. In 2013, Kazakhstan's population rose to 17,280,000 with a 1.7% growth rate over the past year according to the Kazakhstan Statistics Agency.\nThe 2009 population estimate is 6.8% higher than the population reported in the last census from January 1999. The decline in population that began after 1989 has been arrested and possibly reversed. Men and women make up 48.3% and 51.7% of the population, respectively.\nEthnic groups.\nAs of 2025, ethnic Kazakhs are 71.3% of the population and ethnic Russians are 14.6%. The ethnic Russian population has significantly declined since the breakup of the Soviet Union. Other groups include Tatars (1.1%), Ukrainians (1.8%), Uzbeks (3.3%), Germans (1.1%), Uyghurs (1.5%), Azerbaijanis, Dungans, Turks, Koreans, Poles, and Lithuanians. Some minorities such as Ukrainians, Koreans, Volga Germans, Chechens, Meskhetian Turks, and Russian political opponents of the regime, had been deported to Kazakhstan in the 1930s and 1940s by Josef Stalin. Some of the largest Soviet labour camps (Gulag) existed in the country.\nSignificant Russian immigration was also connected with the Virgin Lands Campaign and Soviet space program during the Khrushchev era. In 1989, ethnic Russians were 37.8% of the population and Kazakhs held a majority in only 7 of the 20 regions of the country. Before 1991 there were about one million Germans in Kazakhstan, mostly descendants of the Volga Germans deported to Kazakhstan during World War II. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, most of them emigrated to Germany. Most members of the smaller Pontian Greek minority have emigrated to Greece. In the late 1930s thousands of Koreans in the Soviet Union were deported to Central Asia. These people are now known as Koryo-saram.\nThe 1990s were marked by the emigration of many of the country's Russians, Ukrainians and Volga Germans, a process that began in the 1970s. This has made indigenous Kazakhs the largest ethnic group. Additional factors in the increase in the Kazakhstani population are higher birthrates and immigration of ethnic Kazakhs from China, Mongolia, and Russia.\nLanguages.\nKazakhstan is officially a bilingual country. Kazakh (part of the Kipchak sub-branch of the Turkic languages) was proficiently spoken by 80.1% of the population according to 2021 census, and has the status of \"state language\". Russian, on the other hand, was spoken by 83.7% as of 2021. It has equal status to Kazakh as an \"official language\", and is used routinely in business, government, and inter-ethnic communication. However, only 63.4% of ethnic Kazakhs and 49.3% of the country's population are daily speakers of the Kazakh language, according to the same census.\nThe government announced in January 2015 that the Latin alphabet would replace Cyrillic as the writing system for the Kazakh language by 2025. Other minority languages spoken in Kazakhstan include Uzbek, Ukrainian, Uyghur, Kyrgyz, Tatar, and German. English, as well as Turkish, have gained popularity among younger people since the collapse of the Soviet Union. Education across Kazakhstan is conducted in either Kazakh, Russian, or both. In Nazarbayev's resignation speech of 2019, he projected that the people of Kazakhstan in the future will speak three languages (Kazakh, Russian and English).\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, 69.3% of the population is Muslim, 17.2% are Christian, 0.2% follow other religions (mostly Buddhist and Jewish), 11.01% chose not to answer, and 2.25% identify as atheist.\nKazakhstan is a secular state whose constitution guarantees religious freedoms. Article 39 of the constitution states: \"Human rights and freedoms shall not be restricted in any way.\" Article 14 prohibits \"discrimination on religious basis\" and Article 19 ensures that everyone has the \"right to determine and indicate or not to indicate his/her ethnic, party and religious affiliation.\" The Constitutional Council affirmed these rights in a 2009 declaration, which stated that a proposed law limiting the rights of certain individuals to practice their religion was declared unconstitutional.\nIslam is the largest religion in Kazakhstan, followed by Eastern Orthodox Christianity. After decades of religious suppression by the Soviet Union, the coming of independence witnessed a surge in the expression of ethnic identity, partly through religion. The free practice of religious beliefs and the establishment of full freedom of religion led to an increase of religious activity. Hundreds of mosques, churches, and other religious structures were built in the span of a few years, with the number of religious associations rising from 670 in 1990 to 4,170 today.\nSome figures show that non-denominational Muslims form the majority, while others indicate that most Muslims in the country are Sunnis following the Hanafi school. These include ethnic Kazakhs, who constitute about 7% of the population, as well as ethnic Uzbeks, Uighurs, and Tatars. Less than 1% are part of the Sunni Shafi`i school (primarily Chechens). There are also some Ahmadi Muslims. There are a total of 2,300 mosques, all of them are affiliated with the \"Spiritual Association of Muslims of Kazakhstan\", headed by a supreme mufti. Unaffiliated mosques are forcefully closed. Eid al-Adha is recognised as a national holiday. One quarter of the population is Russian Orthodox, including ethnic Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians. Other Christian groups include Roman Catholics, Greek Catholics, and Protestants. There are a total of 258 Orthodox churches, 93 Catholic churches (9 Greek Catholic), and over 500 Protestant churches and prayer houses. The Russian Orthodox Christmas is recognised as a national holiday in Kazakhstan. Other religious groups include Judaism, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Hinduism, Buddhism, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nAccording to the 2009 Census data, there are few Christians outside the Slavic and Germanic ethnic groups.\nEducation.\nEducation is universal and mandatory through to the secondary level and the adult literacy rate is 99.5%. On average, these statistics are equal for both women and men in Kazakhstan.\nEducation consists of three main phases: primary education (forms 1\u20134), basic general education (forms 5\u20139) and senior level education (forms 10\u201311 or 12) divided into continued general education and vocational education. Vocational Education usually lasts three or four years. (Primary education is preceded by one year of pre-school education.) These levels can be followed in one institution or in different ones (e.g., primary school, then secondary school). Recently, several secondary schools, specialised schools, magnet schools, gymnasiums, lyceums and linguistic and technical gymnasiums have been founded. Secondary professional education is offered in special professional or technical schools, lyceums or colleges and vocational schools.\nAt present, there are universities, academies and institutes, conservatories, higher schools and higher colleges. There are three main levels: basic higher education that provides the fundamentals of the chosen field of study and leads to the award of the bachelor's degree; specialised higher education after which students are awarded the Specialist's Diploma; and scientific-pedagogical higher education which leads to the master's degree. Postgraduate education leads to the \"Kandidat Nauk\" (\"Candidate of Sciences\") and the Doctor of Sciences (PhD). With the adoption of the Laws on Education and on Higher Education, a private sector has been established and several private institutions have been licensed.\nOver 2,500 students in Kazakhstan have applied for student loans totalling about $9\u00a0million. The largest number of student loans come from Almaty, Astana and Kyzylorda.\nThe training and skills development programs in Kazakhstan are also supported by international organisations. For example, on 30 March 2015, the World Banks' Group of Executive Directors approved a $100\u00a0million loan for the Skills and Job project in Kazakhstan. The project aims to provide training to unemployed, unproductively self-employed, and employees in need of training.\nCulture.\nBefore the Russian colonisation, the Kazakhs had a highly developed culture based on their nomadic pastoral economy. Islam was introduced into the region with the arrival of the Arabs in the 8th century. It initially took hold in the southern parts of Turkestan and spread northward. The Samanids helped the religion take root through zealous missionary work. The Golden Horde further propagated Islam amongst the tribes in the region during the 14th century.\nKazakhstan is home to a large number of prominent contributors to literature, science and philosophy: Abay Qunanbayuli, Mukhtar Auezov, Gabit Musirepov, Kanysh Satpayev, Mukhtar Shakhanov, Saken Seyfullin, Jambyl Jabayev, among many others.\nTourism is a rapidly growing industry in Kazakhstan and it is joining the international tourism networking. In 2010, Kazakhstan joined The Region Initiative (TRI) which is a Tri-regional Umbrella of Tourism-related organisations. TRI is functioning as a link between three regions: South Asia, Central Asia, and Eastern Europe. Armenia, Bangladesh, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Russia, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Ukraine are now partners, and Kazakhstan is linked with other South Asian, Eastern European, and Central Asian countries in the tourism market.\nLiterature.\nKazakh literature is defined as \"the body of literature, both oral and written, produced in the Kazakh language by the Kazakh people of Central Asia\". Kazakh literature expands from the current territory of Kazakhstan, also including the era of Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic, Kazakh recognised territory under the Russian Empire and the Kazakh Khanate. There is some overlap with several complementary themes, including the literature of Turkic tribes that inhabited Kazakhstan over the course of its history and literature written by ethnic Kazakhs.\nAccording to Chinese written sources from the 6th\u20138th centuries CE, the Turkic tribes of Kazakhstan had an oral poetry tradition. These came from earlier periods and were primarily transmitted by bards: professional storytellers and musical performers. Traces of this tradition are shown on Orkhon script stone carvings dated 5th\u20137th centuries CE that describe rule of Kultegin and Bilge, two early Turkic rulers (\"kagans\"). Amongst the Kazakhs, the bard was a primarily, though not exclusively, male profession. Since at least the 17th century, Kazakh bards could be divided into two main categories: the j\u0131raws (jiraus, jyraus), who passed on the works of others, usually not creating and adding their own original work; and the aqyns (akyns), who improvised or created their own poems, stories or songs. There were several types of works, such as didactic \"termes\", elegiac \"tolgaws\", and epic \"j\u0131rs\". Although the origins of such tales are often unknown, most of them were associated with bards of the recent or more distant past, who supposedly created them or passed them on, by the time most Kazakh poetry and prose was first written down in the second half of the 19th century. There are clear stylistic differences between works first created in the 19th century, and works dating from earlier periods but not documented before the 19th century, such as those attributed to such 16th- and 17th-century bards as Er Shoban and Dosmombet J\u0131raw (also known as Dospambet Jyrau; he appeared to have been literate, and reportedly visited Constantinople), and even to such 15th-century bards as Shalkiz and Asan Qaygh\u0131.\nOther notable bards include Kaztugan Jyrau, Jiembet Jyrau, Axtamberdy Jyrau, and Buxar Jyrau Kalkamanuly, who was an advisor to Ablai Khan, and whose works have been preserved by M\u00e4\u0161h\u00fcr J\u00fcsip K\u00f6peev. \"Er Targh\u0131n\" and \"Alpam\u0131s\" are two of the most famous examples of Kazakh literature to be recorded in the 19th century. The \"Book of Dede Korkut\" and Oguz Name (a story of an ancient Turkic king Oghuz Khan) are the most well-known Turkic heroic legends. Initially created around the 9th century CE, they were passed on through generations in oral form. The legendary tales were recorded by Turkish authors in 14\u201316th centuries C.E.\nThe preeminent role in the development of modern literary Kazakh belongs to Abai Qunanbaiuly (, sometimes Russified to Abay Kunanbayev, \u0410\u0431\u0430\u0439 \u041a\u0443\u043d\u0430\u043d\u0431\u0430\u0435\u0432) (1845\u20131904), whose writings did much to preserve Kazakh folk culture. Abai's major work is \"The Book of Words\" (), a philosophical treatise and collection of poems where he criticises Russian colonial policies and encourages other Kazakhs to embrace education and literacy. The literary magazines \"Ay Qap\" (published between 1911 and 1915 in Arabic script) and \"Qazaq\" (published between 1913 and 1918) played an important role in the development of the intellectual and political life among early 20th-century Kazakhs.\nMusic.\nThe modern state of Kazakhstan is home to the Kazakh State Kurmangazy Orchestra of Folk Instruments, the Kazakh State Philharmonic Orchestra, the Kazakh National Opera and the Kazakh State Chamber Orchestra. The folk instrument orchestra was named after Kurmangazy Sagyrbayuly, a famous composer and dombra player from the 19th century. The Musical-Dramatic Training College, founded in 1931, was the first institute of higher education for music. Two years later, the Orchestra of Kazakh Folk Musical Instruments was formed.\nThe Foundation Asyl Mura is archiving and publishing historical recordings of great samples of Kazakh music both traditional and classical. The leading conservatoire is in Almaty, the Qurmanghazy Conservatoire. It competes with the national conservatoire in Astana, Kazakhstan's capital.\nWhen referring to traditional Kazakh music, authentic folklore must be separated from \"folklorism\". The latter denotes music executed by academically trained performers who aim at preserving the traditional music for coming generations. As far as can be reconstructed, the music of Kazakhstan from the period before a strong Russian influence consists of instrumental music and vocal music. Instrumental music, with the pieces (\"K\u00fcy\") being performed by soloists. Text is often seen in the background (or \"program\") for the music, as many K\u00fcy titles refer to stories. Vocal music, either as part of a ceremony such as a wedding (mainly performed by women), or as part of a feast. Here we might divide into subgenres: epic singing, containing not only historical facts, but as well the tribe's genealogy, love songs, and didactic verses; and as a special form the composition of two or more singers in public (Aitys), of dialogue character and usually unexpectedly frankly in content.\nThe Russian influence on the music life in Kazakhstan can be seen in two spheres: first, the introduction of musical academic institutions such as concert houses with opera stages, and conservatories, where European music was performed and taught, and second, by trying to incorporate Kazakh traditional music into these academic structures. Controlled first by the Russian Empire and then the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan's folk and classical traditions became connected with ethnic Russian music and Western European music. Prior to the 20th century, Kazakh folk music was collected and studied by ethnographic research teams including composers, music critics and musicologists. In the first part of the 19th century, Kazakh music was transcribed in linear notation. Some composers of this era set Kazakh folk songs to Russian-style European classical music.\nThe Kazakhs themselves, however, did not write their own music in notation until 1931. Later, as part of the Soviet Union, Kazakh folk culture was encouraged in a sanitised manner designed to avoid political and social unrest. The result was a bland derivative of real Kazakh folk music. In 1920, Aleksandr Zatayevich, a Russian official, created major works of art music with melodies and other elements of Kazakh folk music. Beginning in 1928 and accelerating in the 1930s, he also adapted traditional Kazakh instruments for use in Russian-style ensembles, such as by increasing the number of frets and strings. Soon, these styles of modern orchestral playing became the only way for musicians to officially play; Kazakh folk was turned into patriotic, professional and socialist endeavours.\nFine arts.\nIn Kazakhstan, the fine arts, in the classical sense, have their origins in the second half of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century. It was largely influenced by Russian artists, such as Vasily Vereshchagin and Nikolai Khludov, who intensively travelled in Central Asia. Khludov had a particular influence on the development of the local school of painting, becoming the teacher of many local artists. The most famous of these is Abilkhan Kasteyev, after whom the State Museum of Art of Kazakhstan was renamed in 1984.\nThe Kazakh school of fine arts was fully formed by the 1940s and flourished in the 1950s. Local painters, graphic artists and sculptors, trained under the unified Soviet system of artist education, began active work, often using national motifs in their art. The painters O. Tansykbaev, J. Shardenov, K. Telzhanov, and S. Aitbaev, graphic artists E. Sidorkina and A. Duzelkhanov, and sculptors H. Nauryzbaeva and E. Sergebaeva are today counted among the key figures of Kazakhstani art.\nCuisine.\nIn the national cuisine, livestock meat, like horse meat and beef can be cooked in a variety of ways and is usually served with a wide assortment of traditional bread products. Refreshments include black tea, often served with milk and dried fruits (such as dried apricots) and nuts. In southern provinces, people often prefer green tea. Traditional milk-derived drinks such as ayran, shubat and kymyz. A traditional Kazakh dinner involves a variety of appetisers on the table, followed by a soup and one or two main courses such as pilaf and beshbarmak. They also drink their national beverage, kumys, which consists of fermented mare's milk.\nSport.\nKazakhstan consistently performs in Olympic competitions. It is especially successful in boxing. This has brought some attention to the Central Asian nation and increased world awareness of its athletes. Dmitry Karpov and Olga Rypakova are among the most notable Kazakhstani athletes. Dmitry Karpov is a distinguished decathlete, taking bronze in both the 2004 Summer Olympics, and the 2003 and 2007 World Athletics Championships. Olga Rypakova is an athlete, specialising in triple jump (women's), taking silver in the 2011 World Championships in Athletics and Gold in the 2012 Summer Olympics. Kazakhstan's city of Almaty submitted bids twice for the Winter Olympics: in 2014 and again for the 2022 Winter Olympics. Astana and Almaty hosted the 2011 Asian Winter Games.\nPopular sports in Kazakhstan include football, basketball, ice hockey, bandy, and boxing.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Kazakhstan. The Football Federation of Kazakhstan is the sport's national governing body. The FFK organises the men's, women's, and futsal national teams.\nKazakhstan's most famous basketball player was Alzhan Zharmukhamedov, who played for CSKA Moscow and the Soviet Union's national basketball team in the 1960s and 1970s. Kazakhstan's national basketball team was established in 1992, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Since its foundation, it has been competitive at the continental level. Its greatest accomplishment was at the 2002 Asian Games, where it defeated the Philippines in its last game to win the bronze medal. At the official Asian Basketball Championship, now called FIBA Asia Cup, the Kazakhs' best finish was 4th place in 2007.\nThe Kazakhstan national bandy team is among the best in the world, and has many times won the bronze medal at the Bandy World Championship, including the 2012 edition when Kazakhstan hosted the tournament on home ice. The team won the first bandy tournament at the Asian Winter Games. During the Soviet time, Dynamo Alma-Ata won the Soviet Union national championships in 1977 and 1990 and the European Cup in 1978. Bandy is developed in ten of the country's seventeen administrative divisions (eight of the fourteen regions and two of the three cities which are situated inside of but are not part of regions). Akzhaiyk from Oral, however, is the only professional club.\nThe Kazakh national ice hockey team have competed in ice hockey in the 1998 and 2006 Winter Olympics, as well as in the 2006 Men's World Ice Hockey Championships. The Kazakhstan Hockey Championship is held since 1992. Barys Astana is the main domestic Kazakhstani ice hockey professional team, and having played in the Kazakhstani national league until the 2008\u201309 season, when they were transferred to play in the Kontinental Hockey League. Meanwhile, the Kazzinc-Torpedo and play in the Supreme Hockey League since 1996 and the Saryarka Karagandy since 2012. Top Kazakhstani ice hockey players include Nik Antropov, Ivan Kulshov and Evgeni Nabokov.\nKazakh boxers are generally well known in the world. In the last three Olympic Games, their performance was assessed as one of the best and they had more medals than any country in the world, except Cuba and Russia (in all three games). In 1996 and 2004, three Kazakhstani boxers (Vassiliy Jirov in 1996, Bakhtiyar Artayev in 2004 and Serik Sapiyev in 2012) were recognised as the best boxers for their techniques with the Val Barker Trophy, awarded to the best boxer of the tournament. In boxing, Kazakhstan performed well in the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. Two boxers, Bekzat Sattarkhanov and Yermakhan Ibraimov, earned gold medals. Another two boxers, Bulat Zhumadilov and Mukhtarkhan Dildabekov, earned silver medals. Oleg Maskaev, born in Zhambyl, representing Russia, was the WBC Heavyweight Champion after knocking out Hasim Rahman on 12 August 2006. The reigning WBA, WBC, IBF and IBO middleweight champion is Kazakh boxer Gennady Golovkin. Natascha Ragosina, representing Russia, but from Qara\u011fandy held seven versions of the women's super middleweight title, and two heavyweight titles during her boxing career. She holds the record as the longest-reigning WBA female super middleweight champion, and the longest-reigning WBC female super middleweight champion.\nFilm.\nKazakhstan's film industry is run through the state-owned Kazakhfilm studios based in Almaty. The studio has produced movies such as \"Myn Bala\", \"Harmony Lessons\", and \"Shal\". Kazakhstan is the host of the International Astana Action Film Festival and the Eurasia International Film Festival held annually. Hollywood director Timur Bekmambetov is from Kazakhstan and has become active in bridging Hollywood to the Kazakhstan film industry.\nKazakhstan journalist Artur Platonov won Best Script for his documentary \"Sold Souls\" about Kazakhstan's contribution to the struggle against terrorism at the 2013 Cannes Corporate Media and TV Awards.\nSerik Aprymov's \"Little Brother\" (\"Bauyr\") won at the Central and Eastern Europe Film Festival goEast from the German Federal Foreign Office.\nMedia.\nKazakhstan was ranked 161 out of 180 countries on the Reporters Without Borders World Press Freedom Index in 2014. A mid-March 2002 court order, with the government as a plaintiff, stated that \"Respublika\" were to stop printing for three months. The order was evaded by printing under other titles, such as \"Not That Respublika\". In early 2014, a court also issued a cease publication order to the small-circulation \"Assandi-Times\" newspaper, saying it was a part of the Respublika group. Human Rights Watch said: \"this absurd case displays the lengths to which Kazakh authorities are willing to go to bully critical media into silence.\"\nWith support from the US Department of State's Bureau for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (DRL), the American Bar Association Rule of Law Initiative opened a media support centre in Almaty to assist press outlets in Kazakhstan.\nUNESCO World Heritage sites.\nKazakhstan has three cultural and two natural sites on the UNESCO World Heritage list. The cultural sites are:\nThe natural sites are:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0. Text taken from http://, 365\u2013387, UNESCO, UNESCO Publishing. \nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral\nGovernment\nTrade\n "}
{"id": "16643", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16643", "title": "History of Kazakhstan", "text": "Kazakhstan, the largest country fully within the Eurasian Steppe, has been a historical crossroads and home to numerous different peoples, states and empires throughout history. Throughout history, peoples on the territory of modern Kazakhstan had nomadic lifestyle, which developed and influenced Kazakh culture.\nHuman activity in the region began with the extinct Homo erectus one million\u2013800,000 years ago in the Karatau Mountains and the Caspian and Balkhash areas. Neanderthals were present from 140,000 to 40,000 years ago in the Karatau Mountains and central Kazakhstan. Modern \"Homo sapiens\" appeared from 40,000 to 12,000 years ago in southern, central and eastern Kazakhstan. After the end of the last glacial period (12,500 to 5,000 years ago) human settlement spread across the country and led to the extinction of the mammoth and the woolly rhinoceros. Hunter-gatherer communes invented bows and boats and used domesticated wolves and traps for hunting.\nThe Neolithic Revolution was marked by the appearance of animal husbandry and agriculture, giving rise to the Atbasar, Kelteminar, Botai, and Ust-Narym cultures. The Botai culture (3600\u20133100 BC) is credited with the first domestication of horses, and ceramics and polished-stone tools also appeared during this period. The fourth and third millennia witnessed the beginning of metal production, the manufacture of copper tools and the use of casting molds. In the second millennium BC ore mining developed in central Kazakhstan.\nThe change in climate forced the massive relocation of populations in and out of the steppe belt. The dry period that lasted from the end of the second millennium to the beginning of the 1st millennium BC caused the depopulation of the arid belts and river-valley oasis areas, the populations moving north to the forest steppe.\nAfter the end of the arid period at the beginning of the first millennium BC nomadic populations migrated into Kazakhstan from the west and the east, repopulating abandoned areas. They included several Indo-Iranians, often known collectively as the Saka.\nIn the 13th century, the region of modern-day Kazakhstan was part of the Mongol Empire and later controlled by the Golden Horde. After the Horde's decline, the region became part of the Uzbek Khanate, whose nomads were collectively known as Uzbeks due to their conversion to Islam under Uzbeg Khan (1313\u20131341). This group, including the founders of the Kazakh Khanate, arose from the merging of Mongols and Turkic peoples in the Kipchak Steppe. In the 1450s, Zhanibek Khan and Kerey Khan, two Jochid princes, broke away from the Uzbek Khanate and established the Kazakh Khanate. The Kazakh identity emerged when the eastern nomads of the Kipchak Steppe split into Kazakhs and Shibanid Uzbeks in the early 16th century. The Kazakhs, like other Chinggisid peoples such as the Shibanid Uzbeks, Crimean Tatars, and Mangyt/Nogais, shared a common Turkic language, Mongol traditions, Chinggisid royal lineage, and Sunni Islam. By the 16th century, the Kazakhs had asserted their independence and expanded their territory, transforming their khanate into a nomadic empire. The Kazakh Khanate reached its peak in the 16th century, controlling vast parts of the Qipchaq steppe and was the last remaining Chinggisid state.\nDuring the reign of the three sons of Kasym Khan, the authority of the khan weakened somewhat, leading to the eventual fragmentation of the Kazakh Khanate into three distinct \"hordes\": the Great Horde in southeastern Kazakhstan north of the Tien Shan, the Middle Horde in the central steppe near the Aral Sea, and the Little Horde between the Aral Sea and the Ural River. In these regions, the khan\u2019s power was often constrained by tribal leaders, known as sultans, and even more so by the beys and batyrs, heads of the clan-based communities. Although the khans nominally commanded a formidable military, their authority relied heavily on the loyalty of these local leaders.\nThe final son of Kasym Khan to rule, Haqnazar, overcame these challenges, reunited the three hordes, and expanded his power beyond the steppes. He brought under his control not only the Kazakh hordes but also the Bashkirs, Kyrgyzes and Nogais, as well as territories such as the Kazan, Siberian, and Astrakhan khanates, and cities like Bukhara, Khiva, and Tashkent. According to Rychkov, Haqnazar\u2019s reign was marked by a brutal consolidation of power, where he exploited the instability of neighboring peoples, imposed heavy tributes, and severely restricted their movements and resources. He limited them to a single cooking pot per three households, confiscated livestock, goods, and even children, and prohibited land ownership and movement across certain rivers. These actions rendered these peoples impoverished and submissive, but they also strengthened his dominion across the region.\nHis successors continued these military campaigns, including Tevkkel Khan (1586\u20131598), who briefly captured Samarkand. However, by the early 17th century, the khanate's internal unity once again began to erode, and central power weakened further, leading to a period of fragmentation and the rise of numerous smaller, local rulers.\nBut After Tauke's death in 1715/1718, the Kazakh Khanate lost its unity, and the three hordes essentially became separate khanates. During the 17th century, the Kazakhs fought the Oirats. The early 18th century marked the height of the Kazakh Khanate. During this time, the Little Horde took part in the 1723\u20131730 war against the Dzungar Khanate, following the invasion known as the \"Great Disaster.\" Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakhs achieved notable victories at the Bulanty River in 1726 and at A\u00f1yraqai in 1729.\nAblai Khan also played a major role in the wars against the Dzungars during the 1720s\u20131750s, for which he was honored as a \"batyr\" (\"hero\") by the people. He later became the last khan whose power was recognized throughout the Kazakh steppe, ruling the Middle Zhuz between 1771 and 1781. In 1740, Ablai accepted Russian suzerainty, while at the same time maintaining a policy of balancing between the Russian Empire and the Qing dynasty, which for a period allowed the Kazakh Khanate to keep a degree of autonomy. After his death, his son Vali Khan (1781\u20131819) abandoned an independent stance and acknowledged Russian suzerainty.\nIn 1822, the khanate institution among the Kazakh hordes was formally abolished, which led to the uprising of Sultan Qasym in 1824\u20131827. The last serious effort to revive the khanate was undertaken by Sultan Kenesary Qasymov, who in 1837 proclaimed himself khan and conducted an armed struggle against Russian authorities until his death in 1847.\nFollowing Kazakhstan\u2019s incorporation into Russian Empire, Kazakh intellectuals led a cultural renaissance that was more advanced than that of other Central Asian peoples. Figures like Shoqan Walikhanov and Abay Kunanbayev adapted modern ideas to create a secular, dynamic Kazakh culture, setting them apart from other Central Asian intellectual movements Despite their rural, nomadic existence, the Kazakhs were one of the most literate and progressive indigenous groups in the region. This intellectual leadership helped them absorb and adapt modern ideas more effectively than their neighbors.\nIn the wake of the Russian Revolution, the Alash Orda government was formed in 1917 as an attempt to secure Kazakh autonomy. Although it existed only in name, Alash Orda represented the Kazakh push for self-rule. The Bolshevik Red Army eventually defeated White Russian forces in the region by 1920, and Kazakhstan was incorporated into the Soviet Union.\nDespite their nomadic lifestyle, Kazakhs were one of the most literate indigenous groups in Central Asia. But the Soviet policy of forced collectivization devastated the Kazakh population. Between 1926 and 1939, Kazakhstan\u2019s population dropped by nearly one-fifth, with 1.5 million deaths, primarily due to mostly starvation and related diseases, others as a result of violence. Thousands of Kazakhs fled to China, though most did not survive the journey.\nKazakhstan became a full Soviet republic in 1936. The Virgin Lands Program, launched in the 1950s, opened northern Kazakhstan to wheat farming by Slavic settlers, contributing to an ecological disaster that severely impacted the Aral Sea. Kazakhstan\u2019s strategic importance grew during the Soviet period, with the establishment of the Soviet space-launch center and nuclear testing sites on its territory. From 1959 to 1986, Dinmukhamed Kunayev, the first secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan, dominated the region's politics. His pragmatic leadership balanced the interests of both Kazakhs and Russians. However, Kunayev\u2019s removal by Mikhail Gorbachev in 1986 led to the Jeltoqsan riots, the first serious protests in the Soviet Union during the 1980s, signaling widespread discontent among the Kazakh population.\nKazakhstan declared sovereignty on October 25, 1990, and became fully independent on December 16, 1991, after the collapse of the Soviet Union.\nPrehistory.\nHumans have inhabited Kazakhstan since the Lower Paleolithic, generally pursuing the nomadic pastoralism for which the region's climate and terrain are suitable. Prehistoric Bronze Age cultures that extended into the region include the Srubna, the Afanasevo and the Andronovo. Between 500 BC and 500 AD Kazakhstan was home to the Saka and the Huns, early nomadic warrior cultures.\nAccording to the Journal of Archaeological Science, in July 2020 scientists from South Ural State University studied two Late Bronze Age horses with the aid of radiocarbon dating from Kurgan 5 of the Novoilinovsky 2 cemetery in the Lisakovsk city in the Kostanay region. Researcher Igor Chechushkov indicated that the Andronovites were riding horses several centuries earlier than many researchers had previously assumed. Among the horses investigated, the stallion was nearly 20 years old and the mare was 18 years old. According to scientists, animals were buried with the person they accompanied throughout their lives, and they were used not only for food but also for harnessing vehicles and riding.\nTurkic people migrated into Kazakhstan.\nAt the beginning of the first millennium the steppes east of the Caspian were inhabited and settled by a variety of peoples, mainly nomads speaking Indo-European and Uralic languages, including the Alans, Aorsi, Budini, Issedones/Wusun, Madjars, Massagetae and Sakas. The names, relations between and constituents of these peoples were sometimes fluid and interchangeable. Some of them formed states, including Yancai (northwest of the Aral Sea) and Kangju in the east. Over the course of several centuries the area became dominated by Turkic and other exogenous languages, which arrived with nomad invaders and settlers from the east.\nFollowing the entry of the Huns many of the previous inhabitants migrated westward into Europe or were absorbed by the Huns. The focus of the Hun Empire gradually moved westward from the steppes into Eastern Europe.\nFor a few centuries events in the future Kazakhstan are unclear and frequently the subject of speculation based on mythic or apocryphal folk tales popular among various peoples that migrated westward through the steppes.\nFrom the middle of the 2nd century the Yueban \u2013 an offshoot of the Xiongnu and therefore possibly connected to the Huns \u2013 established a state in far-eastern Kazakhstan.\nOver the next few centuries peoples such as the Akatziri, Avars (known later as the Pannonian Avars; not to be confused with the Avars of the Caucasus), Sabirs and Bulgars migrated through the area and into the Caucasus and Eastern Europe.\nBy the beginning of the 6th century the proto-Mongolian Rouran Khaganate had annexed areas that were later part of east Kazakhstan.\nThe G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, a Turkic people formerly subject to the Rouran, migrated westward, pushing the remnants of the Huns west and southward. By the mid-6th Century, the First Turkic Khaganate was established.A few decades later, a civil war resulted in the khaganate being split, and establishment of the Eastern Turkic Khaganate and Western Turkic Khaganate. In 630 and 659, the Eastern and Western Turkic Khaganate were invaded and conquered by the Tang China. Towards the end of the 7th century, the two states were reunited in the Second Turkic Khaganate. However, the khaganate began to fragment only a few generations later.\nIn 766 the Oghuz Yabgu State (\"Oguz il\") was founded, with its capital in Jankent, and came to occupy most of the later Kazakhstan. It was founded by the Oghuz Turks, refugees from the neighbouring Turgesh Kaganate. The Oghuz lost a struggle with the Karluks for control of Turgesh, other Oguz clans migrated from the Turgesh-controlled Zhetysu to the Karatau Mountains and the Chu valley, in the Issyk Kul basin.\nCuman-Kipchak period.\nIn the eighth and ninth centuries, portions of southern Kazakhstan were conquered by Arabs who introduced Islam. The Oghuz Turks controlled western Kazakhstan from the ninth through the 11th centuries; and Turkic peoples of Kipchaks and Kimaks, controlled the east at roughly the same time. In turn the Cumans controlled western Kazakhstan from around the 12th century until the 1220s. Since then, those vast lands are came to be known as Dashti-Kipchak, or the Kipchak Steppe.\nDuring the ninth century the Qarluq confederation formed the Qarakhanid state, which conquered Transoxiana (the area north and east of the Oxus River, the present-day Amu Darya). Beginning in the early 11th century, the Qarakhanids fought constantly among themselves and with the Seljuk Turks to the south. The Qarakhanids, who had converted to Islam, were conquered in the 1130s by the Kara-Khitan (moved west from North China). In the mid-12th century an independent state of Khorazm along the Oxus River broke away from the weakening Karakitai, but the bulk of the Kara-Khitan lasted until the Mongol invasion of Genghis Khan from 1219 to 1221.\nMongol Empire and Golden Horde.\nDuring Mongol advancement into Desht-i-Kipchak lands, some Cuman-Kipchak leaders fought the advancing Mongols, but most joined them and came to constitute most of the military force of the Mongol Empire.\nThe local Kipchak nobility served the Mongols, while the common nomads made up a significant portion of the Mongol army, which, led by Batu Khan, began its campaign to conquer Eastern Europe in 1237. According to one version, it was due to these tribes that the mixed term \"Tatar-Mongols\" emerged.\nIn the latter 13th century, the western part of the empire, ruled by Jochi (the eldest son of Genghis khan), broke away and established an independent Golden Horde. All of the later rulers of it came from Jochi lineage.\nDuring Uzbeg Khan's rule (1312\u201341), Islam was adopted as a state religion.\nAccording to the latest research of population genetics, mainly of autosomal markers and Y-chromosome polymorphism, it is believed that during the 13th to 15th centuries that the Kazakh ethnicity emerged.\nKazakh Khanate (1465\u20131847).\nAfter the dissolution of Golden Horde, on most of the territory of modern Kazakhstan, the Uzbek Khanate was formed. Under Abu'l-Khayr Khan, the country was weak and the government was corrupt. Two children of Barak Khan, Janibek and Kerei Khan gathered Kazakh people to Jetysu, where they founded Independent Kazakh Khanate.\nShoqan Walikhanov believed that when the Golden Horde began to disintegrate, the reasons why Kazakhs created the large tribal unions which composed the Kazakh Khanate were in order to retain their nomadic territories and secure their rights in the lands where they migrated.\nIn 1500, the Uzbeks concluded peace with the Kazakhs, and the Kazakh Khanate gains its sovereignty from Shaybanids control. All the former Uzbek Khanate lands in the north of Syr Darya were transferred to the Kazakh Khanate.\nIn 1499, Muhammad Shaybani, the grandson of Abu'l-Khayr, was forced to march south with the remaining loyal steppe tribes into Mawarannahr. There, he succeeded in conquering the fragmented state of the Timurids, which had collapsed after the death of Timur. He moved the capital of his state from Sygnak to Bukhara, where in 1500 he established a new state\u2014the Bukhara Khanate. The nomadic Desht-Kipchak tribes that had joined Shaybani mixed with the local sedentary population\u2014the Turkic-speaking Sarts, the ancient Turkic Karluks, and, as victors, they gave their new people the name Uzbeks.\nIn the early 16th century, Kazakhs transformed the Khanate into a nomadic empire stretching across the steppes east of the Caspian Sea and north of the Aral Sea as far as the upper Irtysh River and the western approaches to the Altai Mountains. During the reigns of Burunduk Khan (ruled 1488\u20131509) and Kasym Khan (1509\u201318), the Kazakhs were the masters of virtually the entire steppe region, reportedly able to bring 200,000 cavalry into the field and feared by all their neighbours. Many historians consider Kasym Khan\u2019s leadership the starting point of a distinct and sovereign Kazakh state. His influence extended Kazakh authority from the southeastern regions of modern Kazakhstan to the Ural Mountains.\nMirza Muhammad Haidar wrote in his \"Tarikh-i-Rashidi\" that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;K\u00e1sim Kh\u00e1n became the absolute ruler over all of Dasht-i-Kipch\u00e1k. His army numbered more than a million men, gaining such fame and power as no one had since Juji Kh\u00e1n.\u2014\u200a\nDuring the reign of Kasym Khan (1511\u20131523), the khanate expanded considerably. Numerous victories in wars against neighbouring countries made the Khanate's reputation and country well known even in Western Europe. The first Kazakh code of laws, \"Qasym Khannyn Qasqa Zholy\" (Bright Road of Kasym Khan), was also established in 1520.\nBetween 1522 and 1538, the Khanate experienced its first civil war.\nThe khanate is described in historical texts such as the \"Tarikh-i-Rashidi\" (1541\u20131545) by Muhammad Haidar Dughlat and \"Zhamigi-at-Tavarikh\" (1598\u20131599) by Kadyrgali Kosynuli Zhalayir.\nDuring the reign of the three sons of Kasym Khan, the authority of the khan weakened somewhat, leading to the eventual fragmentation of the Kazakh Khanate into three distinct \"hordes\": the Great Horde in southeastern Kazakhstan north of the Tien Shan, the Middle Horde in the central steppe near the Aral Sea, and the Little Horde between the Aral Sea and the Ural River. In these regions, the khan\u2019s power was often constrained by tribal leaders, known as sultans, and even more so by the beys and batyrs, heads of the clan-based communities. Although the khans nominally commanded a formidable military, their authority relied heavily on the loyalty of these local leaders.\nHaqnazar Khan, the final son of Kasym Khan to rule, emerged as a significant figure in the late 16th century. His reign marked a pivotal moment in the history of the Kazakh Khanate, as he faced numerous challenges and was able to reunite the fractured Kazakh hordes. His reign was marked not only by the reunification of the Kazakh Khanate but also by his aggressive military campaigns, which included systematic raids into Transoxania, a trend that continued under his successors, including Tauekel Khan, who even temporarily captured Samarkand. Expanding his influence beyond the steppes, Haqnazar extended his control to not only the Kazakh people but also neighboring groups such as the Bashkirs, Kyrgyzes, and Nogais. His territorial reach grew to encompass key regions including the Khanates of Kazan, Sibir, and Astrakhan, as well as important cities like Bukhara, Khiva, and Tashkent.\nHis successors continued these military campaigns. In 1598, under Tauekel Khan, Tashkent became part of the Kazakh Khanate, which later made it the capital of the state. The ruler of Tashkent was the outstanding Kazakh statesman and public figure Tole Bi Alibekuly (1663\u20131756), from the Dulat tribe of the Senior Zhuz. During his rule, many architectural structures were erected in Tashkent, which are now historical landmarks of the city. Tole Bi was buried in Tashkent, and his mausoleum is considered one of the city's key attractions.\nAfter Tauke\u2019s death in 1715/1718, the Kazakh Khanate lost its unity, and the three hordes effectively became separate khanates.\nIn 1643, the Kazakh-Dzungar wars unfolded and became a disaster for the Kazakhs. The Khanate's population was divided into three tribes, called juzes: senior, middle and junior. During the reign of Ablai Khan (1771\u20131781), he united all Kazakhs to fight the Dzungars.\nDuring the 17th century, the Kazakhs fought the Oirats, a federation of western Mongol tribes, including the Dzungar. The beginning of the 18th century marked the zenith of the Kazakh Khanate. During this period the Little Horde participated in the 1723\u20131730 war against the Dzungar Khanate, following their \"Great Disaster\" invasion of Kazakh territory. Under the leadership of Abul Khair Khan, the Kazakhs won major victories over the Dzungar at the Bulanty River in 1726 and at the Battle of A\u00f1yraqai in 1729.\nAblai Khan participated in the most significant battles against the Dzungars from the 1720s to the 1750s, for which he was declared a \"batyr\" (\"hero\") by the people. He later became the last khan whose authority was recognised across the Kazakh steppe, ruling the Middle Zhuz from 1771 to 1781. In 1740, Ablai had accepted Russian suzerainty, while pursuing a policy of balancing between Russian Empire and Qing dynasty, which for a time allowed the Kazakh Khanate to preserve relative autonomy. After his death, his son Vali Khan (1781\u20131819) abandoned an independent policy and acknowledged Russian authority.\nIn 1822, the Khanate institution among the Kazakh Hordes was abolished, sparking the uprising of Sultan Qasym in 1824\u20131827. The final attempt to restore the Khanate was led by Sultan Kenesary Qasymov, who proclaimed himself khan in 1837 and conducted an armed struggle against Russian authorities until his death in 1847.\nRussian Empire (1731\u20131917).\nRussian traders and soldiers began to appear on the northwestern edge of Kazakh territory in the 17th century, when Cossacks established forts which later became the cities of Yaitsk (modern Oral) and Guryev (modern Atyrau). The Russians were able to seize Kazakh territory because the khanates were preoccupied by the Zunghar Oirats, who began to move into the region from the east in the late 16th century. Forced westward, the Kazakhs were caught between the Kalmyks and the Russians.\nFirst half of the 1700s, was marked by the surge of conflicts and wars with Dzungars. In 1730 Abul Khayr, a khan of the Lesser Horde, sought Russian assistance. Although Khayr's intent was to form a temporary alliance against the stronger Kalmyks, the Russians gained control of the Lesser Horde. They conquered the Middle Horde by 1798, but the Great Horde remained independent until the 1820s (when the expanding Kokand khanate to the south forced the Great Horde khans to accept Russian protection, which seemed to them the lesser of two evils).\nThe Russian Empire started to integrate the Kazakh steppe. Between 1822 and 1848, the three main Kazakh Khans of the Lesser, Middle and Great Horde were suspended. Russians built many forts to control the conquered territories. Moreover, Russian settlers were provided with land, whereas nomadic tribes had less area available to drive their herds and flocks. Many of the nomadic tribes were forced to adopt poor and sedentary lifestyles. Because of the Russian Empire policy, between 5 and 15 per cent of the population of Kazakh Steppe were immigrants.\nNineteenth-century colonization of Kazakhstan by Russia was slowed by rebellions and wars, such as uprisings led by Isatay Taymanuly and Makhambet Utemisuly from 1836 to 1838 and the war led by Eset Kotibaruli from 1847 to 1858. In 1863, the Russian Empire announced a new policy asserting the right to annex troublesome areas on its borders. This led immediately to the conquest of the remainder of Central Asia and the creation of two administrative districts: the \"General-Gubernatorstvo\" (Governor-Generalships) of Russian Turkestan and the Steppes. Most of present-day Kazakhstan, including Almaty (Verny), was in the latter district.\nDuring the nineteenth century, Kazakhs had remarkable numeracy level, which increased from approximately 72% in 1820 to approximately 88% in 1880. In the first part of the century, Kazakhs were even more numerate than Russians were. However, in that century, Russia conquered many countries and experienced a human capital revolution, which led to a higher numeracy afterwards. Nevertheless, the numeracy of Kazakhs was still higher than other Central Asian nations, which are nowadays referred to as Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan. There could be several reasons for this striking early numeracy level. First and foremost, the settler share could explain part of this, albeit Russians were a minority in the Kazakh steppe. Secondly, the relatively good nutritional situation in Kazakhstan. Protein malnutrition that plagued many other populations of Central Asian nations was absent in Kazakhstan. Moreover, Russian settlers of the 1870s and 1880s might have simulated so-called contact learning. Kazakhs started to invest more in human capital because they observed that Russians were successful in that area.\nDuring the early 19th century, the Russian forts began to limit the area over which the nomadic tribes could drive their herds and flocks. The final disruption of nomadism began in the 1890s, when many Russian settlers were introduced into the fertile lands of northern and eastern Kazakhstan.\nIn 1906 the Trans-Aral Railway between Orenburg and Tashkent was completed, facilitating Russian colonisation of the fertile lands of Zhetysu. Between 1906 and 1912, more than a half-million Russian farms were established as part of reforms by Russian Minister of the Interior Petr Stolypin; the farms pressured the traditional Kazakh way of life, occupying grazing land and using scarce water resources. The administrator for Turkestan (current Kazakhstan), Vasile Balabanov, was responsible for Russian resettlement at this time.\nStarving and displaced, many Kazakhs joined in the Basmachi movement against conscription into the Russian imperial army ordered by the tsar in July 1916 as part of the war effort against Germany in World War I. In late 1916, Russian forces suppressed the widespread armed resistance to the taking of land and conscription of Central Asians. Thousands of Kazakhs were killed, and thousands more fled to China and Mongolia. Many Kazakhs and Russians fought the Communist takeover, and resisted its control until 1920.\nAlash and Turkestan Autonomy.\nAlash orda 1917\u20131920.\nIn Russia started building schools in Kazakhstan. It led to the formation of elite in Kazakh society. Most educated Kazakhs were members of Constitutional Democratic Party, but after it fractioned, Kazakh elite formed new party named after a legendary founder of the Kazakh people\u2014Alash. The party's goal was to found an independent democratic Kazakh state. The party managed to form same-named Orda, which lasted until 1920, when Bolsheviks banned the party.\nThe territory of Alash orda covered most of modern territories of Kazakhstan excluding southern regions.\nTurkestan orda.\nThe Turkestan orda or Kokand Autonomy, was an unrecognized state in Central Asia that existed at the beginning of the Russian Civil War. It was formed on 27 November 1917 and existed until 22 February 1918. It was a secular republic, headed by a president.\nSoviet Union (1920\u20131991).\nThe Kirghiz Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic, established in 1920, was renamed the Kazakh Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic in 1925 when the Kazakhs were officially distinguished from the Kyrgyz by the Soviet government. Although the Russian Empire recognized the ethnic difference between the groups, it called them both \"Kirghiz\" to avoid confusion between the terms \"Kazakhs\" and Cossacks (both names originating from the Turkic \"free man\").\nIn 1925 the republic's original capital, Orenburg, was reincorporated into Russian territory and Kyzylorda became the capital until 1929. Almaty (known as Alma-Ata during the Soviet period), a provincial city in the far southeast, became the new capital in 1929. In 1936, the territory was officially separated from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) and made a Soviet republic: the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic. With an area of , the Kazakh SSR was the second-largest republic in the Soviet Union.\nTwo famines.\nFirst Kazakh famine started in 1919 during the Russian Civil War. Amount of livestock in Kazakhstan decreased from 30 million to 16 million, which left almost million people starving due to the civil war. Apart from a famine, Kazakhstan suffered from stopping of all factories.\nFrom 1929 to 1934, when Joseph Stalin was trying to collectivize agriculture, Kazakhstan endured repeated famine called Asharshylyk similar to the Holodomor in Ukraine; in both republics and the Russian SFSR, peasants slaughtered their livestock in protest against Soviet agricultural policy. During that period, over one million residents and 80 percent of the republic's livestock died. Thousands more tried to escape to China, although most starved in the attempt. According to Robert Conquest, \"The application of party theory to the Kazakhs, and to a lesser extent to the other nomad peoples, amounted economically to the imposition by force of an untried stereotype on a functioning social order, with disastrous results. And in human terms it meant death and suffering proportionally even greater than in the Ukraine\".\nRepressions.\nDuring the 1930s, the Soviet government built Gulags across the Union. There were 11 concentration camps built in Kazakhstan, the most well known being ALZhIR.\nNKVD Order 00486 of 15 August 1937 marked the beginning of mass repression against \"ChSIR: members of the families of traitors to the Motherland\" (). The order gave the right to arrest without evidence of guilt, and sent women political-prisoners to the camps for the first time. In a few months, female \"traitors\" were arrested and sentenced to from five to eight years in prison. More than 18,000 women were arrested, and about 8,000 served time in ALZhIR \u2013 the Akmolinsk Camp of Wives of Traitors to the Motherland (). They included the wives of statesmen, politicians and public figures in the then Soviet Union, including the wives of the former members of the Alash movement. After the closure of the prisons in 1953, it was reported that 1,507 of the women gave birth as a result of being raped by the guards.\nDuring Soviet rule most of former members of Alash started working on translating textbooks for newly building schools, since most Kazakhs still weren't educated. Some of former members joined Communist Party, but still elite protested several politics of Soviet government, like collectivization which led to the artificial famine of 1930\u201333. The Soviet Government attempted to oppress and imprison many of the Kazakh elites. Due to the harsh treatment and conditions in the Kazakh gulags, imprisoned former Alash members experienced accelerated aging over the span of just a few years. This can be observed via photos taken of them before their imprisonment, and gulag mugshots taken before their executions.\nWorld War II.\nThrough the lens of the front lines and the home front, Roberto Carmack argues that World War II spurred Kazakhstan\u2019s larger integration into the Soviet Union. However the war experience simultaneously worsened and reinforced ethnic tensions and social disparities. Even in the Soviet Union\u2019s darkest hours ethnic chauvinism could overrule matters of national security. The Kremlin's propaganda efforts directed at soldiers and civilians, combined with military service and exposure to other parts of the USSR, Sovietized the Kazakh populace and the Kazakh SSR. The war made Kazakhstan more Soviet, but also strengthened its colonial status as a supplier of raw materials and manpower for the war effort, and solidified the hierarchy led by Russia in the USSR.\nRed Army Participation and Battles Involving Kazakhstan's Soldiers.\nA total of 1.2 million soldiers from Kazakhstan were called up to the Red Army, in addition to 178,000 who were already serving in the Soviet military. Soldiers from Kazakhstan participated in all major battles of World War II. At the beginning of the war, hundreds of Kazakh soldiers were among the defenders of the Brest Fortress.\nDuring the Battle of Moscow, which began in late September 1941, the 316th Rifle Division, commanded by General I.V.Panfilov, and the 312th Rifle Division, led by Colonel A. F. Naumov, distinguished themselves particularly.\nThe 1073rd Rifle Regiment, under the command of Bauyrzhan Momyshuly, demonstrated heroic resistance against the enemy. Political officers from the Panfilov Division, such as P. B. Vikhrev, M. Gabdullin, and machine gunner T. Tokhtarov, also exhibited extraordinary bravery. Starting from September 6, 1941, Kazakh military units actively participated in the defense of Leningrad. In the summer of 1942, Kazakh forces entered the front-line zone of the Battle of Stalingrad. Kazakhstan's divisions and units fought in the Battle of Kursk and on other fronts, liberating Belarus, the Baltics, Moldova, Ukraine, and countries of Eastern Europe from occupation.\nDuring the Battle of the Dnieper and the liberation of Kyiv, the 47th Separate Guards Tank Brigade, commanded by Galya Adilbekovich Adilbekov, fought heroically. Adilbekov proved himself in key battles such as the Battle of Vitebsk (1941), the counteroffensive near Trubchevsk (1941), and the Battle of Stalingrad (1942). His bravery was acknowledged early in the war, with independent publications about him in Soviet newspapers \"Vechernyaya Moskva\" (September 5, 1941) and \"Izvestiya\" (September 13, 1941). He was the only representative of Central Asian nations to hold the rank of Guard Lieutenant Colonel \u2014 commanding a separate Guards Tank Regiment at the time of his death.\nAwards.\nFor their heroism on the fronts of World War II, hundreds of thousands of Kazakh soldiers were awarded Soviet orders and medals, including 96,638 Kazakhs. A total of 497 individuals (including 98 Kazakhs) were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Among them were Kazakh women, such as machine gunner M. Mametova and sniper A. Moldagulova. Kazakh pilots T. Y. Begeldinov, L. I. Beda, I. F. Pavlov, and S. D. Lugansky were each twice honored with the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.\nInternal Soviet migration.\nMany Soviet citizens from the western regions of the USSR and a great deal of Soviet industry relocated to the Kazakh SSR during World War II, when Axis armies captured or threatened to capture western Soviet industrial centres. Groups of Soviet citizens including Crimean Tatars, German, and Muslims from the North Caucasus were deported to the Kazakh SSR during the war. The Kremlin feared that they would collaborate with the Nazi invaders. Many Poles from eastern Poland were also deported to the Kazakh SSR, and local people shared their food with the new arrivals.\nMany more non-Kazakhs arrived between 1953 and 1965, during the Virgin Lands Campaign of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev (in office 1958\u20131964). That program saw huge tracts of Kazakh SSR grazing land cultivated for wheat and other cereal grains. More settlement occurred in the late 1960s and 1970s, when the Soviet government paid bonuses to workers participating in a program to relocate Soviet industry closer to Central Asia's coal, gas, and oil deposits. By the 1970s the Kazakh SSR was the only Soviet republic in which those of eponymous nationality was a minority, due to immigration and the decimation of the nomadic Kazakh population.\nThe Kazakh SSR played industrial and agricultural roles in the centrally-controlled Soviet economic system, with coal deposits discovered during the 20th century promising to replace depleted fuel-reserves in the European territories of the USSR. The distance between the European industrial centres and the Kazakh coal-fields posed a formidable problem \u2013 only partially solved by Soviet efforts to industrialize Central Asia. This left the Republic of Kazakhstan a mixed legacy after 1991: a population of nearly as many Russians as Kazakhs; a class of Russian technocrats necessary to economic progress but ethnically unassimilated, and a coal- and oil-based energy industry whose efficiency is limited by inadequate infrastructure.\nRepublic of Kazakhstan (1991\u2013present).\nPerestroika and Glasnost.\nOn 16 December 1986, the Soviet Politburo dismissed longtime General Secretary of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan Dinmukhamed Konayev. His successor was the non-Kazakh Gennady Kolbin from Ulyanovsk, Russia, which triggered demonstrations protesting the move. The protests were violently suppressed by the authorities, and \"between two and twenty people lost their lives, and between 763 and 1137 received injuries. Between 2,212 and 2,336 demonstrators were arrested\". When Kolbin prepared to purge the Communist Youth League he was halted by Moscow, and in September 1989 he was replaced with the Kazakh Nursultan Nazarbayev.\nPriority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty.\nIn June 1990 Moscow declared the sovereignty of the central government over Kazakhstan, forcing Kazakhstan to make its own statement of sovereignty. The exchange exacerbated tensions between the republic's two largest ethnic groups, who at that point were numerically about equal. In mid-August, Kazakh and Russian nationalists began to demonstrate around Kazakhstan's parliament building in an attempt to influence the final statement of sovereignty being drafted; the statement was adopted in October.\nNazarbayev Era.\nLike other Soviet republics at that time, Parliament named Nazarbayev its chairman and converted his chairmanship to the presidency of the republic. Unlike the leaders of the other Soviet republics (especially the independence-minded Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia), Nazarbayev remained committed to the Soviet Union during the spring and summer of 1991 largely because he considered parts of USSR too interdependent economically to be able to survive independently. However, he also fought to control Kazakhstan's mineral wealth and industrial potential.\nThis objective became particularly important after 1990, when it was learned that Mikhail Gorbachev had negotiated an agreement with the American Chevron Corporation to develop Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field; Gorbachev did not consult Nazarbayev until the talks were nearly completed. At Nazarbayev's insistence, Moscow surrendered control of the republic's mineral resources in June 1991 and Gorbachev's authority crumbled rapidly throughout the year. Nazarbayev continued to support him, urging other republic leaders to sign a treaty creating the Union of Sovereign States which Gorbachev had drafted in a last attempt to hold the Soviet Union together.\nSoviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union.\nBecause of the August 1991 Soviet coup d'\u00e9tat attempt against Gorbachev, the union treaty was never implemented. Ambivalent about Gorbachev's removal, Nazarbayev did not condemn the coup attempt until its second day. However, he continued to support Gorbachev and some form of union largely because of his conviction that independence would be economic suicide.\nAt the same time, Nazarbayev began preparing Kazakhstan for greater freedom or outright independence. He appointed professional economists and managers to high positions, and sought advice from foreign development and business experts. The outlawing of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan (CPK) which followed the attempted coup permitted Nazarbayev to take nearly complete control of the republic's economy, more than 90 percent of which had been under the partial (or complete) direction of the Soviet government until late 1991. He solidified his position by winning an uncontested election for president in December 1991.\nA week after the election, Nazarbayev became the president of an independent state when the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus signed documents dissolving the Soviet Union. He quickly convened a meeting of the leaders of the five Central Asian states (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan), raising the possibility of a Turkic confederation of former republics as a counterweight to the Slavic states of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus in whatever federation might succeed the Soviet Union. This move persuaded the three Slavic presidents to include Kazakhstan among the signatories of a recast document of dissolution. Kazakhstan's capital lent its name to the Alma-Ata Protocol, the declaration of principles of the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nIndependent country and the Commonwealth.\nPost-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.\nOn 16 December 1991, five days before the declaration, Kazakhstan became the last of the republics to proclaim its independence.\nThe republic has followed the same general political pattern as the other four Central Asian states. After declaring its independence from a political structure dominated by Moscow and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) until 1991, Kazakhstan retained the governmental structure and most of the leadership which had held power in 1990. Nazarbayev, elected president of the republic in 1991, remained in undisputed power five years later.\nHe took several steps to ensure his position. The constitution of 1993 made the prime minister and the Council of Ministers responsible solely to the president, and a new constitution two years later reinforced that relationship. Opposition parties were limited by legal restrictions on their activities. Within that framework, Nazarbayev gained substantial popularity by limiting the economic shock of separation from the Soviet Union and maintaining ethnic harmony in a diverse country with more than 100 different nationalities.\nIn December 1994 Nazarbayev signed the Budapest Memorandum along with Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States acting as guarantors and thereby denuclearized the nation. The leaders of Ukraine and Belarus also signed similar documents in a joint ceremonial event in Patria Hall at the Budapest Convention Center.\nIn 1997 Kazakhstan's capital was moved from Almaty to Astana, and homosexuality was decriminalized the following year.\nAfter Nazarbayev.\nIn March 2019, President Nursultan Nazarbayev resigned 29 years after taking office. However, he continued to lead the influential security council and held the formal title Leader of the Nation. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev succeeded Nazarbayev as the President of Kazakhstan. His first official act was to rename the capital from Astana to Nur-Sultan after his predecessor. In June 2019, the new president, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, won Kazakhstan's presidential election.\nIn January 2022, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev took over as head of the powerful Security Council, removing Nazarbayev from the post, after violent protests triggered by fuel price. President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev later proposed constitutional amendments aimed at limiting his power and stripping Nazarbayev of his formal title Leader of the Nation. Kazakhs later voted in the 2022 Kazakh constitutional referendum approving of the constitutional amendments. In September 2022, the name of the country's capital was changed back to Astana from Nur-Sultan.\nRelationship with Russia.\nDuring the mid-1990s, although Russia remained the most important sponsor of Kazakhstan in economic and national security matters Nazarbayev supported the strengthening of the CIS. As sensitive ethnic, national-security and economic issues cooled relations with Russia during the decade, Nazarbayev cultivated relations with China, the other Central Asian nations, and the West; however, Kazakhstan remains principally dependent on Russia. The Baikonur Cosmodrome, built during the 1950s for the Soviet space program, is near Tyuratam and the city of Baikonur was built to accommodate the spaceport.\nRelationship with the US.\nKazakhstan also maintains good relations with the United States. The country is the US's 78th-largest trading partner, incurring $2.5 billion in two-way trade, and it was the first country to recognize Kazakhstan after independence. In 1994 and 1995, the US worked with Kazakhstan to remove all nuclear warheads after the latter renounced its nuclear program and closed the Semipalatinsk Test Sites; the last nuclear sites and tunnels were closed by 1995. In 2010, US President Barack Obama met with Nazarbayev at the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, DC and discussed intensifying their strategic relationship and bilateral cooperation to increase nuclear safety, regional stability, and economic prosperity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16644", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16644", "title": "Geography of Kazakhstan", "text": " \nKazakhstan is located in Central Asia, with a small portion in Eastern Europe. With an area of about Kazakhstan is the ninth largest country in the world, more than twice the combined size of the other four Central Asian states and 60% larger than Alaska. The country borders Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyzstan to the south; Russia to the north; Russia and the Caspian Sea to the west; and China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region to the east.\nArea and boundaries.\nAccording to CIA World Factbook estimates:\n* Total: \n** \"country rank in the world\": 9th \n* Land: \n* Water: \n* Australia comparative: slightly larger than Western Australia\n* Canada comparative: slightly less than times the size of Nunavut\n* United States comparative: approximately larger than Alaska\n* Total: \n* Border countries:\n**People's Republic of China (to the southeast) \n**Kyrgyzstan (to the southeast) \n**Russia (to the north) \n**Turkmenistan (to the southwest) \n**Uzbekistan (to the south) .\n*0 km (0 mi)\n**Note: Kazakhstan borders the Caspian Sea. Its coastline with the Caspian Sea is .\n* Border disputes with Russia, Azerbaijan, and Turkmenistan\n* Lowest point: Karagiye Depression \n* Highest point: Khan Tengri \nLands.\nMore than three-quarters (75%) of the country, including the entire west and most of the south, is either semidesert (33.2 percent) or desert (44 percent).\n*Deserts: 44% (1,198,956 km2)\n*Semi-deserts: 14% (381,486 km2)\n*Steppe: 26% (708,474 km2)\n*Forests: only 5.5% (149,870 km2)\n*Deserts + semi-deserts: 58% (1,580,442 km2) \n*Deserts + semi-deserts + steppe: 84% (2,288,916 km2)\nLand use.\nAccording to CIA World Factbook estimates:\n*Arable land: 8.9%\n*Permanent crops: 0%\n*Permanent pastures: 68.5%\n*Forest: 1.2%\n*Other: 21.4%\n*20,660 km2\nTopography and drainage.\nThere is considerable topographical variation within Kazakhstan. The highest point is the top of the mountain Khan Tengri, on the Kyrgyz and Chinese border in the Tian Shan range, with an elevation of ( with ice cap) above sea level; the lowest point is the bottom of the Karagiye depression at below sea level, in the Mangystau province east of the Caspian Sea. Most of the country lies at between above sea level, but Kazakhstan's Caspian shore includes some of the lowest elevations on Earth.\nMany of the peaks of the Altay and Tien Shan ranges are covered with snow, year-round, and their runoff is the source for most of Kazakhstan's freshwater rivers, streams, and lakes. Kazakhstan's Almaty region is also home to the Mynzhylky mountain plateau.\nExcept for the Tobol, Ishim, and Irtysh rivers (the Kazakh names for which are, respectively, Tobyl, Esil, and Ertis), portions of which flow through Kazakhstan, all of Kazakhstan's rivers and streams are part of landlocked systems. They either flow into isolated bodies of water such as the Caspian Sea or simply disappear into the steppes and deserts of central and southern Kazakhstan. Many rivers, streams, and lakes are seasonal, evaporating in summer. The three largest bodies of water are Lake Balkhash, a partially fresh, partially saline lake in the east, near Almaty, the Caspian Sea, and the Aral Sea, all of which lie partially within Kazakhstan.\nSome 9.4 percent of Kazakhstan's land is mixed prairie and forest or treeless prairie, primarily in the north or in the basin of the Ural River in the west. More than three-quarters of the country, including the entire west and most of the south, is either semidesert (33.2 percent) or desert (44 percent). The terrain in these regions is bare, eroded, broken uplands (Upland and lowland), with sand dunes in the Qizilqum (\"The Red Sands\"; in the Russian form, Kyzylkum), Moyunqum (in the Russian form, Muyunkum) and Barsuki deserts, which occupy south-central Kazakhstan.\n*107.5 km3 (2011)\n*Total: 21.14 km3/yr (4%/30%/66%)\n*Per capita: 1,304 m3/yr (2010)\n*Northeastern shore of the Caspian Sea\n*Part of Aral Sea\n*48,000 large and small lakes such as Balkhash Lake, Lake Zaysan and Lake Alakol.\n*8,500 rivers\nClimate.\nThe climate of Kazakhstan consists of mostly continental, semi-arid, and cold desert climates. In summer the temperatures average more than and in winter average .\nThe climatic charts seen below are some noteworthy examples of the country's differing climates, taken from two contrasting cities (with their respective tables) representing two different parts of the country; Aktau and the Caspian Sea shore on the country's west having a distinct cold desert climate and cold semi-arid climate, while Petropavl features a climate typical to the rest of the country; an extreme variation of the humid continental climate known for its uneven rainfall distribution and drastic temperature ranges between seasons. \nDespite the nation's relatively low precipitation rates and mostly arid geography, spring floods brought on by occasional heavy rainfall and snowmelt are not unusual in the northern and central regions of the country. In April 2017, following a winter with snow volumes 60 percent above average, heavy rains resulted in widespread damage and temporarily displaced thousands of people.\nEnvironmental problems.\nThe environment of Kazakhstan has been badly damaged by human activity. Most of the water in Kazakhstan is polluted by industrial effluents, pesticide and fertilizer residue, and, in some places, radioactive elements. The most visible damage has been to the Aral Sea, which as recently as the 1970s was larger than any of the Great Lakes of North America save Lake Superior. The sea began to shrink rapidly when sharply increased irrigation and other demands on the only significant tributaries, the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya (the latter reaching the Aral from neighboring Uzbekistan), all but eliminated inflow. During the Soviet Era, Kazakhstan received water from Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, and Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan provided oil and gas for these two nations in return. However, after the collapse of the USSR this system had collapsed and no plan to replace this system has been put in place. According to research conducted by the International Crisis Group, there is little political will to solve this problem despite Central Asia's need for mutual resource-sharing. By 1993 the Aral Sea had lost an estimated 60 percent of its volume, in the process breaking into three unconnected segments. Increasing salinity and reduced habitat have killed the Aral Sea's fish, hence destroying its once-active fishing industry, and the receding shoreline has left the former port of Aral'sk more than seventy kilometers from the water's edge. The depletion of this large body of water has increased temperature variations in the region, which in turn have affected agriculture. A much greater agricultural impact, however, has come from the salt- and pesticide-laden soil that the wind is known to carry as far away as the Himalaya Mountains and the Pacific Ocean. Deposition of this heavily saline soil on nearby fields effectively sterilizes them. Evidence suggests that salts, pesticides, and residues of chemical fertilizers are also adversely affecting human life around the former Aral Sea; infant mortality in the region approaches 10 percent compared with the national rate of 2.7 percent in 1991.\nBy contrast, the water level of the Caspian Sea has been rising steadily since 1978 for reasons that scientists have not been able to explain fully. At the northern end of the sea, more than 10,000 square kilometres of land in Atyrau Province have been flooded. Experts estimate that if current rates of increase persist, the coastal city of Atyrau, eighty-eight other population centers, and many of Kazakhstan's Caspian oil fields could be submerged soon.\nWind erosion has also affected the northern and central parts of the republic because of the introduction of wide-scale dryland wheat farming. During the 1950s and 1960s, much soil was lost when vast tracts of Kazakhstan's prairies were plowed under as part of Khrushchev's Virgin Lands agricultural project. By the mid-1990s, an estimated 60 percent of the republic's pastureland was in various stages of desertification.\nIndustrial pollution is a bigger concern in Kazakhstan's manufacturing cities, where aging factories pump huge quantities of unfiltered pollutants into the air and groundwater. The former capital, Almaty, is particularly threatened, in part because of the postindependence boom in private automobile ownership.\nThe gravest environmental threat to Kazakhstan comes from radiation, especially in the Semey (Semipalatinsk) region of the northeast, where the Soviet Union tested almost 500 nuclear weapons, 116 of them above ground. Often, such tests were conducted without evacuating or even alerting the local population. Although nuclear testing was halted in 1990, radiation poisoning, birth defects, severe anemia, and leukemia are thought to be very common in the area.\nWith some conspicuous exceptions, lip service has been the primary official response to Kazakhstan's ecological problems. In February 1989, opposition to Soviet nuclear testing and its ill effects in Kazakhstan led to the creation of one of the republic's largest and most influential grass-roots movements, Nevada-Semipalatinsk, which was founded by Kazak poet and public figure Olzhas Suleymenov. In the first week of the movement's existence, Nevada-Semipalatinsk gathered more than two million signatures from Kazakhstanis of all ethnic groups on a petition to Mikhail Gorbachev demanding the end of nuclear testing in Kazakhstan. After a year of demonstrations and protests, the test ban took effect in 1990. It remained in force in 1996, although in 1995 at least one unexploded device reportedly was still in position near Semey.\nOnce its major ecological objective was achieved, Nevada-Semipalatinsk made various attempts to broaden into a more general political movement; it has not pursued a broad ecological or \"green\" agenda. A very small green party, Tabigat, made common cause with the political opposition in the parliament of 1994.\nThe government has established a Ministry of Ecology and Bioresources, with a separate administration for radioecology, but the ministry's programs are underfunded and given low priority. In 1994 only 23 percent of budgeted funds were actually allotted to environmental programs. Many official meetings and conferences are held (more than 300 have been devoted to the problem of the Aral Sea alone), but few practical programs have gone into operation. In 1994 the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the United States Environmental Protection Agency agreed to give Kazakhstan $62 million to help the country overcome ecological problems.\n Earthquakes in the south, and mud slides around Almaty\n Radioactive or toxic chemical sites associated with its former defense industries and test ranges are found throughout the country and pose health risks for human beings and animals; industrial pollution is severe in some cities; because the two main rivers which flowed into the Aral Sea have been diverted for irrigation, it is drying up and leaving behind a harmful layer of chemical pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then picked up by the wind and blown into noxious dust storms; pollution in the Caspian Sea; soil pollution from overuse of agricultural chemicals and salination from poor infrastructure and wasteful irrigation practices\n* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78)\n* Signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16645", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16645", "title": "Demographics of Kazakhstan", "text": " \nThe demographics of Kazakhstan enumerate the demographic features of the population of Kazakhstan, including population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. Some use the word Kazakh to refer to the Kazakh ethnic group and language (autochthonous to Kazakhstan as well as parts of China and Mongolia) and Kazakhstani to refer to Kazakhstan and its citizens regardless of ethnicity, but it is common to use Kazakh in both senses. It is expected that by 2050, the population will range from 23.5 to 27.7 million people.\nOverview.\nOfficial estimates put the population of Kazakhstan at 20,182,003 as of August 2024, of which 62.7% is urban and 37.3% is rural population. In a report released by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) in September 2021, the level of urbanization in Kazakhstan is estimated to reach 69.1% by 2050.\nThe proportion of men makes up 48.85% and the proportion of women is 51.15%.\nEthnic Kazakhs make up 71%, Russians 14.9%, Uzbeks 3.3%, Ukrainians 1.9%, Uygur 1.5%, Germans 1.1%, Tatars 1.1%, and others 5.2%.\nThe first census in Kazakhstan was conducted under Russian Imperial rule in 1897, which estimated population at round 4 million people. Following censuses showed a growth until 1939, where numbers showed a decrease to 6,081 thousand relative to the previous census done 13 years earlier, due to famines of 1922 and 1933.\nBut since 1939 population has steadily increased to 16.5 million in 1989, according to corresponding year census. Official estimates indicate that the population continued to increase after 1989, peaking out at 17 million in 1993 and then declining to 15 million in the 1999 census. The downward trend continued through 2002, when the estimated population bottomed out at 14.9 million, and then resumed its growth. Significant numbers of Russians returned to Russia. Kazakhstan underwent significant urbanization during the first 50 years of the Soviet era, as the share of the rural population declined from more than 90% in the 1920s to less than 50% since the 1970s. The fertility rate declined to amongst the lower rates in the world in 1999 and increased to again amongst the higher rates in the world in 2021.\n\"Data sources\": Population 1897 from Russian Empire Census. Population 1926 from First All-Union Census of the Soviet Union. Population 1939\u20131999 from demoscope.ru, 2002\u20132008 from Kazakhstan Statistical Agency web site. Rural/urban shares 1939\u20131993 from statistical yearbooks, print editions, 2002\u20132008 from Kazakhstan Statistical Agency web site. 2009\u20132014 from Kazakhstan Statistical Agency web site.\nPopulation size and structure.\nPopulation of Kazakhstan 1897\u20132024.\nAs of 2003, there were discrepancies between Western sources regarding the population of Kazakhstan. United States government sources, including the CIA World Factbook and the US Census Bureau International Data Base, listed the population as 15,340,533, while the World Bank gave a 2002 estimate of 14,858,948. This discrepancy was presumably due to difficulties in measurement caused by the large migratory population in Kazakhstan, emigration, and low population density \u2013 only about 5.5 persons per km2 in an area the size of Western Europe.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Data refer to resident population.):\nStructure of the population (01.01.2021) (Estimates):\nThe age group under 15 is considered below the working age, while the age group over 63(60) is above the working age (63 years for men, 60 for women).\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nVital statistics.\nBirths and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n1 Births and deaths until 1979 are estimates.\nCrude birth rates and total fertility rates by region in 2024.\nThus it can be seen that fertility rate is higher in more traditionalist and religious south and west, and lower in the north and east, where the percentage of Slavic and German population is still relatively high.\nAccording to the Kazakhstan Demographic and Health Survey in 1999, the TFR for Kazakhs was 2.5 and that for Russians was 1.38. TFR in 1989 for Kazakhs &amp; Russians were 3.58 and 2.24 respectively.\nLife expectancy at birth.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nKazakhstan's dominant ethnic group, the Kazakhs, traces its origins to the 15th century, when after the disintegration of Golden Horde, numbers of Turkic and Turco-Mongol tribes united to establish the Kazakh Khanate. With a cohesive culture and national identity, they constituted an absolute majority on the land until colonization by the Russian empire.\nRussian advances into the territory of Kazakhstan began in the late 18th century, when the Kazakhs nominally accepted Russian rule in exchange for protection against repeated attacks by the western Mongolian Kalmyks. In the 1890s, Russian peasants began to settle on the fertile lands of northern Kazakhstan, causing many Kazakhs to move eastwards into Chinese territory in search of new grazing grounds. The 1906 completion of the Trans-Aral Railway between Orenburg and Tashkent further facilitated Russian colonization.\nThe first collective farms were formed in Kazakhstan in 1921, populated primarily by Russians and Soviet deportees. In 1930, as part of the first Five Year Plan, the Soviet Government decreed measures of force sedentarization of nomads and their incorporation into collectivized farms. This movement resulted in devastating famines of the 1920s and of the 1930s, claiming the lives of an estimated 40% of ethnic Kazakhs (1.5 million), between 1930 and 1933. Hundreds of thousands also fled to China, Iran and Afghanistan. The famine made Kazakhs a minority of the population of Kazakhstan, and only after the republic gained independence in 1991 did Kazakhs have a slim demographic majority within Kazakhstan.\nDemographics did shift in the 1950s and 1960s, when, as part of Nikita Khrushchev's Virgin Lands Campaign, hundreds of thousands of Soviet citizens relocated to the Kazakh steppes in order to farm. As recognized in the 1959 census, the Kazaks became the second-largest ethnic group in Kazakhstan for the first time in recorded history, comprising just 30% of the total population of Kazakhstan. Russians numbered 42.7%.\nSince the Soviet Union's collapse, the numbers of members of European ethnic groups has been falling and Asian groups have been continuously rising. According to 2024 estimates, the ethnic composition of Kazakhstan was approximately: 71% Kazakh, 14.9% Russian, 3.3% Uzbek, 1.9% Ukrainian, 1.5% Uyghur, 1.1% Tatar, 1.1% German, and &lt;1% Korean, Turkish, Azerbaijani, Belarusian, Dungan, Kurdish, Tajik, Polish, Kyrgyz, Chechen. According to 2021 Census, composition of child population was 79% Kazakh and 9.1% Russian.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nExternal links.\nFor current data, use these sites."}
{"id": "16646", "revid": "2790592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16646", "title": "Politics of Kazakhstan", "text": " \nThe politics of Kazakhstan takes place in the framework of a semi-presidential republic, whereby the President of Kazakhstan is head of state and nominates the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of parliament.\nNone of the elections held in Kazakhstan have been considered free or fair by Western standards with issues noted including ballot tampering, multiple voting, harassment of opposition candidates and press censorship.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by popular vote for a http:// The prime minister and first deputy prime minister are appointed by the president. Council of Ministers is also appointed by the president. President Nazarbayev expanded his presidential powers by decree: only he can initiate constitutional amendments, appoint and dismiss the government, dissolve Parliament, call referendums at his discretion, and appoint administrative heads of regions and cities.\nThe president is the head of state. He also is the commander in chief of the armed forces and may veto legislation that has been passed by the Parliament. President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who was in office since Kazakhstan became independent, won a new 7-year term in the 1999 election that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe said fell short of international standards. A major political opponent, former prime minister Akezhan Kazhegeldin, was prohibited from running against the president because he had attended an unauthorized meeting of \"the movement for free elections\". On top of this the election was unconstitutionally called two years ahead of schedule. Free access to the media is also denied to opposing opinions. In 2002 a law set very stringent requirements for the maintenance of legal status of a political party, which lowered the number of legal parties from 19 in 2002 to 8 in 2003. The prime minister, who serves at the pleasure of the president, chairs the Cabinet of Ministers and serves as Kazakhstan's head of government. There are three deputy prime ministers and 16 ministers in the Cabinet. Bakhytzhan Sagintayev became the Prime Minister in September 2016.\nLegislative branch.\nThe legislature, known as the Parliament (Parliament), has two chambers. The Lower House Assembly (\"Mazhilis\") has 107 seats, elected for a four-year term, 98 seats are from party lists, 9 - from Assembly of People. All MPs are elected for 5 years. The Upper House Senate has 47 members, 40 of whom are elected for six-year terms in double-seat constituencies by the local assemblies, half renewed every two years, and 7 presidential appointees. In addition, ex-presidents are \"ex officio\" senators for life.\nMajilis deputies and the government both have the right of legislative initiative, though most legislation considered by the Parliament is proposed by the government. Several deputies are elected from the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan.\nJudicial branch.\nThere are 65 judges on the Supreme Court of Kazakhstan. There are seven members of the Constitutional Council. Out of the 7 members, 3 are appointed by the president.\nThere are local and oblast (regional) level courts, and a national-level Supreme Court. Local level courts serve as courts of first instance for less serious crimes such as theft and vandalism. Oblast level courts hear more serious criminal cases and also hear cases in rural areas where no local courts have been established. A judgment by a local court may be appealed to the oblast level. The Supreme Court is a cassation court that hears appeals from the oblast courts.\nThe constitution establishes a seven-member Constitutional Council to determine the constitutionality of laws adopted by the legislature. It also rules on challenges to elections and referendums and interprets the constitution. The president appoints three of its members, including the chair.\nUnder constitutional amendments of 1998, the president appoints a chairperson of a Higher Judicial Council, which nominates judges for the Supreme Court. The Council consists of the chairperson of the Constitutional Council, the chairperson of the Supreme Court, the Prosecutor General, the Minister of Justice, senators, judges, and other persons appointed by the president. The president recommends and the Senate (upper legislative chamber) approves these nominees for the Supreme Court. Oblast judges (nominated by the Higher Judicial Council) are appointed by the president. Lower level judges are appointed by the president from a list presented by the Higher Judicial Council. Under legislation approved in 2000, judges serve for life.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nEarly presidential elections were held in Kazakhstan on 9 June 2019 following the resignation of long-term president Nursultan Nazarbayev. Originally scheduled for 2020, seven candidates were registered to participate in the elections, including incumbent president Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, who had assumed the presidency three months before the elections following the resignation of Nazarbayev. Tokayev was subsequently re-elected with 71% of the vote. His closest challenger, Amirjan Qosanov of the Ult Tagdyry party, received 16%.\nInternational organization participation.\nIn 1999, Kazakhstan applied for observer status at the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. The official response of the Assembly was that Kazakhstan could apply for full membership, because it is partially located in Europe, but that they would not be granted any status whatsoever at the Council until their democracy and human rights records improved. Improvement in these areas has been made for in 2012, Kazakhstan was elected by United Nations members to serve on the UN Human Rights Council. Despite this, Kazakhstan is still considered to have a very poor human rights record by analysts such as The Economist Intelligence Unit.\nAsDB, CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS (associate), ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM (observer), NSG, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, SCO, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16647", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16647", "title": "Economy of Kazakhstan", "text": "The economy of Kazakhstan is the largest in Central Asia in both absolute and per capita terms. As of 2023, Kazakhstan attracted more than US$370 billion of foreign investments since becoming an independent republic after the dissolution of the former Soviet Union.\nIt possesses oil reserves as well as minerals and metals. Almost every known element on the periodic table can be found in Kazakhstan. It also has considerable agricultural potential, with its vast steppe lands accommodating both livestock and grain production. The mountains in the south are important for apples and walnuts; both species grow wild there. Kazakhstan's industrial sector rests on the extraction and processing of these natural resources.\nThe dissolution of the Soviet Union and the collapse of demand for Kazakhstan's traditional heavy industry products have resulted in a sharp decline of the economy since 1991, with the steepest annual decline occurring in 1994. In 1995\u201397 the pace of the government program of economic reform and privatization quickened, resulting in a substantial shifting of assets into the private sector. Kazakhstan was granted \"market economy country\" status by the European Union and the United States, in 2000 and 2002 respectively.\nThe December 1996 signing of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium agreement to build a new pipeline from western Kazakhstan's Tengiz Field through Russia to the Black Sea increased prospects for substantially larger oil exports until Putin took issue with the lukewarm support he experienced in the wake of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine from Kazakh President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev. Kazakhstan's economy turned downward in 1998 with a 2.5% decline in GDP growth due to slumping oil prices and the August financial crisis in Russia. A bright spot in 1999 was the recovery of international petroleum prices, which, combined with a well-timed tenge devaluation and a bumper grain harvest, pulled the economy out of recession.\nGDP per capita shrank by 26% in the 1990s. In the 2000s, Kazakhstan's economy grew sharply, aided by increased prices on world markets for Kazakhstan's leading exports: oil, metals and grain. GDP grew 9.6% in 2000, up from 1.7% in 1999. In 2006, extremely high GDP growth had been sustained, and grew by 10.6%. Business with the booming economies of Russia and China, as well as neighboring Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) nations have helped to propel this growth. The increased economic growth also led to a turn-around in government finances, with the budget moving from a cash deficit of 3.7% of GDP in 1999 to 0.1% surplus in 2000. The country experienced a slowdown in economic growth from 2014, sparked by falling oil prices and the effects of the Russo-Ukrainian War. The country's currency was devalued by 19% in 2014 and by 22% in 2015.\nIn 2023, the International Institute for Management Development compiled its World Competitiveness Ranking, ranking Kazakhstan 37th out of 64 countries. The ranking analyzes and ranks countries according to how they manage their competencies to achieve long-term value creation.\nCyril Muller, the World Bank Vice President for Europe and Central Asia, visited Astana in January 2017. He praised the country's progress, made during the 25-year partnership with the World Bank. Muller also talked about Kazakhstan's improved positioning in the World Bank's Doing Business Report 2017, where Kazakhstan ranked 35th out of 190 countries worldwide. After 2000, the government conducted several public sector reforms and adopted the New Public Management (NPM) approach, which was aimed at reducing costs and increasing the efficiency of the public service delivery.\nKazakhstan secured the 3rd position in the Central and South Asia regional ranking of the 2018 Global Innovation Index (GII) released by World Intellectual Property Organization.\nThe main producer of cotton pulp in Kazakhstan is Khlopkoprom. Judging by a number of transactions, its products have been supplied to gunpowder manufacturers in the Russian Federation since 2022. Most of the factories that imported pulp from Kazakhstan for the manufacture of explosives are under US and Ukrainian sanctions. According to OCCRP, Vlast, and iStories, a significant increase in Kazakhstan's exports of cotton pulp and derivatives to the Russian Federation after February 24, 2022, was identified. Exported components are key in the manufacture of explosives and gunpowder. There are contracts for the supply of raw materials to the Kazan Gunpowder Plant from Kazakhstan until 2026, and to the Aleksinsky Chemical Plant (which also produces gunpowder) until 2024.\nMacro-economic trend.\nIn the 2014 Economic Freedom Index published by The Heritage Foundation in Washington, D.C., Kazakhstan has gained 22 points over the past 17 years, which is noted by the authors as among the 20 best improvements recorded by any country. Kazakhstan's economic freedom score is 69.1, equalling \"moderately free\". Its overall score has increased by 0.1 point, with significant improvements in investment freedom and government integrity offsetting steep declines in fiscal health and monetary freedom. Kazakhstan is ranked 11th among 43 countries in the Asia\u2013Pacific region, and its overall score is above the regional and world averages.\nAccording to the World Bank\u2019s latest Kazakhstan economic update \u2013 Economic Recovery During Challenging Times (spring, 2023), the economy is set to experience a moderate growth acceleration, with real GDP forecast to rise by 3.5 percent in 2023 and 4 percent in 2024 supported largely by the hydrocarbons sector as oil production increases. In the 2023 Economic Freedom Index published by The Heritage Foundation in Washington, D.C., Kazakhstan ranks 71st out of 176 countries, falling in the group of \"moderately free\" countries. Kazakhstan's economic freedom score is 62.1.\u00a0 Kazakhstan ranks 13th out of 39 countries in the Asia\u2013Pacific region, and its overall score is above the world and regional averages.\nThis chart shows trends in the gross domestic product of Kazakhstan at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund, with figures in millions of tenge.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132023. Inflation under 5% is in green.\nEconomic growth and GDP.\nAccording to the World Bank, Kazakhstan's economy grew by 5.1% in H1 2023, driven by exports and fiscal stimulus. GDP is projected to grow by 4.5% in 2023 and subsequent years, aided by new oil production coming on-stream.\nKazakhstan's economy recorded an average real GDP growth rate of 3.0% in the decade to 2022, above the 2.5% average for Eastern Europe. In 2022, real GDP growth was 3.3%. The official estimate for Kazakhstan's GDP was $512 billion at the end of 2022 in purchasing power parity terms. \nThe country devalued its currency by 19% in February 2014. The country experienced a slowdown in economic growth from 2014 sparked by falling oil prices and the effects of the 2014 Russo-Ukrainian War.\nThe Government of Kazakhstan signed a Framework Partnership Agreement with IBRD, IFC, MIGA on 1 May 2014; according to this Agreement the World Bank will allocate US$2.5 trillion to Kazakhstan, for the diversification of the economy and reaching the sustainable development.\nThe World Bank report shows that Kazakhstan, as of 2015, reached the level of an upper-middle-income country with a GDP of US$170 billion.\nAnother 22% devaluation occurred in August 2015.\nForeign direct investment increased 30 percent in 2015 in Kazakhstan's agricultural industry and 80 percent in the country's petroleum products sector.\nIn 2016 Kazakhstan's economy started to recover from the crisis caused by low oil prices and the tenge devaluation. According to the Minister of National Economy of Kazakhstan, in nine months of 2016 the GDP growth reached 0.4%. Sectors of economy that experienced the highest growth included construction (6.9%), agriculture (4.9%), and transport sector (4.0%).\nThe GDP per capita in current US$ in Kazakhstan declined by about 40% between 2013 and 2017.\nKazakhstan was ranked 25th out of 190 countries in the World Bank's Doing Business 2020 report. The country improved its position by 3 points, from 28 to 25, in the 2020 ranking compared to the previous year. This placed Kazakhstan ahead of countries such as Iceland (26th place), Austria (27th place), Russia (28th place), Japan (29th place), etc.\nKazakhstan has prioritized the development of non-oil sectors of economy, which accounted for 85% of the country's economic growth in 2019.\nThe biggest growth in 2020 occurred in the automotive industry (+53.6%), pharmaceuticals (+39.7%), processed metal products (+19.5%), mechanical engineering (+16.5%), as well as in light industry (+16.4%). The industries in the service sector that demonstrated growth included construction (+10.7%) and information and communications (+8.2%).\nThe World Bank reported that Kazakhstan's economy recorded a gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 3.2% in 2022. This was a part of the trend where the economy was projected to grow by 3.9% in 2023, driven mainly by the hydrocarbons sector and increased oil production.\nSectors of economy.\nPrimary.\nEnergy.\nKazakhstan is the leading country in the world for uranium production volumes with 35% of global production, and it has the world's second biggest uranium reserves after Australia.\nOil and gas.\nOil and gas is the leading economic sector. In 2000, Kazakhstan produced 35,252,000 metric tons of oil (700,000 barrels per day), a 17.4% increase over 1999's 30,025,000 tons. It exported 28,883,000 tons of oil in 2000, up 38.8% from 20,813,000 tons in 1999. Production in 2001 has been growing at roughly 20%, on target to meet the government's forecast of 40,100,000 tons of oil (800,000 barrels per day). In 2000, production reached 11.5\u00a0km3 of natural gas, up from 8.2\u00a0km3 in 1999.\nKazakhstan has the potential to be a world-class oil exporter in the medium term. The landmark foreign investment in Kazakhstan is the TengizChevroil joint venture, owned 50% by ChevronTexaco, 25% by ExxonMobil, 20% by KazMunaiGas of Kazakhstan, and 5% by LukArco of Russia. The Karachaganak natural gas and gas condensate field is being developed by BG, Agip, ChevronTexaco, and Lukoil. The Agip-led Offshore Kazakhstan Consortium has discovered potentially huge Kashagan oil field in the northern Caspian. Kazakhstan's economic future is linked to oil and gas development. GDP growth will depend on the price of oil, as well as the ability to develop new deposits.\nJanuary 2022 began with thousands of people returning to the streets of Kazakhstan to protest against the surging gas prices, recording four straight days of demonstrations, which is claimed to be the biggest protests to have taken place in the oil-rich country in decades. Protesters invaded into government buildings and took over police vehicles despite a strict emergency led by the state being in place.\nMining.\nKazakhstan is a leading producer of many mineral commodities, including salt, uranium, ferrochrome, titanium sponge, cadmium, potash, magnesium, rhenium, copper, bauxite, gallium and zinc.\nThe country was the world's largest producer of uranium in 2022. In 2019, the country was the world's 10th largest producer of gold; 11th largest world producer of copper; 3rd largest worldwide producer of chromium; 9th largest world producer of bauxite; 9th largest world producer of zinc; 10th largest worldwide producer of antimony; 12th largest world producer of iron ore; 12th largest world producer of lead; 14th largest world producer of manganese; 17th largest world producer of phosphate; 6th largest world producer of bismuth, and the 7th largest world producer of sulfur.\nIndustry.\nMotor cars.\nIn June 2014 the CKD (Complete Knock-Down) assembly of Toyota Fortuner was launched in Kostanay, Kazakhstan. The expected annual output makes around 3,000 cars.\nThe Kazakhstan's car industry was developing rapidly in 2014 producing US$2 billion worth of products annually. Unfortunately, the industry experienced a decline despite high hopes, with sales dwindling to only 47,000 in 2016.\nIn 2020, the Kazakh economy observed the biggest growth in its automotive industry, which saw a 53.6% growth, despite the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe ongoing state support for the domestic auto industry, primarily through recycling fees, is a contentious issue. For 20 years, the industry has largely operated as a mere assembly hub, importing spare parts from abroad and performing basic assembly tasks, such as fitting wheels\u2014hardly advancing towards establishing a truly Kazakh brand in the automotive sector. This situation has fostered public dissent, notably from groups like #\u041d\u0435\u0442\u0443\u0442\u0438\u043b\u044c\u0441\u0431\u043e\u0440\u0443 [no recycling fee], who argue that such policies unfairly prioritize industry support over the needs of regular citizens. This has contributed to an increase in the average age of vehicles across Kazakhstan, as newer, affordable options remain inaccessible for many. The group's primary demands include the abolition of these recycling fees and a redirection of support towards more pressing public needs, challenging the continued governmental support that, they argue, effectively \"mummifies\" an unproductive industry.\nRail.\nGE Transportation acquired 50% stake in Lokomotiv Kurastyru Zauyty in a joint venture with Kazakhstan's national railway company Temir Zholy.\nServices.\nTechnology.\nOn 22 December 2014 the World Bank approved a US$88\u00a0million loan that would support Kazakhstan's efforts to facilitate commercially and socially viable innovation in technology. The Fostering Productive Innovation Project aims to improve the country in areas that are able to foster and support technological innovation.\nRetail.\nAccording to A.T. Kearney's 2015 Global Retail Development Index, Kazakhstan ranked 13 out of 30. In the 2016th Index, Kazakhstan ranked as the 4th best developing country for retail investments, scoring 56.5 out of 100. Kazakhstan's market attracted large international retailers, such as French retail chains Carrefour and Leroy Merlin, as well as food giants McDonald's and KFC.\nGambling.\nGambling in Kazakhstan was developing already during the day of Czarist Russia, then lotteries were organized. In 1698, Czar Peter I signed a decree which allowed organized lotteries for the first time. In later years lotteries were organized by the Ministry of Finance of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which included Kazakhstan.\nThe Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Kazakhstan started issuing licenses for gambling activity in 1999.\nIn 2007 the government of Kazakhstan has introduced a new law which ordered banning gambling on the territory of Kazakhstan besides 2 places which were to become the examples of Russia's special gambling zones. Casinos existing outside these areas had to be closed or moved to places where they could operate legally. The first legal casino opened after the introduction of new law was Casino Flamingo in Kapchagay, which was opened on 1 October 2008.\nIn 2018, the income of gambling companies in Kazakhstan amounted to \u20b819.5\u00a0billion. This is 16.1% more than in 2017. Then this amount was at the level of \u20b816.8\u00a0billion.\nHousing market.\nAs of 2016, the total housing area in Kazakhstan was , an average of per person. The housing area per person increased by 20% in the period from 2005 to 2016, but remained below the UN's recommended standard of per person.\nExternal trade and investment.\nTrade.\nKazakhstan has 11 transcontinental routes, including rail and road routes, and many oil and gas pipelines. The country's geographic position allows for the transporting of goods from China to Europe three to four times faster than other routes.\nSherin Suzhikova, Counselor of Kazakhstan's Chamber of Commerce and Industry and Chao Yon-chuan, Secretary-General of the Taiwan External Trade Development Council (TAITRA), signed an agreement on 13 October 2006 in Taipei to improve economic relations through \"exchanges of market information and visits by trade professionals.\" TAITRA has an office in Almaty, Kazakhstan.\nIn 2006, North Dakota's then Lieutenant Governor Jack Dalrymple led an 18-member delegation of the North Dakota Trade Office representing seven North Dakota companies and Dickinson State University on a trip to Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Russia. North Dakota exports mostly machinery to Kazakhstan, the eighth largest destination for North Dakotan exports; machinery exports increased from US$22,000 to US$25 million between 2000 and 2005.\nThe percentage of high-tech exports (as a share of manufactured exports) from Kazakhstan has grown from just 4.46% in 1995 to 37.17% in 2014. One of the main factors that triggered this growth was the Technology Commercialization Project developed and implemented by the World Bank Group and the Kazakh Government. Through this project, 65 Kazakh tech startups received funding and training helping them get their innovations into markets.\nChina is Kazakhstan's important trade partner. In late March 2015 the two countries signed 33 deals worth US$23.6 billion. The deals cover different industries, such as oil refining, cars, steel.\nKazakhstan's foreign trade turnover in 2018 comprised $93.5bn that is 19.7% more compared to 2017. The volume of export in the reporting period made $67bn (+25.7%) and import was $32.5bn (+9.9%).\nThe Government of Kazakhstan has been supporting Kazakhstani exporters operating in foreign markets through their QazTrade incubator. Since September 2019, the program selects businesses and assists them with navigating bureaucracy and connecting to foreign markets the government deems a priority, including Germany, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, and China.\nNew economic reforms.\nIn his state-of-the-nation address on September 1, 2023, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev of Kazakhstan unveiled a comprehensive plan focused on economic reforms and the new economic course for the country. Among the key points were industrialization, diversification, a move toward green energy, simplification of tax codes, and a focus on transparency and fairness in governance. \nParticular focus will be given to sectors like heavy engineering, uranium enrichment, and automotive components, he noted. Tokayev proposed that in order to support the manufacturing industry, foreign and domestic investors should be exempted from paying taxes and other mandatory payments for the first three years.\nOn fiscal matters, the President called for a coordination of financial and monetary policies, with the aim of achieving stable economic growth of 6-7 percent. He also emphasized the need to attract foreign banks to boost competition and solve the problem of insufficient corporate lending. \nTokayev further accentuated the need to support small and medium enterprises and accelerate privatization.\u00a0Changes in legislation will be initiated to encourage consolidation among small businesses, and efforts will be intensified to demonopolize key markets.\nIn his address, the President also focused on Kazakhstan\u2019s commitment to sustainability and environmental protection. Tokayev highlighted plans to increase renewable energy capacity and develop hydrogen generation. The President proposed to hold a national referendum on the construction of a nuclear power plant.\nThe Kazakh leader also indicated a vision for Kazakhstan to become an IT-focused country. He directed the government to increase the export of IT services to one billion dollars by 2026. This will be facilitated by partnerships with major foreign IT companies.\nIn the realm of transportation, President Tokayev outlined plans to establish Kazakhstan as a major transit hub in Eurasia, focusing on key routes like the Trans-Caspian and the international North-South Corridor. He noted that Kazakhstan should eventually become a full-fledged transport and logistics power. The President also pointed out that the realization of the transport potential depends on Kazakhstan\u2019s constructive and good-neighbourly relations with all neighbouring countries, including Russia, China, and our neighbours in Central and South Asia. \nKazakhstan is developing a national plan to provide projects with high-quality infrastructure by 2029 and is introducing new financial incentive mechanisms to facilitate investment flows into complex oil and gas projects. \nBond market.\nIn October 2014, Kazakhstan introduced its first overseas dollar bonds in 14 years. Kazakhstan issued $2.5\u00a0billion of 10- and 30-year bonds on 5 October 2014, in what was the nation's first dollar-denominated overseas sale since 2000. Kazakhstan sold $1.5\u00a0billion of 10-year dollar bonds to yield 1.5 percentage points above midswaps and $1\u00a0billion of 30-year debt at two percentage points over midswaps. The country drew bids for $11\u00a0billion.\nForeign direct investment.\nKazakhstan has concluded a number of Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs), Treaties with Investment Provisions (TIPs) and Investment Related Instruments (IRIs) according to the database of UNCTAD.\nKazakhstan is the largest recipient of total and annual foreign direct investment of all CIS countries.\nThe OECD has recognized the strides the government has made in opening the country to international investment and in improving the policy framework for investment as part of their efforts to diversify the economy. In 2017 Kazakhstan was invited by OECD to become Adherent to the OECD Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises.\nAs of 30 September 2014, total foreign investment in Kazakhstan reached US$211.5 billion. Of that total, net foreign Direct Investment constituted US$129.3 billion, with portfolio and other investments comprising the remaining US$82.2 billion.\nThe FDI growth in Kazakhstan was largely driven by increased investment in mining, transport, financial services, telecommunication, and energy that compensated for decreasing investment inflows in construction, metallurgy, and trade. The Prime Minister of Kazakhstan, Alikhan Smailov, has stated that Kazakhstan aims to attract foreign direct investment (FDIs) worth around US$25 billion in 2023, adding that 46 projects involving international financial investments were implemented in the country during 2022 in renewable energy, metallurgy, agriculture, mining industry, and engineering. Kazakhstan's top-10 FDI donors in 2022 included the Netherlands, the Unitesd States, Switzerland, Belgium, Russia, South Korea, China, France, the United Kingdom, and Turkey.\nKazakhstan established the Astana International Financial Center (AIFC), modelled on the Dubai International Financial Center, in 2018. The AIFC offers foreign investors an alternative jurisdiction for operations, with tax holidays, flexible labor rules, a Common Law-based legal system, and flexibility to carry out transactions in any currency.\u00a0 The Kazakh government recommends that foreign investors use the AIFC for contracts with Kazakh businesses.\nOver the past five years, the major foreign investors in Kazakhstan have been the Netherlands ($33.8 billion of investment), the United States ($19.4 billion), Switzerland ($12.5 billion), China ($ 6.2 billion) and France ($ 4.7 billion). Notably, almost 60% of the investment projects are related to non-extractive sectors, including manufacturing, transportation, trade, as well as financial and insurance services. Agriculture is one of Kazakhstan's most important sectors where the country seeks to attract foreign investments to boost the competitiveness of this sector of economy. To that end, in 2017 KazAgro negotiated with the European Investment Bank (EIB) a \u20ac200 million loan for a period of 15 years.\n13 Kazakhstan's regions out of 14 saw investment growth in 2020, despite the COVID-19 pandemic. High growth of investment was in the construction sector, specifically in Turkestan region and Zhambyl region as well as Shymkent city. The gross foreign direct investment (FDI) inflow in Kazakhstan reached $28 billion in 2022, a record-high in the past ten years. FDI inflow went up by 17.7 percent since 2021 when it reached $23.8 billion. In 2012, this figure stood at $28.9 billion. The Atyrau Region received most of the investment \u2013 $8.3 billion (a 48.3 percent increase), followed by Almaty city with $7.6 billion (10.9 percent), Astana \u2013 $2.2 billion (107.2 percent), the East Kazakhstan Region \u2013 $2.2 billion (3.1 percent), and the Aktobe Region \u2013 $1.2 billion (11.2 percent down). \u00a0\nOne of the main areas for investment is renewable energy, as Kazakhstan has one of the largest solar and wind potentials in the region. Moreover, it has abundant reserves, amounting to 90% of Central Asia's total, of critical raw materials, which are essential for the deployment of technologies like wind turbines (with rare earth magnets), batteries (lithium and cobalt) and semiconductors (polysilicon). In November 2022, the EU had already recognised Kazakhstan's value for the green transition by signing a strategic partnership for the supply of critical raw materials, as well as green hydrogen.\nInvestor support.\nKazakhstan's investment environment is defined by the government's support for foreign investors. To increase the FDI inflow, the country established the Kazakh Invest National Company, or Kazakh Invest for short. It is a one-stop shop for investors that facilitates investment projects' implementation process from an idea to implementation, as well as ensures aftercare services. In 2018, Kazakh Invest helped develop more than 70 investment proposals in a variety of industries: metallurgy, petrochemistry, food industry, tourism and other. It included creating a business plan, financial model and teaser development.\nCurrently, Kazakh Invest is involved in 216 investment projects and initiatives worth $42.5 billion that will create around 47,000 jobs. This year, 4 investment projects worth $217 million have been launched with the support of the organization, while 85 projects worth $12.3 billion are being implemented.\nIn order to facilitate foreign investment, Kazakhstan launched in 2020 an online portal elicense.kz, which allows to conclude investment contracts online reducing red tape. The first agreement that was concluded via the portal was between Kaz Solar 50 and the German company Solarnet Investment GmbH for a renewable energy project worth \u20b85\u00a0billion.\nTo make Kazakhstan more attractive to foreign investors, Kazakhstan established 14 special economic zones. Companies located in these zones receive preferential treatment, including exemptions from corporate income tax, land tax, property tax, VAT and customs duties for up to 25 years,\nIntellectual property.\nIn 2015 Kazakhstan passed a law to regulate Intellectual Property, patent law, and copyright protections and bring its legislation into line with the European Patent Convention (1994 revision) and the 2006 Singapore Treaty.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nIn April 2025, Al Khaleej Sugar, a leading sugar company from the United Arab Emirates, announced plans to establish a sugar plant in Kazakhstan\u2019s Almaty Region. The decision was made following a meeting on 27 April between the company\u2019s managing director, Sheikh Jamal Al Ghurair, and the region\u2019s governor, Marat Sultangaziyev. The plant\u2019s location was to be near the city of Konayev, chosen for its logistical advantages. Key considerations for the project included securing a reliable water supply, with alternative irrigation sources being explored, as well as the potential development of wind power plants to ensure the plant\u2019s energy self-sufficiency. Al Khaleej Sugar aimed to minimize environmental impact by relying on renewable energy. The company, which controlled 3% of the global refined sugar market, conducted a detailed hydrological analysis to ensure the success of the project.\nPublic policy.\n2015 \"Nurly Zhol\" economic policy.\nOn 11 November 2014 in his address to the nation for 2015, Nazarbayev proclaimed Kazakhstan's New Economic Policy \u2013 The Path to the Future (Nurly Zhol). The new economic policy implies large-scale state investment in infrastructure over the next several years. In the short term, the program \"Nurly Zhol\" will apply the anti-crisis measures to overcome the turbulence in the global economy. The long-term measures of the state program of infrastructure development will help to create a strong platform for new growth.\nKazakhstan has identified five priorities for modernization of the state and the economy to maintain competitiveness in the Fourth Industrial Revolution.\nKazakhstan was ranked 36th in the Ease of Doing Business report released by the World Bank Group in 2018. The report's rankings rate ease of regulations for businesses and strength of property rights.\nThe Heritage Foundation, a Washington, D.C.\u2013based research center, ranked Kazakhstan 41st in its Index of Economic Freedom 2018. Its overall score has increased by 0.1 point, still being only \"moderately free\" with significant improvements in investment freedom and government integrity offsetting steep declines in fiscal health and monetary freedom.\nKazakhstan aimed in 2017 to boost its economy by attracting private investors interested in developing national companies. This is the main goal of privatization that is expected to decrease the share of public property to 15% of GDP. Such companies as Kazakhstan Railways, Samruk-Energo, Kazatomprom, Kaspost, KazMunayGas and Air Astana are expected to be sold through IPO.\nKazakhstan fell from 32nd to the 38th place in the 2018 IMD World Competitiveness ranking. The report evaluates business efficiency, public finance and domestic economy.\nPrivatisation 2016\u20132020.\nIn December 2015, Kazakhstan Government approved new privatization plan for 2016 \u2013 2020. It is a large-scale privatization program that continues the privatization of 2014 and includes 60 major state-owned companies. According to Kazakh Finance ministry, the state budget got \u20b86.99 billion (US$20.6 million) from the deals reached within the 2014\u20132016 privatization program as of 20 Sept. 2016. Kazakhstan's privatization program aims to reduce the state participation in the economy to 15 percent, which is the level set for countries of the OECD.\nAccording to the Kazakh Prime Minister Alikhan Smailov, the implementation of a large-scale privatization plan will reduce the share of state participation in the economy down to 14 percent by 2025. \u00a0\nThe privatization list includes 675 facilities in the public and quasi-public sectors, including the shares of 262 national companies that are part of holdings such as the Samruk Kazyna Sovereign Wealth Fund, KazMunayGas, and Kazakhstan Temir Zholy. \nAccording to Minister of National Economy Alibek Kuantyrov, the plan excludes 200 critical social life support systems such as water, power, and heat facilities. These objects will remain under state ownership.\nSpecial Economic Zones.\nA Special Economic Zone (SEZ) is a part of Kazakhstan's territory, which has a special legal regime, with all the necessary infrastructure, to carry out priority activities.\nKazakhstan has 14 SEZs with different industry orientations in 12 regions nationwide, particularly in the Khorgos-Eastern Gate logistics hub, Turkistan, a center of international tourism and pilgrimage, and the Aktau Seaport, which has incorporated the ports of Aktau and Kuryk in the summer of 2023.\nIn March 2023, Kazakhstan created the G4 City special economic zone in the Almaty Region, seeking to attract nearly 3.7 trillion tenge ($8.1 billion) of investments through 2048. The new economic zone with an area of 30,000 hectares is expected to provide favorable conditions for attracting domestic and foreign investment to create an integrated G4 City, which will facilitate the development of the entire region. \nCurrently, the following SEZs have been established in Kazakhstan:\nSmall and medium-sized enterprises.\nA new program to support small businesses was launched in Kazakhstan in February 2015. 2015 is expected to be a pilot period of the program. During that period the initiative will be focused on three major areas, notably agribusiness, machinery building and production of construction materials, and is to be further extended to other industries.\nIn May 2015 the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) agreed to provide \u20ac41 million for technical cooperation projects, advisory support to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and to introduce a Women in Business program.\nIn 2016 the number of Kazakhstan's telecom start-ups increased by 10% compared to 2015. Around 9,400 small telecom companies are currently registered in the country.\nThe Kazakh Government provides extensive support to businesses, especially SMEs. The share of small and medium-sized businesses (SMEs) in the country's gross domestic product grew by 7.9 percent between 2015 and 2021 and reached 34.7 percent. Kazakhstan plans to raise this indicator to 50% by 2050.\nIn 2023, it was reported that the number of small and medium-sized businesses (SMEs) in Kazakhstan has increased by 23.4% to nearly two million. The number of people working in SMEs increased by more than 18% to 4.1 million, accounting for around 40% of everyone employed in the economy. \nThe share of SMEs in the economy grew from 33.3% to 36.5%, while the volume of output by SMEs increased by 28% to over 59 trillion tenge ($132.4 billion).\nTo expand SMEs\u2019 access to finance, a number of programmes are in place in the country to provide concessional lending and microfinance, subsidised interest rates, loan guarantees and grants to start a business. The main operator of financial support programmes for SMEs is the Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund.\nGovernment programme for business support and business development \u201cBusiness Roadmap 2025\u201d\n\u201cBRM 2025\u201d programme has been in operation since 2010 and is administered by the Ministry of National Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Initially, the focus of the programme was on supporting enterprises in non-extracting and import-substituting sectors. Over time, this was expanded to rural areas, small and single-industry towns\u2019 entrepreneurs, who are not subject to sectoral restrictions. The programme implementation involves both central and local authorities, Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund, Atameken National Chamber of Entrepreneurs and commercial banks. The types of support that the programme offers include interest rate subsidies, loan guarantees, grants, training and consulting assistance; and meets the basic needs of entrepreneurs, making \u201cBRM 2025\u201d the most popular government programme.\nThe programmes of Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund\nDamu Entrepreneurship Development Fund implements a number of its own programmes, which are financed from the company\u2019s own capital or by raising funds from local authorities and international financial organisations. Within the framework of regional programmes, loans are granted at a rate of up to 8.0% in priority sectors, which are determined depending on the specifics of the economy of each region. Within the framework of international programmes, loans are issued on market terms and without sector restrictions.\nIn terms of its own programmes, Damu Fund and its partner organisations (banks, leasing companies, microfinance organisations) have financed more than 55 112 projects for KZT 837 756 million as of the end of 2020. \nIn May 2023, Prime Minister Alikhan Smailov said medium-sized businesses should become the engine of progress that drives Kazakhstan\u2019s manufacturing growth with the launch of competitive products and a wide range of services.\u00a0To enhance the protection of the rights of entrepreneurs, the government is introducing a regulation-from-scratch mechanism to drop 10,000 unwarranted requirements for businesses and automate processes in all areas of state control.\nRecent miscellany.\nKazakhstan was ranked 54th 2017 Economic Freedom of the World report published by Fraser Institute, but ranks 12 places below on place 66 when adjusted by the Gender Disparity Index, which captures the degree to which women around the world have the same legal rights as men and adjusts the economic freedom score accordingly. This shows a large disadvantage of women in business.\nIn recent years a trade route has been established between Kazakhstan and the United States. It now makes up 54% of the World's salt imports and exports by volume (350,000 tonnes per year).\nIn 2021, 14 products developed by Kazakh scientists began being exported to China, Russia, Turkey, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, and the Czech Republic. These products include, but are not limited to, food &amp; drinks based on milk whey; probiotics; an anti-fungal drug; biological sanitation products.\nIn 2021, it was reported that the number of young female entrepreneurs in Kazakhstan has increased by 15 percent.\nGlobal tariff war.\nOn 11 April 2025, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev stated that Kazakhstan was prepared to face the ongoing global economic crisis, which he described as one of the most severe in recent decades. He cited disruptions in global trade and production chains, price volatility, and intensified competition for investment as key challenges. Despite these pressures, Tokayev affirmed that Kazakhstan would maintain its development agenda and continue funding priority infrastructure projects. The statement followed a government meeting addressing falling global prices for energy and commodities. At the time, the economy had seen a temporary boost from rising export demand and the suspension of certain U.S. tariffs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16648", "revid": "382591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16648", "title": "Telecommunications in Kazakhstan", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Kazakhstan include fixed and mobile telephony, broadcasting, and the internet. The market is led by Kazakhtelecom, the partially state-owned incumbent, which operates national backbone networks and provides fixed broadband and pay television to residential and business customers. Mobile services are provided nationwide by Beeline Kazakhstan, Kcell, and Mobile Telecom Service which uses the Tele2 and Altel brands. Fifth-generation (5G) mobile services launched in December 2022 and have expanded under licence obligations that run to 2027. Kazakhstan retained the shared country code +7 after a 2024 decision to continue code-sharing with Russia, following an earlier ITU reservation of +997 for Kazakhstan in 2021.\nTelephones.\nTelephone numbers.\nKazakhstan's international calling code is +7, it is used in combination with the zone codes 6xx and 7xx. It is the only former Soviet country except Russia not yet to have transitioned away from +7, but that does not mean there were not attempts to switch their code. In 2021, the number +997 was allocated by the ITU, and was set in motion to be activated in 2023. However in early 2023, the country applied instead for the number +77 before finally deciding to keep +7.\nTelephone numbers, both fixed and mobile, are 10 digits long.\nKazakhstan's telephone numbering system is structured with zone codes 6xx for fixed-line services and 7xx for mobile phone services. The country has several major telecom providers offering services ranging from fixed-line telephony to mobile and internet packages. The introduction of mobile number portability (MNP) has increased competition among operators by allowing users to switch carriers without changing their phone numbers.\nEfforts to improve telecommunications infrastructure have led to expanded 4G coverage in urban areas, with pilot projects for 5G networks being tested in cities such as Almaty, Astana, and Shymkent. Government initiatives also aim to improve connectivity in rural and remote areas as part of a national push to bridge the digital divide.\nFixed-line.\nTelephone density of fixed telephone subscriptions is decreasing, standing at 16 per 100 people in 2021, compared to its peak of 26 per 100 in 2012.\nMobile.\nAs of 2021, there were estimated to be over 24 million cellular subscriptions; 127 per 100 inhabitants of Kazakhstan.\nKazakhstan has 4G mobile internet and has begun work on 5G as of 2021.\nSatellite.\nKazakhstan's national DAMA satellite communication network was established in 1999 in order to provide communication services to sparsely populated areas with poor road access.\nBroadcast transmission.\nIn Kazakhstan the most popular station is the state run Qazaqstan station.The state also runs the stations Khabar TV, El-Arna, and Eurasia 1.\nInternet.\nIt is estimated that as of 2021, 91% of Kazakhstan residents have access to the internet.\nIn 2023, Kazakhstan will begin the construction on the joint Trans Caspian Fiber Optic (TCFO) project.\nThe government of Kazakhstan carries out surveillance of telecommunications and internet traffic in the country and, as of 2010, was found to filter content related to social and political issues, as well as preparing twice per year a list of websites to be blocked. ISPs are required to prohibit users from disseminating materials or information not in accordance with the country\u2019s laws, including pornography. Since 2015 it is an imprisonable offense to spread unverified information online. Kazakhstan has also throttled or shut down the internet as a response to political dissent, such as during country-wide political unrest in January 2022.\nKey developments.\nIn December 2022, Kcell and Tele2-Altel, both major Kazakhstani mobile network operators (MNOs), launched limited 5G services in the country following their successful acquisition of 5G spectrum licenses. This marked the beginning of the 5G era in Kazakhstan.\nThe two companies have ambitious plans to expand their 5G network infrastructure, aiming to deploy at least 7,000 5G base stations and achieve 80% population coverage by the end of 2027.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16649", "revid": "359256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16649", "title": "Transport in Kazakhstan", "text": " \nThe vast territory of Kazakhstan spans across . The population density is low in Kazakhstan, and the centers of industry and agriculture are spread out and remote from world markets.\nRailways.\nRailways provide 68% of all cargo and passenger traffic to over 57% of the country. There are in common carrier service, excluding industrial lines, of which was electrified as of 2021. All railway lines in Kazakhstan are built in gauge.\nKazakhstan Temir Zholy (KTZ) is the national railway company. KTZ cooperates with French rolling stock manufacturer Alstom in developing Kazakhstan's railway infrastructure. Alstom has more than 600 staff and two joint ventures with KTZ and its subsidiary in Kazakhstan. In July 2017, Alstom opened its first locomotive repairing center in Kazakhstan. It is the only repairing center in Central Asia and the Caucasus.\nAs the Kazakhstani rail system was designed during the Soviet era, rail routes were designed ignoring inter-Soviet borders, based on the needs of Soviet planning. This has caused anomalies, such as the route from Oral to Aktobe passing briefly through Russian territory. It also means that routes might not suit modern-day Kazakhstani needs.\nKazakhstan's developed railway system promotes international and regional trade connecting Asia and Europe. In 2019, the transit of goods through Kazakhstan increased 23% to 664,000 containers.\nRailway links with adjacent countries.\nThe strategy of transport development in Kazakhstan until 2015 was to build of new electrified and of existing railway stations.\nIn 2006, a standard gauge rail link from China to Europe was proposed.\nIn 2007, it was proposed to eliminate break of gauge at Druzhba-Alashankou by converting the Kazakhstan main line to European gauge.\nIn 2008, BOOT line from Zhetigen to Khorgos on the China border. The line would branch off the existing railway near Shaquanzi.\nRapid transit and tram systems.\nAlmaty.\nThere is a small () metro system in Almaty, the former capital and the largest city in the country. Second and third metro lines are planned in the future. The second line would intersect with the first line at Alatau and Zhibek Zholy stations.\nIn May 2011, the construction of the second phase of the Almaty Metro line 1 began. The general contractor is Almatymetrokurylys. The extension includes five new stations, and will connect the downtown area of Almaty with Kalkaman in the suburbs. Its length will be .\nThe construction is divided into three phases. The first phase, the addition of the two stations Sairan and Moscow with a length of opened in 2015.\nThere was a tram system of 10 lines which operated from 1937 to 2015.\nAstana.\nA metro system is currently under construction in Astana , the capital city.\nThe metro line had been a long time coming and the project was abandoned at one point in 2013, but an agreement was signed on 7 May 2015 for the project to go ahead.\nOskemen.\nIn Oskemen, a tram system was operated until 2018. Opened between 1959 and 1978, the tram was a popular form of transport in Oskemen/Ust-Kamenogorsk. At its peak, it had six routes, but in the end it had four routes in operation. It had a fleet of 50 working tram cars.\nPavlodar.\nIn Pavlodar, there is a tram network which began service in 1965. As of 2012[ [update]], the network has 20 regular and three special routes. The network has a 60% share of the local public transport market. Its fleet of 115 trams are due to be replaced and in 2012, with the city announcing plans to purchase 100 new trams.\nTemirtau.\nThere are two tram lines in Temirtau.\nHighways.\nKazakhstan has a road network stretching over , most of which is in need of modernization and repair. It is, however, notable for containing the easterly terminus of European route E40, which contains the most easterly section of the Euroroute network.\nAs per the \"CIA Factbook\", as of 2021, Kazakhstan had a total road network of which was made up of paved and unpaved roads.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], there were 3,845,301 registered cars and a total of 4,425,770 units of autotransport.\nMotorways.\nThe motorway network in Kazakhstan is rather underdeveloped, mainly due to the low population density in the country, which doesn't require wider roads on long distances. There is a total of 490\u00a0km of motorways. The following are the only existing multi-lane, double carriage roads in Kazakhstan:\nInternational routes.\nFive international routes pass through Kazakhstan, totaling . These highways are:\nIn 2009, the country began the construction of the Western Europe-Western China highway, which was completed in 2018, linking the Chinese and Russian highway systems and allowing uninterrupted highway road transport from Europe to China. of that highway stretch across Kazakhstan (Aktobe, Kyzylorda, South Kazakhstan, Zhambyl and Almaty oblasts). The thickness of the asphalt and concrete pavement was planned to be , and the expected lifespan of the highway 25 years, without a major overhaul, and the maximum speed limit . The project includes a number of bridges over rivers, road maintenance facilities, bus stop areas, \"avtopavilony\", cattle trails, and electronic signage. Simultaneously with the construction of this highway, roads were repaired and built in areas along its route.\nPipelines.\nAs of 2017, pipelines in Kazakhstan consist of:\nWaterways and waterborne transportation.\nThere are of waterways on the Syrdariya (Syr Darya), 80%, and Ertis (Irtysh) rivers, (2010)\nPorts and harbours.\nMerchant Marine.\nThe merchant marine has a total of 122 vessels as of 2023[ [update]], consisting of three general cargo vessels, seven petroleum tankers, and 112 other vessels.\nAirports.\nKazakhstan has a total of 132 airports (2025). However, it is quoted as having a total of 449 airports in 2001.\"\"\nThe large area of the country and the associated long distances makes air travel a very important component in domestic travel.\nAirports - with paved runways (2012).\ntotal: 64\nAirports - with unpaved runways (2012).\ntotal: 33\nOpen Sky regime.\n11 airports of Kazakhstan are part of the open sky regime, which allows more foreign carriers and more flights to operate at Kazakh airports. They include the airports of Astana, Almaty, Shymkent, Aktau, Karaganda, Ust-Kamenogorsk, Pavlodar, Kokshetau, Taraz, Petropavlovsk, and Semey.\nHeliports.\nTotal: 32 (2025)\nAirlines.\nThe European Commission blacklisted all Kazakh carriers in 2009, with the sole exception of Air Astana. Since then, Kazakhstan had consistently been taking measures to modernize and revamp its air safety oversight. Thus, in 2016, the European Aviation Safety Agency removed all Kazakh airlines from its blacklist citing \u201csufficient evidence of compliance\u201d with international standards by Kazakh airlines and its Civil Aviation Committee.\nIn December 2021, it was announced that Kazakhstan\u2019s aviation safety record increased to 84%, which is 15% higher than the global average. These statistics were reported from an audit conducted by the ICAO Coordinated Validation Mission.\nThe New Silk Road.\nKazakhstan is actively involved in the New Silk Road initiative, which is an infrastructure project expected to significantly accelerate and reduce the cost of goods delivery from China to Europe through Central Asia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16650", "revid": "49589087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16650", "title": "Armed Forces of the Republic of Kazakhstan", "text": "Combined military forces of Kazakhstan\nThe Armed Forces of the Republic of Kazakhstan (, ; ) are the unified armed forces of Kazakhstan. They consist of three branches (Ground Forces, Air Defense Forces, Naval Forces) as well as four independent formations (Air Assault Forces, Special Forces, Rocket and Artillery Forces, and Territorial Troops). The National Guard, Civil Defense, Border Service and the State Security Service serve as militarized affiliates of the armed forces. The national defence policy aims are based on the Constitution of Kazakhstan. They guarantee the preservation of the independence and sovereignty of the state and the integrity of its land area, territorial waters and airspace and its constitutional order. The armed forces of Kazakhstan act under the authority of the Kazakhstan Ministry of Defence.\nGeneral composition.\nThe branches and subordinate bodies of the armed forces include:\n* the type of troops in the Ground Forces:\n** Special Forces\n** Rocket and Artillery Forces\n* Air Defense Forces\n* Naval Forces\n* Air Assault Forces\n* Special Operations Forces\nManpower.\nThe \"Military Balance 2013\" reported the armed forces' strength as; Army, 20,000, Navy, 3,000, Air Force, 12,000, and MoD, 4,000. It also reported 31,000 paramilitary personnel.\nGeneral Staff.\nThe General Staff is the main body for the management of the armed forces of the state in peacetime and wartime, coordinates the development of plans for the construction and development of the Armed Forces, other troops and military formations, their operational, combat and mobilization training, organizes and carries out strategic planning application and interaction of the Armed Forces, other troops and military formations, and also develops a plan for the operational equipment of the country's territory in defense.\nHistory.\nOn May 7, 1992, the president of Kazakhstan took a number of actions regarding defence. He signed a decree on the 'establishment of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Kazakhstan', the transformation of the State Committee of Defence of the Republic of Kazakhstan into the Ministry of Defence, on the attribution of Sagadat Nurmagambetov the military rank of Colonel General, and the appointment of General-Colonel Sagadat Nurmagambetov as Defence Minister of Kazakhstan. Mukhtar Altynbayev served as the Minister of Defence twice, most recently from December 2001 to 10 January 2007.\nOn June 30, 1992, the Soviet Armed Forces' Turkestan Military District disbanded, following the collapse of the Soviet Union. The most powerful grouping of forces from the Turkestan Military District then became the core of Kazakhstan's new military. Kazakhstan acquired all the units of the 40th Army (the former 32nd Army) and part of the 17th Army Corps, including 6 land force divisions, storage bases, the 14th and 35th air-landing brigades, 2 rocket brigades, 2 artillery regiments and a large amount of equipment which had been withdrawn from over the Urals after the signing of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe.\nOn July 6, 2000, a presidential decree returned the armed forces returned to a dual structure (general-purpose forces and air defense forces). The Airmobile Forces were also created, and it transitioned to a new military-territorial structure of established military districts. In February 2001, a decree divided the functions of the Ministry of Defence and General Staff. From 2000 to 2003, the transition of the Armed Forces to the brigade structure of troops was fully implemented.\nKazakhstan had its first military parade in its history at Otar Military Base on May 7, 2013, celebrating the Defender of the Fatherland Day as the national holiday for the first time ever. During the ceremony, the first woman was promoted to the rank of General. Kazakhstan is a founding member of CSTO and SCO. Kazakhstan also has an Individual Partnership Action Plan with NATO &amp; strategic cooperation with the Turkish Armed Forces.\nDeployments.\nPeacekeeping in Tajikistan.\nDuring the civil war in Tajikistan, in accordance with the decision of the CIS countries, peacekeepers were sent to Tajikistan. The participants were Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan. At the initial stage, on September 10, 1992, one 300 man airborne assault battalion from the 35th Guards Air Assault Brigade was sent to Tajikistan. Later, in the spring of 1993, a consolidated battalion of three rifle companies was formed from three agencies: the Ministry of Defense, the Interior Ministry, and the Border Troops of the KNB. The combat task of the Kazakh military during the civil war in Tajikistan was to strengthen the checkpoints and outposts of the Russian border detachment in Kalai-Khumb. On April 7, 1995, in the Pshikhavr Gorge of the Pamirs, a company was ambushed, during which 17 people were killed, 33 were injured. Over the entire period of peacekeeping missions in Tajikistan, during the hostilities, the combined Kazakh battalion lost 54 soldiers killed and missing. The mission formally ended in 2000, and the peacekeepers left in 2001.\nUN Peacekeeping.\nKazakhstan has one of the most extensive peacekeeping operations in the Commonwealth of Independent States. The KAZBAT is the main Kazakh peacekeeping military unit, falling under the 38th Air Assault Brigade (KAZBRIG) of the Airmobile Forces. It was formed on 31 January 2000 by decree of President Nursultan Nazarbayev. They are trained in accordance with NATO and United Nations standards and are therefore authorized to wear blue helmets while on duty and during parades.\nCovid-19.\nSince the COVID-19 pandemic in Kazakhstan broke out, volunteer military personnel have been called to serve to combat the virus. The volunteers are stationed at checkpoints and city facilities as well as patrolled the streets to enforce lockdowns.\nBudget.\nIn 2012, a quarter of the budget allocated for the MoD was allocated for modernization, restoration, overhaul and the acquisition of weapons. From 2012 to 2014, defense spending amounted to 12 billion tenge.\nBranches.\nGround Forces.\nThe 32nd Army had been serving in Kazakhstan for many years. The 32nd Army had been redesignated initially the 1st Army Corps (1988), then the 40th Army (June 1991). It came under Kazakh control in May 1992. On November 1, 1992, on the basis of units of the former Soviet 40th Army of the Turkestan Military District, the First Army Corps was created, with its headquarters in Semipalatinsk. Later, at its base was established the Eastern Military District, retitled on 13 November 2003 as Regional Command East.\nToday the Ground Forces include four regional commands:\nThere are also the Airmobile Forces with four brigades, and the Artillery and Missile Forces (formed as a separate branch on 7 May 2003).\nAir and air defence forces.\nAt the time of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the 24th Fighter-Bomber Aviation Division with three aviation regiments and three separate regiments was stationed in Kazakhstan. By late 1993 the Kazakhstan Air Force comprised a total of six regiments, with a further air defence fighter regiment. The 11th Division included the 129th Fighter-Bomber Regiment based at Taldy Kurgan, with MiG-27 'Flogger' aircraft and the 134th Fighter-Bomber Regiment at Zhangiz-tobe with MiG-27s. There was also the 149th Bomber Regiment at Zhetigen/Nikolayevka, with Sukhoi Su-24 'Fencers'. Independent elements comprised the 715th Fighter Regiment at Lugovaya, with MiG-29s and MiG-23 'Floggers'; the 39th Reconnaissance Regiment at Balkhash, with MiG-25RBs and Su-24MR \"Fencer\" aircraft, and the 486th Helicopter Regiment based at Ucharal with Mi-24 'Hind'. The sole air defence fighter aviation regiment was the 356th Fighter Aviation Regiment at Semipalatinsk with Mikoyan MiG-31 \"Foxhound\" air defence fighters, which had been part of the 56th Air Defence Corps of the 14th Independent Air Defence Army. The Air Force was under the command of Major General Aliy Petrovich Volkov.\nToday the Kazakh Air and Air Defence Force has four fast jet bases:\nOn 28 October 2010, two strategic agreements signed today establish the framework for Eurocopter's creation of a 50/50 joint venture with Kazakhstan Engineering Kazakhstan to assemble EC145 helicopters, along with the sale of 45 of these locally assembled aircraft for government missions in the country. On 28 November 2011, Eurocopter delivered the first of six EC145s ordered to date by the Kazakh Ministries of Defence and Emergencies. Deliveries are to continue through 2017.\nOn 3 January 2012, Airbus Military signed a firm contract with Kazspetsexport, a state company belonging to the Ministry of Defence of Kazakhstan, to supply two EADS CASA C-295 military transport aircraft plus the related service support package for spare parts and ground support equipment. Additionally, a memorandum of understanding has been signed for a further six C295 aircraft, for which separate firm contracts will be signed progressively over the next few years. The first two aircraft will be delivered by April 2013 and for the remaining six aircraft a delivery schedule will be defined over the following years. This purchase likely represents a quid pro quo. In 2008, EADS made titanium sourcing agreements with Kazakh suppliers.\nIn May 2012, Kazakhstan signed a letter of intent to acquire 20 Eurocopter EC725 helicopters. They were to be assembled in Astana by Kazakhstan Engineering. These Eurocoptors will be fitted with modern systems made by the Turkish firm Aselsan.\nNaval Forces.\nKazakhstan's Naval Forces were established by presidential decree on 7 May 2003 in spite of being the largest landlocked country on earth. They operate on the Caspian Sea, based at Aktau. The Kazakh Naval Force has a strength of 3,000 personnel and is equipped with fourteen inshore patrol craft.\nPersonnel.\nEducational institutions.\nThe following higher educational institutions are the main military academies in Kazakhstan:\nOther militarized educational institutions:\nSecondary schools:\nWomen in the military.\nThere are approximately 8,000-8,500 women serving in the Kazakh army. Of those women, 750 are officers. The Ministry of Defence has been working to promote women in the military through educational programs and career advancement opportunities. Only 2.1% of leadership positions within the Ministry of Defence are held by women. The Ministry of Defence also hosts \"Batyr Arular\", which is a nationwide competition for service men and women, showcasing their combat skills, combat readiness and overall physical ability. \"Batyr Arular\" gives awards for the best service women.\nConscription.\nEvery year, all men aged 18 to 27 are called up for military service in Kazakhstan. There are a number of circumstances due to which one can be released from military service both on a temporary and permanent basis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16651", "revid": "46505507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16651", "title": "Foreign relations of Kazakhstan", "text": " \nKazakhstan's approach to foreign relations is multifaceted and strategic, reflecting the country's unique geopolitical position, historical context, and economic ambitions. At the heart of its international diplomacy is a multivector foreign policy, which aims to maintain balanced and diverse relations with all major global powers and regional neighbours. Kazakhstan is a member of the United Nations, Collective Security Treaty Organization, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (which it chaired in 2010), North Atlantic Cooperation Council, Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and NATO's Partnership for Peace program. Kazakhstan established a customs union with Russia and Belarus which eventually became the Eurasian Economic Union. President Nazarbayev has prioritized economic diplomacy into Kazakhstan's foreign policy.\nEconomic cooperation and development are pivotal in Kazakhstan's foreign policy framework. The nation actively seeks to attract foreign investment, especially in its oil and gas sectors. Kazakhstan is keen on expanding its economic ties across the globe, understanding the critical role of economic interdependence in fostering stable international relations. \nKazakhstan is a proponent of nuclear non-proliferation, having renounced its nuclear arsenal after the dissolution of the Soviet Union. The country actively participates in global discussions on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, leveraging its history to influence these debates.\nIn December 2010, Kazakhstan held its first OSCE summit since 1999.\nIn recent years, Kazakhstan has increasingly positioned itself as a mediator in international disputes, offering its territory as a neutral ground for diplomatic engagement and hosting high-profile international meetings and negotiations.\nEnvironmental sustainability is another focus of Kazakhstan's international engagement. Confronted with challenges like the desiccation of the Aral Sea, Kazakhstan advocates for global cooperation on environmental issues, emphasizing the necessity of collective action to address ecological concerns.\nKazakhstan\u2019s foreign policy is grounded in a respect for international law, sovereignty, and the territorial integrity of states. The nation is an active participant in the United Nations and various international organisations.\nMultilateral agreements.\nKazakhstan, since gaining independence in 1991, has been an active participant in the international community, signing numerous multilateral agreements.\nKazakhstan became a member of the UN in 1992 and has since been a participant in various UN treaties and conventions.\nKazakhstan joined the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapon state in 1993, emphasizing its commitment to nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.\nKazakhstan signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1996, further solidifying its stance against nuclear testing.\nKazakhstan is a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, a political, economic, and security organization established in 2001, along with China, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.\nKazakhstan became a World Trade Organization member in 2015, committing to the organisation's rules and regulations to promote international trade.\nIn 2015 Kazakhstan joined the Inter-American Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters. In September the Kazakh Senate ratified the Convention, which unites 26 countries, including the United States, South Korea, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela and other countries.\nIn December 2015, the European Union and Kazakhstan signed an Enhanced Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (EPCA). This new Agreement, the first of its kind with a Central Asian partner, brought relations between the EU and Kazakhstan to a new level and represented an important milestone in more than 25 years of EU-Kazakhstan relations. \nKazakhstan is a signatory to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), dealing with greenhouse-gas-emissions mitigation, adaptation, and finance.\nIn November 2025 Kazakhstan confirmed that it had joined the Abraham Accords. The country has maintained diplomatic relations with Israel since 1992.\nConcept of Foreign Policy of the Republic of Kazakhstan for 2020-2030.\nThe Concept of Foreign Policy of the Republic of Kazakhstan for 2020-2030\u00a0outlines the country's diplomatic strategy and priorities in the international arena. Key aspects include:\nEconomic diplomacy.\nThe Foreign Ministry of Kazakhstan assumed the new function of attracting investments to Kazakhstan in December 2018. As part of the new responsibilities, the Ministry oversees activities in attracting foreign investment and promoting Kazakh exports abroad, taking away these responsibilities from the reformed Ministry for Investment and Development. Two main objectives of Kazakhstan's economic diplomacy include comprehensive support of Kazakh business abroad and promotion of non-resource export. These objectives are set to help achieve the goals of diversifying the economy, creating new jobs, promoting innovative technologies and attracting foreign investors.\nAs part of economic diplomacy, Kazakhstan compiled a list of 40 countries its Foreign Ministry is to target in a bid to attract more foreign investment. Coordinated by the Foreign Ministry, Kazakhstan's diplomatic missions also address issues of strategic interest to Kazakhstan's business community in their receiving states.\nBorder issues.\nKazakhstan resolved the border determination issues with Kyrgyzstan in 2001, Uzbekistan in 2002, and Turkmenistan in 2017. The country became the first country to resolve border issues with the countries of the region.\nKazakhstan and China resolved their longstanding border issues, fostering a strong partnership that enabled increased investment and economic collaboration. The resolution of these border disputes was pivotal in the development of Kazakh-Chinese economic ties and in combating terrorism. This resolution was also a significant step in reducing tensions and enhancing security in the region. \nKazakhstan reached an agreement on the delimitation of adjacent sections of the Caspian Sea with Russia and Azerbaijan. This agreement was a crucial step in defining the borders of the national sectors of the Caspian seabed for Kazakhstan, Russia, and Azerbaijan, allowing these littoral states exclusive rights for the development and use of the seabed.\u00a0Kazakhstan, along with Azerbaijan, Iran, the Russian Federation, and Turkmenistan, signed the Convention on the Legal Status of the Caspian Sea. This convention, signed in Aktau, Kazakhstan, represented a significant diplomatic achievement, concluding more than two decades of negotiations. \nNuclear weapons non-proliferation.\nWhen the Soviet Union collapsed in December 1991, Kazakhstan inherited 1,410 nuclear warheads and the Semipalatinsk nuclear-weapon test site. By April 1995, Kazakhstan had returned the warheads to Russia and, by July 2000, had destroyed the nuclear testing infrastructure at Semipalatinsk.\nKazakhstan launched The ATOM (Abolish Testing. Our Mission) Project, an international campaign aimed at raising awareness about the human and environmental impacts of nuclear weapons testing. The project seeks to bring an end to nuclear weapons testing globally and to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free world.\nKazakhstan was instrumental in the establishment of the Central Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (CANWFZ), which includes Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. This zone is the first in the Northern Hemisphere and is significant for regional security.\nOn December 2, 2009, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon and the Republic of Kazakhstan designated August 29 as International Day against Nuclear Tests, the anniversary of the date that Kazakhstan closed the Semipalatinsk test site in 1991.\nKazakhstan is a strong supporter of the CTBT and advocates for its universal adoption and entry into force. The country has also established a network of monitoring stations as part of the International Monitoring System to detect nuclear tests.\nThe contribution of Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev to nuclear non-proliferation was highly recognized by Japan. During his visit to Japan in November 2016, Nursultan Nazarbayev was awarded the title of special honorary citizen of Hiroshima for his non-proliferation efforts.\nPeacekeeping initiatives.\nThe first country to which Kazakhstan deployed its peacekeeping forces was Tajikistan. On November 11, 1992, due to a worsening situation, the Supreme Soviet of Tajikistan appealed to the CIS countries for peacekeeping support. On January 22, 1993, at a CIS summit in Minsk, state leaders reviewed and approved this request. President Nursultan Nazarbayev ordered a composite battalion of 700 soldiers, composed of border, internal, and ground forces, to be sent to Tajikistan to secure a section of the border with Afghanistan. During the mission, Kazakhstani soldiers successfully repelled multiple attacks by armed groups attempting to cross into Tajikistan, establishing a reliable barrier against arms and drug smuggling. The Kazakhstani battalion remained stationed on the Afghanistan\u2013Tajikistan border until 2001 when the situation stabilized.\nKazakhstan peacekeepers have also participated in operations in Iraq, where they neutralized approximately 4 million explosive devices. Additionally, Kazakhstan peacekeeping forces have been deployed to Western Sahara, C\u00f4te d\u2019Ivoire, and Lebanon.\nIn 1987, Nazarbayev acted as a mediator in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. On August 27, 1992, he initiated trilateral negotiations in Almaty with the foreign ministers of Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Kazakhstan. These discussions led to an agreement on September 1, 1992, to halt hostilities between Azerbaijan and Armenia.\nIn 2010, Nazarbayev played a key role in resolving the crisis in Kyrgyzstan. He held talks with former president Kurmanbek Bakiyev and arranged for his evacuation to Kazakhstan, thereby helping prevent a civil war.\nPresident Nazarbayev also supported efforts to resolve the Russo-Ukrainian War from 2014 onwards. Kazakhstan organized Normandy Format talks with leaders from Russia, Ukraine, France, and Germany on February 11\u201312, 2015, in Minsk, which aimed to pave the way toward peace.\nKazakhstan has been actively involved in the Syrian conflict resolution process. In 2015, at Nazarbayev\u2019s initiative, meetings among Syrian opposition groups were held in Astana, resulting in the Astana Initiative. Nazarbayev also conducted discussions with leaders from the Muslim world, including the King of Jordan, the Emir of Qatar, and the President of Iran, seeking to foster a peaceful resolution to the Syrian crisis.\nKazakhstan has played an active role in international organizations. In 2010, Kazakhstan chaired the OSCE, and in 2011, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Kazakhstan has been actively involved in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization since its inception and chaired it in 2010\u20132011. In 2016, Kazakhstan was elected as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council for 2017\u20132018.\nIllicit drugs.\nIllegal cannabis and, to a lesser extent, opium production in Kazakhstan is an international issue since much of the crop ends up being sold in other countries, particularly in other member-states of Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). In 1998, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that a \"minimum of 1,517 tons of cannabis was harvested\" in Kazakhstan.\nWith the fall of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan became a major transit country for narcotics produced in Southwest Asia, primarily from Afghanistan. In 2001, Kazakh authorities reported 1,320 cases of drug trafficking and seized 18 metric tons of narcotics. However, this is viewed as a fraction of the actual total volume trafficked and widespread corruption continues to hamper government anti-drug efforts; Transparency International gave Kazakhstan a score of 2.2, on a scale of 0\u201310 with 0 indicating a \"highly corrupt\" state. Russia and other parts of Europe are the main markets for these drugs although drug use is growing in Kazakhstan as well.\nKazAID.\nIn November 2014 Kazakh Foreign Minister and Resident Representative of UNDP in Kazakhstan signed a project document supporting Kazakhstan's Foreign Affairs Ministry in forming KazAID, a system of Official Development Assistance (ODA). KazAID is the first ODA programme among the Central Asian states. The KazAID program implies technical assistance and humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. As of 2016, Kazakhstan provided Afghanistan with 20,000 tons of food products valued at some $20\u00a0million.\nKazakhstan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs with assistance of the UNDP and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) leads ODA titled \"Promoting Kazakhstan's ODA Cooperation with Afghanistan.\" The ODA is aimed at expanding economic independence and rights of Afghan women. The project marks Kazakhstan's first international cooperation for Afghanistan in the framework of national system of ODA.\nOver the past two decades, Kazakhstan has distributed more than $500 million for ODA activities. Countries of Central Asia and Afghanistan are a priority for Kazakhstan's ODA.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Kazakhstan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nKazakhstan has proactively worked to establish ties with African nations. Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Askar Mussinov participated in the 25th Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union in Johannesburg, South Africa June 12\u201315.\nResponding to an international call to help ease the suffering that Ebola is causing in West Africa, Kazakhstan transferred $50,000 to the UN Ebola Trust Fund in late 2014. After that Astana expressed its intention to provide $300,000 to the African Union's special project to fight Ebola.\nThe 1st day of the VIII Astana Economic Forum held on May 21, 2015, was dedicated to Africa and was titled \"Africa \u2013 the Next Driver of the Global Economy\". The Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan Erlan Idrissov noted: \"We recognise that Africa is a continent with huge potential. It has enormous human capital and a large, young population.\u201d More than 20 permanent representatives to the United Nations (UN) from Africa participated in the session.\nOn September 28, 2015, Kazakhstan and the UNDP signed a $2 million cost-sharing agreement launching a new program to help 45 African countries implement the UN's Sustainable Development Goals.\nOn August 8, 2024, Kazakhstan and Congo-Brazzaville signed several cooperation agreements, covering the oil and gas industry, information and communication technologies, and cyber security.\nAmericas.\nKazakhstan's Deputy Foreign Minister Yerzhan Ashikbayev said that Kazakhstan is seeking \"new perspectives\" and boosting its relations with Latin American nations via a series of diplomatic visits.\nAshikbayev attended the 44th General Assembly of the Organization of American States in Asuncion, Paraguay on June 4. Kazakhstan was the largest delegation among the conference's 39 observer nations.\nThe Secretary General of the Organization of American States (OAS), Jos\u00e9 Miguel Insulza, on June 3 met with the Deputy Foreign Minister, Yerzhan Ashikbayev, in Asunci\u00f3n, Paraguay, for the 44th OAS General Assembly where Ashikbayev presented a contribution to help fund important OAS programs.\nForeign Minister Erlan Idrissov conducted a four-day visit to Mexico on September 17\u201320, 2014. During his visit Idrissov met with Mexican Economy Secretary Ildefonso Guajardo, Foreign Secretary Jose Antonio Meade, former President Vincente Fox, other senior officials and business leaders. The Minister and his delegation will view the future site of Kazakhstan's embassy in Mexico City.\nIdrissov said that the main objective of his visit was to build a bridge between Latin America and Eurasia. The Foreign Minister underlined that economic and trade collaboration with Kazakhstan will allow investors to reach neighboring markets, such as Russia and China. Idrissov also said that Kazakhstan seeks to expand its presence in Latin America and considers Mexico as a strategic ally in building these relations, while Kazakhstan can offer the same support to Mexico in the Eurasian region.\nEurope.\nEuropean Free Trade Association.\nDelegations from the EFTA States, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland met with Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan for a first round of negotiations on a broad-based Free Trade Agreement on January 11\u201313, 2011 in Geneva.\nThe launching of EFTA-Russia/Belarus/Kazakhstan free trade negotiations had been announced in November 2010 by Ministers from the seven participating States, following a preparatory process including a Joint Feasibility Study.\nThe 11th round of free trade negotiations was conducted from January 27 to 30, 2014 in Astana, Kazakhstan. A 12th round of negotiations scheduled for April 2014 has been postponed. No new dates have been set yet.\nEuropean Union.\nThe Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) with Kazakhstan has been the legal framework for European Union-Kazakhstan bilateral relations since it entered into force in 1999. In November 2006 a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in the field of energy between the EU and Kazakhstan has been signed establishing the basis for enhanced cooperation.\nThe future European Commission assistance will focus on the following priority areas: promotion of the ongoing reform process at political, economic, judiciary and social level, infrastructure building, and cooperation in the energy sector.\nThe overall EU co-operation objectives, policy responses and priority fields for Central Asia can be found in the EC Regional Strategy Paper for Central Asia 2007\u20132013. In addition to the assistance under the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI), Kazakhstan participates in several ongoing regional programs.\nOn January 20, 2015 Kazakhstan and the EU initialed the EU-Kazakhstan Enhanced Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. This agreement will greatly facilitate stronger political and economic relations between Kazakhstan and the EU. It will increase the flow of trade, services and investment between the parties and will contribute to Kazakhstan's political and social development.\nBilateral relations received a post-pandemic refocus with the EU visit by Kazakhstan's president in November 2021. The visit was the first to Europe by Tokayev since becoming president in 2019.\nNATO.\nKazakhstan has been a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace since May 27, 1994.\nIn October 2014 Kazakhstan and NATO marked 20 years of cooperation within the Partnership for Peace. To that end, from October 6 to 10, 2014 a NATO delegation visited Kazakhstan to take part in a series of public diplomacy events. Among meetings with Kazakhstan's officials, the delegates also visited the Nazarbayev and the Gumilyov Eurasian National universities in Astana, where they delivered lectures explaining NATO's engagement with partners in the Central Asian region and briefed audiences on the key outcomes of the recent NATO Wales Summit, with particular focus on NATO's partnership policy and Afghanistan.\nA NATO delegation also plans to visit Astana in the first half of 2015 and hold a joint event with the Kazakh side in the second half of 2015. The future NATO-Kazakhstan joint activities will be held in the framework of the Partnership for Peace program, which centres on the development and exchange of experience for peacekeeping forces.\nVisa regimes.\nAt the 27th meeting of the Foreign Investors' Council, President Nazarbayev announced visa-free entry for citizens of the United States, the Netherlands, UK, France, Germany, Italy, Malaysia, the UAE, South Korea, and Japan. Currently Kazakhstan and the United States issue 5-year visas to citizens of each other.\nThis will fulfill a goal of diversifying the economy while also helping the world become more acquainted with Kazakhstan's cultural patrimony. Since 2001 to 2012, Kazakhstan has doubled its tourism earnings. Experts expect that Kazakhstan will continue to benefit from tourism from the eased visa regime.\nOn July 15, 2014, Kazakhstan launched a pilot project of visa-free regime for 10 countries: UK, USA, Germany, France, Italy, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Malaysia, the Netherlands, South Korea and Japan. Citizens of these countries can enter, exit and transit through Kazakhstan without a visa for visits of up to 15 calendar days at a time.\nOn June 26, 2015, Kazakhstan issued a resolution expanding the number of countries included in a trial visa-free regime and extended that regime until December 31, 2017. The list now includes 19 countries, including Australia, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Singapore, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the UAE, the U. K. and the U.S.\nStarting from January 1, 2017, Kazakhstan introduced visa-free access for 20 developed countries. These countries include the OECD members, Malaysia, Monaco, the UAE and Singapore. On August 8, 2024, Congo-Brazaville and Kazakhstan signed a visa exemption cooperation agreement between Congo and Kazakhstan.\nCountries whose citizens can visit Kazakhstan visa-free for up to 14 days\nThe updated list for 2023 includes 4 countries: China, India, Iran and, Hong Kong.\nCountries whose citizens can visit Kazakhstan visa-free for up to 30 days\nThe updated list as of January 2023 includes 63 countries: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the United Kingdom, the United States, Turkiye, Vatican City, Vietnam, and the UAE.\nUnited Nations.\nKazakhstan became a member of the United Nations on March 2, 1992, nearly three months after gaining independence.\nDuring the General Assembly on November 12, 2012, Kazakhstan was elected to a seat on the United Nations Human Rights Council for the first time. Their seat is with the Asian Group and their term will expire in 2015.\nAt United Nations Day 2013, Foreign Minister Erlan Idrisov addressed the UN General Assembly saying the UN should develop a regional center in Almaty. Since the United Nations has no regional offices between Vienna and Bangkok, Almaty is home to 18 international organization's regional offices and would be vital to the development of Central Asia and its neighbors.\nAt the 68th Assembly of the United Nations, Foreign Minister Idrisov announced Kazakhstan's bid for a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council for 2017\u20132018. So far they and Thailand have announced their bids.\nIn February 2015 the United Nations' specialized agency World Health Organization opened a new geographically dispersed office (GDO) for primary health care in Kazakhstan at the Kazakh National Medical University of S.Asfendiyarov in Almaty. According to the head the Kazakh Medical University, the GDO of the WHO's European Bureau in Almaty will be financed by the UN.\nIn July 2015 Kazakhstan was accepted to the Executive Council of the World Federation of UNESCO (WCF) Clubs at the ninth WCF World Congress, UNESCO Centres and Associations.\nOn May 6, 2016, Kazakh Foreign Minister Erlan Idrissov spoke at two high level meetings at the U.N. headquarters in New York. The Foreign Minister said that Kazakhstan was calling for a nuclear free world by 2045, the 100th anniversary of the United Nations.\nKazakhstan signed the Paris Climate Change Agreement on Aug 2 at UN Headquarters in New York. The Kazakh Senate ratified the Paris Agreement on October 27, 2016. Under the Paris Agreement, Kazakhstan has committed to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 15-20% by 2030 up to the level observed in 1990.\nIn March 2017, Kazakhstan marked 25 years of its membership in the United Nations. To celebrate this anniversary, Kazakhstan opened the \u201cKazakhstan and the United Nations: Interaction for Peace\u201d exhibition in the Museum of the Library of the First President of Kazakhstan. During 25 years of cooperation, the UN opened 15 representative offices in Kazakhstan, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), among others.\nAstana is a host city of the Eighth International Forum on Energy for Sustainable Development that is planned to be held in June 2017. The Forum is co-organized through collaboration by Kazakhstan with the UN Regional Commissions, as well as UNDP, IEA, IAEA, IRENA, the World Bank, UNID, the Copenhagen Centre on Energy Efficiency, and the Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century.\nUnited Nations Security Council.\nKazakhstan, along with Sweden, Bolivia and Ethiopia, were elected to serve on Security Council for a two-year term, starting from January 1, 2017. Kazakhstan became the first Central Asian country to be elected as a non-permanent member of the UNSC. Kazakhstan assumed the chairmanship of UNSC on January 1, 2018. Kazakhstan focused on drawing attention on international community to the issues of Central Asia and Afghanistan.\nKazakhstan outlined priorities during its UNSC tenure. They included nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, fight against terrorism and extremism, promotion of peacemaking and peace-building, as well as security and development issues in the Central Asian region.\nPresident Nazarbayev's address to the UNSC was presented by the Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan at the ministerial-level open debate of the UNSC held on January 10, 2017. The address was based on the principles of the Kazakh President's earlier Manifesto \u201cThe World. The 21st Century.\u201d It declares Kazakhstan's commitment to building a world free of nuclear weapons and to rid humanity of wars and conflicts.\nPresident Nazarbayev chaired the January 18 UN Security Council briefing on WMD non-proliferation and related measures to better provide security for Central Asia. It was the first time a president of a Central Asian country chaired a UNSC briefing.\nAs a non-permanent member, Kazakhstan was actively involved in the Council\u2019s deliberations and chaired three crucial Sanctions Committees related to ISIL (Da\u2019esh) and Al-Qaida, the Taliban, and Somalia and Eritrea. Kazakhstan\u2019s representatives were responsible for leading council meetings and overseeing crisis management during their presidency of the UNSC.\nPeacekeeping.\nThe Kazakh Peacekeeping Battalion (KazBat) was established in 2000. KazBat's first mission was part of the peacekeeping operation Iraqi Freedom from 2003 to 2008. During this time, nine Kazakh peacekeeping contingents served in Iraq, engaging in demining, convoy safety, base protection, traffic regulation, and humanitarian aid. Kazakh servicemen destroyed about five million explosive ordnance and provided medical assistance to over 500 Iraqi citizens.\nOn October 31, 2018, Kazakhstan deployed 120 Kazakh peacekeepers to serve with the UN mission in furthering peace in south Lebanon. It was the first time Kazakh troops were serving with UNIFIL in the Mission's 40-year history. On August 20, 2020, Kazakhstan deployed a second group of 60 peacekeepers to the UNIFIL.\nKazakhstan has regularly conducted joint anti-terrorism and peacekeeping exercises, \u201cSteppe Eagle,\u201d since 2003, with the participation of NATO forces. Additionally, the Partnership for Peace Training Center (KAZCENT), operational since 2008, trains peacekeepers and offers courses certified by the United Nations, such as \u201cProtection of Civilians\u201d and \u201cUN Staff Officers\u201d.\nShanghai Cooperation Organisation.\nKazakhstan is one of the original founding members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, known as the Shanghai Five. They formally began the organization on April 26, 1996, with the signing of the \"Treaty on Deepening Military Trust in Border Regions\" in Shanghai. Since then, Kazakhstan has become a very active member in global politics within the organization.\nAt the SCO Summit in Bishkek, Kyrygyzstan on September 20, 2013, Kazakhstan met with leaders to discuss many issues. One of the main issues discussed was the focus on regional stability for Afghanistan after the United States withdraws its troops. Kazakhstan also signed the Bishkek Declaration along with members and observers to find diplomatic solutions for Iran and Syria. On Syria, Kazakhstan wanted to help find a diplomatic solution that would not involve direct intervention due to the need of UN authorization. On Iran, Kazakhstan wanted to see a diplomatic solution between Iran and the P5+1 group for Iran to enrich uranium at levels for energy consumption.\nIn November 2016, Kazakhstan chaired first ever SCO human rights consultations. The meetings were held in Beijing and aimed at further consolidation of the SCO member states cooperation in human rights.\nAstana hosted the http:// June 8\u20139, 2017. The summit featured the ceremony of accession of India and Pakistan to the organization. Therefore, the total number of member states increased to eight: China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, India, and Pakistan.\nKazakhstan assumed the rotational chairmanship of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization from July 2023 to July 2024. During this period, President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev outlined the country's priorities for its SCO chairmanship. Key focuses included:\nOther international organizations.\nAntarctic treaty.\nKazakhstan joined the Antarctic Treaty in November 2014 being the 51st country to ratify it.\nKazakhstan had shown an interest in the Antarctic before, with officials even identifying it as a potential source of drinking water for the arid steppe nation. The country staged its first expedition to the South Pole in 2011.\nOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).\nOn January 23 in Davos at the World Economic Forum, Prime Minister of Kazakhstan Karim Massimov and Secretary General of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Angel Gurria signed a Memorandum of Understanding between Kazakhstan and the OECD on the implementation of the Country Program of Cooperation for 2015\u20132016.\nIn July 2016, it was announced that Kazakhstan was admitted to the OECD Competition Committee that aims to promote antitrust reforms. Kazakhstan is the first Central Asian country to join the committee.\nKazakhstan joined the Declaration on International Investment and Multinational Enterprises of the OECD and became an associated participant of the OECD Investment Committee in June 2017. OECD Investment Committee is the leading government forum for cooperation on international investment issues.\nWorld Trade Organization.\nKazakhstan applied for WTO accession on January 29, 1996. The accession negotiations between Kazakhstan and the WTO lasted 20 years and on November 30, 2015, the organization welcomed Kazakhstan as its 162nd Member.\nIn April 2017, the General Council of the WTO announced that Kazakhstan's Ambassador to Switzerland and Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the UN structures Zhanar Aitzhanova would be the Chairperson of the WTO Committee for Trade and Environment in 2017.\nWorld Anti-Crisis Conference.\nThe 21st World Anti Crisis Conference was conducted with the support of the UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/67/19International financial sistem and development from December 21, 2012, on May 23, 2013, within the framework of the VI Astana Economic Forum. Main outcome of the WAC I was the Astana Declaration and the guidelines of the World Anti-Crisis Plan developed using the contributions from the international expert community, the UN member states and the UN Secretariat.\nThe concept of the WAC Plan, based on democratic principles and the interests of all UN member states aims at developing effective measures to overcome the economic and financial crisis, preventing future recessions and ensuring long-term balanced growth of the global economy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
