{"id": "18279", "revid": "47513202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18279", "title": "Light pollution", "text": "Excess artificial light in an environment\nLight pollution refers to artificial lighting that alters the natural patterns of light and dark in ecosystems. In a descriptive sense, light pollution occurs when artificial light is used in a poor or excessive way, especially at night, causing negative effects in the environment and the view of the night sky. Light pollution can be understood not only as a phenomenon resulting from a specific source or kind of pollution, but also as a contributor to the wider, collective impact of various sources of pollution.\nAlthough this type of pollution can exist throughout the day, its effects are magnified during the night with the contrast of the sky's darkness. It has been estimated that 83% of the world's people live under light-polluted skies and that 23% of the world's land area is affected by skyglow.\nThe area affected by artificial illumination continues to increase. A major side effect of urbanization, light pollution is blamed for compromising health, disrupting ecosystems, and spoiling aesthetic environments. Studies show that urban areas are more at risk. Globally, it has increased by at least 49% from 1992 to 2017.\nLight pollution is caused by inefficient or unnecessary use of artificial light. Specific categories of light pollution include light trespass, over-illumination, glare, light clutter, and skyglow. A single offending light source often falls into more than one of these categories.\nSolutions to light pollution are often steps like adjusting light fixtures or using more appropriate light bulbs. Further remediation can be done with more efforts to educate the public in order to push legislative change. However, because it is a man-made phenomenon, addressing its impacts on humans and the environment has political, social, and economic considerations.\nDefinitions.\nLight pollution is the presence of artificial light in otherwise dark conditions.\nThe term is most commonly used in relation to in the outdoor environment and surrounding, but is also used to refer to artificial light indoors. Adverse consequences are multiple; some of them may not be known yet. Light pollution makes it harder for people in cities that use excessive artificial light hard, and like other pollutants it can harm our environment. Light pollution is a side-effect of industrial civilization. Its sources include building exterior and interior lighting, advertising, outdoor area lighting (such as car parks), offices, factories, streetlights, and illuminated sporting venues. It is most severe in highly industrialized, densely populated areas of North America, Europe, and Asia and in major cities in the Middle East and North Africa like Tehran and Cairo, but even relatively small amounts of light can be noticed and create problems. Awareness of the harmful effects of light pollution began in the second half of the 19th century, but efforts to address its effects did not begin until the 1950s. In the 1980s a global dark-sky movement emerged with the founding of the International Dark-Sky Association (IDA). There are now such educational and advocacy organizations in many countries worldwide.\nAbout 83% of people, including 99% of Europeans and Americans, live under light-polluted skies that are more than 10% brighter than natural darkness. 80% of North Americans cannot see the Milky Way galaxy.\nTypes.\nLight trespass.\nLight trespass occurs when unwanted light enters one's property. A common light trespass problem occurs when a strong light enters the window of one's home from the outside, causing problems such as sleep deprivation. A number of cities in the U.S. have developed standards for outdoor lighting to protect the rights of their citizens against light trespass.\nThe Dark-Sky Association was started to reduce the light going up into the sky which reduces the visibility of stars (see Skyglow below). This is any light that is emitted more than 90\u00b0 above nadir. By limiting light at this 90\u00b0 mark they have also reduced the light output in the 80\u201390\u00b0 range which creates most of the light trespass issues.\nU.S. federal agencies may also enforce standards and process complaints within their areas of jurisdiction. For instance, in the case of light trespass by white strobe lighting from communication towers in excess of FAA minimum lighting requirements the Federal Communications Commission maintains an Antenna Structure Registration database information which citizens may use to identify offending structures and provides a mechanism for processing citizen inquiries and complaints. The U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) has also incorporated a credit for reducing the amount of light trespass and sky glow into their environmentally friendly building standard known as LEED.\nLight trespass can be reduced by selecting light fixtures that limit the amount of light emitted more than 80\u00b0 above the nadir. The IESNA definitions include full cutoff (0%), cutoff (10%), and semi-cutoff (20%). (These definitions also include limits on light emitted above 90\u00b0 to reduce sky glow.)\nOver-illumination.\nOver-illumination is the excessive and unnecessary use of light.\nA large and overabundant amount of electricity is required to support light consumption in the United States. U.S homes consumed 81 billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of electricity for lighting in 2020 according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Additionally, the EIA reported that 208 billion kWh and 53 billion kWh of electricity were used for commercial and manufacturing buildings respectively in 2018.\nLight use is not excessive in all developed countries. Amongst developed countries there are large variations in patterns of light use. American cities emit three to five times more light to space per capita compared to German cities.\nOver-illumination stems from several factors:\nMost of these issues can be readily corrected with available, inexpensive technology, and with the resolution of landlord/tenant practices that create barriers to rapid correction of these matters. Most importantly, public awareness would need to improve for industrialized countries to realize the large payoff in reducing over-illumination.\nIn certain cases, an over-illumination lighting technique may be needed. For example, indirect lighting is often used to obtain a \"softer\" look, since hard direct lighting is generally found less desirable for certain surfaces, such as skin. The indirect lighting method is perceived as cozier and suits bars, restaurants, and living quarters. It is also possible to block the direct lighting effect by adding softening filters or other solutions, though intensity will be reduced.\nGlare.\nGlare can be categorized into different types. One such classification is described in a book by Bob Mizon, coordinator for the British Astronomical Association's Campaign for Dark Skies, as follows:\nAccording to Mario Motta, president of the Massachusetts Medical Society, \"...glare from bad lighting is a public-health hazard\u2014especially the older you become. Glare light scattering in the eye causes loss of contrast and leads to unsafe driving conditions, much like the glare on a dirty windshield from low-angle sunlight or the high beams from an oncoming car.\" In essence bright and/or badly shielded lights around roads can partially blind drivers or pedestrians and contribute to accidents.\nThe blinding effect is caused in large part by reduced contrast due to light scattering in the eye by excessive brightness, or to the reflection of light from dark areas in the field of vision, with luminance similar to the background luminance. This kind of glare is a particular instance of disability glare, called veiling glare. (This is not the same as loss of accommodation of night vision which is caused by the direct effect of the light itself on the eye.)\nLight clutter.\nLight clutter refers to excessive groupings of lights. Groupings of lights may generate confusion, distract from obstacles (including those that they may be intended to illuminate), and potentially cause accidents. Clutter is particularly noticeable on roads where the street lights are badly designed, or where brightly lit advertisements surround the roadways. Depending on the motives of the person or organization that installed the lights, their placement and design can even be intended to distract drivers, and can contribute to accidents.\nSky glow.\nSky glow is the bright haze above cities that is produced from excessive artificial lighting at night. This type of light pollution is created from artificial light reflecting in the sky and bouncing around the different types of particles that reside in the atmosphere The effect of sky glow can be harmful in astronomy and on the health of many organisms. It worsens the visibility of the stars, the Milky Way, and significantly increases the natural light levels at night.\nFrom satellites.\nAlso contributing to light pollution are artificial satellites. With increasing numbers of satellite constellations such as OneWeb, Starlink, and Kuiper, members of the astronomical community, notably the IAU, fear that light pollution will increase significantly, one of many concerns reported in the media regarding satellite overcrowding. Public discourse surrounding the continuing deployment of satellite constellations includes multiple petitions by astronomers and citizen scientists, and has raised questions about which regulatory bodies hold jurisdiction over human actions that obscure starlight.\nMeasurement.\nIssues to measuring light pollution.\nMeasuring the effect of sky glow on a global scale is a complex procedure. The natural atmosphere is not completely dark, even in the absence of terrestrial sources of light and illumination from the Moon. This is caused by two main sources: \"airglow\" and \"scattered light\".\nAt high altitudes, primarily above the mesosphere, there is enough UV radiation from the sun at very short wavelengths to cause ionization. When the ions collide with electrically neutral particles they recombine and emit photons in the process, causing airglow. The degree of ionization is sufficiently large to allow a constant emission of radiation even during the night when the upper atmosphere is in the Earth's shadow. Lower in the atmosphere all the solar photons with energies above the ionization potential of N2 and O2 have already been absorbed by the higher layers and thus no appreciable ionization occurs.\nApart from emitting light, the sky also scatters incoming light, primarily from distant stars and the Milky Way, but also the zodiacal light, sunlight that is reflected and backscattered from interplanetary dust particles.\nThe amount of airglow and zodiacal light is quite varied (depending, amongst other things on sunspot activity and the Solar cycle) but given optimal conditions, the darkest possible sky has a brightness of about 22 magnitude/square arcsecond. If a full moon is present, the sky brightness increases to about 18 magnitude/sq. arcsecond depending on local atmospheric transparency, 40 times brighter than the darkest sky. In densely populated areas a sky brightness of 17 magnitude/sq. arcsecond is not uncommon, or as much as 100 times brighter than is natural.\nSatellite imagery measuring.\nTo precisely measure how bright the sky gets, night time satellite imagery of the earth is used as raw input for the number and intensity of light sources. These are put into a physical model of scattering due to air molecules and aerosoles to calculate cumulative sky brightness. Maps that show the enhanced sky brightness have been prepared for the entire world.\nGround-based monitoring.\nIn addition to satellite-based observations, ground-based networks of photometers have become essential for monitoring light pollution over time. One of the most widely used instruments is the Sky Quality Meter (SQM), a compact device that measures night sky brightness (NSB) in magnitudes per square arcsecond. SQMs are deployed by both professional observatories and citizen scientists worldwide, providing high temporal resolution data that complements remote sensing approaches.\nLong-term SQM datasets from urban, intermediate, and rural sites have revealed measurable increases in light pollution. A 2023 study analyzing over a decade of data from 26 sites across Europe - including cities such as Stockholm, Berlin, and Vienna - found average annual increases in NSB of 1.7% in rural areas, 1.8% in urban areas, and 3.7% in intermediate areas. These trends were corrected for sensor aging using twilight calibration methods and adjusted for atmospheric factors such as albedo, vegetation cover, and aerosols through an empirical regression model.\nGround-based studies have also shown that high levels of artificial light at night can suppress the natural circalunar pattern in sky brightness. In urban areas where the NSB exceeds 16.5 mag/arcsec\u00b2, the variation associated with the moon cycle becomes nearly undetectable, potentially affecting species that rely on moonlight for behavior or navigation.\nNational SQM networks have been established in several countries. In Austria, the provincial government of Upper Austria operates a dense SQM network to support both astronomical and environmental research. In Spain, coordinated efforts by researchers including Bar\u00e1 and colleagues have helped quantify the relative contributions of streetlights, traffic, and residential lighting to NSB. In Italy, SQM data have been used to monitor urban and protected areas. The Netherlands also maintains a national monitoring program using SQMs to track long-term trends.\nThese ground-based networks provide continuous data under varied weather conditions and offer a crucial complement to satellite observations, especially for evaluating local lighting policies and environmental impacts.\nBortle scale.\nThe Bortle scale is a nine-level measuring system used to track how much light pollution there is in the sky. A Bortle scale of four or less is required to see the Milky Way whilst one is \"pristine\", the darkest possible.\nGlobal impact.\nEurope.\nInspection of the area surrounding Madrid reveals that the effects of light pollution caused by a single large conglomeration can be felt up to away from the center.\nGlobal effects of light pollution are also made obvious. Research in the late 1990s showed that the entire area consisting of southern England, Netherlands, Belgium, West Germany, and northern France have a sky brightness of at least two to four times normal. The only places in continental Europe where the sky can attain its natural darkness are in northern Scandinavia and in islands far from the continent. The growth of light pollution on the green band has been 11% from 2012\u20132013 to 2014\u20132020, and 24% on the blue band.\nNorth America.\nIn North America the situation is comparable. There is a significant problem with light pollution ranging from the Canadian Maritime Provinces to the American Southwest. The International Dark-Sky Association works to designate areas that have high-quality night skies. These areas are supported by communities and organizations that are dedicated to reducing light pollution (e.g. Dark-sky preserve). The National Park Service Natural Sounds and Night Skies Division has measured night sky quality in national park units across the U.S. Sky quality in the U.S. ranges from pristine (Capitol Reef National Park and Big Bend National Park) to severely degraded (Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area and Biscayne National Park). The National Park Service Night Sky Program monitoring database is available online (2015).\nEast Asia.\nLight pollution in Hong Kong was declared the 'worst on the planet' in March 2013.\nIn June 2016, it was estimated that one third of the world's population could no longer see the Milky Way, including 80% of Americans and 60% of Europeans. Singapore was found to be the most light-polluted country in the world.\nOver the past 21 years, China's provincial capital cities have seen a major increase in light pollution, with hotspots along the eastern coastline region.\nConsequences.\nLight pollution has \"detrimental impacts on wildlife, human health, and ecosystem functions and services\". Only the damage to ecosystems is estimated as 3.36 trillion dollars per year. Ecosystems which are suffering from the highest level of light pollution, deliver 40% less ecological services.\nPublic health impact.\nMedical research on the effects of excessive light on the human body suggests that a variety of adverse health effects may be caused by light pollution or excessive light exposure, and some lighting design textbooks use human health as an explicit criterion for proper interior lighting. Health effects of over-illumination or improper spectral composition of light may include: increased headache incidence, worker fatigue, medically defined stress, decrease in sexual function and increase in anxiety. Likewise, animal models have been studied demonstrating unavoidable light to produce adverse effect on mood and anxiety. For those who need to be awake at night, light at night also has an acute effect on alertness and mood.\nOutdoor artificial light at night \u2013 exposure to contemporary types such as current types of street lighting \u2013 has been linked to risks for obesity, mental disorders, diabetes, and potentially other health issues by preliminary studies.\nIn 2007, \"shift work that involves circadian disruption\" was listed as a probable carcinogen by the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer. (IARC Press release No. 180). Multiple studies have documented a correlation between night shift work and the increased incidence of breast and prostate cancer. One study which examined the link between exposure to artificial light at night (ALAN) and levels of breast cancer in South Korea found that regions which had the highest levels of ALAN reported the highest number of cases of breast cancer. Seoul, which had the highest levels of light pollution, had 34.4% more cases of breast cancer than Ganwon-do, which had the lowest levels of light pollution. This suggested a high correlation between ALAN and the prevalence of breast cancer. It was also found that there was no correlation between other types of cancer such as cervical or lung cancer and ALAN levels.\nA more recent discussion (2009), written by Professor Steven Lockley, Harvard Medical School, can be found in the CfDS handbook \"Blinded by the Light?\". Chapter 4, \"Human health implications of light pollution\" states that \"...light intrusion, even if dim, is likely to have measurable effects on sleep disruption and melatonin suppression. Even if these effects are relatively small from night to night, continuous chronic circadian, sleep and hormonal disruption may have longer-term health risks\". The New York Academy of Sciences hosted a meeting in 2009 on Circadian Disruption and Cancer. In different wavelengths of light, red light has the least inhibitory effect on melatonin.\nIn June 2009, the American Medical Association developed a policy in support of control of light pollution. News about the decision emphasized glare as a public health hazard leading to unsafe driving conditions. Especially in the elderly, glare produces loss of contrast, obscuring night vision.\nA new 2021 study published in the Southern Economic Journal indicates that light pollution may increase by 13% in preterm births before 23 weeks of gestation.\nEcological impact.\nWhile light at night can be beneficial, neutral, or damaging for individual species, its presence invariably disturbs ecosystems. For example, some species of spiders avoid lit areas, while other species are happy to build their webs directly on lamp posts. Since lamp posts attract many flying insects, the spiders that tolerate the light gain an advantage over the spiders that avoid it. This is a simple example of the way in which species frequencies and food webs can be disturbed by the introduction of light at night.\nLight pollution poses a serious threat in particular to nocturnal wildlife, having negative impacts on plant and animal physiology. It can confuse animal navigation, alter competitive interactions, change predator-prey relations, and cause physiological harm. The rhythm of life is orchestrated by the natural diurnal patterns of light and dark, so disruption to these patterns impacts the ecological dynamics. Many species of marine plankton, such as \"Calanus\" copepods, can detect light levels as low as 0.1 \u03bcWm\u22122; using this as a threshold a global atlas of marine Artificial Light at Night has been generated, showing its global widespread nature.\nStudies suggest that light pollution around lakes prevents zooplankton, such as \"Daphnia\", from eating surface algae, causing algal blooms that can kill off the lakes' plants and lower water quality. Light pollution may also affect ecosystems in other ways. For example, entomologists have documented that nighttime light may interfere with the ability of moths and other nocturnal insects to navigate. It can also negative impact on insect development and reproduction. Night-blooming flowers that depend on moths for pollination may be affected by night lighting, as there is no replacement pollinator that would not be affected by the artificial light. This can lead to species decline of plants that are unable to reproduce, and change an area's longterm ecology. Among nocturnal insects, fireflies (Coleoptera: Lampyridae, Phengodidae and Elateridae) are especially interesting study objects for light pollution, once they depend on their own light to reproduce and, consequently, are very sensitive to environmental levels of light. Fireflies are well known and interesting to the general public (unlike many other insects) and are easily spotted by non-experts, and, due to their sensibility and rapid response to environmental changes, good bioindicators for artificial night lighting. Significant declines in some insect populations have been suggested as being at least partially mediated by artificial lights at night.\nA 2009 study also suggests deleterious impacts on animals and ecosystems because of perturbation of polarized light or artificial polarization of light (even during the day, because direction of natural polarization of sun light and its reflection is a source of information for a lot of animals). This form of pollution is named polarized light pollution (PLP). Unnatural polarized light sources can trigger maladaptive behaviors in polarization-sensitive taxa and alter ecological interactions.\nLights on tall structures can disorient migrating birds. Estimates by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of the number of birds killed after being attracted to tall towers range from four to five million per year to an order of magnitude higher. The Fatal Light Awareness Program (FLAP) works with building owners in Toronto, Ontario, Canada and other cities to reduce mortality of birds by turning out lights during migration periods. Another study has found that the lights produced by the Post Tower has affected 25 bird species. As a result, they discovered that decreasing the use of excessive lights increased the survival rate of bird species.\nSimilar disorientation has also been noted for bird species migrating close to offshore production and drilling facilities. Studies carried out by Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij b.v. (NAM) and Shell have led to the development and trial of new lighting technologies in the North Sea. In early 2007, the lights were installed on the Shell production platform L15. The experiment proved a great success since the number of birds circling the platform declined by 50 to 90%.\nBirds migrate at night for several reasons. They save water from dehydration in hot day flying, and part of the bird's navigation system works with stars in some way. With city light outshining the night sky, birds (and also about mammals) no longer navigate by stars.\nSea turtle hatchlings emerging from nests on beaches are another casualty of light pollution. It is a common misconception that hatchling sea turtles are attracted to the moon. Rather, they find the ocean by moving away from the dark silhouette of dunes and their vegetation, a behavior with which artificial lights interfere. The breeding activity and reproductive phenology of toads, however, are cued by moonlight. Juvenile seabirds are also disoriented by lights as they leave their nests and fly out to sea, causing events of high mortality. Amphibians and reptiles are also affected by light pollution. Introduced light sources during normally dark periods can disrupt levels of melatonin production. Melatonin is a hormone that regulates photoperiodic physiology and behaviour. Some species of frogs and salamanders utilize a light-dependent \"compass\" to orient their migratory behaviour to breeding sites. Introduced light can also cause developmental irregularities, such as retinal damage, reduced juvenile growth, premature metamorphosis, reduced sperm production, and genetic mutation. Close to global coastal megacities (e.g. Tokyo, Shanghai), the natural illumination cycles provided by the moon in the marine environment are considerably disrupted by light pollution, with only nights around the full moon providing greater radiances, and over a given month lunar dosages may be a factor of 6 less than light pollution dosages.\nIn September 2009, the 9th European Dark-Sky Symposium in Armagh, Northern Ireland had a session on the environmental effects of light at night (LAN). It dealt with bats, turtles, the \"hidden\" harms of LAN, and many other topics. The environmental effects of LAN were mentioned as early as 1897, in a \"Los Angeles Times\" article. The following is an excerpt from that article, called \"Electricity and English songbirds\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEffect on astronomy.\nAstronomy is very sensitive to light pollution. The night sky viewed from a city bears no resemblance to what can be seen from dark skies. Skyglow (the scattering of light in the atmosphere at night) reduces the contrast between stars and galaxies and the sky itself, making it much harder to see fainter objects. This is one factor that has caused newer telescopes to be built in increasingly remote areas.\nEven at apparent clear night skies, there can be a lot of stray light that becomes visible at longer exposure times in astrophotography. By means of software, the stray light can be reduced, but at the same time, object detail could be lost in the image. The following picture of the area around the Pinwheel Galaxy (Messier 101) with the apparent magnitude of 7.5m with all stars down to an apparent magnitude of 10m was taken in Berlin in a direction close to the zenith with a fast lens (f-number 1.2) and an exposure time of five seconds at an exposure index of ISO 12800:\nSome astronomers use narrow-band \"nebula filters\", which allow only specific wavelengths of light commonly seen in nebulae, or broad-band \"light pollution filters\", which are designed to reduce (but not eliminate) the effects of light pollution by filtering out spectral lines commonly emitted by sodium- and mercury-vapor lamps, thus enhancing contrast and improving the view of dim objects such as galaxies and nebulae. Unfortunately, these light pollution reduction (LPR) filters are not a cure for light pollution. LPR filters reduce the brightness of the object under study and this limits the use of higher magnifications. LPR filters work by blocking light of certain wavelengths, which alters the color of the object, often creating a pronounced green cast. Furthermore, LPR filters work only on certain object types (mainly emission nebulae) and are of little use on galaxies and stars. No filter can match the effectiveness of a dark sky for visual or photographic purposes.\nLight pollution affects the visibility of diffuse sky objects like nebulae and galaxies more than stars, due to their low surface brightness. Most such objects are rendered invisible in heavily light-polluted skies above major cities. A simple method for estimating the darkness of a location is to look for the Milky Way, which from truly dark skies appears bright enough to cast a shadow.\nIn addition to skyglow, light trespass can impact observations when artificial light directly enters the tube of the telescope and is reflected from non-optical surfaces until it eventually reaches the eyepiece. This direct form of light pollution causes a glow across the field of view, which reduces contrast. Light trespass also makes it hard for a visual observer to become sufficiently adapted to the dark. The usual measures to reduce this glare, if reducing the light directly is not an option, include flocking the telescope tube and accessories to reduce reflection, and putting a light shield (also usable as a dew shield) on the telescope to reduce light entering from angles other than those near the target. Under these conditions, some astronomers prefer to observe under a black cloth to ensure maximum adaptation to the dark.\nIncrease in atmospheric pollution.\nA study presented at the American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco found that light pollution destroys nitrate radicals thus preventing the normal night time reduction of atmospheric smog produced by fumes emitted from cars and factories. The study was presented by Harald Stark from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.\nReduction of natural sky polarization.\nIn the night, the polarization of the moonlit sky is strongly reduced in the presence of urban light pollution, because scattered urban light is generally not strongly polarized, especially in urban areas. When the moon is not up, it is possible for the sky to become polarized to some degree, particularly in the case of strongly non-uniform light sources. The polarization pattern of the sky cannot be directly perceived by the human visual system, but is used by some animals for orientation and navigation.\nEconomic relation.\nIt is not uncommon to find 24-hour business, such as gas stations, convenience stores, and pharmacies. Hospitals and other healthcare facilities must be staffed 24 hours per day, seven days per week. With the rise of Amazon, many factories and shipping companies now operate 24x7 shifts to keep up with the demand of the new global consumer. These industries all require light, both inside and outside their facilities to ensure the safety of their workers as they move about their jobs and when the enter and depart the facilities. As a result, \"40% of the United States and almost 20% of the European Union population has lost the ability to view the night sky\u2026in other words, it is as if they never really experience nighttime.\"\nWith a focus on shift work and the continued need for 24-hour operations of specific sectors of the economy, researchers are looking at the impact of light pollution on this group of workers. In 2007 the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) sought to bring notice to the risk from shift work as a probable risk for developing cancers. This move was the result of numerous studies that found increased risks of cancers in groups of shift workers. The 1998 Nurses Health Study found a link between breast cancer and nurses who had worked rotating night shifts in their young adult life. However, it is not possible to halt shift work in these industries. Hospitals must be staffed around the clock.\nResearch suggests that, like other environmental issues, light pollution is primarily a problem caused by industrialized nations. Numerous economic indicators have been examined to get a better sense of where light pollution was occurring around the globe. Countries with paved roads, an indicator of developed infrastructure, often had increased light pollution. Similarly, countries with a high rate of resource extraction also have high rates of light pollution. Also those with the highest GDP and high surface area described as urban and suburban also had the highest rates of light pollution.\nChina is an emerging leader in industrial and economic growth. A recent study of light pollution using the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program Operational Linescan System (DMSL/OLS) found that light pollution is increasing over the eastern coastal cities but decreasing over the industrial and mineral extraction cities. Specifically, urban areas around the Yangtze River delta, Pearl River delta, and Beijing-Tianjin area are specific light pollution areas of concern. Examining China as a whole, it was found that light pollution in the East and North was much higher than the West. This is consistent with major industrial factories located in the East and North while resource extraction dominates the West.\nIn 2009, following the United Nations declaration of \"The Year of Astronomy,\" researchers urged a better understanding of artificial light and the role it plays in social, economic, and environmental issues. Continued unfettered use of artificial light in urban and rural areas would cause a global shift with unpredictable outcomes. Focusing on the economic impact of increased energy consumption in light bulbs, or the move to energy efficiency of lighting, is not enough. Rather, the broader focus should be on the socio-economic, ecologic, and physiologic impacts of light pollution.\nHumans require some artificial night light for shift work, manufacturing, street safety, and nighttime driving and research has shown that artificial light disrupts the lives of animals. However, recent studies suggest that we may be able to find a happy medium. A 2021 article examined seasonal light changes and its effect on all animals, but specifically mollusks. The article claims that previous light research primarily focuses on length of exposure to light. However, further research should attempt to determine the safest amount of light exposure, in terms of duration and intensity, that would be most desirable for both humans and animals. With the development on this data, possible safety limits could be applied for light levels. Ideally, the light level would maintain human benefits, while also decreasing or fully removing the negative impacts on animals.\nNoctalgia.\nNoctalgia is the feeling of loss of access to seeing a starry night sky. This also includes the feeling of \"sky grief\", where people no longer have the ability to look at the stars, something that has been done for most of human existence. The phenomenon also includes the grief over not being able to have the sense of awe and wonder that humans often experience when stargazing.\nCoined by Aprana Venkatesan of the University of San Francisco and John Barentine, an astronomer, the term first appeared in August 2023 as a response to an article on the effects of light pollution published in the journal Science. Venkatesan and Barentine presented an all-encompassing definition that includes the loss of cultural identity and practices, such as storytelling and stargazing, as well as ancient knowledge such as celestial navigation. The authors argued that the night sky deserves a global protection scheme as an important part of the global heritage.\nRemediation.\nEnergy conservation advocates contend that light pollution must be addressed by changing the habits of society, so that lighting is used more efficiently, with less waste and less creation of unwanted or unneeded illumination. Several industry groups also recognize light pollution as an important issue. For example, the Institution of Lighting Engineers in the United Kingdom provides its members with information about light pollution, the problems it causes, and how to reduce its impact. Research in 2017 suggested that energy efficiency may not be enough to reduce the light pollution because of the rebound effect.\nLight levels can be quantified by field measurement or mathematical modeling, the results of which are typically rendered in isophote maps or light contour maps. To deal with light pollution, authorities have taken a variety of measures depending on the interests, beliefs, and understandings of the society involved. These measures range from doing nothing at all to implementing strict laws and regulations specifying how lights may be installed and used.\nReduction.\nReducing light pollution implies many things, such as reducing sky glow, reducing glare, reducing light trespass, and reducing clutter. The method for best reducing light pollution, therefore, depends on exactly what the problem is in any given instance. Possible solutions include:\nImproving lighting fixtures.\nThe use of \"full cutoff\" lighting fixtures, as much as possible, is advocated by most campaigners for the reduction of light pollution. It is also commonly recommended that lights be spaced appropriately for maximum efficiency, and that number of luminaires being used as well as the wattage of each luminaire match the needs of the particular application (based on local lighting design standards).\nFull cutoff fixtures first became available in 1959 with the introduction of General Electric's M100 fixture.\nA full cutoff fixture, when correctly installed, reduces the chance for light to escape above the plane of the horizontal. Light released above the horizontal may sometimes be lighting an intended target, but often serves no purpose. When it enters into the atmosphere, light contributes to sky glow. Some governments and organizations are now considering, or have already implemented, full cutoff fixtures in street lamps and stadium lighting.\nThe use of full cutoff fixtures helps to reduce sky glow by preventing light from escaping above the horizontal. Full cutoff typically reduces the visibility of the lamp and reflector within a luminaire, so the effects of glare are also reduced. Campaigners also commonly argue that full cutoff fixtures are more efficient than other fixtures, since light that would otherwise have escaped into the atmosphere may instead be directed towards the ground. However, full cutoff fixtures may also trap more light in the fixture than other types of luminaires, corresponding to lower luminaire efficiency, suggesting a re-design of some luminaires may be necessary.\nThe use of full cutoff fixtures can allow for lower wattage lamps to be used in the fixtures, producing the same or sometimes a better effect, due to being more carefully controlled. In every lighting system, some sky glow also results from light reflected from the ground. This reflection can be reduced, however, by being careful to use only the lowest wattage necessary for the lamp, and setting spacing between lights appropriately. Assuring luminaire setback is greater than 90\u00b0 from highly reflective surfaces also diminishes reflectance.\nA common criticism of full cutoff lighting fixtures is that they are sometimes not as aesthetically pleasing to look at. This is most likely because historically there has not been a large market specifically for full cutoff fixtures, and because people typically like to see the source of illumination. Due to the specificity with their direction of light, full cutoff fixtures sometimes also require expertise to install for maximum effect.\nThe effectiveness of using full cutoff roadway lights to combat light pollution has also been called into question. According to design investigations, luminaires with full cutoff distributions (as opposed to \"cutoff\" or \"semi cutoff\", compared here) have to be closer together to meet the same light level, uniformity and glare requirements specified by the IESNA. These simulations optimized the height and spacing of the lights while constraining the overall design to meet the IESNA requirements, and then compared total uplight and energy consumption of different luminaire designs and powers. Cutoff designs performed better than full cutoff designs, and semi-cutoff performed better than either cutoff or full cutoff. This indicates that, in roadway installations, over-illumination or poor uniformity produced by full cutoff fixtures may be more detrimental than direct uplight created by fewer cutoff or semi-cutoff fixtures. Therefore, the overall performance of existing systems could be improved more by reducing the number of luminaires than by switching to full cutoff designs.\nHowever, using the definition of \"light pollution\" from some Italian regional bills (i.e., \"every irradiance of artificial light outside competence areas and particularly upward the sky\") only full cutoff design prevents light pollution. The Italian Lombardy region, where only full cutoff design is allowed (Lombardy act no. 17/2000, promoted by Cielobuio-coordination for the protection of the night sky), in 2007 had the lowest per capita energy consumption for public lighting in Italy. The same legislation also imposes a minimum distance between street lamps of about four times their height, so full cut-off street lamps are the best solution to reduce both light pollution and electrical power usage.\nAdjusting types of light sources.\nSeveral different types of light sources exist, each having a variety of properties that determine their appropriateness for different tasks. Particularly notable characteristics are efficiency and spectral power distribution. It is often the case that inappropriate light sources have been selected for a task, either due to ignorance or because more appropriate lighting technology was unavailable at the time of installation. Therefore, poorly chosen light sources often contribute unnecessarily to light pollution and energy waste. By updating light sources appropriately, it is often possible to reduce energy use and pollutive effects while simultaneously improving efficiency and visibility.\nSome types of light sources are listed in order of energy efficiency in the table below (figures are approximate maintained values), and include their visual skyglow impact, relative to LPS lighting.\nMany astronomers request that nearby communities use low-pressure sodium lights or amber Aluminium gallium indium phosphide LED as much as possible because the principal wavelength emitted is comparably easy to work around or in rare cases filter out. The low cost of operating sodium lights is another feature. In 1980, for example, San Jose, California, replaced all street lamps with low pressure sodium lamps, whose light is easier for nearby Lick Observatory to filter out. Similar programs are now in place in Arizona and Hawaii. Such yellow light sources also have significantly less visual skyglow impact, so reduce visual sky brightness and improve star visibility for everyone.\nDisadvantages of low-pressure sodium lighting are that fixtures must usually be larger than competing fixtures, and that color cannot be distinguished, due to its emitting principally a single wavelength of light (see security lighting). Due to the substantial size of the lamp, particularly in higher wattages such as 135 W and 180 W, control of light emissions from low-pressure sodium luminaires is more difficult. For applications requiring more precise direction of light (such as narrow roadways) the native lamp efficacy advantage of this lamp type is decreased and may be entirely lost compared to high pressure sodium lamps. Allegations that this also leads to higher amounts of light pollution from luminaires running these lamps arise principally because of older luminaires with poor shielding, still widely in use in the UK and in some other locations. Modern low-pressure sodium fixtures with better optics and full shielding, and the decreased skyglow impacts of yellow light preserve the luminous efficacy advantage of low-pressure sodium and result in most cases is less energy consumption and less visible light pollution. Unfortunately, due to continued lack of accurate information, many lighting professionals continue to disparage low-pressure sodium, contributing to its decreased acceptance and specification in lighting standards and therefore its use. According to Narisada and Schrueder (2004), another disadvantage of low-pressure sodium lamps is that some research has found that many people find the characteristic yellow light to be less pleasing aesthetically, although they caution that this research isn't thorough enough to draw conclusions from.\nBecause of the increased sensitivity of the human eye to blue and green wavelengths when viewing low-luminances (the Purkinje effect) in the night sky, different sources produce dramatically different amounts of visible skyglow from the same amount of light sent into the atmosphere. To reduce light pollution caused by blue light, it is necessary to adopt lamps that, while maintaining the same photopic luminous flux, produce minimal scotopic light, and at the same time establish specific restrictions on the emitted wavelengths, particularly by shifting the spectral flux towards the blue side of the scotopic band (below 440\u00a0nm), to protect star visibility and significantly reduce the impact of artificial night sky glow.\nThe protected wavelength range, the \"P-band\", should focus between 440 and 540\u00a0nm to preserve star visibility and reduce light pollution in wavelengths harmful to scotopic vision, while using lamps that emit less light in this range can help minimize pollution without compromising star visibility and protect health and the environment.\nRe-designing lighting plans.\nIn some cases, evaluation of existing plans has determined that more efficient lighting plans are possible. For instance, light pollution can be reduced by turning off unneeded outdoor lights, and lighting stadiums only when there are people inside. Timers are especially valuable for this purpose. One of the world's first coordinated \"legislative\" efforts to reduce the adverse effect of this pollution on the environment began in Flagstaff, Arizona, in the U.S. There, more than three decades of ordinance development has taken place, with the full support of the population, often with government support, with community advocates, and with the help of major local observatories, including the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station. Each component helps to educate, protect and enforce the imperatives to intelligently reduce detrimental light pollution.\nOne example of a lighting plan assessment can be seen in a report originally commissioned by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister in the United Kingdom, and now available through the Department for Communities and Local Government. The report details a plan to be implemented throughout the UK, for designing lighting schemes in the countryside, with a particular focus on preserving the environment.\nIn another example, the city of Calgary has recently replaced most residential street lights with models that are comparably energy efficient. The motivation is primarily operation cost and environmental conservation. The costs of installation are expected to be regained through energy savings within six to seven years.\nThe Swiss Agency for Energy Efficiency (SAFE) uses a concept that promises to be of great use in the diagnosis and design of road lighting, \"\"consommation \u00e9lectrique sp\u00e9cifique\" (\"CES\")\", which can be translated into English as \"specific electric power consumption (SEC)\". Thus, based on observed lighting levels in a wide range of Swiss towns, SAFE has defined target values for electric power consumption per metre for roads of various categories. Thus, SAFE currently recommends an SEC of two to three watts per meter for roads less than ten metres wide (four to six for wider roads). Such a measure provides an easily applicable environmental protection constraint on conventional \"norms\", which usually are based on the recommendations of lighting manufacturing interests, who may not take into account environmental criteria. In view of ongoing progress in lighting technology, target SEC values will need to be periodically revised downwards.\nA newer method for predicting and measuring various aspects of light pollution was described in the journal Lighting Research &amp; Technology (September 2008). Scientists at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Lighting Research Center have developed a comprehensive method called Outdoor Site-Lighting Performance (OSP), which allows users to quantify, and thus optimize, the performance of existing and planned lighting designs and applications to minimize excessive or obtrusive light leaving the boundaries of a property. OSP can be used by lighting engineers immediately, particularly for the investigation of glow and trespass (glare analyses are more complex to perform and current commercial software does not readily allow them), and can help users compare several lighting design alternatives for the same site.\nIn the effort to reduce light pollution, researchers have developed a \"Unified System of Photometry\", which is a way to measure how much or what kind of street lighting is needed. The Unified System of Photometry allows light fixtures to be designed to reduce energy use while maintaining or improving perceptions of visibility, safety, and security. There was a need to create a new system of light measurement at night because the biological way in which the eye's rods and cones process light is different in nighttime conditions versus daytime conditions. Using this new system of photometry, results from recent studies have indicated that replacing traditional, yellowish, high-pressure sodium (HPS) lights with \"cool\" white light sources, such as induction, fluorescent, ceramic metal halide, or LEDs can actually reduce the amount of electric power used for lighting while maintaining or improving visibility in nighttime conditions.\nThe International Commission on Illumination, also known as the CIE from its French title, la Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage, will soon be releasing its own form of unified photometry for outdoor lighting.\nDark sky reserves.\nIn 2001 International Dark Sky Places Program was founded in order to encourage communities, parks and protected areas around the world to preserve and protect dark sites through responsible lighting policies and public education. As of January 2022, there are 195 certified International Dark Sky Places in the world. For example, in 2016 China launched its first dark sky reserve in the Tibet Autonomous Region's Ngari Prefecture which covers an area of 2,500 square kilometers. Such areas are important for astronomical observation.\nCommunity involvement.\nIncreased awareness of the effects of artificial lighting could result in legislation to effectively mitigate it. However, some communities may hold back due to factors such as cultural beliefs; in some cultures around the world, darkness may be associated with evil, whereas light would be associated with progress by contrast. Furthermore, societal standards have made humans more active during the day time. However, more recent studies indicate that public awareness of the issue has increased and that more people are experiencing consequences of excessive artificial lighting. An assessment from 2020 shows an increase in citizen awareness in the late 20th century due to the availability of internet search engines and the ability to engage globally. The assessment discussion suggests that better information accessibility and voting may promote understanding and concern about the issue.\nDark infrastructure.\nDark infrastructure is the creation and preservation of networks of natural levels of darkness, in an attempt to mitigate and reduce the adverse effects of artificial light on biodiversity. Implementation includes identifying and preserving existing dark networks as well as reducing artificial light at night.\nIUCN report.\nIn the 2024 report \"The World at Night: Preserving Natural Darkness for Heritage Conservation and Night Sky Appreciation\" by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, light pollution is scrutinized for its contribution to energy waste and climate change and its detrimental effects on ecosystems, human sleep patterns, and traditions such as those of the M\u0101ori with regard to the Pleiades. The report proposes targeted mitigation strategies such as educational campaigns, legislative action, the implementation of dark sky-compliant lighting, and the promotion of certification programs to encourage better lighting practices and astrotourism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nIntroductory\nAstronomy\nEnergy\nEnvironment and ecology\nGeneral\nHandbooks\nIndustrialisation\nReading lists\nUK"}
{"id": "18281", "revid": "19331273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18281", "title": "Lev Tolstoy", "text": ""}
{"id": "18284", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18284", "title": "Langrangian point", "text": ""}
{"id": "18285", "revid": "50945609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18285", "title": "Lagrange point", "text": "Equilibrium points near two orbiting bodies\nIn celestial mechanics, the Lagrange points (), also called the Lagrangian points or libration points, are points of equilibrium for small-mass objects under the gravitational influence of two massive orbiting bodies. Mathematically, this involves the solution of the restricted three-body problem.\nNormally, the two massive bodies exert an unbalanced gravitational force at a point, altering the orbit of whatever is at that point. At the Lagrange points, the gravitational forces of the two large bodies and the centrifugal force balance each other. This can make Lagrange points an excellent location for satellites, as orbit corrections, and hence fuel requirements, needed to maintain the desired orbit are kept at a minimum. \nFor any combination of two orbital bodies, there are five Lagrange points, L1 to L5, all in the orbital plane of the two large bodies. There are five Lagrange points for the Sun\u2013Earth system, and five \"different\" Lagrange points for the Earth\u2013Moon system. L1, L2, and L3 are on the line through the centers of the two large bodies, while L4 and L5 each act as the third vertex of an equilateral triangle formed with the centers of the two large bodies.\nWhen the mass ratio of the two bodies is large enough, the L4 and L5 points are stable points, meaning that objects can orbit them and that they have a tendency to pull objects into them. Several planets have trojan asteroids near their L4 and L5 points with respect to the Sun; Jupiter has more than one million of these trojans. \nSome Lagrange points are being used for space exploration. Two important Lagrange points in the Sun-Earth system are L1, between the Sun and Earth, and L2, on the same line at the opposite side of the Earth; both are well outside the Moon's orbit. Currently, an artificial satellite called the Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) is located at L1 to study solar wind coming toward Earth from the Sun and to monitor Earth's climate, by taking images and sending them back. The James Webb Space Telescope, a powerful infrared space observatory, is located at L2. This allows the satellite's sunshield to protect the telescope from the light and heat of the Sun, Earth and Moon simultaneously with no need to rotate the sunshield. The L1 and L2 Lagrange points are located about from Earth.\nThe European Space Agency's earlier Gaia telescope, and its newly launched Euclid, also occupy orbits around L2. Gaia keeps a tighter Lissajous orbit around L2, while Euclid follows a halo orbit similar to JWST. Each of the space observatories benefit from being far enough from Earth's shadow to utilize solar panels for power, from not needing much power or propellant for station-keeping, from not being subjected to the Earth's magnetospheric effects, and from having direct line-of-sight to Earth for data transfer.\nHistory.\nThe three collinear Lagrange points (L1, L2, L3) were discovered by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler around 1750, a decade before the Italian-born Joseph-Louis Lagrange discovered the remaining two.\nIn 1772, Lagrange published an \"Essay on the three-body problem\". In the first chapter he considered the general three-body problem. From that, in the second chapter, he demonstrated two special constant-pattern solutions, the collinear and the equilateral, for any three masses, with circular orbits.\nLagrange points.\nThe five Lagrange points are labeled and defined as follows:\nL1 point.\nThe L1 point lies on the line defined between the two large masses \"M\"1 and \"M\"2. It is the point where the gravitational attraction of \"M\"2 and that of \"M\"1 combine to produce an equilibrium. An object that orbits the Sun more closely than Earth would typically have a shorter orbital period than Earth, but that ignores the effect of Earth's gravitational pull. If the object is directly between Earth and the Sun, then Earth's gravity counteracts some of the Sun's pull on the object, increasing the object's orbital period. The closer to Earth the object is, the greater this effect is. At the L1 point, the object's orbital period becomes exactly equal to Earth's orbital period. L1 is about 1.5\u00a0million kilometers, or 0.01 au, from Earth in the direction of the Sun.\nL2 point.\nThe L2 point lies on the line through the two large masses beyond the smaller of the two. Here, the combined gravitational forces of the two large masses balance the centrifugal force on a body at L2. On the opposite side of Earth from the Sun, the orbital period of an object would normally be greater than Earth's. The extra pull of Earth's gravity decreases the object's orbital period, and at the L2 point, that orbital period becomes equal to Earth's. Like L1, L2 is about 1.5\u00a0million kilometers or 0.01 au from Earth (away from the sun). An example of a spacecraft designed to operate near the Earth\u2013Sun L2 is the James Webb Space Telescope. Earlier examples include the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe and its successor, \"Planck\".\nL3 point.\nThe L3 point lies on the line defined by the two large masses, beyond the larger of the two. Within the Sun\u2013Earth system, the L3 point exists on the opposite side of the Sun, a little outside Earth's orbit and slightly farther from the barycenter of the Earth-Sun system than Earth is. This placement occurs because the Sun is also affected by Earth's gravity and so orbits around the two bodies' barycenter, which is well inside the body of the Sun. An object at Earth's distance from the Sun would have an orbital period of one year if only the Sun's gravity is considered. But an object on the opposite side of the Sun from Earth and directly in line with both \"feels\" Earth's gravity adding slightly to the Sun's and therefore must orbit a little farther from the barycenter of Earth and Sun in order to have the same 1-year period. It is at the L3 point that the combined pull of Earth and Sun causes the object to orbit with the same period as Earth, in effect orbiting an Earth+Sun mass with the Earth-Sun barycenter at one focus of its orbit. For the above argument, it is important to distinguish between the center of the Sun and the Earth-Sun barycenter. The distance between the L3 point and the center of the Sun is actually \"smaller\" than the distance between the center of the Earth and the center of the Sun.\nL4 and L5 points.\nThe L4 and L5 points lie at the third vertices of the two equilateral triangles in the plane of orbit whose common base is the line between the centers of the two masses, such that the point lies 60\u00b0 ahead of (L4) or behind (L5) the smaller mass with regard to its orbit around the larger mass.\nStability.\nThe triangular points (L4 and L5) are stable equilibria, provided that the ratio of is greater than 24.96. This is the case for the Sun\u2013Earth system, the Sun\u2013Jupiter system, and, by a smaller margin, the Earth\u2013Moon system. When a body at these points is perturbed, it moves away from the point, but the factor opposite of that which is increased or decreased by the perturbation (either gravity or angular momentum-induced speed) will also increase or decrease, bending the object's path into a stable, kidney bean-shaped orbit around the point (as seen in the corotating frame of reference).\nThe points L1, L2, and L3 are positions of unstable equilibrium. Any object orbiting at L1, L2, or L3 will tend to fall out of orbit; it is therefore rare to find natural objects there, and spacecraft inhabiting these areas must employ a small but critical amount of station keeping in order to maintain their position.\nNatural objects at Lagrange points.\nDue to the natural stability of L4 and L5, it is common for natural objects to be found orbiting in those Lagrange points of planetary systems. Objects that inhabit those points are generically referred to as 'trojans' or 'trojan asteroids'. The name derives from the names that were given to asteroids discovered orbiting at the Sun\u2013Jupiter L4 and L5 points, which were taken from mythological characters appearing in Homer's \"Iliad\", an epic poem set during the Trojan War. Asteroids at the L4 point, ahead of Jupiter, are named after Greek characters in the \"Iliad\" and referred to as the \"Greek camp\". Those at the L5 point are named after Trojan characters and referred to as the \"Trojan camp\". Both camps are considered to be types of trojan bodies.\nAs the Sun and Jupiter are the two most massive objects in the Solar System, there are more known Sun\u2013Jupiter trojans than for any other pair of bodies. However, smaller numbers of objects are known at the Lagrange points of other orbital systems:\nObjects which are on horseshoe orbits are sometimes erroneously described as trojans, but do not occupy Lagrange points. Known objects on horseshoe orbits include 3753 Cruithne with Earth, and Saturn's moons Epimetheus and Janus.\nPhysical and mathematical details.\nLagrange points are the constant-pattern solutions of the restricted three-body problem. For example, given two massive bodies in orbits around their common barycenter, there are five positions in space where a third body, of comparatively negligible mass, could be placed so as to maintain its position relative to the two massive bodies. This occurs because the combined gravitational forces of the two massive bodies provide the exact centripetal force required to maintain the circular motion that matches their orbital motion.\nAlternatively, when seen in a rotating reference frame that matches the angular velocity of the two co-orbiting bodies, at the Lagrange points the combined gravitational fields of two massive bodies balance the centrifugal pseudo-force, allowing the smaller third body to remain stationary (in this frame) with respect to the first two.\nL1.\nThe location of L1 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force:\nformula_1\nwhere \"r\" is the distance of the L1 point from the smaller object, \"R\" is the distance between the two main objects, and \"M\"1 and \"M\"2 are the masses of the large and small object, respectively. The quantity in parentheses on the right is the distance of L1 from the center of mass. The solution for \"r\" is the only real root of the following quintic function\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3\nis the mass fraction of \"M2\" and formula_4\nis the normalized distance. If the mass of the smaller object (\"M\"2) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object (\"M\"1) then L1 and L2 are at approximately equal distances \"r\" from the smaller object, equal to the radius of the Hill sphere, given by:\nformula_5\nWe may also write this as:\nformula_6\nSince the tidal effect of a body is proportional to its mass divided by the distance cubed, this means that the tidal effect of the smaller body at the L1 or at the L2 point is about three times of that body. We may also write:\nformula_7\nwhere \"\u03c1\"1 and \"\u03c1\"2 are the average densities of the two bodies and \"d\"1 and \"d\"2 are their diameters. The ratio of diameter to distance gives the angle subtended by the body, showing that viewed from these two Lagrange points, the apparent sizes of the two bodies will be similar, especially if the density of the smaller one is about thrice that of the larger, as in the case of the Earth and the Sun.\nThis distance can be described as being such that the orbital period, corresponding to a circular orbit with this distance as radius around \"M\"2 in the absence of \"M\"1, is that of \"M\"2 around \"M\"1, divided by \u221a3 \u2248 1.73:\nformula_8\nL2.\nThe location of L2 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force:\nformula_9\nwith parameters defined as for the L1 case. The corresponding quintic equation is\nformula_10\nAgain, if the mass of the smaller object (\"M\"2) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object (\"M\"1) then L2 is at approximately the radius of the Hill sphere, given by:\nformula_5\nThe same remarks about tidal influence and apparent size apply as for the L1 point. For example, the angular radius of the Sun as viewed from L2 is arcsin()\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.264\u00b0, whereas that of the Earth is arcsin()\u00a0\u2248\u00a00.242\u00b0. Looking toward the Sun from L2 one sees an annular eclipse. It is necessary for a spacecraft, like Gaia, to follow a Lissajous orbit or a halo orbit around L2 in order for its solar panels to get full sun.\nL3.\nThe location of L3 is the solution to the following equation, gravitation providing the centripetal force:\nformula_12\nwith parameters \"M\"1, \"M\"2, and \"R\" defined as for the L1 and L2 cases, and \"r\" being defined such that the distance of L3 from the center of the larger object is \"R\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"r\". If the mass of the smaller object (\"M\"2) is much smaller than the mass of the larger object (\"M\"1), then:\nformula_13\nThus the distance from L3 to the larger object is less than the separation of the two objects (although the distance between L3 and the barycentre is greater than the distance between the smaller object and the barycentre).\nL4 and L5.\nThe reason these points are in balance is that at L4 and L5 the distances to the two masses are equal. Accordingly, the gravitational forces from the two massive bodies are in the same ratio as the masses of the two bodies, and so the resultant force acts through the barycenter of the system. Additionally, the geometry of the triangle ensures that the resultant acceleration is to the distance from the barycenter in the same ratio as for the two massive bodies. The barycenter being both the center of mass and center of rotation of the three-body system, this resultant force is exactly that required to keep the smaller body at the Lagrange point in orbital equilibrium with the other two larger bodies of the system (indeed, the third body needs to have negligible mass). The general triangular configuration was discovered by Lagrange working on the three-body problem.\nRadial acceleration.\nThe radial acceleration \"a\" of an object in orbit at a point along the line passing through both bodies is given by:\nformula_14\nwhere \"r\" is the distance from the large body \"M\"1, \"R\" is the distance between the two main objects, and sgn(\"x\") is the sign function of \"x\". The terms in this function represent respectively: force from \"M\"1; force from \"M\"2; and centripetal force. The points L3, L1, L2 occur where the acceleration is zero \u2014 see chart at right. Positive acceleration is acceleration towards the right of the chart and negative acceleration is towards the left; that is why acceleration has opposite signs on opposite sides of the gravity wells.\nStability.\nAlthough the L1, L2, and L3 points are nominally unstable, there are quasi-stable periodic orbits called \"halo orbits\" around these points in a three-body system. A full \"n\"-body dynamical system such as the Solar System does not contain these periodic orbits, but does contain quasi-periodic (i.e. bounded but not precisely repeating) orbits following Lissajous-curve trajectories. These quasi-periodic Lissajous orbits are what most of Lagrangian-point space missions have used until now. Although they are not perfectly stable, a modest effort of station keeping keeps a spacecraft in a desired Lissajous orbit for a long time.\nFor Sun\u2013Earth-L1 missions, it is preferable for the spacecraft to be in a large-amplitude () Lissajous orbit around L1 than to stay at L1, because the line between Sun and Earth has increased solar interference on Earth\u2013spacecraft communications. Similarly, a large-amplitude Lissajous orbit around L2 keeps a probe out of Earth's shadow and therefore ensures continuous illumination of its solar panels.\nThe L4 and L5 points are stable provided that the mass of the primary body (e.g. the Earth) is at least 25 times the mass of the secondary body (e.g. the Moon), The Earth is over 81 times the mass of the Moon (the Moon is 1.23% of the mass of the Earth). Although the L4 and L5 points are found at the top of a \"hill\", as in the effective potential contour plot above, they are nonetheless stable. The reason for the stability is a second-order effect: as a body moves away from the exact Lagrange position, Coriolis acceleration (which depends on the velocity of an orbiting object and cannot be modeled as a contour map) curves the trajectory into a path around (rather than away from) the point. Because the source of stability is the Coriolis force, the resulting orbits can be stable, but generally are not planar, but \"three-dimensional\": they lie on a warped surface intersecting the ecliptic plane. The kidney-shaped orbits typically shown nested around L4 and L5 are the projections of the orbits on a plane (e.g. the ecliptic) and not the full 3-D orbits.\nSolar System values.\nThis table lists sample values of L1, L2, and L3 within the Solar System. Calculations assume the two bodies orbit in a perfect circle with separation equal to the semimajor axis and no other bodies are nearby. Distances are measured from the larger body's center of mass (but see barycenter especially in the case of Earth-Moon and Sun-Jupiter) with L3 showing a negative direction. The percentage columns show the distance from the orbit compared to the semimajor axis. E.g. for the Moon, L1 is from Earth's center, which is 84.9% of the Earth\u2013Moon distance or 15.1% \"in front of\" (Earthwards from) the Moon; L2 is located from Earth's center, which is 116.8% of the Earth\u2013Moon distance or 16.8% beyond the Moon; and L3 is located from Earth's center, which is 99.3% of the Earth\u2013Moon distance or 0.7084% inside (Earthward) of the Moon's 'negative' position.\nSpaceflight applications.\nSun\u2013Earth.\nSun\u2013Earth L1 is suited for making observations of the Sun\u2013Earth system. Objects here are never shadowed by Earth or the Moon and, if observing Earth, always view the sunlit hemisphere. The first mission of this type was the 1978 International Sun Earth Explorer 3 (ISEE-3) mission used as an interplanetary early warning storm monitor for solar disturbances. Since June 2015, DSCOVR has orbited the L1 point. Conversely, it is also useful for space-based solar telescopes, because it provides an uninterrupted view of the Sun and any space weather (including the solar wind and coronal mass ejections) reaches L1 up to an hour before Earth. Solar and heliospheric missions currently located around L1 include the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, Wind, Aditya-L1 Mission and the Advanced Composition Explorer. Planned missions include the Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration Probe(IMAP) and the NEO Surveyor.\nSun\u2013Earth L2 is a good spot for space-based observatories. Because an object around L2 will maintain the same relative position with respect to the Sun and Earth, shielding and calibration are much simpler. It is, however, slightly beyond the reach of Earth's umbra, so solar radiation is not completely blocked at L2. Spacecraft generally orbit around L2, avoiding partial eclipses of the Sun to maintain a constant temperature. From locations near L2, the Sun, Earth and Moon are relatively close together in the sky; this means that a large sunshade with the telescope on the dark-side can allow the telescope to cool passively to around 50 K \u2013 this is especially helpful for infrared astronomy and observations of the cosmic microwave background. The James Webb Space Telescope was positioned in a halo orbit about L2 on 24 January 2022.\nSun\u2013Earth L1 and L2 are saddle points and exponentially unstable with time constant of roughly 23 days. Satellites at these points will wander off in a few months unless course corrections are made. \nSun\u2013Earth L3 was a popular place to put a \"Counter-Earth\" in pulp science fiction and comic books, despite the fact that the existence of a planetary body in this location had been understood as an impossibility once orbital mechanics and the perturbations of planets upon each other's orbits came to be understood, long before the Space Age; the influence of an Earth-sized body on other planets would not have gone undetected, nor would the fact that the foci of Earth's orbital ellipse would not have been in their expected places, due to the mass of the counter-Earth. The Sun\u2013Earth L3, however, is a weak saddle point and exponentially unstable with time constant of roughly 150 years. Moreover, it could not contain a natural object, large or small, for very long because the gravitational forces of the other planets are stronger than that of Earth (for example, Venus comes within 0.3\u00a0AU of this L3 every 20\u00a0months).\nA spacecraft orbiting near Sun\u2013Earth L3 would be able to closely monitor the evolution of active sunspot regions before they rotate into a geoeffective position, so that a seven-day early warning could be issued by the NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center. Moreover, a satellite near Sun\u2013Earth L3 would provide very important observations not only for Earth forecasts, but also for deep space support (Mars predictions and for crewed missions to near-Earth asteroids). In 2010, spacecraft transfer trajectories to Sun\u2013Earth L3 were studied and several designs were considered.\nEarth\u2013Moon.\nEarth\u2013Moon L1 allows comparatively easy access to lunar and Earth orbits with minimal change in velocity and this has as an advantage to position a habitable space station intended to help transport cargo and personnel to the Moon and back. The SMART-1 mission passed through the L1 Lagrangian Point on 11 November 2004 and passed into the area dominated by the Moon's gravitational influence.\nEarth\u2013Moon L2 has been used for a communications satellite covering the Moon's far side, for example, Queqiao, launched in 2018, and would be \"an ideal location\" for a propellant depot as part of the proposed depot-based space transportation architecture.\nEarth\u2013Moon L4 and L5 are the locations for the Kordylewski dust clouds. The L5 Society's name comes from the L4 and L5 Lagrangian points in the Earth\u2013Moon system proposed as locations for their huge rotating space habitats. Both positions are also proposed for communication satellites covering the Moon alike communication satellites in geosynchronous orbit cover the Earth.\nSun\u2013Venus.\nScientists at the B612 Foundation were planning to use Venus's L3 point to position their planned Sentinel telescope, which aimed to look back towards Earth's orbit and compile a catalog of near-Earth asteroids.\nSun\u2013Mars.\nIn 2017, the idea of positioning a magnetic dipole shield at the Sun\u2013Mars L1 point for use as an artificial magnetosphere for Mars was discussed at a NASA conference. The idea is that this would protect the planet's atmosphere from the Sun's radiation and solar winds.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18286", "revid": "50742601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18286", "title": "Lucid dream", "text": "Dream where one is aware that one is dreaming\nIn the psychology subfield of oneirology, a lucid dream is a type of dream wherein the dreamer realizes that they are dreaming during their dream. The capacity to have and sustain lucid dreams is a trainable cognitive skill. During a lucid dream, the dreamer may gain some amount of volitional control over the dream characters, narrative, or environment, although this control of dream content is not the salient feature of lucid dreaming. An important distinction is that lucid dreaming is a distinct type of dream from other types of dreams such as prelucid dreams and vivid dreams, although prelucid dreams are a precursor to lucid dreams, and lucid dreams are often accompanied with enhanced dream vividness. Lucid dreams are also a distinct state from other lucid boundary sleep states such as lucid hypnagogia or lucid hypnopompia.\nIn formal psychology, lucid dreaming has been studied and reported for many years. Prominent figures from ancient to modern times have been fascinated by lucid dreams and have sought ways to better understand their causes and purpose. Many different theories have emerged as a result of scientific research on the subject. Further developments in psychological research have pointed to ways in which this form of dreaming may be utilized as a therapeutic technique.\nThe term \"lucid dream\" was coined by Dutch author and psychiatrist Frederik van Eeden in his 1913 article \"A Study of Dreams\", though descriptions of dreamers being aware that they are dreaming predate the article. Psychologist Stephen LaBerge is widely considered the progenitor and leading pioneer of modern lucid dreaming research. He is the founder of the Lucidity Institute at Stanford University.\nDefinition.\nPaul Tholey laid the epistemological basis for the research of lucid dreams, proposing seven different conditions of clarity that a dream must fulfill to be defined as a lucid dream:\nLater, in 1992, a study by Deirdre Barrett examined whether lucid dreams contained four \"corollaries\" of lucidity:\nBarrett found that less than a quarter of lucidity accounts exhibited all four.\nSubsequently, Stephen LaBerge studied the prevalence among lucid dreams of the ability to control the dream scenario, and found that while dream control and dream awareness are correlated, neither requires the other. LaBerge found dreams that exhibit one clearly without the capacity for the other. He also found dreams where, although the dreamer is lucid and aware they could exercise control, they choose simply to observe.\nHistory.\nEastern.\nThe practice of lucid dreaming is central to both the ancient Indian Hindu practice of Yoga nidra and the Tibetan Buddhist practice of dream Yoga. The cultivation of such awareness was a common practice among early Buddhists.\nWestern.\nEarly references to the phenomenon are also found in ancient Greek writing. For example, the philosopher Aristotle wrote: \"often when one is asleep, there is something in consciousness which declares that what then presents itself is but a dream.\" Meanwhile, the physician Galen of Pergamon used lucid dreams as a form of therapy. In addition, a letter written by Saint Augustine of Hippo in AD 415 tells the story of a dreamer, Doctor Gennadius, and refers to lucid dreaming.\nPhilosopher and physician Sir Thomas Browne (1605\u20131682) was fascinated by dreams and described his own ability to lucid dream in his \"Religio Medici\", stating: \"...yet in one dream I can compose a whole Comedy, behold the action, apprehend the jests and laugh my self awake at the conceits thereof.\"\nSamuel Pepys, in his diary entry for 15 August 1665, records a dream, stating: \"I had my Lady Castlemayne in my arms and was admitted to use all the dalliance I desired with her, and then dreamt that this could not be awake, but that it was only a dream.\"\nIn 1867, the French sinologist Marie-Jean-L\u00e9on, Marquis d'Hervey de Saint Denys anonymously published \"Les R\u00eaves et Les Moyens de Les Diriger; Observations Pratiques\" (\"Dreams and the ways to direct them; practical observations\"), in which he describes his own experiences of lucid dreaming, and proposes that it is possible for anyone to learn to dream consciously.\nIn 1913, Dutch psychiatrist and writer Frederik (Willem) van Eeden (1860\u20131932) coined the term \"lucid dream\" in an article entitled \"A Study of Dreams\".\nSome have suggested that the term is a misnomer because Van Eeden was referring to a phenomenon more specific than a lucid dream. Van Eeden intended the term lucid to denote \"having insight\", as in the phrase \"a lucid interval\" applied to someone in temporary remission from a psychosis, rather than as a reference to the perceptual quality of the experience, which may or may not be clear and vivid.\nSkill mastery.\nClinical psychologist, Kristen LaMarca outlined four stages towards mastering the skill of using lucid dreaming:\nProgression along the skill levels is akin to a maturity in the development of the practitioner's discipline, methodology and application.\nCognitive science.\nIn 1968, Celia Green analyzed the main characteristics of such dreams, reviewing previously published literature on the subject and incorporating new data from participants of her own. She concluded that lucid dreams were a category of experience quite distinct from ordinary dreams and said they were associated with rapid eye movement sleep (REM sleep). Green was also the first to link lucid dreams to the phenomenon of false awakenings, which has since been corroborated by more recent studies.\nIn 1973, the National Institute of Mental Health reported that researchers at the University of California, San Francisco, were able to train sleeping subjects to recognize they were in REM dreaming and indicate this by pressing micro switches on their thumbs. Using tones and mild shocks as cues, the experiments showed that the subjects were able to signal knowledge of their various sleep stages, including dreaming.\nIn 1975, Dr. Keith Hearne had the idea to exploit the nature of rapid eye movements (REM) to allow a dreamer to send a message directly from dreams to the waking world. Working with an experienced lucid dreamer (Alan Worsley), he eventually succeeded in recording (via the use of an electrooculogram or EOG) a pre-defined set of eye movements signaled from within Worsley's lucid dream. This occurred at around 8 am on the morning of April 12, 1975. Hearne's EOG experiment was formally recognized through publication in the journal for The Society for Psychical Research. Lucid dreaming was subsequently researched by asking dreamers to perform pre-determined physical responses while experiencing a dream, including eye movement signals.\nIn 1980, Stephen LaBerge at Stanford University developed such techniques as part of his doctoral dissertation. In 1985, LaBerge performed a pilot study that showed that time perception while counting during a lucid dream is about the same as during waking life. Lucid dreamers counted out ten seconds while dreaming, signaling the start and the end of the count with a pre-arranged eye signal measured with electrooculogram recording. LaBerge's results were confirmed by German researchers D. Erlacher and M. Schredl in 2004.\nIn a further study by Stephen LaBerge, four subjects were compared, either singing or counting while dreaming. LaBerge found that the right hemisphere was more active during singing and the left hemisphere was more active during counting.\nNeuroscientist J. Allan Hobson has hypothesized what might be occurring in the brain while lucid. The first step to lucid dreaming is recognizing that one is dreaming. This recognition might occur in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which is one of the few areas deactivated during REM sleep and where working memory occurs. Once this area is activated and the recognition of dreaming occurs, the dreamer must be cautious to let the dream continue, but be conscious enough to remember that it is a dream. While maintaining this balance, the amygdala and parahippocampal cortex might be less intensely activated. To continue the intensity of the dream hallucinations, it is expected the pons and the parieto-occipital junction stay active.\nUsing electroencephalography (EEG) and other polysomnographical measurements, LaBerge and others have shown that lucid dreams begin in the rapid eye movement (REM) stage of sleep. LaBerge also proposes that there are higher amounts of beta-1 frequency band (13\u201319\u00a0Hz) brain wave activity experienced by lucid dreamers, hence there is an increased amount of activity in the parietal lobes making lucid dreaming a conscious process.\nPaul Tholey, a German Gestalt psychologist and a professor of psychology and sports science, originally studied dreams in order to resolve the question of whether one dreams in colour or black and white. In his phenomenological research, he outlined an epistemological frame using critical realism. Tholey instructed his subjects to continuously suspect waking life to be a dream, in order that such a habit would manifest itself during dreams. He called this technique for inducing lucid dreams the \"Reflexionstechnik\" (reflection technique). Subjects learned to have such lucid dreams; they observed their dream content and reported it soon after awakening. Tholey could examine the cognitive abilities of dream figures. Nine trained lucid dreamers were directed to set other dream figures arithmetic and verbal tasks during lucid dreaming. Dream figures who agreed to perform the tasks proved more successful in verbal than in arithmetic tasks. Tholey discussed his scientific results with Stephen LaBerge, who has a similar approach.\nA study was conducted by Stephen LaBerge and other scientists to see if it were possible to attain the ability to lucid dream through a drug. In 2018, galantamine was given to 121 patients in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, the only one of its kind. Some participants found as much as a 42 percent increase in their ability to lucid dream, compared to self-reports from the past six months, and ten people experienced a lucid dream for the first time. It is theorized that galantamine allows acetylcholine to build up, leading to greater recollection and awareness during dreaming.\nTwo-way communication.\nTeams of cognitive scientists have established real-time two-way communication with people undergoing a lucid dream. During dreaming, they were able to consciously communicate with experimenters via eye movements or facial muscle signals, were able to comprehend complex questions and use working memory. Such interactive lucid dreaming could be a new approach for the scientific exploration of the dream state and could have applications for learning and creativity.&lt;ref name=\"10.1016/j.cub.2021.01.026\"&gt; Available under https:// .&lt;/ref&gt;\nAlternative theories.\nOther researchers suggest that lucid dreaming is not a state of sleep, but of brief wakefulness, or \"micro-awakening\". Experiments by Stephen LaBerge used \"perception of the outside world\" as a criterion for wakefulness while studying lucid dreamers, and their sleep state was corroborated with physiological measurements. LaBerge's subjects experienced their lucid dream while in a state of REM, which critics felt may mean that the subjects are fully awake. J. Allen Hobson responded that lucid dreaming must be a state of both waking and dreaming.\nPhilosopher Norman Malcolm was a proponent of dream skepticism. He has argued against the possibility of checking the accuracy of dream reports, pointing out that \"the only criterion of the truth of a statement that someone has had a certain dream is, essentially, his saying so.\" Yet dream reports are not the only evidence that some inner drama is being played out during REM sleep. Electromyography on speech and body muscles has demonstrated the sleeping body covertly walking, gesturing and talking while in REM.\nPrevalence and frequency.\nIn 2016, a meta-analytic study by David Saunders and colleagues on 34 lucid dreaming studies, taken from a period of 50 years, demonstrated that 55% of a pooled sample of 24,282 people claimed to have experienced lucid dreams at least once or more in their lifetime. Furthermore, for those that stated they did experience lucid dreams, approximately 23% reported to experience them on a regular basis, as often as once a month or more. In a 2004 study on lucid dream frequency and personality, a moderate correlation between nightmare frequency and frequency of lucid dreaming was demonstrated. Some lucid dreamers also reported that nightmares are a trigger for dream lucidity. Previous studies have reported that lucid dreaming is more common among adolescents than adults.\nA 2015 study by Julian Mutz and Amir-Homayoun Javadi showed that people who had practiced meditation for a long time tended to have more lucid dreams. The authors claimed that \"Lucid dreaming is a hybrid state of consciousness with features of both waking and dreaming\" in a review they published in Neuroscience of Consciousness in 2017.\nMutz and Javadi found that during lucid dreaming, there is an increase in activity of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the bilateral frontopolar prefrontal cortex, the precuneus, the inferior parietal lobules, and the supramarginal gyrus. All are brain functions related to higher cognitive functions, including working memory, planning, and self-consciousness. The researchers also found that during a lucid dream, \"levels of self-determination\" were similar to those that people experienced during states of wakefulness. They also found that lucid dreamers can only control limited aspects of their dream at once.\nMutz and Javadi also have stated that by studying lucid dreaming further, scientists could learn more about various types of consciousness, which happen to be less easy to separate and research at other times.\nSuggested applications.\nTreating nightmares.\nIt has been suggested that those who suffer from nightmares could benefit from the ability to be aware they are indeed dreaming. A pilot study performed in 2006 showed that lucid dreaming therapy treatment was successful in reducing nightmare frequency. This treatment consisted of exposure to the idea, mastery of the technique, and lucidity exercises. It was not clear what aspects of the treatment were responsible for the success of overcoming nightmares, though the treatment as a whole was said to be successful.\nAustralian psychologist Milan Colic has explored the application of principles from narrative therapy to clients' lucid dreams, to reduce the impact not only of nightmares during sleep but also depression, self-mutilation, and other problems in waking life. Colic found that therapeutic conversations could reduce the distressing content of dreams, while understandings about life\u2014and even characters\u2014from lucid dreams could be applied to their lives with marked therapeutic benefits.\nPsychotherapists have applied lucid dreaming as a part of therapy. Studies have shown that, by inducing a lucid dream, recurrent nightmares can be alleviated. It is unclear whether this alleviation is due to lucidity or the ability to alter the dream itself. A 2006 study performed by Victor Spoormaker and Van den Bout evaluated the validity of lucid dreaming treatment (LDT) in chronic nightmare sufferers. LDT is composed of exposure, mastery and lucidity exercises. Results of lucid dreaming treatment revealed that the nightmare frequency of the treatment groups had decreased. In another study, Spoormaker, Van den Bout, and Meijer (2003) investigated lucid dreaming treatment for nightmares by testing eight subjects who received a one-hour individual session, which consisted of lucid dreaming exercises. The results of the study revealed that the nightmare frequency had decreased and the sleep quality had slightly increased.\nHolzinger, Kl\u00f6sch, and Saletu managed a psychotherapy study under the working name of 'Cognition during dreaming\u2014a therapeutic intervention in nightmares', which included 40 subjects, men and women, 18\u201350 years old, whose life quality was significantly altered by nightmares. The test subjects were administered Gestalt group therapy, and 24 of them were also taught to enter the state of lucid dreaming by Holzinger. This was purposefully taught in order to change the course of their nightmares. The subjects then reported the diminishment of their nightmare prevalence from 2\u20133 times a week to 2\u20133 times per month.\nCreativity.\nIn her book \"The Committee of Sleep\", Deirdre Barrett describes how some experienced lucid dreamers have learned to remember specific practical goals such as artists looking for inspiration seeking a show of their own work once they become lucid or computer programmers looking for a screen with their desired code. However, most of these dreamers had many experiences of failing to recall waking objectives before gaining this level of control.\n\"Exploring the World of Lucid Dreaming\" by Stephen LaBerge and Howard Rheingold (1990) discusses creativity within dreams and lucid dreams, including testimonials from a number of people who claim they have used the practice of lucid dreaming to help them solve a number of creative issues, from an aspiring parent thinking of potential baby names to a surgeon practicing surgical techniques. The authors discuss how creativity in dreams could stem from \"conscious access to the contents of our unconscious minds\"; access to \"tacit knowledge\"\u2014the things we know but can't explain, or things we know but are unaware that we know.\n\"The Dreams Behind the Music\" book by Craig Webb (2016) details lucid dreams of a number of musical artists, including how they are able not just to hear, but also compose, mix, arrange, practice, and perform music while conscious within their dreams.\nRisks.\nThough lucid dreaming can be beneficial to a number of aspects of life, some risks have been suggested. Those struggling with certain mental illnesses could find it hard to tell the difference between reality and the lucid dream (psychosis).\nA very small percentage of people may experience sleep paralysis, which can sometimes be confused with lucid dreaming. Although from the outside, both seem to be quite similar, there are a few distinct differences that can help differentiate them. A person usually experiences sleep paralysis when they partially wake up in REM atonia, a state in which said person is partially paralyzed and cannot move their limbs. When in sleep paralysis, people may also experience hallucinations. Although said hallucinations cannot cause physical damage, they may still be frightening. There are three common types of hallucinations: an intruder in the same room, a crushing feeling on one's chest or back, and a feeling of flying or levitating. About 7.6% of the general population have experienced sleep paralysis at least once. Exiting sleep paralysis to a waking state can be achieved by intently focusing on a part of the body, such as a finger, and wiggling it, then continuing the action of moving to the hand, the arm, and so on, until the person is fully awake.\nLong-term risks with lucid dreaming have not been extensively studied, although many people have reported lucid dreaming for many years without any adverse effects. In 2018, researchers at the Wisconsin Institute for Sleep and Consciousness conducted a study that concluded individuals who lucid dream more frequently have a more active and well-connected prefrontal cortex.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18288", "revid": "43640434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18288", "title": "Lyric", "text": "Lyric may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18289", "revid": "44342819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18289", "title": "Legislative branch", "text": ""}
{"id": "18290", "revid": "12782318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18290", "title": "Light-emitting diode", "text": "Semiconductor and solid-state light source\nIn electrical engineering, a light-emitting diode (LED) is a semiconductor device that emits light when current flows through it. Electrons in the semiconductor recombine with electron holes, releasing energy in the form of photons. The color of the light (corresponding to the energy of the photons) is determined by the energy required for electrons to cross the band gap of the semiconductor. White light is obtained by using multiple semiconductors or a layer of light-emitting phosphor on the semiconductor device.\nAppearing as practical electronic components in 1962, the earliest LEDs emitted low-intensity infrared (IR) light. Infrared LEDs are used in remote-control circuits, such as those used with a wide variety of consumer electronics. The first visible-light LEDs were of low intensity and limited to red.\nEarly LEDs were often used as indicator lamps, replacing small incandescent bulbs, and in seven-segment displays. Later developments produced LEDs available in visible, ultraviolet (UV), and infrared wavelengths with high, low, or intermediate light output; for instance, white LEDs suitable for room and outdoor lighting. LEDs have also given rise to new types of displays and sensors, while their high switching rates have uses in advanced communications technology. LEDs have been used in diverse applications such as aviation lighting, fairy lights, strip lights, automotive headlamps, advertising, stage lighting, general lighting, traffic signals, camera flashes, lighted wallpaper, horticultural grow lights, and medical devices.\nLEDs have many advantages over incandescent light sources, including lower power consumption, a longer lifetime, improved physical robustness, smaller sizes, and faster switching. In exchange for these generally favorable attributes, disadvantages of LEDs include electrical limitations to low voltage and generally to DC (not AC) power, the inability to provide steady illumination from a pulsing DC or an AC electrical supply source, and a lesser maximum operating temperature and storage temperature.\nLEDs are transducers of electricity into light. They operate in reverse of photodiodes, which convert light into electricity.\nHistory.\nElectroluminescence from a solid state diode was discovered in 1906 by Henry Joseph Round of Marconi Labs, and was published in February 1907 in Electrical World. Round observed that various carborundum (silicon carbide) crystals would emit yellow, light green, orange, or blue light when a voltage was passed between the poles.\nA silicon carbide LED was created by Soviet inventor Oleg Losev in 1927.\nCommercially viable LEDs only became available after Texas Instruments engineers patented efficient near-infrared emission from a diode based on GaAs in 1962. Commercial LEDs were extremely costly and saw no practical use until Monsanto and Hewlett-Packard developed them to the point where a unit cost less than five cents in the 1970s.\nIn the early 1990s, Shuji Nakamura, Hiroshi Amano and Isamu Akasaki developed blue light-emitting diodes, bringing white lighting and full-color LED displays into practical use. For this work, they won the 2014 Nobel Prize in Physics.\nPhysics of light production and emission.\nIn a light-emitting diode, the recombination of electrons and electron holes in a semiconductor produces light (infrared, visible or UV), a process called electroluminescence. The wavelength of the light depends on the energy band gap of the semiconductors used. Since these materials have a high index of refraction, design features of the devices, such as special optical coatings and die shape, are required to efficiently emit light.\nUnlike a laser, the light emitted from an LED is neither spectrally nor spatially coherent nor even highly monochromatic. Its spectrum is sufficiently narrow that it appears to the human eye as a pure (saturated) color. Also, it cannot approach the very high intensity characteristic of lasers.\nSingle-color LEDs.\nBy selection of different semiconductor materials, single-color LEDs can be made that emit light in a narrow band of wavelengths, from the near-infrared through the visible spectrum and into the ultraviolet range. The required operating voltages of LEDs increase as the emitted wavelengths become shorter (higher energy, red to blue), because of their increasing semiconductor band gap.\nBlue LEDs have an active region consisting of one or more InGaN quantum wells sandwiched between thicker layers of GaN, called cladding layers. By varying the relative In/Ga fraction in the InGaN quantum wells, the light emission can in theory be varied from violet to amber.\nAluminium gallium nitride (AlGaN) of varying Al/Ga fraction can be used to manufacture the cladding and quantum well layers for ultraviolet LEDs, but these devices have not yet reached the level of efficiency and technological maturity of InGaN/GaN blue/green devices. If unalloyed GaN is used in this case to form the active quantum well layers, the device emits near-ultraviolet light with a peak wavelength centred around 365\u00a0nm. Green LEDs manufactured from the InGaN/GaN system are far more efficient and brighter than green LEDs produced with non-nitride material systems, but practical devices still exhibit efficiency too low for high-brightness applications.\nWith AlGaN and AlGaInN, even shorter wavelengths are achievable. Near-UV emitters at wavelengths around 360\u2013395\u00a0nm are already cheap and often encountered, for example, as black light lamp replacements for inspection of anti-counterfeiting UV watermarks in documents and bank notes, and for UV curing. Substantially more expensive, shorter-wavelength diodes are commercially available for wavelengths down to 240\u00a0nm. As the photosensitivity of microorganisms approximately matches the absorption spectrum of DNA, with a peak at about 260\u00a0nm, UV LED emitting at 250\u2013270\u00a0nm are expected in prospective disinfection and sterilization devices. Recent research has shown that commercially available UVA LEDs (365\u00a0nm) are already effective disinfection and sterilization devices.\nUV-C wavelengths were obtained in laboratories using aluminium nitride (210\u00a0nm), boron nitride (215\u00a0nm) and diamond (235\u00a0nm).\nWhite LEDs.\nThere are two primary ways of producing white light-emitting diodes (WLED). One is to use individual LEDs that emit three primary colors\u2014red, green and blue\u2014and then mix all the colors to form white light. The other, more common method is to use a phosphor material to convert monochromatic light from a blue or UV LED to broad-spectrum white light, similar to a fluorescent lamp. The yellow phosphor is made of cerium-doped YAG crystals suspended in the package or coated on the LED. This YAG phosphor causes white LEDs to appear yellow when off, and the space between the crystals allow some blue light to pass through in LEDs with partial phosphor conversion. Alternatively, white LEDs may use other phosphors like manganese(IV)-doped potassium fluorosilicate (PFS) or other engineered phosphors. PFS assists in red light generation, and is used in conjunction with a conventional Ce:YAG phosphor.\nIn LEDs with PFS phosphor, some blue light passes through the phosphors, the Ce:YAG phosphor converts blue light to green and red (yellow) light, and the PFS phosphor converts blue light to red light. The color emission spectrum or color temperature of white phosphor-converted and other phosphor-converted LEDs can be controlled by changing the concentration of several phosphors that form a phosphor blend used in an LED package.\nThe 'whiteness' of the light produced is engineered to suit the human eye. Because of metamerism, it is possible to have quite different spectra that appear white. The appearance of objects illuminated by that light may vary as the spectrum varies. This is the issue of color rendition, quite separate from color temperature. An orange or cyan object could appear with the wrong color and much darker as the LED or phosphor does not emit the wavelength it reflects. The best color rendition LEDs use a mix of phosphors, resulting in less efficiency and better color rendering.\nThe first white light-emitting diodes (LEDs) were offered for sale in the autumn of 1996. Nichia made some of the first white LEDs which were based on blue LEDs with Ce:YAG phosphor. Ce:YAG is often grown using the Czochralski method.\nRGB systems.\nMixing red, green, and blue sources to produce white light needs electronic circuits to control the blending of the colors. Since LEDs have slightly different emission patterns, the color balance may change depending on the angle of view, even if the RGB sources are in a single package, so RGB diodes are seldom used to produce white lighting. Nonetheless, this method has many applications because of the flexibility of mixing different colors, and in principle, this mechanism also has higher quantum efficiency in producing white light.\nThere are several types of multicolor white LEDs: di-, tri-, and tetrachromatic white LEDs. Several key factors that play among these different methods include color stability, color rendering capability, and luminous efficacy. Often, higher efficiency means lower color rendering, presenting a trade-off between the luminous efficacy and color rendering. For example, the dichromatic white LEDs have the best luminous efficacy (120 lm/W), but the lowest color rendering capability. Although tetrachromatic white LEDs have excellent color rendering capability, they often have poor luminous efficacy. Trichromatic white LEDs are in between, having both good luminous efficacy (&gt;70 lm/W) and fair color rendering capability.\nOne of the challenges is the development of more efficient green LEDs. The theoretical maximum for green LEDs is 683 lumens per watt, but as of 2010 few green LEDs exceed even 100 lumens per watt. The blue and red LEDs approach their theoretical limits.\nMulticolor LEDs offer a means to form light of different colors. Most perceivable colors can be formed by mixing different amounts of three primary colors. This allows precise dynamic color control. Their emission power decays exponentially with rising temperature,\nresulting in a substantial change in color stability. Such problems hinder industrial use. Multicolor LEDs without phosphors cannot provide good color rendering because each LED is a narrowband source. LEDs without phosphors, while a poorer solution for general lighting, are the best solution for displays, whether they are LCD-backlit or direct LED-based pixels.\nDimming a multicolor LED source to match the characteristics of incandescent lamps is difficult because manufacturing variations, age, and temperature change the actual color value output. To emulate the appearance of dimming in incandescent lamps, LEDs may require a feedback system with color sensor to actively monitor and control the color.\nPhosphor-based LEDs.\nThis method involves coating LEDs of one color (mostly blue LEDs made of InGaN) with phosphors of different colors to form white light; the resultant LEDs are called phosphor-based or phosphor-converted white LEDs (pcLEDs). A fraction of the blue light undergoes the Stokes shift, which transforms it from shorter wavelengths to longer. Depending on the original LED's color, various color phosphors are used. Using several phosphor layers of distinct colors broadens the emitted spectrum, effectively raising the color rendering index (CRI).\nPhosphor-based LEDs have efficiency losses due to heat loss from the Stokes shift and other phosphor-related issues. Their luminous efficacies compared to normal LEDs depend on the spectral distribution of the resultant light output and the original wavelength of the LED itself. For example, the luminous efficacy of a typical YAG yellow phosphor based white LED ranges from 3 to 5 times the luminous efficacy of the original blue LED because of the human eye's greater sensitivity to yellow than to blue (as modeled in the luminosity function).\nDue to the simplicity of manufacturing, the phosphor method is still the most popular method for making high-intensity white LEDs. The design and production of a light source or light fixture using a monochrome emitter with phosphor conversion is simpler and cheaper than a complex RGB system, and the majority of high-intensity white LEDs presently on the market are manufactured using phosphor light conversion.\nAmong the challenges being faced to improve the efficiency of LED-based white light sources is the development of more efficient phosphors. As of 2010, the most efficient yellow phosphor is still the YAG phosphor, with less than 10% Stokes shift loss. Losses attributable to internal optical losses due to re-absorption in the LED chip and in the LED packaging itself typically account for another 10% to 30% loss. Currently, in the area of phosphor LED development, much effort is being spent on optimizing these devices to higher light output and higher operation temperatures. For instance, the efficiency can be raised by adapting better package design or by using a more suitable type of phosphor. Conformal coating process is frequently used to address the issue of varying phosphor thickness.\nSome phosphor-based white LEDs encapsulate InGaN blue LEDs inside phosphor-coated epoxy. Alternatively, the LED might be paired with a remote phosphor, a preformed polycarbonate piece coated with the phosphor material. Remote phosphors provide more diffuse light, which is desirable for many applications. Remote phosphor designs are also more tolerant of variations in the LED emissions spectrum. A common yellow phosphor material is cerium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Ce3+:YAG).\nWhite LEDs can also be made by coating near-ultraviolet (NUV) LEDs with a mixture of high-efficiency europium-based phosphors that emit red and blue, plus copper and aluminium-doped zinc sulfide (ZnS:Cu, Al) that emits green. This is a method analogous to the way fluorescent lamps work. This method is less efficient than blue LEDs with YAG:Ce phosphor, as the Stokes shift is larger, but it yields light with better spectral characteristics, which render color better. Due to the higher radiative output of the ultraviolet LEDs than of the blue ones, both methods offer comparable brightness. A concern is that UV light may leak from a malfunctioning light source and cause harm to human eyes or skin. \nA new style of wafers composed of gallium-nitride-on-silicon (GaN-on-Si) is being used to produce white LEDs using 200-mm silicon wafers. This avoids the typical costly sapphire substrate for relatively small 100- or 150-mm wafer sizes. The sapphire apparatus must be coupled with a mirror-like collector to reflect light that would otherwise be wasted. It was predicted that in 2020, 40% of all GaN LEDs are made with GaN-on-Si.\nMixed white LEDs.\nThere are RGBW LEDs that combine RGB units with a phosphor white LED on the market. Doing so retains the extremely tunable color of RGB LEDs, but allows color rendering and efficiency to be optimized when a color close to white is selected.\nSome phosphor white LED units are \"tunable white\", blending two extremes of color temperatures (commonly 2700K and 6500K) to produce intermediate values. This feature allows users to change the lighting to suit the current use of a multifunction room. As illustrated by a straight line on the chromaticity diagram, simple two-white blends will have a pink bias, becoming most severe in the middle. A small amount of green light, provided by another LED, could correct the problem. Some products are RGBWW, i.e. RGBW with tunable white.\nA final class of white LED with mixed light is dim-to-warm. These are ordinary 2700K white LED bulbs with a small red LED that turns on when the bulb is dimmed. Doing so makes the color warmer, emulating an incandescent light bulb.\nZinc selenide white LEDs.\nExperimental white LEDs have been developed using homoepitaxially grown zinc selenide (ZnSe) on ZnSe substrates. These LEDs lack the yellow phosphors found in conventional white LEDs. In ZnSe LEDs, the active region emits blue light, while the conductive ZnSe substrate emits yellow light, resulting in white light output. Researchers suggest these LEDs offer lower operating voltages and a wider range of color temperatures than conventional white LEDs.\nOrganic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).\nIn an organic light-emitting diode (OLED), the electroluminescent material composing the emissive layer of the diode is an organic compound. The organic material is electrically conductive due to the delocalization of pi electrons caused by conjugation over all or part of the molecule, and the material therefore functions as an organic semiconductor. The organic materials can be small organic molecules in a crystalline phase, or polymers.\nThe potential advantages of OLEDs include thin, low-cost displays with a low driving voltage, wide viewing angle, and high contrast and color gamut. Polymer LEDs have the added benefit of printable and flexible displays. OLEDs have been used to make visual displays for portable electronic devices such as cellphones, digital cameras, lighting and televisions.\nTypes.\nLEDs are made in different packages for different applications. A single or a few LED junctions may be packed in one miniature device for use as an indicator or pilot lamp. An LED array may include controlling circuits within the same package, which may range from a simple resistor, blinking or color changing control, or an addressable controller for RGB devices. Higher-powered white-emitting devices will be mounted on heat sinks and will be used for illumination. Alphanumeric displays in dot matrix or bar formats are widely available. Special packages permit connection of LEDs to optical fibers for high-speed data communication links.\nMiniature.\nThese are mostly single-die LEDs used as indicators, and they come in various sizes from 1.8\u00a0mm to 10\u00a0mm, through-hole and surface mount packages. Typical current ratings range from around 1\u00a0mA to above 20\u00a0mA. LED's can be soldered to a flexible PCB strip to form LED tape popularly used for decoration.\nCommon package shapes include round, with a domed or flat top, rectangular with a flat top (as used in bar-graph displays), and triangular or square with a flat top. The encapsulation may also be clear or tinted to improve contrast and viewing angle. Infrared devices may have a black tint to block visible light while passing infrared radiation, such as the Osram SFH 4546.\n5\u00a0V and 12\u00a0V LEDs are ordinary miniature LEDs that have a series resistor for direct connection to a 5V or 12V supply.\nHigh-power.\nHigh-power LEDs (HP-LEDs) or high-output LEDs (HO-LEDs) can be driven at currents from hundreds of mA to more than an ampere, compared with the tens of mA for other LEDs. Some can emit over a thousand lumens. LED power densities up to 300 W/cm2 have been achieved. Since overheating is destructive, the HP-LEDs must be mounted on a heat sink to allow for heat dissipation. If the heat from an HP-LED is not removed, the device fails in seconds. One HP-LED can often replace an incandescent bulb in a flashlight, or be set in an array to form a powerful LED lamp.\nSome HP-LEDs in this category are the Nichia 19 series, Lumileds Rebel Led, Osram Opto Semiconductors Golden Dragon, and Cree X-lamp. As of September 2009, some HP-LEDs manufactured by Cree exceed 105\u00a0lm/W.\nExamples for Haitz's law\u2014which predicts an exponential rise in light output and efficacy of LEDs over time\u2014are the CREE XP-G series LED, which achieved 105lm/W in 2009 and the Nichia 19 series with a typical efficacy of 140lm/W, released in 2010.\nAC-driven.\nLEDs developed by Seoul Semiconductor can operate on AC power without a DC converter. For each half-cycle, part of the LED emits light and part is dark, and this is reversed during the next half-cycle. The efficiency of this type of HP-LED is typically 40lm/W. A large number of LED elements in series may be able to operate directly from line voltage. In 2009, Seoul Semiconductor released a high DC voltage LED, named 'Acrich MJT', capable of being driven from AC power with a simple controlling circuit. The low-power dissipation of these LEDs affords them more flexibility than the original AC LED design.\nStrip.\nThere are many types of LED Strips each with different codenames and LED types. Each one can vary in input power, led spacing, color capability and more.\nConsiderations for use.\nPower sources.\nThe current in an LED or other diodes rises exponentially with the applied voltage (see Shockley diode equation), so a small change in voltage can cause a large change in current. Current through the LED must be regulated by an external circuit such as a constant current source to prevent damage. Since most common power supplies are (nearly) constant-voltage sources, LED fixtures must include a power converter, or at least a current-limiting resistor.\nLEDs are sensitive to voltage. They must be supplied with a voltage above their threshold voltage and a current below their rating. Current and lifetime change greatly with a small change in applied voltage. They thus require a current-regulated supply (usually just a series resistor for indicator LEDs).\nEfficiency droop: The efficiency of LEDs decreases as the electric current increases. Heating also increases with higher currents, which compromises LED lifetime. These effects put practical limits on the current through an LED in high power applications.\nElectrical polarity.\nUnlike a traditional incandescent lamp, an LED will light only when voltage is applied in the forward direction of the diode. No current flows and no light is emitted if voltage is applied in the reverse direction. If the reverse voltage exceeds the breakdown voltage, which is typically about five volts, a large current flows and the LED will be damaged. If the reverse current is sufficiently limited to avoid damage, the reverse-conducting LED is a useful noise diode.\nBy definition, the energy band gap of any diode is higher when reverse-biased than when forward-biased. Because the band gap energy determines the wavelength of the light emitted, the color cannot be the same when reverse-biased. The reverse breakdown voltage is sufficiently high that the emitted wavelength cannot be similar enough to still be visible. Though dual-LED packages exist that contain a different color LED in each direction, it is not expected that any single LED element can emit visible light when reverse-biased.\nIt is not known if any zener diode could exist that emits light only in reverse-bias mode. Uniquely, this type of LED would conduct when connected backwards.\nManufacturing.\nLED manufacturing involves multiple steps, including epitaxy, chip processing, chip separation, and packaging.\nIn a typical LED manufacturing process, encapsulation is performed after probing, dicing, die transfer from wafer to package, and wire bonding or flip chip mounting, perhaps using indium tin oxide, a transparent electrical conductor. In this case, the bond wire(s) are attached to the ITO film that has been deposited in the LEDs.\nFlip chip circuit on board (COB) is a technique that can be used to manufacture LEDs.\nColors and materials.\nConventional LEDs are made from a variety of inorganic semiconductor materials. The following table shows the available colors with wavelength range, voltage drop and material:\nApplications.\nLED uses fall into five major categories:\nThe application of LEDs in horticulture has revolutionized plant cultivation by providing energy-efficient, customizable lighting solutions that optimize plant growth and development. LEDs offer precise control over light spectra, intensity, and photoperiods, enabling growers to tailor lighting conditions to the specific needs of different plant species and growth stages. This technology enhances photosynthesis, improves crop yields, and reduces energy costs compared to traditional lighting systems. Additionally, LEDs generate less heat, allowing closer placement to plants without risking thermal damage, and contribute to sustainable farming practices by lowering carbon footprints and extending growing seasons in controlled environments. Light spectrum affects growth, metabolite profile, and resistance against fungal phytopathogens of \"Solanum lycopersicum\" seedlings. LEDs can also be used in micropropagation.\nIndicators and signs.\nThe low energy consumption, low maintenance and small size of LEDs has led to uses as status indicators and displays on a variety of equipment and installations. Large-area LED displays are used as stadium displays, dynamic decorative displays, and dynamic message signs on freeways. Thin, lightweight message displays are used at airports and railway stations, and as destination displays for trains, buses, trams, and ferries.\nOne-color light is well suited for traffic lights and signals, exit signs, emergency vehicle lighting, ships' navigation lights, and LED-based Christmas lights.\nBecause of their long life, fast switching times, and visibility in broad daylight due to their high output and focus, LEDs have been used in automotive brake lights and turn signals. The use in brakes improves safety, due to a great reduction in the time needed to light fully, or faster rise time, about 200 milliseconds faster than an incandescent bulb. This gives drivers behind more time to react. In a dual intensity circuit (rear markers and brakes) if the LEDs are not pulsed at a fast enough frequency, they can create a phantom array, where ghost images of the LED appear if the eyes quickly scan across the array. White LED headlamps are beginning to appear. Using LEDs has styling advantages because LEDs can form much thinner lights than incandescent lamps with parabolic reflectors.\nDue to the relative cheapness of low output LEDs, they are also used in many temporary uses such as glowsticks and throwies. Artists have also used LEDs for LED art.\nLighting.\nWith the development of high-efficiency and high-power LEDs, it has become possible to use LEDs in lighting and illumination. To encourage the shift to LED lamps and other high-efficiency lighting, in 2008 the US Department of Energy created the L Prize competition. The Philips Lighting North America LED bulb won the first competition on August 3, 2011, after successfully completing 18 months of intensive field, lab, and product testing.\nEfficient lighting is needed for sustainable architecture. As of 2011, some LED bulbs provide up to 150\u00a0lm/W and even inexpensive low-end models typically exceed 50\u00a0lm/W, so that a 6-watt LED could achieve the same results as a standard 40-watt incandescent bulb. The lower heat output of LEDs also reduces demand on air conditioning systems. Worldwide, LEDs are rapidly adopted to displace less effective sources such as incandescent lamps and CFLs and reduce electrical energy consumption and its associated emissions. Solar powered LEDs are used as street lights and in architectural lighting.\nThe mechanical robustness and long lifetime are used in automotive lighting on cars, motorcycles, and bicycle lights. LED street lights are employed on poles and in parking garages. In 2007, the Italian village of Torraca was the first place to convert its street lighting to LEDs.\nCabin lighting on recent Airbus and Boeing jetliners uses LED lighting. LEDs are also being used in airport and heliport lighting. LED airport fixtures currently include medium-intensity runway lights, runway centerline lights, taxiway centerline and edge lights, guidance signs, and obstruction lighting.\nLEDs are also used as a light source for DLP projectors, and to backlight newer LCD television (referred to as LED TV), computer monitor (including laptop) and handheld device LCDs, succeeding older CCFL-backlit LCDs although being superseded by OLED screens. RGB LEDs raise the color gamut by as much as 45%. Screens for TV and computer displays can be made thinner using LEDs for backlighting.\nLEDs are small, durable and need little power, so they are used in handheld devices such as flashlights. LED strobe lights or camera flashes operate at a safe, low voltage, instead of the 250+ volts commonly found in xenon flashlamp-based lighting. This is especially useful in cameras on mobile phones, where space is at a premium and bulky voltage-raising circuitry is undesirable.\nLEDs are used for infrared illumination in night vision uses including security cameras. A ring of LEDs around a video camera, aimed forward into a retroreflective background, allows chroma keying in video productions.\nLEDs are used in mining operations, as cap lamps to provide light for miners. Research has been done to improve LEDs for mining, to reduce glare and to increase illumination, reducing risk of injury to the miners.\nLEDs are increasingly finding uses in medical and educational applications, for example as mood enhancement. NASA has even sponsored research for the use of LEDs to promote health for astronauts.\nData communication and other signalling.\nLight can be used to transmit data and analog signals. For example, lighting white LEDs can be used in systems assisting people to navigate in closed spaces while searching necessary rooms or objects.\nAssistive listening devices in many theaters and similar spaces use arrays of infrared LEDs to send sound to listeners' receivers. Light-emitting diodes (as well as semiconductor lasers) are used to send data over many types of fiber optic cable, from digital audio over TOSLINK cables to the very high bandwidth fiber links that form the Internet backbone. For some time, computers were commonly equipped with IrDA interfaces, which allowed them to send and receive data to nearby machines via infrared.\nBecause LEDs can cycle on and off millions of times per second, very high data bandwidth can be achieved. For that reason, visible light communication (VLC) has been proposed as an alternative to the increasingly competitive radio bandwidth. VLC operates in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum, so data can be transmitted without occupying the frequencies of radio communications.\nMachine vision systems.\nMachine vision systems often require bright and homogeneous illumination, so features of interest are easier to process. LEDs are often used.\nBarcode scanners are the most common example of machine vision applications, and many of those scanners use red LEDs instead of lasers. Optical computer mice use LEDs as a light source for the miniature camera within the mouse.\nLEDs are useful for machine vision because they provide a compact, reliable source of light. LED lamps can be turned on and off to suit the needs of the vision system, and the shape of the beam produced can be tailored to match the system's requirements.\nBiological detection.\nThe discovery of radiative recombination in aluminum gallium nitride (AlGaN) alloys by U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) led to the conceptualization of UV light-emitting diodes (LEDs) to be incorporated in light-induced fluorescence sensors used for biological agent detection. In 2004, the Edgewood Chemical Biological Center (ECBC) initiated the effort to create a biological detector named TAC-BIO. The program capitalized on semiconductor UV optical sources (SUVOS) developed by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).\nUV-induced fluorescence is one of the most robust techniques used for rapid real-time detection of biological aerosols. The first UV sensors were lasers lacking in-field-use practicality. In order to address this, DARPA incorporated SUVOS technology to create a low-cost, small, lightweight, low-power device. The TAC-BIO detector's response time was one minute from when it sensed a biological agent. It was also demonstrated that the detector could be operated unattended indoors and outdoors for weeks at a time.\nAerosolized biological particles fluoresce and scatter light under a UV light beam. Observed fluorescence is dependent on the applied wavelength and the biochemical fluorophores within the biological agent. UV induced fluorescence offers a rapid, accurate, efficient and logistically practical way for biological agent detection. This is because the use of UV fluorescence is reagentless, or a process that does not require an added chemical to produce a reaction, with no consumables, or produces no chemical byproducts.\nAdditionally, TAC-BIO can reliably discriminate between threat and non-threat aerosols. It was claimed to be sensitive enough to detect low concentrations, but not so sensitive that it would cause false positives. The particle-counting algorithm used in the device converted raw data into information by counting the photon pulses per unit of time from the fluorescence and scattering detectors, and comparing the value to a set threshold.\nThe original TAC-BIO was introduced in 2010, while the second-generation TAC-BIO GEN\u00a0II, was designed in 2015 to be more cost-efficient, as plastic parts were used. Its small, light-weight design allows it to be mounted to vehicles, robots, and unmanned aerial vehicles. The second-generation device could also be utilized as an environmental detector to monitor air quality in hospitals, airplanes, or even in households to detect fungus and mold.\nOther applications.\nThe light from LEDs can be modulated very quickly so they are used extensively in optical fiber and free-space optics communications. This includes remote controls, such as for television sets, where infrared LEDs are often used. Opto-isolators use an LED combined with a photodiode or phototransistor to provide a signal path with electrical isolation between two circuits. This is especially useful in medical equipment where the signals from a low-voltage sensor circuit (usually battery-powered) in contact with a living organism must be electrically isolated from any possible electrical failure in a recording or monitoring device operating at potentially dangerous voltages. An optoisolator also lets information be transferred between circuits that do not share a common ground potential.\nMany sensor systems rely on light as the signal source. LEDs are often ideal as a light source due to the requirements of the sensors. The Nintendo Wii's sensor bar uses infrared LEDs. Pulse oximeters use them for measuring oxygen saturation. Some flatbed scanners use arrays of RGB LEDs rather than the typical cold-cathode fluorescent lamp as the light source. Having independent control of three illuminated colors allows the scanner to calibrate itself for more accurate color balance, and there is no need for warm-up. Further, its sensors only need be monochromatic, since at any one time the page being scanned is only lit by one color of light.\nSince LEDs can also be used as photodiodes, they can be used for both photo emission and detection. This could be used, for example, in a touchscreen that registers reflected light from a finger or stylus. Many materials and biological systems are sensitive to, or dependent on, light. Grow lights use LEDs to increase photosynthesis in plants, and bacteria and viruses can be removed from water and other substances using UV LEDs for sterilization. LEDs of certain wavelengths have also been used for light therapy treatment of neonatal jaundice and acne.\nUV LEDs, with spectra range of 220\u00a0nm to 395\u00a0nm, have other applications, such as water/air purification, surface disinfection, glue curing, free-space non-line-of-sight communication, high performance liquid chromatography, UV curing dye printing, phototherapy (295nm Vitamin D, 308nm Excimer lamp or laser replacement), medical/ analytical instrumentation, and DNA absorption.\nLEDs have also been used as a medium-quality voltage reference in electronic circuits. The forward voltage drop (about 1.7\u00a0V for a red LED or 1.2V for an infrared) can be used instead of a Zener diode in low-voltage regulators. Red LEDs have the flattest I/V curve above the knee. Nitride-based LEDs have a fairly steep I/V curve and are useless for this purpose. Although LED forward voltage is far more current-dependent than a Zener diode, Zener diodes with breakdown voltages below 3\u00a0V are not widely available.\nThe progressive miniaturization of low-voltage lighting technology, such as LEDs and OLEDs, suitable to incorporate into low-thickness materials has fostered experimentation in combining light sources and wall covering surfaces for interior walls in the form of LED wallpaper.\nResearch and development.\nKey challenges.\nLEDs require optimized efficiency to hinge on ongoing improvements such as phosphor materials and quantum dots.\nThe process of down-conversion (the method by which materials convert more-energetic photons to different, less energetic colors) also needs improvement. For example, the red phosphors that are used today are thermally sensitive and need to be improved in that aspect so that they do not color shift and experience efficiency drop-off with temperature. Red phosphors could also benefit from a narrower spectral width to emit more lumens and becoming more efficient at converting photons.\nIn addition, work remains to be done in the realms of current efficiency droop, color shift, system reliability, light distribution, dimming, thermal management, and power supply performance.\nEarly suspicions were that the LED droop was caused by elevated temperatures. Scientists showed that temperature was not the root cause of efficiency droop. The mechanism causing efficiency droop was identified in 2007 as Auger recombination, which was taken with mixed reaction. A 2013 study conclusively identified Auger recombination as the cause.\nPotential technology.\nA new family of LEDs are based on the semiconductors called perovskites. In 2018, less than four years after their discovery, the ability of perovskite LEDs (PLEDs) to produce light from electrons already rivaled those of the best performing OLEDs. They have a potential for cost-effectiveness as they can be processed from solution, a low-cost and low-tech method, which might allow perovskite-based devices that have large areas to be made with extremely low cost. Their efficiency is superior by eliminating non-radiative losses, in other words, elimination of recombination pathways that do not produce photons; or by solving outcoupling problem (prevalent for thin-film LEDs) or balancing charge carrier injection to increase the EQE (external quantum efficiency). The most up-to-date PLED devices have broken the performance barrier by shooting the EQE above 20%.\nIn 2018, Cao et al. and Lin et al. independently published two papers on developing perovskite LEDs with EQE greater than 20%, which made these two papers a mile-stone in PLED development. Their device have similar planar structure, i.e. the active layer (perovskite) is sandwiched between two electrodes. To achieve a high EQE, they not only reduced non-radiative recombination, but also utilized their own, subtly different methods to improve the EQE.\nIn the work of Cao \"et al.\", researchers targeted the outcoupling problem, which is that the optical physics of thin-film LEDs causes the majority of light generated by the semiconductor to be trapped in the device. To achieve this goal, they demonstrated that solution-processed perovskites can spontaneously form submicrometre-scale crystal platelets, which can efficiently extract light from the device. These perovskites are formed via the introduction of amino acid additives into the perovskite precursor solutions. In addition, their method is able to passivate perovskite surface defects and reduce nonradiative recombination. Therefore, by improving the light outcoupling and reducing nonradiative losses, Cao and his colleagues successfully achieved PLED with EQE up to 20.7%.\nLin and his colleague used a different approach to generate high EQE. Instead of modifying the microstructure of perovskite layer, they chose to adopt a new strategy for managing the compositional distribution in the device\u2014an approach that simultaneously provides high luminescence and balanced charge injection. In other words, they still used flat emissive layer, but tried to optimize the balance of electrons and holes injected into the perovskite, so as to make the most efficient use of the charge carriers. Moreover, in the perovskite layer, the crystals are perfectly enclosed by MABr additive (where MA is CH3NH3). The MABr shell passivates the nonradiative defects that would otherwise be present perovskite crystals, resulting in reduction of the nonradiative recombination. Therefore, by balancing charge injection and decreasing nonradiative losses, Lin and his colleagues developed PLED with EQE up to 20.3%.\nHealth and safety.\nCertain blue LEDs and cool-white LEDs can exceed safe limits of the so-called blue-light hazard as defined in eye safety specifications such as \"ANSI/IESNA RP-27.1\u201305: Recommended Practice for Photobiological Safety for Lamp and Lamp Systems\". One study showed no evidence of a risk in normal use at domestic illuminance, and that caution is only needed for particular occupational situations or for specific populations. In 2006, the International Electrotechnical Commission published \"IEC 62471 Photobiological safety of lamps and lamp systems\", replacing the application of early laser-oriented standards for classification of LED sources.\nWhile LEDs have the advantage over fluorescent lamps, in that they do not contain mercury, they may contain other hazardous metals such as lead and arsenic.\nIn 2016 the American Medical Association (AMA) issued a statement concerning the possible adverse influence of blueish street lighting on the sleep-wake cycle of city-dwellers. Critics in the industry claim exposure levels are not high enough to have a noticeable effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18291", "revid": "50752082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18291", "title": "Luxembourgish", "text": "Germanic language spoken in Luxembourg\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLuxembourgish ( ; also \"Luxemburgish\", \"Luxembourgian\", \"Letzebu(e)rgesch\"; ) is a West Germanic language that is spoken mainly in Luxembourg. About 400,000 people speak Luxembourgish worldwide.\nThe language is standardized and officially the national language of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. As such, Luxembourgish is different from the German language also used in the Grand Duchy. The German language exists in a national standard variety of Luxembourg, which is slightly different from the standard varieties in Germany, Austria or Switzerland. Another important language of Luxembourg is French, which had a certain influence on both the national language, Luxembourgish, and the Luxembourg national variety of German. Luxembourgish, German and French are the three official languages \"(Amtssprachen)\" of Luxembourg.\nAs a standard form of the Moselle Franconian language, Luxembourgish has similarities with other High German dialects and the wider group of West Germanic languages. The status of Luxembourgish as the national language of Luxembourg and the existence there of a regulatory body have removed Luxembourgish, at least in part, from the domain of Standard German, its traditional . It is also related to the Transylvanian Saxon dialect spoken by the Transylvanian Saxons in Transylvania, contemporary central Romania.\nHistory.\nThe Codex Mariendalensis, a nearly 6000-line epic poem about the life of the 13th-century Yolanda of Vianden, has been described by the National Library of Luxembourg as the earliest known text written in Luxembourgish. It was published in the early 14th century and discovered in 1999 at Ansembourg Castle.\nLuxembourgish was considered a German dialect like many others until about World War II but then the language underwent ausbau, creating its own standard form in vocabulary, grammar, and spelling and therefore is seen today as an independent language. Luxembourgish managed to gain linguistic autonomy against a vigorous One Standard German Axiom by being framed as an independent language with a name rather than as a national pluricentric standard variety of German.\nAs Luxembourgish has a maximum of some 285,000 native speakers, resources in the language, like books, newspapers, magazines, television, internet, etc., are limited. Since most Luxembourgers also speak Standard German and French, there is strong competition with these languages, which both have large language resources. Because of this, the use of Luxembourgish remains limited.\nLanguage family.\nLuxembourgish belongs to the West Central German group of the High German languages and is the primary example of a Moselle Franconian language. Furthermore, it is closely related to Transylvanian Saxon which has been spoken since the High Middle Ages by the Transylvanian Saxons in Transylvania, present-day central Romania.\nSpeech.\nLuxembourgish is considered the national language of Luxembourg and also one of the three administrative languages, alongside German and French.\nIn Luxembourg, 77% of residents can speak Luxembourgish, and it is the primary language of 48% of the population. It is also spoken in the Arelerland region of Belgium (part of the Province of Luxembourg) and in small parts of Lorraine in France.\nIn the German Eifel and Hunsr\u00fcck regions, similar local Moselle Franconian dialects of German are spoken. The language is also spoken by a few descendants of Luxembourg immigrants in the United States and Canada.\nOther Moselle Franconian dialects are spoken by ethnic Germans long settled in Transylvania, Romania (Siebenb\u00fcrgen).\nMoselle Franconian dialects outside the Luxembourg state border tend to have far fewer French loanwords, and these mostly remain from the French Revolution.\nThe political party that places the greatest importance on promoting, using and preserving Luxembourgish is the Alternative Democratic Reform Party (ADR) and its electoral success in the 1999 election pushed the CSV-DP government to make knowledge of it a criterion for naturalisation. It is currently also the only political party in Luxembourg that wishes to implement written laws also in Luxembourgish and that wants Luxembourgish to be an officially recognized language of the European Union. In this context, in 2005, then-Deputy Prime Minister Jean Asselborn of the LSAP rejected a demand made by the ADR to make Luxembourgish an official language of the EU, citing financial reasons and the sufficiency of official German and French. A similar proposal by the ADR was rejected by the Chamber of Deputies in 2024.\nVarieties.\nThere are several distinct dialect forms of Luxembourgish including Areler (from Arlon), Eechternoacher (Echternach), Dikrecher (Diekirch), Kli\u00e4rrwer (Clervaux), Miseler (Moselle), Stater (Luxembourg City), Veiner (Vianden), Minetter (Southwest Luxembourg) and Weelzer (Wiltz). Further small vocabulary differences may be seen even between small villages. These varieties are grouped into North, East, South, and Center dialects which can be automatically categorised with a correctness of about 80%.\nIncreasing mobility of the population and the dissemination of the language through mass media such as radio and television are leading to a gradual standardisation towards a \"Standard Luxembourgish\" through the process of koineization.\nSurrounding languages.\nThere is no distinct geographic boundary between the use of Luxembourgish and the use of other closely related High German dialects (for example, Lorraine Franconian); it instead forms a dialect continuum of gradual change.\nSpoken Luxembourgish is relatively hard to understand for speakers of German who are generally not familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects (or at least other West Central German dialects). They can usually read the language to some degree. For those Germans familiar with Moselle Franconian dialects, it is relatively easy to understand and speak Luxembourgish as far as the everyday vocabulary is concerned. The large number of French loanwords in Luxembourgish may hamper communication about certain topics or with certain speakers (those who use many terms taken from French).\nOrthography.\nStandardisation.\nA number of proposals for standardising the orthography of Luxembourgish can be documented, going back to the middle of the 19th century. There was no officially recognised system until the adoption of the \"OLO\" () on 5 June 1946. This orthography provided a system for speakers of all varieties of Luxembourgish to transcribe words the way they pronounced them, rather than imposing a single, standard spelling for the words of the language. The rules explicitly rejected certain elements of German orthography (e.g., the use of \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9 and \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9, the capitalisation of nouns). Similarly, new principles were adopted for the spelling of French loanwords.\nThis proposed orthography, so different from existing \"foreign\" standards that people were already familiar with, did not enjoy widespread approval.\nA more successful standard eventually emerged from the work of the committee of specialists charged with the task of creating the \"Luxemburger W\u00f6rterbuch\", published in 5 volumes between 1950 and 1977. The orthographic conventions adopted in this decades-long project, set out in Bruch (1955), provided the basis of the standard orthography that became official on 10 October 1975. Modifications to this standard were proposed by the \"Permanent Council of the Luxembourguish language\" and adopted officially in the spelling reform of 30 July 1999. A detailed explanation of current practice for Luxembourgish can be found in Schanen &amp; Lulling (2003).\nAlphabet.\nThe Luxembourgish alphabet consists of the 26 Latin letters plus three letters with diacritics: \u27e8\u00e9\u27e9, \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9, and \u27e8\u00eb\u27e9. In loanwords from French and Standard German, other diacritics are usually preserved:\nIn German loanwords, the digraphs \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 indicate the diphthong , which does not appear in native words.\nOrthography of vowels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEifeler Regel.\nLike many other varieties of Western High German, Luxembourgish has a rule of final \"n\"-deletion in certain contexts. The effects of this rule (known as the \"Eifel Rule\") are indicated in writing, and therefore must be taken into account when spelling words and morphemes ending in \u27e8n\u27e9 or \u27e8nn\u27e9. For example:\nPhonology.\nConsonants.\nThe consonant inventory of Luxembourgish is quite similar to that of Standard German.\nGrammar.\nNominal syntax.\nLuxembourgish has three genders (masculine, feminine, and neuter), and three cases (nominative, accusative, and dative). These are marked morphologically on determiners and pronouns. As in German, there is no morphological gender distinction in the plural.\nThe forms of the articles and of some selected determiners are given below:\nAs seen above, Luxembourgish has plural forms of (\"a, an\"), namely in the nominative/accusative and in the dative. They are not used as indefinite articles, which\u2014as in German and English\u2014do not exist in the plural, but they do occur in the compound pronouns (\"what, which\") and (\"such\"). For example: (\"what things\"); (\"such things\"). Moreover, they are used before numbers to express an estimation: (\"some 30,000 spectators\").\nDistinct nominative forms survive in a few nominal phrases such as (\"the devil\") and (\"our Lord\"). Rare examples of the genitive are also found: (\"end of the month\"), (\"at the beginning of the week\"). The functions of the genitive are normally expressed using a combination of the dative and a possessive determiner: e.g. (lit. \"to the man his book\", i.e. \"the man's book\"). This is known as a periphrastic genitive, and is a phenomenon also commonly seen in dialectal and colloquial German, and in Dutch.\nThe forms of the personal pronouns are given in the following table (unstressed forms appear in parentheses):\nThe 2pl form is also used as a polite singular (like French , see T-V distinction); the forms are capitalised in writing:\n (\"How did you [informal sg.] like the concert?\")\n (\"How did you [informal pl.] like the concert?\")\n (\"How did you [formal sg. or pl.] like the concert?\")\nLike most varieties of colloquial German, but even more invariably, Luxembourgish uses definite articles with personal names. They are obligatory and not to be translated:\n (\"Serge is in the kitchen.\")\nA feature Luxembourgish shares with only some western dialects of German is that women and girls are most often referred to with forms of the \"neuter\" pronoun :\n (\"That's Nathalie. She is tired because she has worked a lot in her garden.\")\nAdjectives.\nAdjectives show a different morphological behaviour when used attributively and predicatively. In predicative use, e.g. when they occur with verbs like \"sinn\" (\"to be\"), adjectives receive no extra ending:\nIn attributive use, i.e. when placed before the noun they describe, they change their ending according to the grammatical gender, number and case of the noun:\nThe definite article changes with the use of an attributive adjective: feminine \"d'\" goes to \"d\u00e9i\" (or \"di\"), neuter \"d'\" goes to \"dat\", and plural \"d'\" changes to \"d\u00e9i\".\nThe comparative in Luxembourgish is formed analytically, i.e. the adjective itself is not altered (compare the use of -\"er\" in German and English; \"tall\" \u2192 \"taller\", \"klein\" \u2192 \"kleiner\"). Instead it is formed using the adverb \"m\u00e9i\": e.g. \"sch\u00e9in\" \u2192 \"m\u00e9i sch\u00e9in\"\nThe superlative involves a synthetic form consisting of the adjective and the suffix \"-st\": e.g. \"sch\u00e9in\" \u2192 \"sch\u00e9inst \" (compare German \"sch\u00f6nst\", English \"prettiest\"). Attributive modification requires the emphatic definite article and the inflected superlative adjective:\nPredicative modification uses either the same adjectival structure or the adverbial structure \"am\"+ -\"sten\": e.g. \"sch\u00e9in\" \u2192 \"am sch\u00e9insten\":\nSome common adjectives have exceptional comparative and superlative forms:\nSeveral other adjectives also have comparative forms, not commonly used as normal comparatives, but in special senses:\nWord order.\nLuxembourgish exhibits \"verb second\" word order in clauses. More specifically, Luxembourgish is a V2-SOV language, like German and Dutch. In other words, we find the following finite clausal structures:\nEch kafen en Hutt. Muer kafen ech en Hutt. (lit. \"I buy a hat. Tomorrow buy I a hat.)\nWat kafen ech haut? (lit. \"What buy I today?\")\nBass de midd? (\"Are you tired?\")\nG\u00ebff mer deng Hand! (\"Give me your hand!\")\nDu weess, datt ech midd sinn. (lit. \"You know, that I tired am.\")\nNon-finite verbs (infinitives and participles) generally appear in final position:\nEch hunn en Hutt kaf. (lit. \"I have a hat bought.\")\nDu solls net esou vill Kaffi dr\u00e9nken. (lit. \"You should not so much coffee drink.\")\nN\u00ebmme L\u00ebtzebuergesch schw\u00e4tzen! (lit. \"Only Luxembourgish speak!\")\nThese rules interact so that in subordinate clauses, the finite verb and any non-finite verbs must all cluster at the end. Luxembourgish allows different word orders in these cases:\nHie freet, ob ech komme kann. (cf. German \"Er fragt, ob ich kommen kann.\") (lit. \"He asks if I come can.\")\nHie freet, ob ech ka kommen. (cf. Dutch \"Hij vraagt of ik kan komen.\") (lit. \"He asks if I can come.\")\nThis is also the case when two non-finite verb forms occur together:\nEch hunn net k\u00ebnne kommen. (cf. Dutch \"Ik heb niet kunnen komen.\") (lit, \"I have not be-able to-come\")\nEch hunn net komme k\u00ebnnen. (cf. German \"Ich habe nicht kommen k\u00f6nnen.\") (lit, \"I have not to-come be-able\")\nLuxembourgish (like Dutch and German) allows prepositional phrases to appear after the verb cluster in subordinate clauses:\nalles, wat Der \u00ebmmer wollt w\u00ebssen iwwer L\u00ebtzebuerg\n(lit. \"everything what you always wanted know about Luxembourg\")\nVocabulary.\nLuxembourgish has borrowed many French words. For example, the word for a bus driver is \"Buschauffeur\" (as in Dutch and Swiss German), which would be \"Busfahrer\" in German and \"chauffeur de bus\" in French.\nSome words are different from Standard German, but have equivalents in German dialects. An example is \"Gromperen\" (potatoes \u2013 German: \"Kartoffeln\"). Other words are exclusive to Luxembourgish.\nSelected common phrases.\n\"Note: Words spoken in sound clip do not reflect all words on this list.\"\nNeologisms.\nNeologisms in Luxembourgish include both entirely new words, and the attachment of new meanings to old words in everyday speech. The most recent neologisms come from the English language in the fields of telecommunications, computer science, and the Internet.\nRecent neologisms in Luxembourgish include:\nAcademic projects.\nBetween 2000 and 2002, Luxembourgish linguist J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lulling compiled a lexical database of 125,000-word forms as the basis for the first Luxembourgish spellchecker (Projet C.ORT.IN.A).\nThe LaF (\"L\u00ebtzebuergesch als Friemsprooch\" \u2013 Luxembourgish as a Foreign Language) is a set of four language proficiency certifications for Luxembourgish and follows the ALTE framework of language examination standards. The tests are administered by the Institut National des Langues Luxembourg.\nThe \"Centre for Luxembourg Studies\" at the University of Sheffield was founded in 1995 on the initiative of Professor Gerald Newton. It is supported by the government of Luxembourg which funds an endowed chair in Luxembourg Studies at the university.\nThe first class of students to study the language outside of the country as undergraduate students began their studies at the 'Centre for Luxembourg Studies' at Sheffield in the academic year 2011\u20132012.\nEndangered status claims.\nUNESCO declared Luxembourgish to be an endangered language in 2019, adding it to its \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\".\nAdditionally, some local media have argued that the Luxembourgish language is at risk of disappearing, and that it should be considered an endangered language. Even though the government claims that more people than ever are able to speak Luxembourgish, these are absolute numbers and often include the many naturalized citizens who have passed the \"Sproochentest,\" a language test that certifies the knowledge of merely A.2. in speaking and B.1. in understanding.\nLuxembourgish language expert and historian argues that not only the absolute number of Luxembourgish speakers should be considered when defining the status of a language, but also the proportion of speakers in a country. Noting that the proportion of native Luxembourgish speakers has decreased in recent decades, Atten believes that Luxembourgish will inevitably disappear, stating:\nIt is simple math, if there are about 70% foreigners and about 30% Luxembourgers (which is the case in Luxembourg City), then it cannot possibly be said that Luxembourgish is thriving. That would be very improbable.\nAlain Atten also argues that the situation is even more dramatic, since the cited percentages take only the residents of Luxembourg into account, excluding the 200,000 cross-border-workers present in the country on a daily basis. This group plays a major role in the daily use of languages in Luxembourg, thus further lowering the percentage of Luxembourgish speakers present in the country.\nThe following numbers are based on statistics by \"STATEC\" (those since 2011) and show that the percentage of the population that is able to speak Luxembourgish has been constantly diminishing for years (The 200,000 cross-border workers are not included in this statistic):\nIt has also been argued that two very similar languages, Alsatian and Lorraine Franconian, which were very broadly spoken by the local populations at the beginning of the 20th century in Alsace and in Lorraine respectively, have been nearly completely supplanted by French, and that a similar fate could also be possible for Luxembourgish. Another example of the replacement of Luxembourgish by French occurred in Arelerland (historically a part of Luxembourg, today in Belgium), where the vast majority of the local population spoke Luxembourgish as a native language well into the 20th century. Today, Luxembourgish is nearly extinct in this region, having been replaced by French.\nAccording to some Luxembourgish news media and members of (an association for the preservation and promotion of the language), the biggest threat to the existence of Luxembourgish is indeed French, since it is the language of most official documents and street signs in Luxembourg; this considerably weakens the possibility for Luxembourgish to be practiced by new speakers and learners. In most cases, this passively forces expats to learn French instead of Luxembourgish.\nIn 2021 it was announced that public announcements in Luxembourgish (and in German as well) at Luxembourg Airport would cease; it would only be using French and English for future public announcements. This will cause Luxembourgish to go unused at Luxembourg Airport after many decades. Actioun L\u00ebtzebuergesch declared itself to be hugely upset by this new governmental measure, citing that other airports in the world seem to have no problems making public announcements in multiple languages. According to a poll conducted by AL, 92.84% of the Luxembourgish population wished to have public announcements to be made in Luxembourgish at Luxembourg Airport.\nADR politician Fred Keup has claimed that Luxembourgish is already on its way to complete replacement by French.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nIn English\nIn French\nIn Luxembourgish\nIn German"}
{"id": "18292", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18292", "title": "Lev Kuleshov", "text": "Soviet filmmaker and film theorist\nLev Vladimirovich Kuleshov (; 13 January\u00a0[O.S. 1 January]\u00a01899 \u2013 29 March 1970) was a Russian and Soviet filmmaker and film theorist, one of the founders of the world's first film school, the Moscow Film School. He was given the title People's Artist of the RSFSR in 1969. He was intimately involved in development of the style of film making known as Soviet montage, especially its psychological underpinning, including the use of editing and the cut to influence the emotions of audience, a principle known as the Kuleshov effect. He also developed the theory of creative geography, which is the use of the action around a cut to connect otherwise disparate settings into a cohesive narrative.\nLife and career.\nLev Kuleshov was born in 1899 into an intellectual Russian family. His father Vladimir Sergeyevich Kuleshov was of noble heritage; he studied art in the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture and Architecture, despite his own father's disapproval. He then married a village schoolteacher Pelagia Aleksandrovna Shubina who was raised in an orphanage, which only led to more confrontation. They gave birth to two sons: Boris and Lev.\nAt the time Lev Kuleshov was born, the family became financially broke, lost their estate and moved to Tambov, living a modest life. In 1911 Vladimir Kuleshov died; three years later Lev and his mother moved to Moscow where his elder brother was studying and working as an engineer. Lev Kuleshov decided to follow the steps of his father and entered the Moscow School of Painting, although he didn't finish it. In 1916 he applied to work at the film company led by Aleksandr Khanzhonkov. He produced scenery for Yevgeni Bauer's pictures, such as \"The King of Paris\", \"For Happiness\" and others. With time Kuleshov became more interested in film theory. He co-directed his first movie \"Twilight\" in 1917. His next film was released under the Soviet patronage. Although many Russian filmmakers left the country after 1917, Kuleshov stayed, hoping to create a new Soviet cinema. He worked for the state, editing pre-revolutionary \"bourgeois\" footage to align with Boleshevik ideology.\nInspired by American films such as The Birth of a Nation and lectures by Vladimir Gardin, Kuleshov developed a philosophy of editing and montage, which he considered as fundamental to cinema as harmony was to music. He famously demonstrated the eponymous Kuleshov Effect by juxtaposing the same footage of Ivan Mozzhukhin against different images, including a meal and a corpse. Although the footage was unchanged, viewers interpreted Mozzhukhin's expression differently based on its context. Kuleshov rejected Konstantin Stanislavski's acting method, which emphasized psychology and emotions, and instead emphasized precise, legible movements which could be cleanly edited. He called his performers \"naturshchik\" (models) instead of \"actors\", and had them rehearse using a \"spacial metric grid\" to confirm their movements followed 90- and 45-degree angles.\nDuring 1918\u20131920 he covered the Russian Civil War with a documentary crew. In 1919 he headed the first Soviet film courses at the National Film School. He contributed the article \"Kinematografichesky naturshchik\" to the first issue of \"Zrelishcha\" in 1922. Among his other notable students were Vsevolod Pudovkin, Boris Barnet, Mikhail Romm, Sergey Komarov, Porfiri Podobed, Vladimir Fogel and Aleksandra Khokhlova who became his wife. Another one of his famous inventions was creative geography, also known as artificial landscape. Those techniques were described in his book \"The Basics of Film Direction\" (1941) which was later translated into many languages.\nIn addition to his theoretical and teaching work, Kuleshov directed a number of feature-length films. Among his most notable works are an action-comedy \"The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in the Land of the Bolsheviks\" (1924), a psychological drama \"By the Law\" (1926) adapted from the short story by Jack London and a biographical drama \"The Great Consoler\" (1933) based on O. Henry's life and works. In 1934 and 1935 Kuleshov went to Tajikistan to direct there \"Dokhunda\", a movie based on the novel by Tajik national poet Sadriddin Ayni, but the project was regarded with suspicion by the authorities as possibly exciting Tajik nationalism, and stopped. No footage survives.\nAfter directing his last film in 1943, Kuleshov served as an artistic director and an academic rector at VGIK where he worked for the next 25 years. He was a member of the jury at the 27th Venice International Film Festival, as well as a special guest during other international film festivals.\nKuleshov was awarded the Order of Lenin shortly before his death. He died in Moscow in 1970. He was buried at the Novodevichy Cemetery. He was survived by his wife Aleksandra Khokhlova (1897\u20131985) \u2013 an actress, film director and educator, granddaughter of Pavel Tretyakov and Sergey Botkin \u2013 and Aleksandra's son Sergei from her first marriage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18293", "revid": "48549243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18293", "title": "Lovecraft", "text": ""}
{"id": "18295", "revid": "983723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18295", "title": "Legacy system", "text": "Old computing technology or system that remains in use\nIn computing, a legacy system is an old method, technology, computer system, or application program, \"of, relating to, or being a previous or outdated computer system\", yet still in use. Often referencing a system as \"legacy\" means that it paved the way for the standards that would follow it. This can also imply that the system is out of date or in need of replacement.\nLegacy code is old computer source code that is no longer supported on standard hardware and environments, and is a codebase that is in some respect obsolete or supporting something obsolete. Legacy code may be written in programming languages, use frameworks and external libraries, or use architecture and patterns that are no longer considered modern, increasing the mental burden and ramp-up time for software engineers who work on the codebase. Legacy code may have zero or insufficient automated tests, making refactoring dangerous and likely to introduce bugs. Long-lived code is susceptible to software rot, where changes to the runtime environment, or surrounding software or hardware may require maintenance or emulation of some kind to keep working. Legacy code may be present to support legacy hardware, a separate legacy system, or a legacy customer using an old feature or software version.\nWhile the term usually refers to source code, it can also apply to executable code that no longer runs on a later version of a system, or requires a compatibility layer to do so. An example would be a classic Macintosh application which will not run natively on macOS, but runs inside the Classic environment, or a Win16 application running on Windows XP using the Windows on Windows feature in XP.\nAn example of legacy hardware are legacy ports like PS/2 and VGA ports, and CPUs with older, incompatible instruction sets (with e.g. newer operating systems). Examples in legacy software include legacy file formats like .swf for Adobe Flash or .123 for Lotus 1-2-3, and text files encoded with legacy character encodings like EBCDIC.\nOverview.\nThe first use of the term \"legacy\" to describe computer systems probably occurred in the 1960s. By the 1980s it was commonly used to refer to existing computer systems to distinguish them from the design and implementation of new systems. Legacy was often heard during a conversion process, for example, when moving data from the legacy system to a new database.\nWhile this term may indicate that some engineers may feel that a system is out of date, a legacy system can continue to be used for a variety of reasons. It may simply be that the system still provides for the users' needs. In addition, the decision to keep an old system may be influenced by economic reasons such as return on investment challenges or vendor lock-in, the inherent challenges of change management, or a variety of other reasons other than functionality. Backward compatibility (such as the ability of newer systems to handle legacy file formats and character encodings) is a goal that software developers often include in their work.\nEven if a legacy system is no longer used, it may continue to impact the organization due to its historical role. Historic data may not have been converted into the new system format and may exist within the new system with the use of a customized schema crosswalk, or may exist only in a data warehouse. In either case, the effect on business intelligence and operational reporting can be significant. A legacy system may include procedures or terminology which are no longer relevant in the current context, and may hinder or confuse understanding of the methods or technologies used.\nOrganizations can have compelling reasons for keeping a legacy system, such as:\nProblems posed by legacy computing.\nLegacy systems are considered to be potentially problematic by some software engineers for several reasons.\nImprovements on legacy software systems.\nWhere it is impossible to replace legacy systems through the practice of application retirement, it is still possible to enhance (or \"re-face\") them. Most development often goes into adding new interfaces to a legacy system. The most prominent technique is to provide a Web-based interface to a terminal-based mainframe application. This may reduce staff productivity due to slower response times and slower mouse-based operator actions, yet it is often seen as an \"upgrade\", because the interface style is familiar to unskilled users and is easy for them to use. John McCormick discusses such strategies that involve middleware.\nPrinting improvements are problematic because legacy software systems often add no formatting instructions, or they use protocols that are not usable in modern PC/Windows printers. A print server can be used to intercept the data and translate it to a more modern code. Rich Text Format (RTF) or PostScript documents may be created in the legacy application and then interpreted at a PC before being printed.\nBiometric security measures are difficult to implement on legacy systems. A workable solution is to use a Telnet or HTTP proxy server to sit between users and the mainframe to implement secure access to the legacy application.\nThe change being undertaken in some organizations is to switch to automated business process (ABP) software which generates complete systems. These systems can then interface to the organizations' legacy systems and use them as data repositories. This approach can provide a number of significant benefits: the users are insulated from the inefficiencies of their legacy systems, and the changes can be incorporated quickly and easily in the ABP software.\nModel-driven reverse and forward engineering approaches can be also used for the improvement of legacy software.\nNASA example.\nAndreas M. Hein researched the use of legacy systems in space exploration at the Technical University of Munich. According to Hein, legacy systems are attractive for reuse if an organization has the capabilities for verification, validation, testing, and operational history. These capabilities must be integrated into various software life cycle phases such as development, implementation, usage, or maintenance. For software systems, the capability to use and maintain the system are crucial. Otherwise the system will become less and less understandable and maintainable.\nAccording to Hein, verification, validation, testing, and operational history increases the confidence in a system's reliability and quality. However, accumulating this history is often expensive. NASA's now retired Space Shuttle program used a large amount of 1970s-era technology. Replacement was cost-prohibitive because of the expensive requirement for flight certification. The original hardware completed the expensive integration and certification requirement for flight, but any new equipment would have had to go through that entire process again. This long and detailed process required extensive tests of the new components in their new configurations before a single unit could be used in the Space Shuttle program. Thus any new system that started the certification process becomes a \"de facto\" legacy system by the time it is approved for flight.\nAdditionally, the entire Space Shuttle system, including ground and launch vehicle assets, was designed to work together as a closed system. Since the specifications did not change, all of the certified systems and components performed well in the roles for which they were designed. Even before the Shuttle was scheduled to be retired in 2010, NASA found it advantageous to keep using many pieces of 1970s technology rather than to upgrade those systems and recertify the new components.\nPerspectives on legacy code.\nSome in the software engineering prefer to describe \"legacy code\" without the connotation of being obsolete. Among the most prevalent neutral conceptions are \"source code inherited from someone else\" and \"source code inherited from an older version of the software\". Eli Lopian, CEO of Typemock, has defined it as \"code that developers are afraid to change\". Michael Feathers introduced a definition of \"legacy code\" as \"code without tests\", which reflects the perspective of legacy code being difficult to work with in part due to a lack of automated regression tests. He also defined characterization tests to start putting \"legacy code\" under test.\nGinny Hendry characterized creation of code as a \"challenge\" to current coders to create code that is \"like other legacies in our lives\u2014like the antiques, heirlooms, and stories that are cherished and lovingly passed down from one generation to the next. What if legacy code was something we took pride in?\".\nAdditional uses of the term \"legacy\" in computing.\nThe term \"legacy support\" is often used in conjunction with legacy systems. The term may refer to a feature of modern software. For example, Operating systems with \"legacy support\" can detect and use older hardware. The term may also be used to refer to a business function; e.g. a software or hardware vendor that is supporting, or providing software maintenance, for older products.\nA \"legacy\" product may be a product that is no longer sold, has lost substantial market share, or is a version of a product that is not current. A legacy product may have some advantage over a modern product making it appealing for customers to keep it around. A product is only truly \"obsolete\" if it has an advantage to nobody\u2014if no person making a rational decision would choose to acquire it new.\nThe term \"legacy mode\" often refers specifically to backward compatibility. A software product that is capable of performing as though it were a previous version of itself, is said to be \"running in legacy mode\". This kind of feature is common in operating systems and web browsers, where many applications depend on these underlying components.\nThe computer mainframe era saw many applications running in legacy mode. In the modern business computing environment, n-tier, or 3-tier architectures are more difficult to place into legacy mode as they include many components making up a single system.\nVirtualization technology is a recent innovation allowing legacy systems to continue to operate on modern hardware by running older operating systems and browsers on a software system that emulates legacy hardware.\nBrownfield architecture.\nProgrammers have borrowed the term \"brownfield\" from the construction industry, where previously developed land (often polluted and abandoned) is described as \"brownfield\".\nAlternative view.\nThere is an alternate favorable opinion\u2014growing since the end of the Dotcom bubble in 1999\u2014that legacy systems are simply computer systems in working use:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Legacy code\" often differs from its suggested alternative by actually working and scaling.\u2014\u200a\nIT analysts estimate that the cost of replacing business logic is about five times that of reuse, even discounting the risk of system failures and security breaches. Ideally, businesses would never have to rewrite most core business logic: \"debits = credits\" is a perennial requirement.\nThe IT industry is responding with \"legacy modernization\" and \"legacy transformation\": refurbishing existing business logic with new user interfaces, sometimes using screen scraping and service-enabled access through web services. These techniques allow organizations to understand their existing code assets (using discovery tools), provide new user and application interfaces to existing code, improve workflow, contain costs, minimize risk, and enjoy classic qualities of service (near 100% uptime, security, scalability, etc.).\nThis trend also invites reflection on what makes legacy systems so durable. Technologists are relearning the importance of sound architecture from the start, to avoid costly and risky rewrites. The most common legacy systems tend to be those which embraced well-known IT architectural principles, with careful planning and strict methodology during implementation. Poorly designed systems often don't last, both because they wear out and because their inherent faults invite replacement. Thus, many organizations are rediscovering the value of both their legacy systems and the theoretical underpinnings of those systems.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18296", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18296", "title": "Loding", "text": ""}
{"id": "18297", "revid": "48721835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18297", "title": "Lamentations (disambiguation)", "text": "The Book of Lamentations is part of the Old Testament or Hebrew Bible.\nLamentations may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18298", "revid": "38806159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18298", "title": "Lunar eclipse", "text": "Natural phenomenon wherein the Earth casts a shadow on the Moon\nA lunar eclipse, also called a blood moon, is an astronomical event that occurs when the Moon orbits through Earth's shadow.\u200d\u200d Lunar eclipses occur during eclipse season, when the Moon's orbital plane is approximately in line with Earth and the Sun. The type and length of a lunar eclipse depend on the Moon's proximity to the lunar node.\u200d\u200d In contrast with illusive and short-lasting solar eclipses, lunar eclipses can be observed from anywhere on the night side of Earth and often last for an hour or longer. Lunar eclipses are safe to observe without eye protection.\nLunar eclipses are notable for causing the Moon to appear orange or red. This occurs when the Moon passes through the Earth's umbra, necessitating any sunlight that reaches the Moon to first pass through the Earth's atmosphere. The resulting Rayleigh scattering removes high-wavelength colors such as violet and blue from the incoming light before it reflects off the lunar surface and is observed on Earth.\nTypes of lunar eclipses.\nPenumbral lunar eclipse.\nA penumbral lunar eclipse occurs when Earth's silhouette partially blocks the Sun in the lunar sky but does not occlude it completely, ensuring some sunlight can still reach the Moon directly. The designation refers to the Moon being partially inside of the penumbra, which describes the region of any shadow that is cast by a light source which is not collimated and has a non-zero angular diameter. A penumbral eclipse is designated as a total penumbral eclipse if the moon lies exclusively inside of the penumbra. \nPenumbral eclipses are observed from Earth as a subtle dimming of the lunar surface.\u200d Of all lunar eclipses, approximately one-third are penumbral eclipses; of those, only 3% are total penumbral eclipses. \nPartial lunar eclipse.\nA partial lunar eclipse refers to the Moon lying partially inside of the umbra, where the relative size of the Earth in the lunar sky allows it to block the Sun entirely. During a partial eclipse, the dark region covered by the umbra will appear more much more distinct than the penumbral dimming. \nThe Moon's average orbital speed is about , or a little more than its diameter per hour, so totality may last up to nearly 107minutes. Nevertheless, the total time between the first and last contacts of the Moon's limb with Earth's shadow is much longer and could last up to 236minutes.\u200d\nTotal lunar eclipse.\nWhen the Moon's near side entirely passes into the Earth's umbral shadow, a total lunar eclipse occurs.\u200d Just prior to complete entry, the brightness of the lunar limb\u2014the curved edge of the Moon still being hit by direct sunlight\u2014will cause the rest of the Moon to appear comparatively dim. The moment the Moon enters a complete eclipse, the entire surface will become more or less uniformly bright, being able to reveal stars surrounding it. Later, as the Moon's opposite limb is struck by sunlight, the overall disk will again become obscured.\nThis is because, as viewed from the Earth, the brightness of a lunar limb is generally greater than that of the rest of the surface, due to reflections from the many surface irregularities within the limb: sunlight striking these irregularities is always reflected back in greater quantities than that striking more central parts, which is why the edges of full moons generally appear brighter than the rest of the lunar surface. This is similar to the effect of velvet fabric over a convex curved surface, which, to an observer, will appear darkest at the center of the curve. It will be true of any planetary body with little or no atmosphere and an irregular cratered surface (e.g., Mercury) when viewed opposite the Sun.\u200d\nCentral lunar eclipse.\nWhen, during a total lunar eclipse, the Moon passes near and through the centre of Earth's shadow, contacting the antisolar point, it is classified as a central lunar eclipse.\u200d This type of lunar eclipse is less frequent, occurring in 59.6% of all total lunar eclipses.\u200d\nThe relative distance of the Moon from Earth at the time of an eclipse can affect the eclipse's duration. In particular, when the Moon is near apogee, the farthest point from Earth in its orbit, its orbital speed is the slowest. The diameter of Earth's umbra does not decrease appreciably within the changes in the Moon's orbital distance. Thus, the concurrence of a totally eclipsed Moon near apogee will lengthen the duration of totality.\u200d\nSelenelion.\nA \"selenelion\" or \"selenehelion\", also called a \"horizontal eclipse\", occurs where and when both the Sun and an eclipsed Moon can be observed at the same time. The event can only be observed just before sunset or just after sunrise, when both bodies will appear just above opposite horizons at nearly opposite points in the sky. A selenelion occurs during every total lunar eclipse\u2014it is an experience of the \"observer\", not a planetary \"event\" separate from the lunar eclipse itself. Typically, observers on Earth located on high mountain ridges undergoing false sunrise or false sunset \"at the same moment of a total lunar eclipse\" will be able to experience it. Although during selenelion the Moon is completely within the Earth's umbra, both it and the Sun can be observed in the sky because atmospheric refraction causes each body to appear higher (i.e., more central) in the sky than its true geometric planetary position.\u200d\nTiming.\nThe timing of total lunar eclipses is determined by what are known as its \"contacts\" (moments of contact with Earth's shadow):\u200d\nDanjon scale.\nThe following scale (the scale) was devised by for rating the overall darkness of lunar eclipses:\u200d\nLunar versus solar eclipses.\nThere is often confusion between a solar eclipse and a lunar eclipse. While both involve interactions between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon, they are very different in their interactions.\nThe Moon does not completely darken as it passes through the umbra because of the refraction of sunlight by Earth's atmosphere into the shadow cone; if Earth had no atmosphere, the Moon would be completely dark during the eclipse.\u200d The reddish coloration arises because sunlight reaching the Moon must pass through a long and dense layer of Earth's atmosphere, where it is scattered. Shorter wavelengths are more likely to be scattered by the air molecules and small particles; thus, the longer wavelengths predominate by the time the light rays have penetrated the atmosphere. Human vision perceives this resulting light as red. This is the same effect that causes sunsets and sunrises to turn the sky a reddish color.\u200d An alternative way of conceiving this scenario is to realize that, as viewed from the Moon, the Sun would appear to be setting (or rising) behind Earth.\nThe amount of refracted light depends on the amount of dust or clouds in the atmosphere; this also controls how much light is scattered. In general, the dustier the atmosphere, the more that other wavelengths of light will be removed (compared to red light), leaving the resulting light a deeper red color. This causes the resulting coppery-red hue of the Moon to vary from one eclipse to the next. Volcanoes are notable for expelling large quantities of dust into the atmosphere, and a large eruption shortly before an eclipse can have a large effect on the resulting color.\u200d\nIn culture.\nThe symbol for a lunar eclipse (or any body in the shadow of another) is (U+1F776\ud83d\udf76).\nSeveral cultures have myths related to lunar eclipses or allude to the lunar eclipse as being a good or bad omen. The Egyptians saw the eclipse as a sow swallowing the Moon for a short time; other cultures view the eclipse as the Moon being swallowed by other animals, such as a jaguar in Mayan tradition, or a mythical three-legged toad known as in China. Some societies thought it was a demon swallowing the Moon, and that they could chase it away by throwing stones and curses at it.\u200d Ancient Greeks understood the Earth was round, citing the Earth's shadow observed during a lunar eclipse as evidence.\u200d Some Hindus believe in the importance of bathing in the Ganges River following an eclipse because it will help to achieve salvation.\u200d\nInca.\nSimilarly to the Mayans, the Incans believed that lunar eclipses occurred when a jaguar ate the Moon, which is why a blood moon looks red. The Incans also believed that once the jaguar finished eating the Moon, it could come down and devour all the animals on Earth, so they would take spears and shout at the Moon to keep it away.\u200d\nMesopotamians.\nThe ancient Mesopotamians believed that a lunar eclipse was when the Moon was being attacked by seven demons. This attack was more than just one on the Moon, however, for the Mesopotamians linked what happened in the sky with what happened on the land, and because the king of Mesopotamia represented the land, the seven demons were thought to be also attacking the king. In order to prevent this attack on the king, the Mesopotamians made someone pretend to be the king so they would be attacked instead of the true king. After the lunar eclipse was over, the substitute king was made to disappear (possibly by poisoning).\u200d\nChinese.\nIn some Chinese cultures, people would ring bells to prevent a dragon or other wild animals from biting the Moon.\u200d In the 19thcentury, during a lunar eclipse, the Chinese navy fired its artillery because of this belief.\u200d During the dynasty(c.), according to the \"Book of Songs\", the sight of a red moon engulfed in darkness was believed to foreshadow famine or disease.\u200d\nOccurrence.\nIn the 21st century there are 228 lunar eclipses, an average of 2.28 per year, with at least two every year.\nTotal lunar eclipses are less common than partial lunar eclipses. Over a 5,000year span from 2000BCE to 3000CE, 36.3% of lunar eclipses are penumbral, 34.9% are partial, and 28.8% are total.\u200d If the date and time of an eclipse is known, the occurrence of upcoming eclipses is predictable using an eclipse cycle, like the saros. During a saros period, lasting 18years and 11days, there will usually be 70eclipses, of which 29 are lunar.\u200d Eclipses occur only during an eclipse season, when the Sun appears to pass near either node of the Moon's orbit.\nView from the Moon.\nA lunar eclipse is, on the Moon, a solar eclipse. The occurrence makes Earth's atmosphere appear as a red ring around the dark Earth. One such event was captured by the Surveyor3 camera in1967.\u200d A second event was photographed in color by the Blue Ghost Mission1 in2025.\u200d During a full moon, the phase during which lunar eclipses take place, the dark side of the Earth is illuminated by the Moon and its moonlight.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18299", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18299", "title": "L enantiomer", "text": ""}
{"id": "18301", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18301", "title": "Lester Bowles Pearson", "text": ""}
{"id": "18303", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18303", "title": "Liber Pontificalis", "text": "Book of biographies of popes\nThe Liber Pontificalis (Latin for 'pontifical book' or \"Book of the Popes\") is a book of biographies of popes from Saint Peter until the 15th century. The original publication of the \"Liber Pontificalis\" stopped with Pope Adrian II (867\u2013872) or Pope Stephen V (885\u2013891), but it was later supplemented in a different style until Pope Eugene IV (1431\u20131447) and then Pope Pius II (1458\u20131464). Although quoted virtually uncritically from the 8th to 18th centuries, the \"Liber Pontificalis\" has undergone intense modern scholarly scrutiny. The work of the French priest Louis Duchesne (who compiled the major scholarly edition), and of others has highlighted some of the underlying redactional motivations of different sections, though such interests are so disparate and varied as to render improbable one populariser's claim that it is an \"unofficial instrument of pontifical propaganda.\"\nThe title \"Liber Pontificalis\" goes back to the 12th century, although it only became current in the 15th century, and the canonical title of the work since the edition of Duchesne in the 19th century. In the earliest extant manuscripts it is referred to as Liber episcopalis in quo continentur acta beatorum pontificum Urbis Romae ('episcopal book in which are contained the acts of the blessed pontiffs of the city of Rome') and later the Gesta or Chronica pontificum.\nAuthorship.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Saint Jerome was considered the author of all the biographies up until those of Pope Damasus I (366\u2013383), based on an apocryphal letter between Saint Jerome and Pope Damasus published as a preface to the Medieval manuscripts. The attribution originated with Rabanus Maurus and is repeated by Martin of Opava, who extended the work into the 13th century. Other sources attribute the early work to Hegesippus and Irenaeus, having been continued by Eusebius of Caesarea.\nIn the 16th century, Onofrio Panvinio attributed the biographies after Damasus until Pope Nicholas I (858\u2013867) to Anastasius Bibliothecarius; Anastasius continued to be cited as the author into the 17th century, although this attribution was disputed by the scholarship of Caesar Baronius, Ciampini, Schelstrate and others.\nThe modern interpretation, following that of Louis Duchesne, is that the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was gradually and unsystematically compiled, and that the authorship is impossible to determine, with a few exceptions (e.g. the biography of Pope Stephen II (752\u2013757) to papal \"Primicerius\" Christopher; the biographies of Pope Nicholas I and Pope Adrian II (867\u2013872) to Anastasius). Duchesne and others have viewed the beginning of the \"Liber Pontificalis\" up until the biographies of Pope Felix III (483\u2013492) as the work of a single author, who was a contemporary of Pope Anastasius II (496-498), relying on \"Catalogus Liberianus\", which in turn draws from the papal catalogue of Hippolytus of Rome, and the \"Leonine Catalogue\", which is no longer extant. Most scholars believe the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was first compiled in the 5th or 6th century.\nBecause of the use of the \"vestiarium\", the records of the papal treasury, some have hypothesised that the author of the early \"Liber Pontificalis\" was a clerk of the papal treasury. Edward Gibbon's \"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\" (1788) summarised the scholarly consensus as being that the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was composed by \"apostolic librarians and notaries of the viiith and ixth centuries\" with only the most recent portion being composed by Anastasius.\nDuchesne and others believe that the author of the first addition to the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was a contemporary of Pope Silverius (536\u2013537), and that the author of another (not necessarily the second) addition was a contemporary of Pope Conon (686\u2013687), with later popes being added individually and during their reigns or shortly after their deaths.\nContent.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" originally only contained the names of the bishops of Rome and the durations of their pontificates. As enlarged in the 6th century, each biography consists of: the birth name of the pope and that of his father, place of birth, profession before elevation, length of pontificate, historical notes of varying thoroughness, major theological pronouncements and decrees, administrative milestones (including building campaigns, especially of Roman churches), ordinations, date of death, place of burial, and the duration of the ensuing \"sede vacante\".\nPope Adrian II (867\u2013872) is the last pope for which there are extant manuscripts of the original \"Liber Pontificalis\": the biographies of Pope John VIII, Pope Marinus I, and Pope Adrian III are missing and the biography of Pope Stephen V (885\u2013891) is incomplete. From Stephen V through the 10th and 11th centuries, the historical notes are extremely abbreviated, usually with only the pope's origin and reign duration.\nExtension.\nIt was only in the 12th century that the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was systematically continued, although papal biographies exist in the interim period in other sources.\nPetrus Guillermi.\nDuchesne refers to the 12th-century work by Petrus Guillermi in 1142 at the monastery of St. Gilles (Diocese of Reims) as the \"Liber Pontificalis of Petrus Guillermi (son of William)\". Guillermi's version is mostly copied from other works with small additions or excisions from the papal biographies of Pandulf, nephew of Hugo of Alatri, which in turn was copied almost verbatim from the original \"Liber Pontificalis\" (with the notable exception of the biography of Pope Leo IX), then from other sources until Pope Honorius II (1124\u20131130), and with contemporary information from Pope Paschal II (1099\u20131118) to Pope Urban II (1088\u20131099).\nDuchesne attributes all biographies from Pope Gregory VII to Urban II to Pandulf, while earlier historians like Giesebrecht and Watterich attributed the biographies of Gregory VII, Victor III, and Urban II to Petrus Pisanus, and the subsequent biographies to Pandulf. These biographies until those of Pope Martin IV (1281\u20131285) are extant only as revised by Petrus Guillermi in the manuscripts of the monastery of St. Gilles having been taken from the Chronicle of Martin of Opava.\nEarly in the 14th century, an unknown author built upon the continuation of Petrus Guillermi, adding the biographies of popes Martin IV (d. 1285) through John XXII (1316\u20131334), with information taken from the \"Chronicon Pontificum\" of Bernardus Guidonis, stopping abruptly in 1328.\nBoso.\nIndependently, the cardinal-nephew of Pope Adrian IV, Cardinal Boso intended to extend the \"Liber Pontificalis\" from where it left off with Stephen V, although his work was only published posthumously as the \"Gesta Romanorum Pontificum\" alongside the \"Liber Censuum\" of Pope Honorius III. Boso drew on Bonizo of Sutri for popes from John XII to Gregory VII, and wrote from his own experiences about the popes from Gelasius II (1118\u20131119) to Alexander III (1179\u20131181).\nWestern Schism.\nAn independent continuation appeared in the reign of Pope Eugene IV (1431\u20131447), appending biographies from Pope Urban V (1362\u20131370) to Pope Martin V (1417\u20131431), encompassing the period of the Western Schism. A later recension of this continuation was expanded under Pope Eugene IV.\n15th century.\nThe two collections of papal biographies of the 15th century remain independent, although they may have been intended to be continuations of the \"Liber Pontificalis\". The first extends from popes Benedict XII (1334\u20131342) to Martin V (1417\u20131431), or in one manuscript to Eugene IV (1431\u20131447). The second extends from Pope Urban VI (1378\u20131389) to Pope Pius II (1458\u20131464).\nEditions.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" was first edited by Joannes Busaeus under the title \"Anastasii bibliothecarii Vit\u00e6 seu Gesta Romanorum Pontificum\" (Mainz, 1602). A new edition, including the \"Historia ecclesiastica\" of Anastasius, was edited by Fabrotti (Paris, 1647). Another edition, editing the older \"Liber Pontificalis\" up to Pope Adrian II and adding Pope Stephen VI, was compiled by Fr. Bianchini (4 vols., Rome, 1718\u201335; a projected fifth volume did not appear). Muratori reprinted Bianchini's edition, adding the remaining popes through John XXII (Scriptores rerum Italicarum, III). Migne also republished Bianchini's edition, adding several appendixes (P. L., cxxvii\u2013cxxviii).\nModern editions include those of Louis Duchesne (\"Liber Pontificalis. Texte, introduction et commentaire\", 2 vols., Paris, 1886\u201392) and Theodor Mommsen (\"Gestorum Pontificum Romanorum pars I: Liber Pontificalis\", Mon. Germ. hist., Berlin, 1898). Duchesne incorporates the \"Annales Romani\" (1044\u20131187) into his edition of the \"Liber Pontificalis\", which otherwise relies on the two earliest known recensions of the work (530 and 687). Mommsen's edition is incomplete, extending only until 715. Translations and further commentaries appeared throughout the 20th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18305", "revid": "38016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18305", "title": "Loaded words", "text": ""}
{"id": "18306", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18306", "title": "Latin alphabet", "text": "Alphabet of the Latin language\nThe Latin alphabet is the collection of letters originally used by the ancient Romans to write the Latin language. Largely unaltered except for a couple letters splitting (\u27e8J\u27e9 from \u27e8I\u27e9 and \u27e8U\u27e9 from \u27e8V\u27e9), an addition (\u27e8W\u27e9), and extensions (such as letters with diacritics), it forms the Latin script that is used to write many languages worldwide: in western and central Europe, in Africa, in the Americas, and in Oceania.\nIts basic modern 26-letter inventory is standardized as the ISO basic Latin alphabet.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Latin alphabet\" may refer to either the alphabet used to write Latin (as described in this article) or other alphabets based on the Latin script, which is the basic set of letters common to the various alphabets descended from the classical Latin alphabet, such as the English alphabet. These Latin-script alphabets may discard letters, like the Rotokas alphabet, or add new letters, like the Danish and Norwegian alphabets. Letter shapes have evolved over the centuries, including the development in Medieval Latin of lower-case, forms which did not exist in the Classical period alphabet.\nEvolution.\nThe Latin alphabet evolved from the visually similar Etruscan alphabet, which evolved from the Cumaean Greek version of the Greek alphabet, which was itself descended from the Phoenician alphabet, which in turn derived from Egyptian hieroglyphs. The Etruscans ruled early Rome; their alphabet evolved in Rome over successive centuries to produce the Latin alphabet.\nDuring the Middle Ages, the Latin alphabet was used (sometimes with modifications) for writing Romance languages, which are direct descendants of Latin, as well as for writing Celtic, Germanic, Baltic and some Slavic languages. With the age of colonialism and Christian evangelism, the Latin script spread beyond Europe, coming into use for writing indigenous American, Australian, Austronesian, Austroasiatic and African languages. More recently, linguists have also tended to prefer the Latin script or the International Phonetic Alphabet (itself largely based on the Latin script) when transcribing or creating written standards for non-European languages, such as the African reference alphabet.\nSigns and abbreviations.\nAlthough Latin did not use diacritical marks, apart from the apex and sicilicus, signs of truncation of words (often placed above or at the end of the truncated word) were very common. Furthermore, abbreviations or smaller overlapping letters were often used. This meant that if the text was engraved on stone, the number of letters to be engraved was reduced, while if it was written on paper or parchment, it saved precious space. This custom continued in the Middle Ages: hundreds of symbols and abbreviations exist, varying from century to century.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nIt is generally believed that the Latin alphabet used by the Romans was derived from the Old Italic alphabet used by the Etruscans. That alphabet was derived from the Euboean alphabet used by the Cumae, which in turn was derived from the Phoenician alphabet.\nOld Latin alphabet.\nLatin included 21 different characters. The letter \u27e8C\u27e9 was the western form of the Greek gamma, but it was used for the sounds and alike, possibly under the influence of Etruscan, which might have lacked any voiced plosives. Later, probably during the 3rd century BC, the letter \u27e8Z\u27e9 \u2013 not needed to write Latin properly \u2013 was replaced with the new letter \u27e8G\u27e9, a \u27e8C\u27e9 modified with a small vertical stroke, which took its place in the alphabet. From then on, \u27e8G\u27e9 represented the voiced plosive , while \u27e8C\u27e9 was generally reserved for the voiceless plosive . The letter \u27e8K\u27e9 was used only rarely, in a small number of words such as \"Kalendae\", often interchangeably with \u27e8C\u27e9.\nClassical Latin alphabet.\nAfter the Roman conquest of Greece in the 1st century BC, Latin adopted the Greek letters \u27e8Y\u27e9 and \u27e8Z\u27e9 (or readopted, in the latter case) to write Greek loanwords, placing them at the end of the alphabet. An attempt by the emperor Claudius to introduce three additional letters \u27e8\u2183, \u2132, \u2c75\u27e9 did not last. Thus, it was during the classical Latin period that the Latin alphabet contained 21 letters and 2 foreign letters:\nThe Latin names of some of these letters are disputed; for example, \u27e8H\u27e9 may have been called or . In general the Romans did not use the traditional (Semitic-derived) names as in Greek: the names of the plosives were formed by adding to their sound (except for \u27e8K\u27e9 and \u27e8Q\u27e9, which needed different vowels to be distinguished from \u27e8C\u27e9) and the names of the continuants consisted as a rule either of the bare sound, or the sound preceded by .\nThe letter \u27e8Y\u27e9 when introduced was probably called \"hy\" as in Greek, the name upsilon not being in use yet, but this was changed to (\"Greek i\") as Latin speakers had difficulty distinguishing its foreign sound from . \u27e8Z\u27e9 was given its Greek name, zeta. This scheme has continued to be used by most modern European languages that have adopted the Latin alphabet. For the Latin sounds represented by the various letters see Latin spelling and pronunciation; for the names of the letters in English see English alphabet.\nDiacritics were not regularly used, but they did occur sometimes, the most common being the apex used to mark long vowels, which had previously sometimes been written doubled. However, in place of taking an apex, the letter i was written taller: \u27e8\u27e9. For example, what is today transcribed was written \u27e8\u27e9 in the inscription depicted.\nSome letters have more than one form in epigraphy.\nLatinists have treated some of them especially such as \u27e8\ua7f5\u27e9, a variant of \u27e8H\u27e9 found in Roman Gaul.\nThe primary mark of punctuation was the interpunct, which was used as a word divider, though it fell out of use after 200 AD.\nOld Roman cursive script, also called majuscule cursive and capitalis cursive, was the everyday form of handwriting used for writing letters, by merchants writing business accounts, by schoolchildren learning the Latin alphabet, and even emperors issuing commands. A more formal style of writing was based on Roman square capitals, but cursive was used for quicker, informal writing. It was most commonly used from about the 1st century BC to the 3rd century, but it probably existed earlier than that. It led to Uncial, a majuscule script commonly used from the 3rd to 8th centuries AD by Latin and Greek scribes.\nTironian notes were a shorthand system consisting of thousands of signs.\nNew Roman cursive script, also known as minuscule cursive, was in use from the 3rd century to the 7th century, and uses letter forms that are more recognizable to modern eyes; \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8b\u27e9, \u27e8d\u27e9, and \u27e8e\u27e9 had taken a more familiar shape, and the other letters were proportionate to each other. This script evolved into a variety of regional medieval scripts (for example, the Merovingian, Visigothic and Benevantan scripts), to be later supplanted by the Carolingian minuscule.\nMedieval and later developments.\nIt was not until the Middle Ages that the letter \u27e8W\u27e9 (originally a ligature of two \u27e8V\u27e9s) was added to the Latin alphabet, to represent sounds from the Germanic languages which did not exist in medieval Latin, and only after the Renaissance did the convention of treating \u27e8I\u27e9 and \u27e8U\u27e9 as vowels, and \u27e8J\u27e9 and \u27e8V\u27e9 as consonants, become established. Prior to that, the former had been merely allographs of the latter.\nWith the fragmentation of political power, the style of writing changed and varied greatly throughout the Middle Ages, even after the invention of the printing press. Early deviations from the classical forms were the uncial script, a development of the Old Roman cursive, and various so-called minuscule scripts that developed from New Roman cursive, of which the insular script developed by Irish literati and derivations of this, such as Carolingian minuscule were the most influential, introducing the lower case forms of the letters, as well as other writing conventions that have since become standard.\nThe languages that use the Latin script generally use capital letters to begin paragraphs and sentences and proper nouns. The rules for capitalization have changed over time, and different languages have varied in their rules for capitalization. Old English, for example, was rarely written with even proper nouns capitalized, whereas Modern English writers and printers of the 17th and 18th century frequently capitalized most and sometimes all nouns; for example, from the preamble of the United States Constitution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.\nThis is still systematically done in modern German.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18307", "revid": "31302412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18307", "title": "Lugh", "text": "Irish god of skills and the arts\nLugh or Lug (; ) is a figure in Irish mythology. A member of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, a group of supernatural beings, Lugh is portrayed as a warrior, a king, a master craftsman and a saviour. He is associated with skill and mastery in multiple disciplines, including the arts. Lugh also has associations with oaths, truth, and the law, and therefore with rightful kingship. He is also associated with intelligence. Lugh is linked with the harvest festival of Lughnasadh, which bears his name. His most common epithets are \"L\u00e1mfada\" ( ; \"long hand\" or \"long arm\", possibly for his skill with a spear or his ability as a ruler) and \"Samild\u00e1nach\" ( ; \"equally skilled in many arts\"). This has sometimes been anglicised as \"Lew of the Long Hand\".\nIn mythology, Lugh is the son of Cian and Ethniu (or Ethliu). He is the maternal grandson of the Fomorian tyrant Balor, whom Lugh kills in the \"Battle of Mag Tuired\". Lugh's son is the hero C\u00fa Chulainn, who is believed to be an incarnation of Lugh.\nLugh has several magical possessions. He wields an unstoppable fiery spear and a sling stone and owns a hound named \"Failinis\". He is said to have invented \"fidchell\", ball games, and horse racing.\nHe is the Irish manifestation of the pan-Celtic god Lugus, and his Welsh counterpart is Lleu Llaw Gyffes. The \"interpretatio romana\" has Lug correspond to the Romans god Mercury.\nName.\nEtymology.\nThe meaning of Lugh's name is still a matter of debate. Some scholars propose that it derives from a suggested Proto-Indo-European root meaning \"to bind by oath\" (compare Old Irish and Welsh , both meaning \"oath, vow, act of swearing\" and derived from a suffixed Proto-Celtic form, , \"oath\"), suggesting that he was originally a god of oaths and sworn contracts. When Balor meets Lugh in the Second Battle of Moytura he calls Lugh a \"babbler\". \nIn the past his name was generally believed to come from another suggested Proto-Indo-European root , \"flashing light\", and since the Victorian era he has often been considered a sun god, similar to the Greco-Roman Apollo. However, the figure of Lugh in Irish mythology and literature seems to be a better match with a romanized god identified with Mercury, described by Julius Caesar in his \"De Bello Gallico\". There are serious phonological issues with deriving the name from , notably that Proto-Indo-European never produced Proto-Celtic ; for this reason, most modern specialists in Celtic languages no longer accept this etymology.\nDescription.\nLugh is typically described as a youthful warrior. In the brief narrative \"Baile in Sc\u00e1il\", Lugh is described as being very large and very beautiful and a spear-wielding horseman.\nWhen he appears before the wounded C\u00fa Chulainn in the T\u00e1in B\u00f3 C\u00faalnge he is described as follows:\nA man fair and tall, with a great head of curly yellow hair. He has a green mantle wrapped about him and a brooch of white silver in the mantle over his breast. Next to his white skin, he wears a tunic of royal satin with red-gold insertion reaching to his knees. He carries a black shield with a hard boss of white-bronze. In his hand a five-pointed spear and next to it a forked javelin. Wonderful is the play and sport and diversion that he makes (with these weapons). But none accosts him and he accosts none as if no one could see him.\nElsewhere Lugh is described as a tall young man with bright red cheeks, white sides, a bronze-coloured face and blood-coloured hair.\nIn \"The Fate of the Children of Turenn\" Lugh's appearance is compared to the sun on several occasions. He is described by Bres as follows:\n Then arose Breas, the son of Balar, and he said: \"It is a wonder to me\", said he, \"that the sun to rise in the west today, and in the east every other day\". \"It would be better that it wer so\", said the druids. \"What else is it?\" said he. \"The radiance of the face of Lugh of the Long Arms\", said they.\nElsewhere in the same passage, the following remark is made:\n ... they were not long there when they saw an army and a goodly host coming towards them from the East, and in the vanguard there was one young man high in authority over all; and like to the setting sun was the radiance of his face and forehead, and they were unable to gaze upon his countenance on account of its splendour. And this is who it was - Lugh Lamhfhada Loinnbheimionach ... from the Land of Promise ... and when the \"Cathbarr\" (Manannan's helmet) was let off of him the appearance of his face and forehead was as brilliant as the sun on a dry summer's day.\nMythology.\nBirth.\nLugh's father is Cian of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, and his mother is Ethniu (Eithne in Modern Irish), daughter of Balor of the Fomorians. In \"Cath Maige Tuired\" their union is a dynastic marriage following an alliance between the Tuatha D\u00e9 and the Fomorians. In the \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn,\" Cian gives the boy to Tailtiu, queen of the Fir Bolg, in fosterage. In the Dindsenchas, Lugh, the foster-son of Tailtiu, is described as the \"son of the Dumb Champion\". In the poem Baile Suthain Sith Eamhna Lugh is called \"descendant of the poet.\"\nA folktale told to John O'Donovan by Shane O'Dugan of Tory Island in 1835 recounts the birth of a grandson of Balor who grows up to kill his grandfather. The grandson is unnamed, his father is called Mac Cinnfhaelaidh and the manner of his killing of Balor is different, but it has been taken as a version of the birth of Lugh, and was adapted as such by Lady Gregory. In this tale, Balor hears a druid's prophecy that he will be killed by his own grandson. To prevent this he imprisons his only daughter in the T\u00f3r M\u00f3r (great tower) of Tory Island. She is cared for by twelve women, who are to prevent her from ever meeting or even learning of the existence of men.\nOn the mainland, Mac Cinnfhaelaidh owns a magic cow who gives such abundant milk that everyone, including Balor, wants to possess her. While the cow is in the care of Mac Cinnfhaelaidh's brother Mac Samthainn, Balor appears in the form of a little red-haired boy and tricks him into giving him the cow. Looking for revenge, Mac Cinnfhaelaidh calls on a \"leanan s\u00eddhe\" (fairy woman) called Bir\u00f3g, who transports him by magic to the top of Balor's tower, where he seduces Ethniu. In time, she gives birth to triplets, which Balor gathers up in a sheet and sends to drown in a whirlpool. The messenger drowns two of the babies but unwittingly drops one child into the harbour, where he is rescued by Bir\u00f3g. She takes him to his father, who gives him to his brother, Gavida the smith, in fosterage.\nThere may be further triplism associated with his birth. His father in the folktale is one of a triad of brothers, Mac Cinnfhaelaidh, Gavida, and Mac Samthainn, whereas in the \"Lebor Gab\u00e1la\", his father Cian is mentioned alongside his brothers C\u00fa and Cethen. Two characters called Lugaid, a popular medieval Irish name thought to derive from Lugh, have three fathers: Lugaid Riab nDerg (Lugaid of the Red Stripes) was the son of the three \"Findemna\" or fair triplets, and Lugaid mac Con Ro\u00ed was also known as \"mac Tr\u00ed Con\", \"son of three hounds\". In Ireland's other great \"sequestered maiden\" story, the tragedy of Deirdre, the king's intended is carried off by three brothers, who are hunters with hounds. The canine imagery continues with Cian's brother C\u00fa (\"hound\"), another Lugaid, Lugaid Mac Con (son of a hound), and Lugh's son C\u00fachulainn (\"Culann's Hound\"). A fourth Lugaid was Lugaid Lo\u00edgde, a legendary King of Tara and ancestor of (or inspiration for) Lugaid Mac Con.\nLugh joins the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann.\nAs a young man Lugh travels to Tara to join the court of King Nuada of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann. The doorkeeper will not let him in unless he has a skill he can use to serve the king. He offers his services as a wright, a smith, a champion, a swordsman, a harpist, a hero, a poet, a historian, a sorcerer, and a craftsman, but each time is rejected as the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann already have someone with that skill. When Lugh asks if they have anyone with all those skills simultaneously, the doorkeeper has to admit defeat, and Lugh joins the court and is appointed Chief Ollam of Ireland. He wins a flagstone-throwing contest against Ogma, the champion, and entertains the court with his harp. The Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann are, at that time, oppressed by the Fomorians, and Lugh is amazed at how meekly they accept their oppression. Nuada wonders if this young man could lead them to freedom. Lugh is given command over the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, and he begins making preparations for war.\nSons of Tuireann.\nTuireann and Cian, Lugh's father, are old enemies, and one day his sons, Brian, Iuchar, and Iucharba spot Cian in the distance and decide to kill him. They find him hiding in the form of a pig, but Cian tricked the brothers into allowing him to transform back into a man before they killed him, giving Lugh the legal right to claim compensation for a father rather than just a pig. When they try to bury him, the ground spits his body back twice before keeping him down, and eventually confesses that it is a grave to Lugh.\nLugh holds a feast and invites the brothers, and during it he asks them what they would demand as compensation for the murder of their father. They reply that death would be the only just demand, and Lugh agrees. He then accuses them of the murder of his father, Cian, and sets them on a series of seemingly impossible quests. The brothers go on an adventure and achieve them all except the last one, which will surely kill them. Despite Tuireann's pleas, Lugh demands that they proceed and, when they are all fatally wounded, he denies them the use of one of the items they have retrieved, a magic pigskin which heals all wounds. They die of their wounds and Tuireann dies of grief over their bodies.\nBattle of Magh Tuireadh.\nUsing the magic artefacts the sons of Tuireann have gathered, Lugh leads the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann in the Second Battle of Mag Tuireadh against the Fomorians. Prior to the battle, Lugh asked each man and woman in his army what art he or she would bring to the fray. He then addressed his army in speech, which elevated each warrior's spirit to that of a king or lord. Nuada is killed in the battle by Balor. Lugh faces Balor, who opens his terrible, poisonous eye that kills all it looks upon, but Lugh shoots a sling -stone that drives his eye out the back of his head, killing Balor and wreaking havoc on the Fomorian army behind.\nAfter the victory Lugh finds Bres, the half-Fomorian former king of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, alone and unprotected on the battlefield, and Bres begs for his life. If he is spared, he promises, he will ensure that the cows of Ireland always give milk. The Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann refuse the offer. He then promises four harvests a year, but the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann say one harvest a year suits them. But Lugh spares his life on the condition that he teach the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann how and when to plough, sow, and reap.\nLater life and death.\nLugh instituted an event similar to the Olympic Games called the Assembly of Talti which finished on Lughnasadh (1 August) in memory of his foster mother, Tailtiu, at the town that bears her name, now Teltown, County Meath. He likewise instituted Lughnasadh fairs in the areas of Carman and Naas in honour of Carman and N\u00e1s, the eponymous tutelary goddesses of these two regions. Horse races and displays of martial arts were important activities at all three fairs. Lughnasadh is a celebration of Lugh's triumph over the spirits of the Otherworld who had tried to keep the harvest for themselves. It survived long into Christian times and is still celebrated under a variety of names. \"L\u00fanasa\" is now the Irish name for the month of August.\nAccording to a poem of the \"dindsenchas\", Lugh was responsible for the death of Bres. He made 300 wooden cows and filled them with a bitter, poisonous red liquid which was then \"milked\" into pails and offered to Bres to drink. Bres, who was under an obligation not to refuse hospitality, drank it down without flinching, and it killed him.\nLugh is said to have invented the board game fidchell.\nOne of his wives, Buach, had an affair with Cermait, son of the Dagda. Lugh killed him in revenge, but Cermait's sons, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, and Mac Gr\u00e9ine, killed Lugh in return, spearing him through the foot then drowning him in Loch Lugborta in County Westmeath He had ruled for forty years. Cermait was later revived by his father, the Dagda, who used the smooth or healing end of his staff to bring Cermait back to life.\nFamily.\nLugh is given the matriname \"mac Ethlenn\" or \"mac Ethnenn\" (\"son of Ethliu or Ethniu\", his mother) and the patriname \"mac Cein\" (\"son of Cian\", his father). He is the maternal grandson of the Fomorian tyrant Balor, whom Lugh kills in the \"Battle of Mag Tuired\". Lugh's son is the hero C\u00fa Chulainn, who is believed to be an incarnation of Lugh.\nHe had several wives, including Bu\u00ed (AKA Buach or Bua \"Victory\") and N\u00e1s, daughters of Ruadri Ruad, king of Britain. Bu\u00ed lived and was buried at Knowth (Cnogba). N\u00e1s was buried at Naas, County Kildare, which is said to be named after her. Lugh had a son, Ibic \"of the horses\", by N\u00e1s. It is said that N\u00e1s dies with the noise of combat. Therefore it is difficult to know where she dies. Lugh's daughter or sister was Ebliu, who married Fintan. By the mortal Deichtine, Lugh was the father to the hero C\u00fa Chulainn.\nPossessions.\nLugh possessed a number of magical items, retrieved by the sons of Tuirill Piccreo in Middle Irish redactions of the Lebor Gab\u00e1la. Not all the items are listed here. The late narrative \"Fate of the Children of Tuireann\" not only gives a list of items gathered for Lugh, but also endows him with such gifts from the sea god Manann\u00e1n as the sword Fragarach, the horse Enbarr (Aonbarr), the boat / (\"Wave-Sweeper\"), his armour and helmet.\nLugh's spear.\nLugh's spear (), according to the text of The Four Jewels of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, was said to be impossible to overcome, taken to Ireland from Gorias (or Findias).\nLugh obtained the Spear of Assal () as fine () imposed on the children of Tuirill Piccreo (or Biccreo), according to the short account in which adds that the incantation \"Ibar (Yew)\" made the cast always hit its mark, and \"Athibar (Re-Yew)\" caused the spear to return.\nIn a full narrative version called (The Fate of the Children of Tuireann), from copies no earlier than the 17th century, Lugh demands the spear named \"Ar-\u00e9adbair\" or \"Areadbhair\" (Early Modern Irish: ) which belonged to Pisear, king of Persia. Areadbhair's tip had to be kept immersed in a pot of water to keep it from igniting, a property similar to the L\u00fain of Celtchar. This spear is also called \"Slaughterer\" in translation.\nThere is yet another name that Lugh's spear goes by: \"A [yew] tree, the finest of the wood\" (Early Modern Irish: ), occurring in an inserted verse within \"The Fate of the Children of Tuireann\". \"The famous yew of the wood\" () is also the name that Lugh's spear is given in a tract which alleges that it, the L\u00fain of Celtchar and the spear Crimall that blinded Cormac Mac Airt were one and the same weapon (tract in TCD MS 1336 (H 3. 17), col. 723, discussed in the L\u00fain page).\nLugh's projectile weapon, whether a dart or missile, was envisioned to be symbolic of lightning-weapon.\nLugh's sling rod, named \"Lugh's Chain\", was the rainbow and the Milky Way, according to popular writer Charles Squire. Squire adds that Lugh's spear which needed no wielding was alive and thirsted so for blood that only by steeping its head in a sleeping-draught of pounded fresh poppy leaves could it be kept at rest. When a battle was near, it was drawn out; then it roared and struggled against its thongs, fire flashed from it, and it tore through the ranks of the enemy once slipped from the leash, never tired of slaying.\nSling-stone.\nAccording to the brief accounts in the Lebor Gab\u00e1la \u00c9renn, Lugh used the \"sling-stone\" (\"cloich tabaill\") to slay his grandfather, Balor the Strong-Smiter in the Battle of Magh Tuired. The narrative , preserved in a unique 16th-century copy, words it slightly different saying that Lugh used the sling-stone to destroy the evil eye of Balor of the Piercing Eye (Bolur Birugderc).\nThe ammunition that Lugh used was not just a stone, but a \"tathlum\" according to a certain poem in Egerton MS. 1782 (olim W. Monck Mason MS.), the first quatrain of which is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Meyer (1905) ed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014O'Curry (1873) tr.\nThe poem goes on to describe the composition of this tathlum, as being formed from the blood collected from toads, bears, lions, vipers and the neck-base of Osmuinn, mixed with the sands of the Armorian Sea and the Red Sea.\nFragarach.\nLugh is also seen girt with the Freagarthach (better known as Fragarach), the sword of Manann\u00e1n, in the assembly of the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann in the \"Fate of the Children of Tuireann\".\nLugh's horse and magic boat.\nLugh had a horse named Aenbharr which could fare over both land and sea. Like much of his equipment, it was furnished to him by the sea god Manann\u00e1n mac Lir. When the Children of Tuireann asked to borrow this horse, Lugh begrudged them, saying it would not be proper to make a loan of a loan. Consequently, Lugh was unable to refuse their request to use Lugh's currach (coracle) or boat, the \"Wave-Sweeper\" ().\nIn the Lebor Gab\u00e1la, Gainne and Rea were the names of the pair of horses belonging to the king of the isle of Sicily [on the (Tyrrhene sea)], which Lug demanded as \u00e9raic from the sons of Tuirill Briccreo.\nLugh's hound.\nFailinis was the name of the whelp of the King of Ioruaidhe that Lugh demanded as \u00e9iric (a forfeit) in the \"Oidhead Chloinne Tuireann\". This concurs with the name of the hound mentioned in an \"Ossianic Ballad\", sometimes referred to by its opening line \" (They came here as a band of three)\". In the ballad, the hound is called \u1e60alinnis (Shalinnis) or Failinis (in the Lismore text), and belonged to a threesome from Iruaide whom the Fianna encounter. It is described as \"the ancient greyhound... that had been with Lugh of the Mantles, / Given him by the sons of Tuireann Bicreann\"\nComparative mythology.\nLugh has been connected with the pan-Celtic god Lugus. Through Lugus, John Rhys has argued Lugh is cognate with the Welsh mythological figure Lleu Llaw Gyffes. Sometimes Lugh is interpreted as a storm god and, less often today, as a sun god. Thus, equating Lugh with the Roman gods Jupiter or Sol, respectively. Others have noted a similarity in Lugh's slaying of Balor to the slaying of Baldr by Loki. Lugh's mastery of all arts led Marie Henri d'Arbois de Jubainville to link Lugus with the unnamed Gaulish god whom Julius Caesar identifies with Mercury and describes as the \"inventor of all the arts\".\nSt. Mologa has been theorized to be a Christian continuation of the god Lugh.\nToponymy.\nThe County of Louth in Ireland is named after the village of Louth, which is named after the god Lugh. Historically, the place name has had various spellings; \"Lugmad\", \"Lughmhaigh\", and \"Lughmhadh\" (see Historic Names List, for full listing). \"L\u00fa\" is the modern simplified spelling. Other places named for Lugh include the cairn at Seelewey (Suidhe Lughaidh, or Lug's Seat), Dunlewey, and Rath-Lugaidh in Carney, Sligo. Seelewey was located in Moyturra Chonlainn and, according to local folklore, was a place where giants used to gather in olden days.\nThe modern city of Lyon was founded as \"Colonia Copia Felix Munatia\" in 43 BC. By the end of the first century AD it was known as \"Lugdunum\", a Latinized variant of the ancient Gaulish name *Lugudunon, meaning \"Fortress of Lugh\".\nOne of the four regions in Galicia is called Lugo, in honour of this god.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n(M G L Baillie\nSchool of Archaeology and Palaeoecology, Queen's University, Belfast)"}
{"id": "18308", "revid": "17087306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18308", "title": "Lanthanide", "text": "Elements with atomic numbers 57-70\nLanthanides in the periodic table\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Periodic table (32 columns, micro)/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA lanthanide () is any of the 14 metallic chemical elements with atomic numbers 57\u201370, from lanthanum through ytterbium. The IUPAC recommended standard name of this series is lanthanoid ().\nIn the periodic table, they fill the 4f orbitals. Lutetium (element 71) is also sometimes considered a lanthanide, despite being a d-block element and a transition metal.\nThe informal chemical symbol Ln is used in general discussions of lanthanide chemistry to refer to any lanthanide. All but one of the lanthanides are f-block elements, corresponding to the filling of the 4f electron shell. Lutetium is a d-block element (thus also a transition metal), and on this basis its inclusion has been questioned; however, like its congeners scandium and yttrium in group 3, it behaves similarly to the other 14. The term rare-earth element or rare-earth metal is often used to include the stable group 3 elements Sc, Y, and Lu in addition to the 4f elements. All lanthanide elements form trivalent cations, Ln3+, whose chemistry is largely determined by the ionic radius, which decreases steadily from lanthanum (La) to lutetium (Lu).\nIn presentations of the periodic table, the f-block elements are customarily shown as two additional rows below the main body of the table. This convention is entirely a matter of aesthetics and formatting practicality; a rarely used wide-formatted periodic table inserts the 4f and 5f series in their proper places, as parts of the table's sixth and seventh rows (periods), respectively.\nPrimordial\u2003 From decay\u2003 Synthetic\u2003Border shows natural occurrence of the element\nEtymology.\nThe term \"lanthanide\" was introduced by Victor Goldschmidt in 1925. Despite their abundance, the technical term \"lanthanides\" is interpreted to reflect a sense of elusiveness on the part of these elements, as it comes from the Greek \u03bb\u03b1\u03bd\u03b8\u03b1\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd (\"lanthanein\"), \"to lie hidden\". \nThe word reflects their property of \"hiding\" behind each other in minerals. The term derives from lanthanum, first discovered in 1838, at that time a so-called new rare-earth element \"lying hidden\" or \"escaping notice\" in a cerium mineral, and it is an irony that lanthanum was later identified as the first in an entire series of chemically similar elements and gave its name to the whole series. \nThese elements are called lanthanides because the elements in the series are chemically similar to lanthanum. Because \"lanthanide\" means \"like lanthanum\", it has been argued that lanthanum cannot logically be a lanthanide, but the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) acknowledges its inclusion based on common usage. The current IUPAC recommendation is that the name \"lanthanoid\" be used rather than \"lanthanide\", as the suffix \"-ide\" is preferred for negative ions, whereas the suffix \"-oid\" indicates similarity to one of the members of the containing family of elements.IR-3.6 However, \"lanthanide\" is still commonly used.\nPhysical properties of the elements.\nThe properties of the lanthanides arise from the order in which the electron shells of these elements are filled\u2014the outermost (6s) has the same configuration for all of them, and a deeper (4f) shell is progressively filled with electrons as the atomic number increases from 57 towards 71. For many years, mixtures of more than one rare earth were considered to be single elements, such as neodymium and praseodymium being thought to be the single element didymium. Very small differences in solubility are used in solvent and ion-exchange purification methods for these elements, which require repeated application to obtain a purified metal. The diverse applications of refined metals and their compounds can be attributed to the subtle and pronounced variations in their electronic, electrical, optical, and magnetic properties.\nGschneider and Daane (1988) attribute the trend in melting point which increases across the series, (lanthanum (920\u00a0\u00b0C) \u2013 lutetium (1622\u00a0\u00b0C)) to the extent of hybridization of the 6s, 5d, and 4f orbitals. The hybridization is believed to be at its greatest for cerium, which has the lowest melting point of all, 795\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe lanthanide metals are soft; their hardness increases across the series. Europium stands out, as it has the lowest density in the series at 5.24 g/cm3 and the largest metallic radius in the series at 208.4 pm. It can be compared to barium, which has a metallic radius of 222 pm. It is believed that the metal contains the larger Eu2+ ion and that there are only two electrons in the conduction band. Ytterbium also has a large metallic radius, and a similar explanation is suggested.\nThe resistivities of the lanthanide metals are relatively high, ranging from 29 to 134 \u03bc\u03a9\u00b7cm. These values can be compared to a good conductor such as aluminium, which has a resistivity of 2.655 \u03bc\u03a9\u00b7cm.\nWith the exceptions of La, Yb, and Lu (which have no unpaired f electrons), the lanthanides are strongly paramagnetic, and this is reflected in their magnetic susceptibilities. Gadolinium becomes ferromagnetic at below 16\u00a0\u00b0C (Curie point). The other heavier lanthanides \u2013 terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, and ytterbium \u2013 become ferromagnetic at much lower temperatures.\nf \u2192 f transitions are symmetry forbidden (or Laporte-forbidden), which is also true of transition metals. However, transition metals are able to use vibronic coupling to break this rule. The valence orbitals in lanthanides are almost entirely non-bonding and as such little effective vibronic coupling takes, hence the spectra from f \u2192 f transitions are much weaker and narrower than those from d \u2192 d transitions. In general this makes the colors of lanthanide complexes far fainter than those of transition metal complexes. \nEffect of 4f orbitals.\nViewing the lanthanides from left to right in the periodic table, the seven 4f atomic orbitals become progressively more filled (see above and ). The electronic configuration of most neutral gas-phase lanthanide atoms is [Xe]6s24f\"n\", where \"n\" is 56 less than the atomic number \"Z\". Exceptions are La, Ce, Gd, and Lu, which have 4f\"n\"\u221215d1 (though even then 4f\"n\" is a low-lying excited state for La, Ce, and Gd; for Lu, the 4f shell is already full, and the fifteenth electron has no choice but to enter 5d). With the exception of lutetium, the 4f orbitals are chemically active in all lanthanides and produce profound differences between lanthanide chemistry and transition metal chemistry. The 4f orbitals penetrate the [Xe] core and are isolated, and thus they do not participate much in bonding. This explains why crystal field effects are small and why they do not form \u03c0 bonds. As there are seven 4f orbitals, the number of unpaired electrons can be as high as 7, which gives rise to the large magnetic moments observed for lanthanide compounds. \nMeasuring the magnetic moment can be used to investigate the 4f electron configuration, and this is a useful tool in providing an insight into the chemical bonding. The lanthanide contraction, i.e. the reduction in size of the Ln3+ ion from La3+ (103 pm) to Lu3+ (86.1\u00a0pm), is often explained by the poor shielding of the 5s and 5p electrons by the 4f electrons.\nChemistry and compounds.\nThe chemistry of the lanthanides is dominated by the +3 oxidation state, and in LnIII compounds the 6s electrons and (usually) one 4f electron are lost and the ions have the configuration [Xe]4f(\"n\"\u22121). All the lanthanide elements exhibit the oxidation state +3. In addition, Ce3+ can lose its single f electron to form Ce4+ with the stable electronic configuration of xenon. Also, Eu3+ can gain an electron to form Eu2+ with the f7 configuration that has the extra stability of a half-filled shell. Other than Ce(IV) and Eu(II), none of the lanthanides are stable in oxidation states other than +3 in aqueous solution. \nIn terms of reduction potentials, the Ln0/3+ couples are nearly the same for all lanthanides, ranging from \u22121.99 (for Eu) to \u22122.35 V (for Pr). Thus these metals are highly reducing, with reducing power similar to alkaline earth metals such as Mg (\u22122.36 V).\nLanthanide oxidation states.\nThe ionization energies for the lanthanides can be compared with aluminium. In aluminium the sum of the first three ionization energies is 5139 kJ\u00b7mol\u22121, whereas the lanthanides fall in the range 3455 \u2013 4186 kJ\u00b7mol\u22121. This correlates with the highly reactive nature of the lanthanides.\nThe sum of the first two ionization energies for europium, 1632 kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 can be compared with that of barium 1468.1 kJ\u00b7mol\u22121 and europium's third ionization energy is the highest of the lanthanides. The sum of the first two ionization energies for ytterbium are the second lowest in the series and its third ionization energy is the second highest. The high third ionization energy for Eu and Yb correlate with the half filling 4f7 and complete filling 4f14 of the 4f subshell, and the stability afforded by such configurations due to exchange energy. Europium and ytterbium form salt like compounds with Eu2+ and Yb2+, for example the salt like dihydrides. Both europium and ytterbium dissolve in liquid ammonia forming solutions of Ln2+(NH3)x again demonstrating their similarities to the alkaline earth metals.\nThe relative ease with which the 4th electron can be removed in cerium and (to a lesser extent praseodymium) indicates why Ce(IV) and Pr(IV) compounds can be formed, for example CeO2 is formed rather than Ce2O3 when cerium reacts with oxygen. Also Tb has a well-known IV state, as removing the 4th electron in this case produces a half-full 4f7 configuration.\nThe additional stable valences for Ce and Eu mean that their abundances in rocks sometimes varies significantly relative to the other rare earth elements: see cerium anomaly and europium anomaly.\nSeparation of lanthanides.\nThe similarity in ionic radius between adjacent lanthanide elements makes it difficult to separate them from each other in naturally occurring ores and other mixtures. Historically, the very laborious processes of cascading and fractional crystallization were used. Because the lanthanide ions have slightly different radii, the lattice energy of their salts and hydration energies of the ions will be slightly different, leading to a small difference in solubility. Salts of the formula Ln(NO3)3\u00b72NH4NO3\u00b74H2O can be used. Industrially, the elements are separated from each other by solvent extraction. Typically an aqueous solution of nitrates is extracted into kerosene containing tri-\"n\"-butylphosphate. The strength of the complexes formed increases as the ionic radius decreases, so solubility in the organic phase increases. Complete separation can be achieved continuously by use of countercurrent exchange methods. The elements can also be separated by ion-exchange chromatography, making use of the fact that the stability constant for formation of EDTA complexes increases for log K \u2248 15.5 for [La(EDTA)]\u2212 to log K \u2248 19.8 for [Lu(EDTA)]\u2212.\nCoordination chemistry and catalysis.\nWhen in the form of coordination complexes, lanthanides exist overwhelmingly in their +3 oxidation state, although particularly stable 4f configurations can also give +4 (Ce, Pr, Tb) or +2 (Sm, Eu, Yb) ions. All of these forms are strongly electropositive and thus lanthanide ions are hard Lewis acids. The oxidation states are also very stable; with the exceptions of SmI2 and cerium(IV) salts, lanthanides are not used for redox chemistry. 4f electrons have a high probability of being found close to the nucleus and are thus strongly affected as the nuclear charge increases across the series; this results in a corresponding decrease in ionic radii referred to as the lanthanide contraction.\nThe low probability of the 4f electrons existing at the outer region of the atom or ion permits little effective overlap between the orbitals of a lanthanide ion and any binding ligand. Thus lanthanide complexes typically have little or no covalent character and are not influenced by orbital geometries. The lack of orbital interaction also means that varying the metal typically has little effect on the complex (other than size), especially when compared to transition metals. Complexes are held together by weaker electrostatic forces which are omni-directional and thus the ligands alone dictate the symmetry and coordination of complexes. Steric factors therefore dominate, with coordinative saturation of the metal being balanced against inter-ligand repulsion. This results in a diverse range of coordination geometries, many of which are irregular, and also manifests itself in the highly fluxional nature of the complexes. As there is no energetic reason to be locked into a single geometry, rapid intramolecular and intermolecular ligand exchange will take place. This typically results in complexes that rapidly fluctuate between all possible configurations.\nMany of these features make lanthanide complexes effective catalysts. Hard Lewis acids are able to polarise bonds upon coordination and thus alter the electrophilicity of compounds, with a classic example being the Luche reduction. The large size of the ions coupled with their labile ionic bonding allows even bulky coordinating species to bind and dissociate rapidly, resulting in very high turnover rates; thus excellent yields can often be achieved with loadings of only a few mol%. The lack of orbital interactions combined with the lanthanide contraction means that the lanthanides change in size across the series but that their chemistry remains much the same. This allows for easy tuning of the steric environments and examples exist where this has been used to improve the catalytic activity of the complex and change the nuclearity of metal clusters.\nDespite this, the use of lanthanide coordination complexes as homogeneous catalysts is largely restricted to the laboratory and there are currently few examples them being used on an industrial scale. Lanthanides exist in many forms other than coordination complexes and many of these are industrially useful. In particular lanthanide metal oxides are used as heterogeneous catalysts in various industrial processes.\nLn(III) compounds.\nThe trivalent lanthanides mostly form ionic salts. The trivalent ions are hard acceptors and form more stable complexes with oxygen-donor ligands than with nitrogen-donor ligands. The larger ions are 9-coordinate in aqueous solution, [Ln(H2O)9]3+ but the smaller ions are 8-coordinate, [Ln(H2O)8]3+. There is some evidence that the later lanthanides have more water molecules in the second coordination sphere. Complexation with monodentate ligands is generally weak because it is difficult to displace water molecules from the first coordination sphere. Stronger complexes are formed with chelating ligands because of the chelate effect, such as the tetra-anion derived from 1,4,7,10-tetraazacyclododecane-1,4,7,10-tetraacetic acid (DOTA).\nLn(II) and Ln(IV) compounds.\nThe most common divalent derivatives of the lanthanides are for Eu(II), which achieves a favorable f7 configuration. Divalent halide derivatives are known for all of the lanthanides. They are either conventional salts or are Ln(III) \"electride\"-like salts. The simple salts include YbI2, EuI2, and SmI2. The electride-like salts, described as Ln3+, 2I\u2212, e\u2212, include LaI2, CeI2 and GdI2. Many of the iodides form soluble complexes with ethers, e.g. TmI2(dimethoxyethane)3. Samarium(II) iodide is a useful reducing agent. Ln(II) complexes can be synthesized by transmetalation reactions. The normal range of oxidation states can be expanded via the use of sterically bulky cyclopentadienyl ligands, in this way many lanthanides can be isolated as Ln(II) compounds.\nCe(IV) in ceric ammonium nitrate is a useful oxidizing agent. The Ce(IV) is the exception owing to the tendency to form an unfilled f shell. Otherwise tetravalent lanthanides are rare. However, recently Tb(IV) and Pr(IV) complexes have been shown to exist.\nHydrides.\nLanthanide metals react exothermically with hydrogen to form LnH2, dihydrides. With the exception of Eu and Yb, which resemble the Ba and Ca hydrides (non-conducting, transparent salt-like compounds), they form black, pyrophoric, conducting compounds where the metal sub-lattice is face centred cubic and the H atoms occupy tetrahedral sites. Further hydrogenation produces a trihydride which is non-stoichiometric, non-conducting, more salt like. The formation of trihydride is associated with and increase in 8\u201310% volume and this is linked to greater localization of charge on the hydrogen atoms which become more anionic (H\u2212 hydride anion) in character.\nHalides.\nThe only tetrahalides known are the tetrafluorides of cerium, praseodymium, terbium, neodymium and dysprosium, the last two known only under matrix isolation conditions.\nAll of the lanthanides form trihalides with fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine. They are all high melting and predominantly ionic in nature. The fluorides are only slightly soluble in water and are not sensitive to air, and this contrasts with the other halides which are air sensitive, readily soluble in water and react at high temperature to form oxohalides.\nThe trihalides were important as pure metal can be prepared from them. In the gas phase the trihalides are planar or approximately planar, the lighter lanthanides have a lower % of dimers, the heavier lanthanides a higher proportion. The dimers have a similar structure to Al2Cl6.\nSome of the dihalides are conducting while the rest are insulators. The conducting forms can be considered as LnIII electride compounds where the electron is delocalised into a conduction band, Ln3+ (X\u2212)2(e\u2212). All of the diiodides have relatively short metal-metal separations. The CuTi2 structure of the lanthanum, cerium and praseodymium diiodides along with HP-NdI2 contain 44 nets of metal and iodine atoms with short metal-metal bonds (393-386 La-Pr). these compounds should be considered to be two-dimensional metals (two-dimensional in the same way that graphite is). The salt-like dihalides include those of Eu, Dy, Tm, and Yb. The formation of a relatively stable +2 oxidation state for Eu and Yb is usually explained by the stability (exchange energy) of half filled (f7) and fully filled f14. GdI2 possesses the layered MoS2 structure, is ferromagnetic and exhibits colossal magnetoresistance.\nThe sesquihalides Ln2X3 and the Ln7I12 compounds listed in the table contain metal clusters, discrete Ln6I12 clusters in Ln7I12 and condensed clusters forming chains in the sesquihalides. Scandium forms a similar cluster compound with chlorine, Sc7Cl12 Unlike many transition metal clusters these lanthanide clusters do not have strong metal-metal interactions and this is due to the low number of valence electrons involved, but instead are stabilised by the surrounding halogen atoms.\nLaI and TmI are the only known monohalides. LaI, prepared from the reaction of LaI3 and La metal, it has a NiAs type structure and can be formulated La3+ (I\u2212)(e\u2212)2. TmI is a true Tm(I) compound, however it is not isolated in a pure state.\nOxides and hydroxides.\nAll of the lanthanides form sesquioxides, Ln2O3. The lighter/larger lanthanides adopt a hexagonal 7-coordinate structure while the heavier/smaller ones adopt a cubic 6-coordinate \"C-M2O3\" structure. All of the sesquioxides are basic, and absorb water and carbon dioxide from air to form carbonates, hydroxides and hydroxycarbonates. They dissolve in acids to form salts.\nCerium forms a stoichiometric dioxide, CeO2, where cerium has an oxidation state of +4. CeO2 is basic and dissolves with difficulty in acid to form Ce4+ solutions, from which CeIV salts can be isolated, for example the hydrated nitrate Ce(NO3)4.5H2O. CeO2 is used as an oxidation catalyst in catalytic converters. Praseodymium and terbium form non-stoichiometric oxides containing LnIV, although more extreme reaction conditions can produce stoichiometric (or near stoichiometric) PrO2 and TbO2.\nEuropium and ytterbium form salt-like monoxides, EuO and YbO, which have a rock salt structure. EuO is ferromagnetic at low temperatures, and is a semiconductor with possible applications in spintronics. A mixed EuII/EuIII oxide Eu3O4 can be produced by reducing Eu2O3 in a stream of hydrogen. Neodymium and samarium also form monoxides, but these are shiny conducting solids, although the existence of samarium monoxide is considered dubious.\nAll of the lanthanides form hydroxides, Ln(OH)3. With the exception of lutetium hydroxide, which has a cubic structure, they have the hexagonal UCl3 structure. The hydroxides can be precipitated from solutions of LnIII. They can also be formed by the reaction of the sesquioxide, Ln2O3, with water, but although this reaction is thermodynamically favorable it is kinetically slow for the heavier members of the series. Fajans' rules indicate that the smaller Ln3+ ions will be more polarizing and their salts correspondingly less ionic. The hydroxides of the heavier lanthanides become less basic, for example Yb(OH)3 and Lu(OH)3 are still basic hydroxides but will dissolve in hot concentrated NaOH.\nChalcogenides (S, Se, Te).\nAll of the lanthanides form Ln2Q3 (Q= S, Se, Te). The sesquisulfides can be produced by reaction of the elements or (with the exception of Eu2S3) sulfidizing the oxide (Ln2O3) with H2S. The sesquisulfides, Ln2S3 generally lose sulfur when heated and can form a range of compositions between Ln2S3 and Ln3S4. The sesquisulfides are insulators but some of the Ln3S4 are metallic conductors (e.g. Ce3S4) formulated (Ln3+)3 (S2\u2212)4 (e\u2212), while others (e.g. Eu3S4 and Sm3S4) are semiconductors. Structurally the sesquisulfides adopt structures that vary according to the size of the Ln metal. The lighter and larger lanthanides favoring 7-coordinate metal atoms, the heaviest and smallest lanthanides (Yb and Lu) favoring 6 coordination and the rest structures with a mixture of 6 and 7 coordination. \nPolymorphism is common amongst the sesquisulfides. The colors of the sesquisulfides vary metal to metal and depend on the polymorphic form. The colors of the \u03b3-sesquisulfides are La2S3, white/yellow; Ce2S3, dark red; Pr2S3, green; Nd2S3, light green; Gd2S3, sand; Tb2S3, light yellow and Dy2S3, orange. The shade of \u03b3-Ce2S3 can be varied by doping with Na or Ca with hues ranging from dark red to yellow, and Ce2S3 based pigments are used commercially and are seen as low toxicity substitutes for cadmium based pigments.\nAll of the lanthanides form monochalcogenides, LnQ, (Q= S, Se, Te). The majority of the monochalcogenides are conducting, indicating a formulation LnIIIQ2\u2212(e-) where the electron is in conduction bands. The exceptions are SmQ, EuQ and YbQ which are semiconductors or insulators but exhibit a pressure induced transition to a conducting state.\nCompounds LnQ2 are known but these do not contain LnIV but are LnIII compounds containing polychalcogenide anions.\nOxysulfides Ln2O2S are well known, they all have the same structure with 7-coordinate Ln atoms, and 3 sulfur and 4 oxygen atoms as near neighbours.\nDoping these with other lanthanide elements produces phosphors. As an example, gadolinium oxysulfide, Gd2O2S doped with Tb3+ produces visible photons when irradiated with high energy X-rays and is used as a scintillator in flat panel detectors.\nWhen mischmetal, an alloy of lanthanide metals, is added to molten steel to remove oxygen and sulfur, stable oxysulfides are produced that form an immiscible solid.\nPnictides (group 15).\nAll of the lanthanides form a mononitride, LnN, with the rock salt structure. The mononitrides have attracted interest because of their unusual physical properties. SmN and EuN are reported as being \"half metals\". NdN, GdN, TbN and DyN are ferromagnetic, SmN is antiferromagnetic. Applications in the field of spintronics are being investigated.\nCeN is unusual as it is a metallic conductor, contrasting with the other nitrides also with the other cerium pnictides. A simple description is Ce4+N3\u2212 (e\u2013) but the interatomic distances are a better match for the trivalent state rather than for the tetravalent state. A number of different explanations have been offered.\nThe nitrides can be prepared by the reaction of lanthanum metals with nitrogen. Some nitride is produced along with the oxide, when lanthanum metals are ignited in air. Alternative methods of synthesis are a high temperature reaction of lanthanide metals with ammonia or the decomposition of lanthanide amides, Ln(NH2)3. Achieving pure stoichiometric compounds, and crystals with low defect density has proved difficult. The lanthanide nitrides are sensitive to air and hydrolyse producing ammonia.\nThe other pnictides phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and bismuth also react with the lanthanide metals to form monopnictides, LnQ, where Q = P, As, Sb or Bi. Additionally a range of other compounds can be produced with varying stoichiometries, such as LnP2, LnP5, LnP7, Ln3As, Ln5As3 and LnAs2.\nCarbides.\nCarbides of varying stoichiometries are known for the lanthanides. Non-stoichiometry is common. All of the lanthanides form LnC2 and Ln2C3 which both contain C2 units. \nThe dicarbides with exception of EuC2, are metallic conductors with the calcium carbide structure and can be formulated as Ln3+C22\u2212(e\u2013). The C-C bond length is longer than that in CaC2, which contains the C22\u2212 anion, indicating that the antibonding orbitals of the C22\u2212 anion are involved in the conduction band. These dicarbides hydrolyse to form hydrogen and a mixture of hydrocarbons. EuC2 and to a lesser extent YbC2 hydrolyse differently producing a higher percentage of acetylene (ethyne). \nThe sesquicarbides, Ln2C3 can be formulated as Ln4(C2)3. These compounds adopt the Pu2C3 structure which has been described as having C22\u2212 anions in bisphenoid holes formed by eight near Ln neighbours. The C-C bond is less elongated than in the dicarbides, with the exception of Ce2C3, indicating that the delocalized metal electrons do not fill C-C antibonding orbitals. \nOther carbon rich stoichiometries are known for some lanthanides. Ln3C4 (Ho-Lu) containing C, C2 and C3 units; Ln4C7 (Ho-Lu) contain C atoms and C3 units and Ln4C5 (Gd-Ho) containing C and C2 units.\nMetal rich carbides contain interstitial C atoms and no C2 or C3 units. These are Ln4C3 (Tb and Lu); Ln2C (Dy, Ho, Tm) and Ln3C (Sm-Lu). These hydrolyze to methane.\nBorides.\nAll of the lanthanides form a number of borides. The \"higher\" borides (LnBx where x &gt; 12) are insulators/semiconductors whereas the lower borides are typically conducting. The lower borides have stoichiometries of LnB2, LnB4, LnB6 and LnB12. Applications in the field of spintronics are being investigated. The range of borides formed by the lanthanides can be compared to those formed by the transition metals. The boron rich borides are typical of the lanthanides (and groups 1\u20133) whereas for the transition metals tend to form metal rich, \"lower\" borides. The lanthanide borides are typically grouped together with the group 3 metals with which they share many similarities of reactivity, stoichiometry and structure. Collectively these are then termed the rare earth borides.\nMany methods of producing lanthanide borides have been used, amongst them are direct reaction of the elements; the reduction of Ln2O3 with boron; reduction of boron oxide, B2O3, and Ln2O3 together with carbon; reduction of metal oxide with boron carbide, B4C. Producing high purity samples has proved to be difficult. Single crystals of the higher borides have been grown in a low melting metal (e.g. Sn, Cu, Al).\nDiborides, LnB2, have been reported for Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb and Lu. All have the same, AlB2, structure containing a graphitic layer of boron atoms. Low temperature ferromagnetic transitions for Tb, Dy, Ho and Er. TmB2 is ferromagnetic at 7.2 K.\nTetraborides, LnB4 have been reported for all of the lanthanides except EuB4, all have the same UB4 structure. The structure has a boron sub-lattice consists of chains of octahedral B6 clusters linked by boron atoms. The unit cell decreases in size successively from LaB4 to LuB4. The tetraborides of the lighter lanthanides melt with decomposition to LnB6. Attempts to make EuB4 have failed. The LnB4 are good conductors and typically antiferromagnetic.\nHexaborides, LnB6 have been reported for all of the lanthanides. They all have the CaB6 structure, containing B6 clusters. They are non-stoichiometric due to cation defects. The hexaborides of the lighter lanthanides (La \u2013 Sm) melt without decomposition, EuB6 decomposes to boron and metal and the heavier lanthanides decompose to LnB4 with exception of YbB6 which decomposes forming YbB12. The stability has in part been correlated to differences in volatility between the lanthanide metals. In EuB6 and YbB6 the metals have an oxidation state of +2 whereas in the rest of the lanthanide hexaborides it is +3. This rationalises the differences in conductivity, the extra electrons in the LnIII hexaborides entering conduction bands. EuB6 is a semiconductor and the rest are good conductors. LaB6 and CeB6 are thermionic emitters, used, for example, in scanning electron microscopes.\nDodecaborides, LnB12, are formed by the heavier smaller lanthanides, but not by the lighter larger metals, La \u2013 Eu. With the exception YbB12 (where Yb takes an intermediate valence and is a Kondo insulator), the dodecaborides are all metallic compounds. They all have the UB12 structure containing a 3 dimensional framework of cubooctahedral B12 clusters.\nThe higher boride LnB66 is known for all lanthanide metals. The composition is approximate as the compounds are non-stoichiometric. They all have similar complex structure with over 1600 atoms in the unit cell. The boron cubic sub lattice contains super icosahedra made up of a central B12 icosahedra surrounded by 12 others, B12(B12)12. Other complex higher borides LnB50 (Tb, Dy, Ho Er Tm Lu) and LnB25 are known (Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er) and these contain boron icosahedra in the boron framework.\nOrganometallic compounds.\nLanthanide-carbon \u03c3 bonds are well known; however as the 4f electrons have a low probability of existing at the outer region of the atom there is little effective orbital overlap, resulting in bonds with significant ionic character. As such organo-lanthanide compounds exhibit carbanion-like behavior, unlike the behavior in transition metal organometallic compounds. Because of their large size, lanthanides tend to form more stable organometallic derivatives with bulky ligands to give compounds such as Ln[CH(SiMe3)3]. Analogues of uranocene are derived from dilithiocyclooctatetraene, Li2C8H8. Organic lanthanide(II) compounds are also known, such as Cp*2Eu.\nPhysical properties.\nMagnetic and spectroscopic.\nAll the trivalent lanthanide ions, except lanthanum and lutetium, have unpaired f electrons. (Ligand-to-metal charge transfer can nonetheless produce a nonzero f-occupancy even in La(III) compounds.) However, the magnetic moments deviate considerably from the spin-only values because of strong spin\u2013orbit coupling. The maximum number of unpaired electrons is 7, in Gd3+, with a magnetic moment of 7.94 B.M., but the largest magnetic moments, at 10.4\u201310.7 B.M., are exhibited by Dy3+ and Ho3+. However, in Gd3+ all the electrons have parallel spin and this property is important for the use of gadolinium complexes as contrast reagent in MRI scans.\nCrystal field splitting is rather small for the lanthanide ions and is less important than spin\u2013orbit coupling in regard to energy levels. Transitions of electrons between f orbitals are forbidden by the Laporte rule. Furthermore, because of the \"buried\" nature of the f orbitals, coupling with molecular vibrations is weak. Consequently, the spectra of lanthanide ions are rather weak and the absorption bands are similarly narrow. Glass containing holmium oxide and holmium oxide solutions (usually in perchloric acid) have sharp optical absorption peaks in the spectral range 200\u2013900\u00a0nm and can be used as a wavelength calibration standard for optical spectrophotometers, and are available commercially.\nAs f-f transitions are Laporte-forbidden, once an electron has been excited, decay to the ground state will be slow. This makes them suitable for use in lasers as it makes the population inversion easy to achieve. The is one that is widely used. Europium-doped yttrium vanadate was the first red phosphor to enable the development of color television screens. Lanthanide ions have notable luminescent properties due to their unique 4f orbitals. Laporte forbidden f-f transitions can be activated by excitation of a bound \"antenna\" ligand. This leads to sharp emission bands throughout the visible, NIR, and IR and relatively long luminescence lifetimes.\nOccurrence.\nSamarskite and similar minerals contain lanthanides in association with the elements such as tantalum, niobium, hafnium, zirconium, vanadium, and titanium, from group 4 and group 5, often in similar oxidation states. Monazite is a phosphate of numerous group 3 + lanthanide + actinide metals and mined especially for the thorium content and specific rare earths, especially lanthanum, yttrium and cerium. Cerium and lanthanum as well as other members of the rare-earth series are often produced as a metal called mischmetal containing a variable mixture of these elements with cerium and lanthanum predominating; it has direct uses such as lighter flints and other spark sources which do not require extensive purification of one of these metals. \nThere are also lanthanide-bearing minerals based on group-2 elements, such as yttrocalcite, yttrocerite and yttrofluorite, which vary in content of yttrium, cerium, lanthanum and others. Other lanthanide-bearing minerals include bastn\u00e4site, florencite, chernovite, perovskite, xenotime, cerite, gadolinite, lanthanite, fergusonite, polycrase, blomstrandine, h\u00e5leniusite, miserite, loparite, lepersonnite, euxenite, all of which have a range of relative element concentration and may be denoted by a predominating one, as in monazite-(Ce). Group 3 elements do not occur as native-element minerals in the fashion of gold, silver, tantalum and many others on Earth, but may occur in lunar soil. Very rare halides of cerium, lanthanum, and presumably other lanthanides, feldspars and garnets are also known to exist.\nThe lanthanide contraction is responsible for the great geochemical divide that splits the lanthanides into light and heavy-lanthanide enriched minerals, the latter being almost inevitably associated with and dominated by yttrium. This divide is reflected in the first two \"rare earths\" that were discovered: yttria (1794) and ceria (1803). The geochemical divide has put more of the light lanthanides in the Earth's crust, but more of the heavy members in the Earth's mantle. The result is that although large rich ore-bodies are found that are enriched in the light lanthanides, correspondingly large ore-bodies for the heavy members are few. The principal ores are monazite and bastn\u00e4site. Monazite sands usually contain all the lanthanide elements, but the heavier elements are lacking in bastn\u00e4site. The lanthanides obey the Oddo\u2013Harkins rule \u2013 odd-numbered elements are less abundant than their even-numbered neighbors.\nThree of the lanthanide elements have radioactive isotopes with long half-lives (138La, 147Sm and 176Lu) that can be used to date minerals and rocks from Earth, the Moon and meteorites. Promethium is effectively a man-made element, as all its isotopes are radioactive with half-lives shorter than 20\u00a0years.\nApplications.\nIndustrial.\nLanthanide elements and their compounds have many uses but the quantities consumed are relatively small in comparison to other elements. About 15000 ton/year of the lanthanides are consumed as catalysts and in the production of glasses. This 15000 tons corresponds to about 85% of the lanthanide production. From the perspective of value, however, applications in phosphors and magnets are more important.\nThe devices lanthanide elements are used in include superconductors, samarium-cobalt and neodymium-iron-boron high-flux rare-earth magnets, magnesium alloys, electronic polishers, refining catalysts and hybrid car components (primarily batteries and magnets). Lanthanide ions are used as the active ions in luminescent materials used in optoelectronics applications, most notably the laser. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers are significant devices in optical-fiber communication systems. Phosphors with lanthanide dopants are also widely used in cathode-ray tube technology such as television sets. The earliest color television CRTs had a poor-quality red; europium as a phosphor dopant made good red phosphors possible. Yttrium iron garnet (YIG) spheres can act as tunable microwave resonators. \nLanthanide oxides are mixed with tungsten to improve their high temperature properties for TIG welding, replacing thorium, which was mildly hazardous to work with. Many defense-related products also use lanthanide elements such as night-vision goggles and rangefinders. The SPY-1 radar used in some Aegis equipped warships, and the hybrid propulsion system of s all use rare earth magnets in critical capacities.\nThe price for lanthanum oxide used in fluid catalytic cracking has risen from $5 per kilogram in early 2010 to $140 per kilogram in June 2011.\nMost lanthanides are widely used in lasers, and as (co-)dopants in doped-fiber optical amplifiers; for example, in Er-doped fiber amplifiers, which are used as repeaters in the terrestrial and submarine fiber-optic transmission links that carry internet traffic. These elements deflect ultraviolet and infrared radiation and are commonly used in the production of sunglass lenses. Other applications are summarized in the following table:\nThe complex Gd(DOTA) is used in magnetic resonance imaging.\nMixtures containing all of the lanthanides operating as a single-atom catalysts have been proposed for the electroreduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) to carbon monoxide (CO) with a faradaic efficiency greater than 90%.\nRadiation Resistance.\nTitanium oxides of the lanthanides, Ln2Ti2O7, have potential in the storage of nuclear waste. These compounds can incorporate radioactive actinides and yet resist radiation damage. This resistance depends on the critical amorphization temperature of each lanthanide. The critical amorphization temperature decreases with decreasing lanthanide ionic radius. Consequently, lanthanides of a smaller ionic radius possess a higher radiation resistance than larger lanthanides.\nLife science.\nLanthanide complexes can be used for optical imaging. Applications are limited by the lability of the complexes. \nSome applications depend on the unique luminescence properties of lanthanide chelates or cryptates. These are well-suited for this application due to their large Stokes shifts and extremely long emission lifetimes (from microseconds to milliseconds) compared to more traditional fluorophores (e.g., fluorescein, allophycocyanin, phycoerythrin, and rhodamine). \nThe biological fluids or serum commonly used in these research applications contain many compounds and proteins which are naturally fluorescent. Therefore, the use of conventional, steady-state fluorescence measurement presents serious limitations in assay sensitivity. Long-lived fluorophores, such as lanthanides, combined with time-resolved detection (a delay between excitation and emission detection) minimizes prompt fluorescence interference.\nTime-resolved fluorometry (TRF) combined with F\u00f6rster resonance energy transfer (FRET) offers a powerful tool for drug discovery researchers: Time-Resolved F\u00f6rster Resonance Energy Transfer or TR-FRET. TR-FRET combines the low background aspect of TRF with the homogeneous assay format of FRET. The resulting assay provides an increase in flexibility, reliability and sensitivity in addition to higher throughput and fewer false positive/false negative results.\nThis method involves two fluorophores: a donor and an acceptor. Excitation of the donor fluorophore (in this case, the lanthanide ion complex) by an energy source (e.g. flash lamp or laser) produces an energy transfer to the acceptor fluorophore if they are within a given proximity to each other (known as the F\u00f6rster's radius). The acceptor fluorophore in turn emits light at its characteristic wavelength.\nThe two most commonly used lanthanides in life science assays are shown below along with their corresponding acceptor dye as well as their excitation and emission wavelengths and resultant Stokes shift (separation of excitation and emission wavelengths).\nPossible medical uses.\nCurrently there is research showing that lanthanide elements can be used as anticancer agents. The main role of the lanthanides in these studies is to inhibit proliferation of the cancer cells. Specifically cerium and lanthanum have been studied for their role as anti-cancer agents.\nOne of the specific elements from the lanthanide group that has been tested and used is cerium (Ce). There have been studies that use a protein-cerium complex to observe the effect of cerium on the cancer cells. The hope was to inhibit cell proliferation and promote cytotoxicity. Transferrin receptors in cancer cells, such as those in breast cancer cells and epithelial cervical cells, promote the cell proliferation and malignancy of the cancer. Transferrin is a protein used to transport iron into the cells and is needed to aid the cancer cells in DNA replication. Transferrin acts as a growth factor for the cancerous cells and is dependent on iron. Cancer cells have much higher levels of transferrin receptors than normal cells and are very dependent on iron for their proliferation.\nIn the field of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), compounds containing gadolinium are utilized extensively.\nThe photobiological characteristics, anticancer, anti-leukemia, and anti-HIV activities of the lanthanides with coumarin and its related compounds are demonstrated by the biological activities of the complex.\nCerium has shown results as an anti-cancer agent due to its similarities in structure and biochemistry to iron. Cerium may bind in the place of iron on to the transferrin and then be brought into the cancer cells by transferrin-receptor mediated endocytosis. The cerium binding to the transferrin in place of the iron inhibits the transferrin activity in the cell. This creates a toxic environment for the cancer cells and causes a decrease in cell growth. This is the proposed mechanism for cerium's effect on cancer cells, though the real mechanism may be more complex in how cerium inhibits cancer cell proliferation. Specifically in HeLa cancer cells studied in vitro, cell viability was decreased after 48 to 72 hours of cerium treatments. Cells treated with just cerium had decreases in cell viability, but cells treated with both cerium and transferrin had more significant inhibition for cellular activity.\nAnother specific element that has been tested and used as an anti-cancer agent is lanthanum, more specifically lanthanum chloride (LaCl3). The lanthanum ion is used to affect the levels of let-7a and microRNAs miR-34a in a cell throughout the cell cycle. When the lanthanum ion was introduced to the cell in vivo or in vitro, it inhibited the rapid growth and induced apoptosis of the cancer cells (specifically cervical cancer cells). This effect was caused by the regulation of the let-7a and microRNAs by the lanthanum ions. The mechanism for this effect is still unclear but it is possible that the lanthanum is acting in a similar way as the cerium and binding to a ligand necessary for cancer cell proliferation.\nIn the field of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), compounds containing gadolinium are utilized extensively.\nBiological effects.\nDue to their sparse distribution in the earth's crust and low aqueous solubility, the lanthanides have a low availability in the biosphere, and for a long time were not known to naturally form part of any biological molecules. In 2007 a novel methanol dehydrogenase that strictly uses lanthanides as enzymatic cofactors was discovered in a bacterium from the phylum Verrucomicrobiota, \"Methylacidiphilum fumariolicum\". This bacterium was found to survive only if there are lanthanides present in the environment. Compared to most other nondietary elements, non-radioactive lanthanides are classified as having low toxicity. The same nutritional requirement has also been observed in \"Methylorubrum extorquens\" and \"Methylobacterium radiotolerans\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18309", "revid": "50324240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18309", "title": "Lucifer", "text": "Mythological and religious figure\nLucifer is believed to be a fallen angel and the Devil in Christian theology. Lucifer is associated with the sin of pride and believed to have attempted a usurpation of God, whereafter being banished to hell.\nThe concept of a fallen angel attempting to overthrow the highest deity parallels Attar's attempt to overthrow Ba'al in Canaanite mythology; Attar is thrown into the underworld as a result of his failure. The story is alluded to in the Book of Isaiah and transferred to Christian beliefs, and is also used in the Vulgate (the late-4th-century Latin translation of the Bible). \nAs Lucifer is the antagonist of God in Christian beliefs, some sects of Satanism began to venerate him as a bringer of freedom. Other religious communities, such as the Gnostics and Freemasons, have been accused of worshipping Lucifer as their deity.\nLucifer frequently appears in popular media to this day.\nRoman folklore and etymology.\nIn Roman folklore, Lucifer (\"light-bringer\" in Latin) was the name of the planet Venus, though it was often personified as a male figure bearing a torch. The Greek name for this planet was variously Phosphoros (also meaning \"light-bringer\") or Heosphoros/Eosphoros (meaning \"dawn-bringer\"). Lucifer was said to be \"the fabled son of Aurora and Cephalus, and father of Ceyx\". He was often presented in poetry as heralding the dawn. The Latin word corresponding to Greek is . It is used in its astronomical sense both in prose and poetry. Poets sometimes personify the star, placing it in a mythological context. As the Latin name for the morning appearances of the planet Venus, it corresponds not only to the Greek names \"Phosphoros\" and \"Eosphoros\", but also to the Egyptian name \"Tioumoutiri\", and the Old English term \"Morgensteorra\" (morning star). \nA similar name used by the Roman poet Catullus for the planet in its evening aspect is \"Noctifer\" (Night-Bringer). This name respectively corresponded to not only the Greek name \"Hesperus\" \u1f1d\u03c3\u03c0\u03b5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (star of the evening), but also the Egyptian name \"Ouaiti\", and the Old English term \"\u00c6fensteorra\" (evening star). \nLatin L\u016bcifer \u201clight-bringer, morning star\u201d (lux + ferre); used in the Vulgate for Isaiah 14:12 (Hebrew ; translates to \"Shining One, Son of the morning/dawn\"), later applied to Satan in Christian tradition. The translation of the Hebrew word means \"Shining One\". \nThe 2nd-century Roman mythographer Hyginus said of the planet:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The fourth star is that of Venus, Luciferus by name. Some say it is Juno's. In many tales it is recorded that it is called Hesperus, too. It seems to be the largest of all stars. Some have said it represents the son of Aurora and Cephalus, who surpassed many in beauty, so that he even vied with Venus, and, as Eratosthenes says, for this reason it is called the star of Venus. It is visible both at dawn and sunset, and so properly has been called both Luciferus and Hesperus.\nThe Latin poet Ovid, in his 1st-century epic , describes Lucifer as ordering the heavens:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Aurora, watchful in the reddening dawn, threw wide her crimson doors and rose-filled halls; the Stellae took flight, in marshaled order set by Lucifer who left his station last.\nOvid, speaking of Phosphorus and Hesperus (the Evening Star, the evening appearance of the planet Venus) as identical, makes him the father of Daedalion. Ovid also makes him the father of Ceyx, while the Latin grammarian Servius makes him the father of the Hesperides or of Hesperis.\nIn the classical Roman period, Lucifer was not typically regarded as a deity and had few, if any, myths, though the planet was associated with various deities and often poetically personified. Cicero stated that \"You say that Sol and Luna are deities, and the Greeks identify the former with Apollo and the latter with Diana. But if Luna is a goddess, then Lucifer (the Morning-Star) also and the rest of the Wandering Stars () will have to be counted gods; and if so, then the Fixed Stars () as well.\"\nPlanet Venus, Sumerian folklore, and fall from heaven motif.\nThe motif of a heavenly being striving for the highest seat of heaven only to be cast down to the underworld has its origins in the motions of the planet Venus, known as the morning star.\nA similar theme is present in the Babylonian myth of Etana. The \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe fall from heaven motif also has a parallel in Canaanite mythology. In ancient Canaanite religion, the morning star is personified as the god, who attempted to occupy the throne of Ba'al and, finding he was unable to do so, descended and ruled the underworld. The original myth may have been about the lesser god Helel trying to dethrone the Canaanite high god El, who lived on a mountain to the north. Hermann Gunkel's reconstruction of the myth told of a mighty warrior called H\u00ealal, whose ambition was to ascend higher than all the other stellar divinities, but who had to descend to the depths; it thus portrayed as a battle the process by which the bright morning star fails to reach the highest point in the sky before being faded out by the rising sun.\nThis Jewish tradition has echoes also in Jewish pseudepigrapha such as 2 Enoch and the Life of Adam and Eve. The Life of Adam and Eve, in turn, shaped the idea of Iblis in the Quran.\nChristianity.\nIn the Bible.\nIn the Book of Isaiah, chapter 14, the king of Babylon is condemned in a prophetic vision by the prophet Isaiah and is called (, Hebrew for \"shining one, son of the morning\"), who is addressed as (). The title refers to the planet Venus as the morning star, and that is how the Hebrew word is usually interpreted. The Hebrew word transliterated as or occurs only once in the Hebrew Bible. The Septuagint renders in Greek as (), \"bringer of dawn\", the Ancient Greek name for the morning star. Similarly the Vulgate renders in Latin as , the name in that language for the morning star. According to the King James Bible-based Strong's Concordance, the original Hebrew word means \"shining one, light-bearer\", and the English translation given in the King James text is the Latin name for the planet Venus, \"Lucifer\", as it was already in the Wycliffe Bible.\nHowever, the translation of as \"Lucifer\" has been abandoned in modern English translations of Isaiah 14:12. Present-day translations render as \"morning star\" (New International Version, New Century Version, New American Standard Bible, Good News Translation, Holman Christian Standard Bible, Contemporary English Version, Common English Bible, Complete Jewish Bible), \"daystar\" (New Jerusalem Bible, The Message), \"Day Star\" (New Revised Standard Version, English Standard Version), \"shining one\" (New Life Version, New World Translation, JPS Tanakh), or \"shining star\" (New Living Translation).\nIn a modern translation from the original Hebrew, the passage in which the phrase \"Lucifer\" or \"morning star\" occurs begins with the statement: \"On the day the Lord gives you relief from your suffering and turmoil and from the harsh labour forced on you, you will take up this taunt against the king of Babylon: How the oppressor has come to an end! How his fury has ended!\" After describing the death of the king, the taunt continues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How you have fallen from heaven, \"morning star\", son of the dawn! You have been cast down to the earth, you who once laid low the nations! You said in your heart, \"I will ascend to the heavens; I will raise my throne above the stars of God; I will sit enthroned on the mount of assembly, on the utmost heights of Mount Zaphon. I will ascend above the tops of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High.\" But you are brought down to the realm of the dead, to the depths of the pit. Those who see you stare at you, they ponder your fate: \"Is this the man who shook the earth and made kingdoms tremble, the man who made the world a wilderness, who overthrew its cities and would not let his captives go home?\"\nFor the unnamed \"king of Babylon\", a wide range of identifications have been proposed. They include a Babylonian ruler of the prophet Isaiah's own time, the later Nebuchadnezzar II, under whom the Babylonian captivity of the Jews began, or Nabonidus, and the Assyrian kings Tiglath-Pileser, Sargon II and Sennacherib. Verse 20 says that this king of Babylon will not be \"joined with them [all the kings of the nations] in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy people; the seed of evil-doers shall not be named for ever\", but rather be cast out of the grave, while \"All the kings of the nations, all of them, sleep in glory, every one in his own house.\" Herbert Wolf held that the \"king of Babylon\" was not a specific ruler but a generic representation of the whole line of rulers.\nIsaiah 14:12 became a source for the popular conception of the fallen angel motif. Rabbinic Judaism has rejected any belief in rebel or fallen angels. In the 11th century, the \"Pirkei De-Rabbi Eliezer\" illustrates the origin of the \"fallen angel myth\" by giving two accounts, one relates to the angel in the Garden of Eden who seduces Eve, and the other relates to the angels, the who cohabit with the daughters of man (Genesis 6:1\u20134). An association of Isaiah 14:12\u201318 with a personification of evil, called the devil, developed outside of mainstream Rabbinic Judaism in pseudepigrapha, and later in Christian writings, particularly with the apocalypses.\nThe metaphor of the morning star that Isaiah 14:12 applied to a king of Babylon gave rise to the general use of the Latin word for \"morning star\", capitalized, as the original name of the devil before his fall from grace, linking Isaiah 14:12 with Luke 10 (\"I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven\") and interpreting the passage in Isaiah as an allegory of Satan's fall from heaven.\nConsidering pride as a major sin peaking in self-deification, Lucifer () became the template for the devil. As a result, Lucifer was identified with the devil in Christianity and in Christian popular literature, as in Dante Alighieri's \"Inferno\", Joost van den Vondel's \"Lucifer\", and John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\". Early medieval Christianity fairly distinguished between Lucifer and Satan. While Lucifer, as the devil, is fixated in hell, Satan executes the desires of Lucifer as his vassal.\nInterpretations.\nAquila of Sinope derives the word , the Hebrew name for the morning star, from the verb (to lament). This derivation was adopted as a proper name for an angel who laments the loss of his former beauty. The Christian church fathers\u200a\u2013\u200afor example Jerome, in his Vulgate\u200a\u2013\u200atranslated this as Lucifer.\nSome Christian writers have applied the name \"Lucifer\" as used in the Book of Isaiah, and the motif of a heavenly being cast down to the earth, to the devil. Sigve K. Tonstad argues that the New Testament War in Heaven theme of Revelation 12, in which the dragon \"who is called the devil and Satan [...] was thrown down to the earth\", was derived from the passage about the Babylonian king in Isaiah 14. Origen (184/185\u2013253/254) interpreted such Old Testament passages as being about manifestations of the devil. Origen was not the first to interpret the Isaiah 14 passage as referring to the devil: he was preceded by at least Tertullian (c.\u2009160\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009225), who in his (book 5, chapters 11 and 17) twice presents as spoken by the devil the words of Isaiah 14:14: \"I will ascend above the tops of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High\". Though Tertullian was a speaker of the language in which the word was created, \"Lucifer\" is not among the numerous names and phrases he used to describe the devil. Even at the time of Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430), a contemporary of the composition of the Vulgate, \"Lucifer\" had not yet become a common name for the devil.\nAugustine's work (5th century) became the major opinion of Western demonology including in the Catholic Church. For Augustine, the rebellion of the Devil was the first and final cause of evil. By this he rejected some earlier teachings about Satan having fallen when the world was already created. Further, Augustine rejects the idea that envy could have been the first sin (as some early Christians believed, evident from sources like the \"Cave of Treasures\" in which Satan has fallen because he envies humans and refused to prostrate himself before Adam), since pride (\"loving yourself more than others and God\") is required to be envious (\"hatred for the happiness of others\"). He argues that evil came first into existence by the free will of Satan. His attempt to take God's throne is not an assault on the gates of heaven, but a turn to solipsism in which the Devil becomes God in his world. When the king of Babylon uttered his phrase in Isaiah, he was speaking through the sprite of Lucifer, the head of devils. He concluded that everyone who falls away from God are within the body of Lucifer, and is a devil.\nAdherents of the King James Only movement and others who hold that Isaiah 14:12 does indeed refer to the Devil have decried the modern translations. An opposing view attributes to Origen the first identification of the \"Lucifer\" of Isaiah 14:12 with the Devil and to Tertullian and Augustine of Hippo the spread of the story of Lucifer as fallen through pride, envy of God and jealousy of humans.\nThe 1409 Lollard manuscript titled \"Lanterne of Light\" associated Lucifer with the deadly sin of pride.\nProtestant theologian John Calvin rejected the identification of Lucifer with Satan or the Devil. He said: \"The exposition of this passage, which some have given, as if it referred to Satan, has arisen from ignorance: for the context plainly shows these statements must be understood in reference to the king of the Babylonians.\" Martin Luther also considered it a gross error to refer this verse to the Devil.\nCounter-Reformation writers, like Albertanus of Brescia, classified the seven deadly sins each to a specific Biblical demon. He, as well as Peter Binsfield, assigned Lucifer to the sin of pride.\nGnosticism.\nSince Lucifer's sin mainly consists of self-deification, some Gnostic sects identified Lucifer with the creator deity in the Old Testament. In the Bogomil and Cathar text \"Gospel of the Secret Supper\", Lucifer is a glorified angel but fell from heaven to establish his own kingdom and became the Demiurge who created the material world and trapped souls from heaven inside matter. Jesus descended to earth to free the captured souls. In contrast to mainstream Christianity, the cross was denounced as a symbol of Lucifer and his instrument in an attempt to kill Jesus.\nLatter Day Saint movement.\nLucifer is regarded within the Latter Day Saint movement as the pre-mortal name of the Devil. Latter-day Saint theology teaches that in a heavenly council, Lucifer rebelled against the plan of God the Father and was subsequently cast out. The Doctrine and Covenants reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him\u2014he was Lucifer, a son of the morning. And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning! And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord commanded us that we should write the vision; for we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his Christ\u2014Wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them round about.\u2014\u200a\nAfter becoming Satan by his fall, Lucifer \"goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the souls of men.\" Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints consider Isaiah 14:12 to be referring to both the king of the Babylonians and the Devil.\nOther occurrences.\nArabian legends.\nAccording to Arabian legend the star Suhail (Canopus) was cast down from a his original place to a lower place in heaven; a story parallel to that of Lucifer. As recorded by the companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad Ibn Abbas, Suhail has once been the intermediary between the authority of command and the stars which had the position of soldiers. From that place he become the originator of rebellion and was eventually degraded and cast down to the southern sky.\nThe notion that the stars are soldiers may originate from Persian beliefs, but also appear in the Ethopian Book of Enoch: \"And the stars which roll over the fire are they which have been transgressed the commandment of the Lord in the beginning of their rising, because they did not come forth at their appointed time.\"\nAnother legend states that Suhail has once been a Yemenite tithe-collector, but transformed into a star as means of punishment for his injust dealings. The idea that people turn into stars as a form of punishment is common in Arabian legend. The planet Venus was, according to Arabian legend, once a beautiful woman who has been transformed into a star as means of punishment when she seduced two angels.\nSatanism.\nLuciferianism is a belief structure that venerates the fundamental traits that are attributed to Lucifer. The custom usually reveres Lucifer not as the Devil, but as a savior, a guardian or instructing spirit or even the true god as opposed to Jehovah.\nIn LaVeyan Satanism, Lucifer is described by \"The Satanic Bible\" as one of the four crown princes of hell, particularly that of the East, the \"lord of the air\", and is called the bringer of light, the morning star, intellectualism, and enlightenment.\nAnthroposophy.\nRudolf Steiner's writings, which formed the basis for Anthroposophy, characterised Lucifer as a spiritual opposite to Ahriman, with Christ between the two forces, mediating a balanced path for humanity. Lucifer represents an intellectual, imaginative, delusional, otherworldly force which might be associated with visions, subjectivity, psychosis and fantasy. He associated Lucifer with the religious/philosophical cultures of Egypt, Rome and Greece. Steiner believed that Lucifer, as a supersensible Being, had incarnated in China about 3000 years before the birth of Christ.\nFreemasonry.\nL\u00e9o Taxil (1854\u20131907) claimed that Freemasonry is associated with worshipping Lucifer. In what is known as the Taxil hoax, he alleged that leading Freemason Albert Pike had addressed \"The 23 Supreme Confederated Councils of the World\" (an invention of Taxil), instructing them that Lucifer was God, and was in opposition to the evil god Adonai. Taxil promoted a book by Diana Vaughan (actually written by Taxil, as he later confessed publicly) that purported to reveal a highly secret ruling body called the Palladium, which controlled the organization and had a satanic agenda. As described by \"Freemasonry Disclosed\" in 1897:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With frightening cynicism, the miserable person we shall not name here [Taxil] declared before an assembly especially convened for him that for twelve years he had prepared and carried out to the end the most sacrilegious of hoaxes. We have always been careful to publish special articles concerning Palladism and Diana Vaughan. We are now giving in this issue a complete list of these articles, which can now be considered as not having existed.\nSupporters of Freemasonry assert that, when Albert Pike and other Masonic scholars spoke about the \"Luciferian path,\" or the \"energies of Lucifer,\" they were referring to the Morning Star, the light bearer, the search for light; the very antithesis of dark. Pike says in Morals and Dogma, \"Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who bears the Light, and with its splendors intolerable blinds feeble, sensual, or selfish Souls? Doubt it not!\" Much has been made of this quote.\nTaxil's work and Pike's address continue to be quoted by anti-masonic groups.\nIn \"Devil-Worship in France\", Arthur Edward Waite compared Taxil's work to today's tabloid journalism, replete with logical and factual inconsistencies.\nCharles Godfrey Leland.\nIn a collection of folklore and magical practices supposedly collected in Italy by Charles Godfrey Leland and published in his \"Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches\", the figure of Lucifer is featured prominently as both the brother and consort of the goddess Diana, and father of Aradia, at the center of an alleged Italian witch-cult. In Leland's mythology, Diana pursued her brother Lucifer across the sky as a cat pursues a mouse. According to Leland, after dividing herself into light and darkness:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere, the motions of Diana and Lucifer once again mirror the celestial motions of the moon and Venus, respectively. Though Leland's Lucifer is based on the classical personification of the planet Venus, he also incorporates elements from Christian tradition, as in the following passage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the several modern Wiccan traditions based in part on Leland's work, the figure of Lucifer is usually either omitted or replaced as Diana's consort with either the Etruscan god Tagni, or Dianus (Janus, following the work of folklorist James Frazer in \"The Golden Bough\").\nModern popular culture.\nIn modern popular culture, Lucifer is often depicted as a charismatic, complex, and sometimes sympathetic figure rather than a purely evil being. He is frequently portrayed as a fallen angel with a rebellious streak, and may be intelligent, witty, and even morally conflicted.\nIn \"Supernatural\" Lucifer is the main antagonist of the fifth season. The conflict between the good and evil angels is portrayed as a conflict between brothers. Despite being the villain in the story, he is held in higher regards than the antagonistic deities, as Lucifer defeats the pagan gods alone, in one episode. His background story further adds to his moral ambiguity. His evil motivations are said to stem from his love to God: When God shows love for humanity and orders the angels to bow before them, Lucifer refuses because he could only love God. His depictions are inspired by the Islamic traditions about Iblis, and Satanael as a son of God in Bogomilism.\nNotable examples include the television series \"Lucifer\" (2016\u20132021), where he is a suave nightclub owner who rebelled against his lord-father and abandoned the role as Hell's warden, and \"The Sandman\" comics, which present him as a refined ruler of hell seeking independence, both stemming from DC Comics' interpretation of the religious figure. These portrayals emphasize his free will, disdain for authority, and struggle with his identity, often blending elements of myth, theology, and contemporary storytelling.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18310", "revid": "43805798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18310", "title": "Lambda phage", "text": "Bacteriophage that infects Escherichia coli\nLambda phage (coliphage \u03bb, scientific name Lambdavirus lambda) is a bacterial virus, or bacteriophage, that infects the bacterial species \"Escherichia coli\" (\"E. coli\"). It was discovered by Esther Lederberg in 1950. The wild type of this virus has a temperate life cycle that allows it to either reside within the genome of its host through lysogeny or enter into a lytic phase, during which it kills and lyses the cell to produce offspring. Lambda strains, mutated at specific sites, are unable to lysogenize cells; instead, they grow and enter the lytic cycle after superinfecting an already lysogenized cell.\nThe phage particle consists of a head (also known as a capsid), a tail, and tail fibers (see image of virus below). The head contains the phage's double-strand linear DNA genome. During infections, the phage particle recognizes and binds to its host, \"E. coli\", causing DNA in the head of the phage to be ejected through the tail into the cytoplasm of the bacterial cell. Usually, a \"lytic cycle\" ensues, where the lambda DNA is replicated and new phage particles are produced within the cell. This is followed by cell lysis, releasing the cell contents, including virions that have been assembled, into the environment. However, under certain conditions, the phage DNA may integrate itself into the host cell chromosome in the lysogenic pathway. In this state, the \u03bb DNA is called a prophage and stays resident within the host's genome without apparent harm to the host. The host is termed a lysogen when a prophage is present. This prophage may enter the lytic cycle when the lysogen enters a stressed condition.\nAnatomy.\nThe virus particle consists of a head and a tail that can have tail fibers. The whole particle consists of 12\u201314 different proteins with more than 1000 protein molecules total and one DNA molecule located in the phage head. However, it is still not entirely clear whether the L and M proteins are part of the virion. All characterized lambdoid phages possess an N protein-mediated transcription antitermination mechanism, with the exception of phage HK022.\nThe genome contains 48,502 base pairs of double-stranded, linear DNA, with 12-base single-strand segments at both 5' ends. These two single-stranded segments are the \"sticky ends\" of what is called the \"cos\" site. The \"cos\" site circularizes the DNA in the host cytoplasm. In its circular form, the phage genome, therefore, is 48,502 base pairs in length. The lambda genome can be inserted into the \" E. coli\" chromosome and is then called a prophage. See section below for details.\nThe tail of lambda phages is made of at least 6 proteins (H, J, U, V, Stf, Tfa) and requires 7 more for assembly (I, K, L, M, Z, G/T). This assembly process begins with protein J, which then recruits proteins I, L, K, and G/T to add protein H. Once G and G/T leave the complex, protein V can assemble onto the J/H scaffold. Then, protein U is added to the head-proximal end of the tail. Protein Z is able to connect the tail to the head. Protein H is cleaved due to the actions of proteins U and Z.\nLife cycle.\nInfection.\nLambda phage is a non-contractile tailed phage, meaning during an infection event it cannot 'force' its DNA through a bacterial cell membrane. It must instead use an existing pathway to invade the host cell, having evolved the tip of its tail to interact with a specific pore to allow entry of its DNA to the hosts.\nOn initial infection, the stability of cII determines the lifestyle of the phage; stable cII will lead to the lysogenic pathway, whereas if cII is degraded the phage will go into the lytic pathway. Low temperature, starvation of the cells and high multiplicity of infection (MOI) are known to favor lysogeny (see later discussion).\nN antitermination.\nThis occurs without the N protein interacting with the DNA; the protein instead binds to the freshly transcribed mRNA. Nut sites contain 3 conserved \"boxes\", of which only BoxB is essential.\nLytic life cycle.\nThis is the lifecycle that the phage follows following most infections, where the cII protein does not reach a high enough concentration due to degradation, so does not activate its promoters.\nRightward transcription.\nRightward transcription expresses the \"O\", \"P\" and \"Q\" genes. O and P are responsible for initiating replication, and Q is another antiterminator that allows the expression of head, tail, and lysis genes from \"PR'\".\nPr is the promoter for rightward transcription, and the cro gene is a regulator gene. The cro gene will encode for the Cro protein that will then repress Prm promoter.\u00a0 Once Pr transcription is underway the Q gene will then be transcribed at the far end of the operon for rightward transcription. The Q gene is a regulator gene found on this operon, which will control the expression of later genes for rightward transcription. Once the gene's regulatory proteins allow for expression, the Q protein will then act as an anti-terminator. This will then allow for the rest of the operon to be read through until it reaches the transcription terminator. Thus allowing expression of later genes in the operon, and leading to the expression of the lytic cycle.\nPr promoter has been found to activate the origin in the use of rightward transcription, but the whole picture of this is still somewhat misunderstood. Given there are some caveats to this, for instance this process is different for other phages such as N15 phage, which may encode for DNA polymerase. Another example is the P22 phage may replace the p gene, which encodes for an essential replication protein for something that is capable of encoding for a DnaB helices.\nQ antitermination.\nQ is similar to N in its effect: Q binds to RNA polymerase in \"Qut\" sites and the resulting complex can ignore terminators, however the mechanism is very different; the Q protein first associates with a DNA sequence rather than an mRNA sequence.\nLeftward transcription.\nLeftward transcription expresses the \"gam,\" \"xis\", \"bar\" and \"int\" genes. Gam proteins are involved in recombination. Gam is also important in that it inhibits the host RecBCD nuclease from degrading the 3' ends in rolling circle replication. Int and xis are integration and excision proteins vital to lysogeny.\nLeftward Transcription mutations.\nLeftward transcription is believed to result in a deletion mutation of the \"rap\" gene resulting in a lack of growth of lambda phage. This is due to RNA polymerase attaching to pL promoter site instead of the pR promotor site. Leftward transcription results in \"bar\"I and \"bar\"II transcription on the left operon. Bar positive phenotype is present when the \"rap\" gene is absent. The lack of growth of lambda phage is believed to occur due to a temperature sensitivity resulting in inhibition of growth.\nLysogenic (or lysenogenic) life cycle.\nThe lysogenic lifecycle begins once the cI protein reaches a high enough concentration to activate its promoters, after a small number of infections.\nThe prophage is duplicated with every subsequent cell division of the host. The phage genes expressed in this dormant state code for proteins that repress expression of other phage genes (such as the structural and lysis genes) in order to prevent entry into the lytic cycle. These repressive proteins are broken down when the host cell is under stress, resulting in the expression of the repressed phage genes. Stress can be from starvation, poisons (like antibiotics), or other factors that can damage or destroy the host. In response to stress, the activated prophage is excised from the DNA of the host cell by one of the newly expressed gene products and enters its lytic pathway.\nProphage integration.\nThe integration of phage \u03bb takes place at a special attachment site in the bacterial and phage genomes, called \"att\u03bb\". The sequence of the bacterial att site is called \"attB\", between the \"gal\" and \"bio\" operons, and consists of the parts B-O-B', whereas the complementary sequence in the circular phage genome is called \"attP\" and consists of the parts P-O-P'. The integration itself is a sequential exchange (see genetic recombination) via a Holliday junction and requires both the phage protein Int and the bacterial protein IHF (\"integration host factor\"). Both Int and IHF bind to \"attP\" and form an intasome, a DNA-protein-complex designed for site-specific recombination of the phage and host DNA. The original B-O-B' sequence is changed by the integration to B-O-P'-phage DNA-P-O-B'. The phage DNA is now part of the host's genome.\nInduction.\nThe classic induction of a lysogen involved irradiating the infected cells with UV light. Any situation where a lysogen undergoes DNA damage or the SOS response of the host is otherwise stimulated leads to induction.\nMultiplicity reactivation and prophage reactivation.\nMultiplicity reactivation (MR) is the process by which multiple viral genomes, each containing inactivating genome damage, interact within an infected cell to form a viable viral genome. MR was originally discovered with phage T4, but was subsequently found in phage \u03bb (as well as in numerous other bacterial and mammalian viruses). MR of phage \u03bb inactivated by UV light depends on the recombination function of either the host or of the infecting phage. Absence of both recombination systems leads to a loss of MR.\nSurvival of UV-irradiated phage \u03bb is increased when the E. coli host is lysogenic for an homologous prophage, a phenomenon termed prophage reactivation. Prophage reactivation in phage \u03bb appears to occur by a recombinational repair process similar to that of MR.\nRepressor.\nThe repressor found in the phage lambda is a notable example of the level of control possible over gene expression by a very simple system. As discovered by Barbara J. Meyer, it forms a 'binary switch' with two genes under mutually exclusive expression.\nThe lambda repressor gene system consists of (from left to right on the chromosome):\nThe lambda repressor is a self assembling dimer also known as the cI protein. It binds DNA in the helix-turn-helix binding motif. It regulates the transcription of the cI protein and the Cro protein.\nThe life cycle of lambda phages is controlled by cI and Cro proteins. The lambda phage will remain in the lysogenic state if cI proteins predominate, but will be transformed into the lytic cycle if cro proteins predominate.\nThe cI dimer may bind to any of three operators, OR1, OR2, and OR3, in the order OR1 &gt; OR2 &gt; OR3.\nBinding of a cI dimer to OR1 enhances binding of a second cI dimer to OR2, an effect called cooperativity. Thus, OR1 and OR2 are almost always simultaneously occupied by cI. However, this does not increase the affinity between cI and OR3, which will be occupied only when the cI concentration is high.\nAt high concentrations of cI, the dimers will also bind to operators OL1 and OL2 (which are over 2 kb downstream from the R operators). When cI dimers are bound to OL1, OL2, OR1, and OR2 a loop is induced in the DNA, allowing these dimers to bind together to form an octamer. This is a phenomenon called \"long-range cooperativity\". Upon formation of the octamer, cI dimers may cooperatively bind to OL3 and OR3, repressing transcription of cI. This \"autonegative\" regulation ensures a stable minimum concentration of the repressor molecule and, should SOS signals arise, allows for more efficient prophage induction.\nLytic vs. lysogenic.\nAn important distinction here is that between the two decisions; lysogeny and lysis on infection, and continuing lysogeny or lysis from a prophage. The latter is determined solely by the activation of RecA in the SOS response of the cell, as detailed in the section on induction. The former will also be affected by this; a cell undergoing an SOS response will always be lysed, as no cI protein will be allowed to build up. However, the initial lytic/lysogenic decision on infection is also dependent on the cII and cIII proteins.\nIn cells with sufficient nutrients, protease activity is high, which breaks down cII. This leads to the lytic lifestyle. In cells with limited nutrients, protease activity is low, making cII stable. This leads to the lysogenic lifestyle. cIII appears to stabilize cII, both directly and by acting as a competitive inhibitor to the relevant proteases. This means that a cell \"in trouble\", i.e. lacking in nutrients and in a more dormant state, is more likely to lysogenise. This would be selected for because the phage can now lie dormant in the bacterium until it falls on better times, and so the phage can create more copies of itself with the additional resources available and with the more likely proximity of further infectable cells.\nA full biophysical model for lambda's lysis-lysogeny decision remains to be developed. Computer modeling and simulation suggest that random processes during infection drive the selection of lysis or lysogeny within individual cells. However, recent experiments suggest that physical differences among cells, that exist prior to infection, predetermine whether a cell will lyse or become a lysogen.\nAs a genetic tool.\nLambda phage has been used heavily as a model organism and has been an excellent tool first in microbial genetics, and then later in molecular genetics. Some of its uses include its application as a vector for the cloning of recombinant DNA; the use of its site-specific recombinase (int) for the shuffling of cloned DNAs by the gateway method; and the application of its Red operon, including the proteins Red alpha (also called 'exo'), beta and gamma in the DNA engineering method called recombineering. The 48 kb DNA fragment of lambda phage is not essential for productive infection and can be replaced by foreign DNA, which can then be replicated by the phage. Lambda phage will enter bacteria more easily than plasmids, making it a useful vector that can either destroy or become part of the host's DNA. Lambda phage can also be manipulated and used as an anti-cancer vaccine that targets human aspartyl (asparaginyl) \u03b2-hydroxylase (ASPH, HAAH), which has been shown to be beneficial in cases of hepatocellular carcinoma in mice. Lambda phage has also been of major importance in the study of specialized transduction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18312", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18312", "title": "Lycopersicum lycopersicum", "text": ""}
{"id": "18313", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18313", "title": "Louis Armstrong", "text": "American jazz trumpeter and singer (1901\u20131971)\nLouis Daniel Armstrong (August 4, 1901\u00a0\u2013 July 6, 1971), nicknamed \"Satchmo\", \"Satch\", and \"Pops\", was an American jazz and blues trumpeter and vocalist. He was among the most influential figures in jazz. His career spanned five decades and several eras in the history of jazz. Armstrong received numerous accolades including the Grammy Award for Best Male Vocal Performance for \"Hello, Dolly!\" in 1965, as well as a posthumous win for the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1972. His influence crossed musical genres, with inductions into the \"DownBeat\" Jazz Hall of Fame, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and the National Rhythm &amp; Blues Hall of Fame, among others.\nArmstrong was born and raised in New Orleans. Coming to prominence in the 1920s as an inventive trumpet and cornet player, he was a foundational influence in jazz, shifting the focus of the music from collective improvisation to solo performance. Around 1922, Armstrong followed his mentor, Joe \"King\" Oliver, to Chicago to play in Oliver's Creole Jazz Band. Armstrong earned a reputation at \"cutting contests\", and his fame reached band leader Fletcher Henderson. Armstrong moved to New York City, where he became a featured and musically influential band soloist and recording artist. By the 1950s, Armstrong was an international musical icon, appearing regularly in radio and television broadcasts and on film. Apart from his music, he was also beloved as an entertainer, often joking with the audience and keeping a joyful public image at all times.\nArmstrong's best known songs include \"What a Wonderful World\", \"La Vie en Rose\", \"Hello, Dolly!\", \"On the Sunny Side of the Street\", \"Dream a Little Dream of Me\", \"When You're Smiling\" and \"When the Saints Go Marching In\". He collaborated with Ella Fitzgerald, producing three records together: \"Ella and Louis\" (1956), \"Ella and Louis Again\" (1957), and \"Porgy and Bess\" (1959). He also appeared in films such as \"A Rhapsody in Black and Blue\" (1932), \"Cabin in the Sky\" (1943), \"High Society\" (1956), \"Paris Blues\" (1961), \"A Man Called Adam\" (1966), and \"Hello, Dolly!\" (1969).\nWith his instantly recognizable, rich, gravelly voice, Armstrong was also an influential singer and skillful improviser. He was also skilled at scat singing. By the end of Armstrong's life, his influence had spread to popular music. He was one of the first popular African-American entertainers to \"cross over\" to wide popularity with white and international audiences. Armstrong rarely publicly discussed racial issues, sometimes to the dismay of fellow black Americans, but took a well-publicized stand for desegregation in the Little Rock crisis. He could access the upper echelons of American society at a time when this was difficult for black men.\nEarly life.\nArmstrong is believed to have been born in New Orleans on August 4, 1901, but the date has been heavily debated. Armstrong himself often claimed he was born on July 4, 1900. His parents were Mary Estelle \"Mayann\" Albert and William Armstrong. Mary Albert was from Boutte, Louisiana and gave birth at home when she was about 16. Less than a year and a half later, they had a daughter, Beatrice \"Mama Lucy\" Armstrong (1903\u20131987), who Albert raised. William Armstrong abandoned the family shortly after that.\nLouis Armstrong was raised by his grandmother until the age of five, when he was returned to his mother. Armstrong spent his youth in poverty in a rough neighborhood known as The Battlefield, on the southern section of Rampart Street. At the age of six, Armstrong started attending the Fisk School for Boys, a school that accepted black children in the racially segregated school system of New Orleans.\nArmstrong lived with his mother and sister during this time and worked for the Karnoffskys, a family of Lithuanian Jews, at their home. Armstrong helped their sons Morris and Alex collect \"rags and bones\" and deliver coal. In 1969, while recovering from heart and kidney problems at Beth Israel Hospital in New York City, Armstrong wrote a memoir called \"Louis Armstrong + the Jewish Family in New Orleans, LA., the Year of 1907\", describing his time working for the Karnoffsky family.\nArmstrong writes about singing \"Russian Lullaby\" with the Karnoffsky family when their baby son David was put to bed and credits the family with teaching him to sing \"from the heart.\" Curiously, Armstrong quotes lyrics for it that appear to be the same as the \"Russian Lullaby\", copyrighted by Irving Berlin in 1927, about 20 years after Armstrong remembered singing it as a child. Gary Zucker, Armstrong's doctor at Beth Israel hospital in 1969, shared Berlin's song lyrics with him, and Armstrong quoted them in the memoir. This inaccuracy may be because he wrote the memoir over 60 years after the events described. Regardless, the Karnoffskys treated Armstrong exceptionally well. Knowing he lived without a father, they fed and nurtured Armstrong.\nIn his memoir, \"Louis Armstrong + the Jewish Family in New Orleans, La., the Year of 1907\", he described his discovery that this family was also subject to discrimination by \"other white folks\" who felt that they were better than Jews: \"I was only seven years old but I could easily see the ungodly treatment that the white folks were handing the poor Jewish family whom I worked for.\" Armstrong wrote about what he learned from them: \"how to live\u2014real life and determination.\" His first musical performance may have been at the side of the Karnoffskys' junk wagon. Armstrong tried playing a tin horn to attract customers to distinguish them from other hawkers. Morris Karnoffsky gave Armstrong an advance toward purchasing a cornet from a pawn shop.\nLater, as an adult, Armstrong wore a Star of David given to him by his Jewish manager, Joe Glaser, until the end of his life, in part in memory of this family who had raised him.\nWhen Armstrong was 11, he dropped out of school. His mother moved into a one-room house on Perdido Street with Armstrong, Lucy, and her common-law husband, Tom Lee, next door to her brother Ike and his two sons. Armstrong joined a quartet of boys who sang in the streets for money. Cornetist Bunk Johnson said he taught the eleven-year-old to play by ear at Dago Tony's honky tonk. In his later years, Armstrong credited King Oliver. Armstrong said about his youth, \"Every time I close my eyes blowing that trumpet of mine\u2014I look right in the heart of good old New Orleans ... It has given me something to live for.\"\nBorrowing his stepfather's gun without permission, Armstrong fired a blank into the air and was arrested on December 31, 1912. He spent the night at New Orleans Juvenile Court and was sentenced the next day to detention at the Colored Waif's [sic] Home. Life at the home was spartan. Mattresses were absent, and meals were often little more than bread and molasses. Captain Joseph Jones ran the home like a military camp and used corporal punishment.\nArmstrong developed his cornet skills by playing in the band. Peter Davis, who frequently appeared at the home at the request of Captain Jones, became Armstrong's first teacher and chose him as the bandleader. With this band, the 13-year-old Armstrong attracted the attention of Kid Ory.\nOn June 14, 1914, Armstrong was released into the custody of his father and his new stepmother, Gertrude. Armstrong lived in this household with two stepbrothers for several months. After Gertrude gave birth to a daughter, Armstrong's father never welcomed him, so Armstrong returned to his mother, Mary Albert. Armstrong had to share a bed in her small home with his mother and sister. His mother still lived in The Battlefield, leaving Armstrong open to old temptations, but he sought work as a musician.\nArmstrong found a job at a dance hall owned by Henry Ponce, who had connections to organized crime. He met the six-foot tall drummer Black Benny, who became Armstrong's guide and bodyguard. Around the age of 15, he pimped for a prostitute named Nootsy. However, that relationship failed after she stabbed Armstrong in the shoulder, and his mother choked her nearly to death.\nArmstrong briefly studied shipping management at the local community college but was forced to quit after being unable to afford the fees. While selling coal in Storyville, he heard spasm bands, groups that played music out of household objects. Armstrong listened to the early sounds of jazz from bands that played in brothels and dance halls, such as Pete Lala's, where King Oliver performed.\nCareer.\nRiverboat education.\nEarly in his career, Armstrong played in brass bands and riverboats in New Orleans, in the late 1910s. He traveled with the band of Fate Marable, which toured on the steamboat \"Sidney\" with the Streckfus Steamers line up and down the Mississippi River. Marable was proud of Armstrong's musical knowledge, and he insisted that Armstrong and other musicians in his band learn sight reading. Armstrong described his time with Marable as \"going to the University\" since it gave him a wider experience working with written arrangements. In 1918, Armstrong's mentor, King Oliver, decided to go north and resigned his position in Kid Ory's band; Armstrong replaced him. Armstrong also became the second trumpet for the Tuxedo Brass Band.\nThroughout his riverboat experience, Armstrong's musicianship began to mature and expand. At age 20, he could read music. Armstrong became one of the first jazz musicians to be featured on extended trumpet solos, injecting his own personality and style. Armstrong also started singing in his performances.\nChicago period recordings.\nIn 1922, Armstrong moved to Chicago at the invitation of King Oliver, although Armstrong would return to New Orleans periodically for the rest of his life. Playing second cornet to Oliver in Oliver's Creole Jazz Band in the black-only Lincoln Gardens on the South Side of Chicago, Armstrong could make enough money to quit his day jobs. Although race relations were poor, Chicago was booming. The city had jobs for blacks, who made good wages at factories, with some left for entertainment.\nOliver's band was among Chicago's most influential jazz bands in the early 1920s. Armstrong lived luxuriously in his apartment with his first private bath. Excited to be in Chicago, Armstrong began his career-long pastime of writing letters to friends in New Orleans. Armstrong could blow 200 high Cs in a row. As his reputation grew, Armstrong was challenged to cutting contests by other musicians.\nArmstrong's first studio recordings were with Oliver for Gennett Records on April 5\u20136, 1923. They endured several hours on the train to remote Richmond, Indiana, and the band was paid little. The quality of the performances was affected by a lack of rehearsal, crude recording equipment, bad acoustics, and a cramped studio. These early recordings were true acoustic, the band playing directly into a large funnel connected directly to the needle making the groove in the master recording. The much improved Electrical recording system with a better dynamic range was not invented until 1926. Initially, because Armstrong's playing was so loud, Oliver could not be heard on the recording when he played next to Oliver. Armstrong had to stand 15 feet from Oliver in a far corner of the room to remedy this.\nLil Hardin, whom Armstrong would marry in 1924, urged Armstrong to seek more prominent billing and develop his style apart from the influence of Oliver. At her suggestion, Armstrong began playing classical music in church concerts to broaden his skills and dressing more stylishly to offset his girth. Her influence eventually undermined Armstrong's relationship with his mentor, especially concerning his salary and additional money that Oliver held back from Armstrong and other band members. Armstrong's mother, Mayann Albert, came to visit him in Chicago during the summer of 1923 after being told that Armstrong was \"out of work, out of money, hungry, and sick\"; Hardin located and decorated an apartment for her to live in while she stayed.\nFletcher Henderson Orchestra.\nArmstrong and Oliver parted amicably in 1924. Shortly afterward, Armstrong was invited to go to New York City to play with the Fletcher Henderson Orchestra, the top African-American band of the time. He switched to the trumpet to blend in better with the other musicians in his section. Armstrong's influence on Henderson's tenor sax soloist, Coleman Hawkins, can be judged by listening to the records made by the band during this period.\nArmstrong adapted to Henderson's tightly controlled style, playing the trumpet and experimenting with the trombone. The other members were affected by Armstrong's emotional style. His act included singing and telling tales of New Orleans characters, especially preachers. The Henderson Orchestra played in prominent venues for white patrons only, including the Roseland Ballroom, with arrangements by Don Redman. Duke Ellington's orchestra went to Roseland to catch Armstrong's performances.\nDuring this time, Armstrong recorded with Clarence Williams (a friend from New Orleans), the Williams Blue Five, Sidney Bechet, and blues singers Alberta Hunter, Ma Rainey, and Bessie Smith.\nThe Hot Five.\nIn 1925, Armstrong returned to Chicago largely at the insistence of Lil, who wanted to expand his career and income. In publicity, much to his chagrin, she billed Armstrong as \"The World's Greatest Trumpet Player.\" For a time, he was a member of the Lil Hardin Armstrong Band and worked for his wife. Armstrong formed Louis Armstrong and his Hot Five and recorded the hits \"Potato Head Blues\" and \"Muggles\". The word \"muggles\" was a slang term for marijuana, something Armstrong often used during his life.\nThe Hot Five included Kid Ory (trombone), Johnny Dodds (clarinet), Johnny St. Cyr (banjo), Lil Armstrong on piano, and usually no drummer. Over a 12-month period starting in November 1925, this quintet produced twenty-four records. Armstrong's band leading style was easygoing, as St. Cyr noted: \"One felt so relaxed working with him, and he was very broad-minded ... always did his best to feature each individual.\"\nAmong the Hot Five and Seven records were \"Cornet Chop Suey\", \"Struttin' With Some Barbecue\", \"Hotter Than That\", and \"Potato Head Blues\", all featuring highly creative solos by Armstrong. According to Thomas Brothers, recordings such as \"Struttin' with Some Barbeque\" were so superb, \"planned with density and variety, bluesyness, and showiness\", that the arrangements were probably showcased at the Sunset Caf\u00e9. His recordings soon after with pianist Earl \"Fatha\" Hines, their famous 1928 \"Weather Bird\" duet and Armstrong's trumpet introduction to and solo in \"West End Blues\", remain some of the most influential improvisations in jazz history. Young trumpet players across the country bought these recordings and memorized his solos.\nArmstrong was now free to develop his style as he wished, which included a heavy dose of effervescent jive, such as \"Whip That Thing, Miss Lil\" and \"Mr. Johnny Dodds, Aw, Do That Clarinet, Boy!\"\nArmstrong also played with Erskine Tate's Little Symphony, mostly at the Vendome Theatre. They furnished music for silent movies and live shows, including jazz versions of classical music, such as \"Madame Butterfly\", which gave Armstrong experience with longer forms of music and with hosting before a large audience. He began scat singing (improvised vocal jazz using nonsensical words) and was among the first to record it on the Hot Five recording \"Heebie Jeebies\" in 1926. The recording was so popular that the group became the most famous jazz band in the United States, even though they had seldom performed live. Young musicians across the country, black or white, were turned on by Armstrong's new type of jazz.\nAfter separating from Lil, Armstrong started to play at the Sunset Caf\u00e9 for Al Capone's associate Joe Glaser in the Carroll Dickerson Orchestra, with Earl Hines on piano, which was renamed Louis Armstrong and his Stompers. However, Hines was the music director, and Glaser managed the orchestra. Hines and Armstrong became fast friends and successful collaborators. It was at the Sunset Caf\u00e9 that Armstrong accompanied singer Adelaide Hall. During Hall's tenure at the venue, she experimented, developed, and expanded her scat singing with Armstrong's guidance and encouragement.\nIn the first half of 1927, Armstrong assembled his Hot Seven group, which added drummer Al \"Baby\" Dodds and tuba player Pete Briggs while preserving most of his original Hot Five lineup. John Thomas replaced Kid Ory on the trombone. Later that year, Armstrong organized a series of new Hot Five sessions, which resulted in nine more records. In the last half of 1928, he started recording with a new group: Zutty Singleton (drums), Earl Hines (piano), Jimmy Strong (clarinet), Fred Robinson (trombone), and Mancy Carr (banjo).\nThe Harlem Renaissance.\nArmstrong made a huge impact during the 1920s Harlem Renaissance. His music touched well-known writer Langston Hughes. Hughes admired Armstrong and acknowledged him as one of the most recognized musicians of the era. Hughes wrote many books that celebrated jazz and recognized Armstrong as one of the leaders of the Harlem Renaissance's newfound love of African-American culture. The sound of jazz, along with musicians such as Armstrong, helped shape Hughes as a writer. Just like the musicians, Hughes wrote his words with jazz.\nArmstrong changed jazz during the Harlem Renaissance. As \"The World's Greatest Trumpet Player\" during this time, Armstrong cemented his legacy and continued a focus on his vocal career. His popularity brought together many black and white audiences.\nEmerging as a vocalist.\nArmstrong returned to New York in 1929, where he played in the pit orchestra for the musical \"Hot Chocolates\", an all-black revue written by Andy Razaf and pianist Fats Waller. Armstrong made a cameo appearance as a vocalist, regularly stealing the show with his rendition of \"Ain't Misbehavin'.\" Armstrong's version of the song became his biggest-selling record yet.\nArmstrong started to work at Connie's Inn in Harlem, chief rival to the Cotton Club, a venue for elaborately staged floor shows, and a front for gangster Dutch Schultz. Armstrong had considerable success with vocal recordings, including versions of songs composed by his old friend Hoagy Carmichael. His 1930s recordings took full advantage of the RCA ribbon microphone, introduced in 1931, which imparted warmth to vocals and became an intrinsic part of the \"crooning\" sound of artists like Bing Crosby. Armstrong's interpretation of Carmichael's \"Stardust\" became one of the most successful versions of this song ever recorded, showcasing Armstrong's unique vocal sound and style and his innovative approach to singing songs that were already standards.\nArmstrong's radical re-working of Sidney Arodin and Carmichael's \"Lazy River\", recorded in 1931, encapsulated his groundbreaking approach to melody and phrasing. The song begins with a brief trumpet solo. Then, the main melody is introduced by sobbing horns, memorably punctuated by Armstrong's growling interjections at the end of each bar: \"Yeah! ...\"Uh-huh\"...\"Sure\"...\"Way down, way down.\" In the first verse, Armstrong ignores the notated melody and sings as if playing a trumpet solo, pitching most of the first line on a single note and using strongly syncopated phrasing. In the second stanza, he breaks into an almost entirely improvised melody, which then evolves into a classic passage of Armstrong's scat singing.\nAs with his trumpet playing, Armstrong's vocal innovations served as a foundation for jazz vocal interpretation. The uniquely gravelly coloration of his voice became an archetype that was endlessly imitated. Armstrong's scat singing was enriched by his matchless experience as a trumpet soloist. His resonant, velvety lower-register tone and bubbling cadences on sides such as \"Lazy River\" greatly influenced younger white singers such as Bing Crosby.\nWork during hard times.\nThe Great Depression of the early 1930s was especially hard on the jazz scene. After a long downward spiral, the Cotton Club closed in 1936, and many musicians stopped playing altogether as club dates evaporated. Bix Beiderbecke died, and Fletcher Henderson's band broke up. King Oliver made a few records but otherwise struggled. Sidney Bechet became a tailor, later moving to Paris, and Kid Ory returned to New Orleans and raised chickens.\nArmstrong moved to Los Angeles in 1930 to seek new opportunities. He played at the New Cotton Club in Los Angeles with Lionel Hampton on drums. The band drew the Hollywood crowd, which could still afford a lavish nightlife, while radio broadcasts from the club connected with younger audiences at home. Bing Crosby and many other celebrities were regulars at the club. In 1931, Armstrong appeared in his first movie, \"Ex-Flame\". He was also convicted of marijuana possession but received a suspended sentence.\nArmstrong returned to Chicago in late 1931 and played in bands more in the Guy Lombardo vein, and he recorded more standards. When the mob insisted that he get out of town, Armstrong visited New Orleans, had a hero's welcome, and saw old friends. He sponsored a local baseball team called Armstrong's Secret Nine and had a cigar named after him. However, Armstrong was on the road again soon. After a tour across the country shadowed by the mob, he fled to Europe.\nAfter returning to the United States, Armstrong undertook several exhausting tours. His agent, Johnny Collins's erratic behavior and his own spending ways left Armstrong short of cash. Breach of contract violations plagued him. Armstrong hired Joe Glaser as his new manager, a tough mob-connected wheeler-dealer who began straightening out his legal mess, mob troubles, and debts. Armstrong also began to experience problems with his fingers and lips, aggravated by his unorthodox playing style. As a result, Armstrong branched out, developing his vocal style and making his first theatrical appearances. Armstrong appeared in movies again, including Crosby's 1936 hit \"Pennies from Heaven\". In 1937, Armstrong substituted for Rudy Vallee on the CBS radio network and became the first African American to host a sponsored national broadcast.\nReviving his career with the All-Stars.\nAfter spending many years on the road, Armstrong settled permanently in Queens, New York, in 1943 with his fourth wife, Lucille. Although subject to the vicissitudes of Tin Pan Alley and the gangster-ridden music business, as well as anti-black prejudice, Armstrong continued to develop his playing.\nBookings for big bands tapered off during the 1940s due to changes in public tastes. Ballrooms closed, and competition from other types of music, especially pop vocals, became more popular than big band music. Under such circumstances, it became impossible to finance a 16-piece touring band.\nA widespread revival of interest in the 1940s in the traditional jazz of the 1920s made it possible for Armstrong to consider a return to the small-group musical style of his youth. Armstrong was featured as a guest artist with Lionel Hampton's band at the famed second Cavalcade of Jazz concert held at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles, produced by Leon Hefflin Sr., on October 12, 1946. Armstrong also led a highly successful small-group jazz concert at New York Town Hall on May 17, 1947, featuring him with trombonist/singer Jack Teagarden. During the concert, Armstrong and Teagarden performed a duet on Hoagy Carmichael's \"Rockin' Chair\" they then recorded for Okeh Records.\nArmstrong's manager, Joe Glaser, changed the Armstrong big band on August 13, 1947, into a six-piece traditional jazz group featuring Armstrong with (initially) Teagarden, Earl Hines and other top swing and Dixieland musicians, most of whom were previously leaders of big bands. The new group was announced at the opening of Billy Berg's Supper Club.\nThis smaller group was called Louis Armstrong and His All-Stars and included at various times Earl \"Fatha\" Hines, Barney Bigard, Edmond Hall, Jack Teagarden, Trummy Young, Arvell Shaw, Billy Kyle, Marty Napoleon, Big Sid \"Buddy\" Catlett, Cozy Cole, Tyree Glenn, Barrett Deems, Mort Herbert, Joe Darensbourg, Eddie Shu, Joe Muranyi and percussionist Danny Barcelona.\nOn February 28, 1948, Suzy Delair sang the French song \"C'est si bon\" at the Hotel Negresco during the first Nice Jazz Festival. Armstrong was present and loved the song. On June 26, 1950, he recorded the American version of the song (English lyrics by Jerry Seelen) in New York City with Sy Oliver and his Orchestra. When it was released, the disc was a worldwide success, and the song was then performed by the greatest international singers.\nArmstrong was the first jazz musician to appear on the cover of \"Time\" magazine on February 21, 1949. He and his All-Stars were featured at the ninth Cavalcade of Jazz concert also at Wrigley Field in Los Angeles produced by Leon Hefflin Sr. held on June 7, 1953, along with Shorty Rogers, Roy Brown, Don Tosti and His Mexican Jazzmen, Earl Bostic, and Nat \"King\" Cole.\nOver 30 years, Armstrong played more than 300 performances a year, making many recordings and appearing in more than 30 films.\nA jazz ambassador.\nBy the 1950s, Armstrong was a widely beloved American icon and cultural ambassador who commanded an international fanbase. However, a growing generation gap became apparent between him and the young jazz musicians who emerged in the postwar era, such as Charlie Parker, Miles Davis, and Sonny Rollins. The postwar generation regarded their music as abstract art and considered Armstrong's vaudevillian style, half-musician and half-stage entertainer, outmoded and Uncle Tomism. \"... he seemed a link to minstrelsy that we were ashamed of.\" Armstrong called bebop \"Chinese music\". While touring Australia in 1954, he was asked if he could play bebop. \"'Bebop?' he husked. 'I just play music. Guys who invent terms like that are walking the streets with their instruments under their arms.'\"\nAfter finishing his contract with Decca Records, Armstrong went freelance and recorded for other labels. He continued an intense international touring schedule, but suffered a heart attack in 1959 while in Italy and had to rest.\nIn 1964, after more than two years without setting foot in a studio, Armstrong recorded his biggest-selling record, \"Hello, Dolly!\", a song by Jerry Herman, originally sung by Carol Channing. Armstrong's version remained on the Hot 100 for 22 weeks, longer than any other record produced that year, and went to No.\u00a01, making him the oldest person to accomplish that feat at 62 years, nine months, and five days. Armstrong's hit dislodged The Beatles from the No.\u00a01 position they had occupied for 14 consecutive weeks with three different songs.\nArmstrong toured well into his 60s, even visiting part of the Communist Bloc in 1965. Armstrong also toured Africa, Europe, and Asia under the sponsorship of the US State Department with great success, earning the nickname \"Ambassador Satch\" and inspiring Dave Brubeck to compose his jazz musical \"The Real Ambassadors\". His travels included performances in Egypt, Ghana and Nigeria.\nBy 1968, Armstrong was approaching 70, and his health was failing. His heart and kidney ailments forced him to stop touring, though he continued to record, including \"What a Wonderful World\", which topped the British charts for a month. Armstrong did not perform publicly in 1969 and spent most of the year recuperating at home. Meanwhile, his longtime manager, Joe Glaser, died. By the summer of 1970, Armstrong's doctors pronounced him fit enough to resume live performances. Armstrong embarked on another world tour, but a heart attack forced him to take a break for two months.\nArmstrong made his last recorded trumpet performances on his 1968 album \"Disney Songs the Satchmo Way\".\nPersonal life.\nPronunciation of name.\nThe Louis Armstrong House Museum website states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judging from home recorded tapes now in our Museum Collections, Louis pronounced his own name as \"Lewis.\" On his 1964 record \"Hello, Dolly\", he sings, \"This is Lewis, Dolly\", but in 1933, he made a record called \"Laughin' Louie.\" Many broadcast announcers, fans, and acquaintances called him \"Louie\", and in a videotaped interview from 1983, Lucille Armstrong calls her late husband \"Louie\" as well. Musicians and close friends usually called him \"Pops\".\nIn a memoir written for Robert Goffin between 1943 and 1944, Armstrong stated, \"All white folks call me Louie\", suggesting that he himself did not, or that no whites addressed him by one of his nicknames such as Pops. That said, Armstrong was registered as \"Lewie\" for the 1920 U.S. census. On various live records, he is called \"Louie\" on stage, such as on the 1952 \"Can Anyone Explain?\" from the live album \"In Scandinavia vol.1\". The same applies to his 1952 studio recording of the song \"Chloe\", where the choir in the background sings \"Louie ... Louie\", with Armstrong responding, \"What was that? Somebody called my name?\". \"Lewie\" is the French pronunciation of \"Louis\" and is commonly used in Louisiana.\nFamily.\nArmstrong was performing at the Brick House in Gretna, Louisiana when he met Daisy Parker, a local prostitute, and started an affair as a client. Armstrong returned to Gretna on several occasions to visit her. He found the courage to look for her home to see her away from work. There, Armstrong found out she had a common-law husband. Not long after that, Parker traveled to Armstrong's home on Perdido Street and they checked into Kid Green's hotel that evening. On the next day, March 19, 1919, Armstrong and Parker married at City Hall. They adopted a three-year-old boy, Clarence, whose mother, Armstrong's cousin Flora, had died soon after giving birth. Clarence Armstrong was mentally disabled as a result of a head injury at an early age. Armstrong spent the rest of his life taking care of him. His marriage to Parker ended when they separated in 1923.\nOn February 4, 1924, Armstrong married Lil Hardin Armstrong, King Oliver's pianist. She had divorced her first husband a few years earlier. Armstrong's second wife helped him develop his career, but they separated in 1931 and divorced in 1938. Armstrong then married Alpha Smith. His relationship with Alpha began while he was playing at the Vendome during the 1920s and continued long after. Armstrong's marriage to her lasted four years; they divorced in 1942. He then married Lucille Wilson, a singer at the Cotton Club in New York, in October 1942. They remained married until his death in 1971.\nArmstrong's marriages produced no offspring. However, in December 2012, 57-year-old Sharon Preston-Folta claimed to be his daughter from a 1950s affair between Armstrong and Lucille \"Sweets\" Preston, a dancer at the Cotton Club. In a 1955 letter to his manager, Joe Glaser, Armstrong affirmed his belief that Preston's newborn baby was his daughter, and ordered Glaser to pay a monthly allowance of $400 ($ in 2024 dollars) to mother and child.\nPersonality.\nArmstrong was colorful and charismatic. His autobiography vexed some biographers and historians because Armstrong had a habit of telling tales, particularly about his early childhood when he was less scrutinized, and his embellishments lack consistency.\nIn addition to being an entertainer, Armstrong was a leading personality. He was beloved by an American public that usually offered little access beyond their public celebrity to even the most significant black performers, and Armstrong was able to live a private life of access and privilege afforded to few other black Americans during that era.\nArmstrong generally remained politically neutral, which sometimes alienated him from other black Americans who expected him to use his prominence within white America to become more outspoken during the civil rights movement. However, Armstrong criticized President Eisenhower for not acting forcefully on civil rights.\nHealth problems.\nThe trumpet is notoriously hard on the lips, and Armstrong suffered from lip damage over most of his life. This was due to Armstrong's aggressive playing style and preference for narrow mouthpieces that would stay in place more easily but tended to dig into the soft flesh of his inner lip. During his 1930s European tour, Armstrong suffered an ulceration so severe that he had to stop playing entirely for a year. Eventually, Armstrong took to using salves and creams on his lips and also cutting off scar tissue with a razor blade. By the 1950s, Armstrong was an official spokesman for Ansatz-Creme Lip Salve.\nDuring a backstage meeting with trombonist Marshall Brown in 1959, Armstrong was advised to see a doctor and receive proper treatment for his lips instead of relying on home remedies. However, Armstrong did not get around to that until his final years, by which point his health was failing, and the doctors considered surgery too risky.\nIn 1959, Armstrong was hospitalized for pneumonia while on tour in Italy. Doctors were concerned about his lungs and heart, but by the end of June, Armstrong rallied on.\nNicknames.\nThe nicknames \"Satchmo\" and \"Satch\" are short for \"Satchelmouth\". The nickname origin is uncertain. The most common tale that biographers tell is the story of Armstrong as a young boy in New Orleans dancing for pennies. He scooped the coins off the street and stuck them into his mouth to prevent bigger children from stealing them. Someone dubbed Armstrong \"satchel mouth\" for his mouth acting as a satchel. Another tale is that because of his large mouth, Armstrong was nicknamed \"satchel mouth\", which was shortened to \"Satchmo.\"\nEarly on, Armstrong was also known as \"Dipper\", short for \"Dippermouth\", a reference to the piece \"Dippermouth Blues\" and something of a riff on his unusual embouchure.\nThe nickname \"Pops\" came from Armstrong's own tendency to forget people's names and simply call them \"Pops\" instead. The nickname was turned on Armstrong himself. It was used as the title of a 2010 biography of Armstrong by Terry Teachout.\nAfter a competition at the Savoy, he was crowned and nicknamed \"King Menelik\", after the Emperor of Ethiopia, for slaying \"ofay jazz demons.\"\nRace.\nArmstrong celebrated his heritage as a black man from a poor New Orleans neighborhood and tried to avoid what he called \"putting on airs.\" Many younger black musicians criticized Armstrong for playing in front of segregated audiences and for not taking a stronger stand in the American civil rights movement. When Armstrong did speak out, it made national news. In 1957, journalism student Larry Lubenow scored a candid interview with Armstrong while the musician was performing in Grand Forks, North Dakota, shortly after the conflict over school desegregation in Little Rock, Arkansas. Armstrong denounced both Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus and President Dwight D. Eisenhower, saying the President had \"no guts\" and was \"two-faced.\" Armstrong told his interviewer that he would cancel a planned tour of the Soviet Union on behalf of the State Department, saying, \"The way they're treating my people in the South, the government can go to hell\"; he could not represent his government abroad when it was in conflict with its own people. The FBI kept a file on Armstrong for his outspokenness about integration. Armstrong\u2019s outburst drew both praise and backlash; figures like Jackie Robinson and Lena Horne publicly supported him, while a Mississippi radio station banned his records. His longtime road manager, Pierre Tallerie, attempted to walk back Armstrong\u2019s comments to the press, prompting a sharp public rebuke from Armstrong, who nearly fired Tallerie and insisted on speaking for himself going forward.\nReligion.\nWhen asked about his religion, Armstrong answered that he was raised a Baptist, always wore a Star of David, and was friends with the pope. Armstrong wore the Star of David in honor of the Karnoffsky family who took him in as a child and lent him money to buy his first cornet. Armstrong was baptized a Catholic in the Sacred Heart of Jesus Church in New Orleans, and he met Pope Pius XII and Pope Paul VI.\nPersonal habits.\nArmstrong was concerned with his health. Armstrong used laxatives to control his weight, a practice he advocated both to acquaintances and in the diet plans he published under the title \"Lose Weight the Satchmo Way\". Armstrong's laxative of preference in his younger days was Pluto Water, but when he discovered the herbal remedy Swiss Kriss, he became an enthusiastic convert, extolling its virtues to anyone who would listen and passing out packets to everyone he encountered, including members of the British royal family.\nArmstrong also appeared in humorous risqu\u00e9 cards that he had printed to send to friends. The cards bore a picture of Armstrong sitting on a toilet\u2014as viewed through a keyhole\u2014with the slogan \"Satch says, 'Leave it all behind ya!'\" The cards have sometimes been incorrectly described as ads for Swiss Kriss. In a live recording of \"Baby, It's Cold Outside\" with Velma Middleton, he changes the lyric from \"Put another record on while I pour\" to \"Take some Swiss Kriss while I pour.\" Armstrong's laxative use began as a child when his mother would collect dandelions and peppergrass around the railroad tracks to give to her children for their health.\nArmstrong was a heavy marijuana smoker for much of his life and spent nine days in jail in 1930 after being arrested outside a club for drug possession. Armstrong described marijuana as \"a thousand times better than whiskey.\"\nArmstrong's concern with his health and weight was balanced by his love of food, reflected in such songs as \"Cheesecake\", \"Cornet Chop Suey\", and \"Struttin' with Some Barbecue\", though the latter was written about a fine-looking companion, and not food. Armstrong kept a strong connection throughout his life to the cooking of New Orleans, always signing his letters, \"Red beans and ricely yours ...\".\nA fan of Major League Baseball, Armstrong founded a team in New Orleans that was known as Raggedy Nine and transformed the team into his Armstrong's \"Secret Nine Baseball.\"\nWritings.\nArmstrong's gregariousness extended to writing. On the road, he wrote constantly, sharing favorite themes of his life with correspondents around the world. Armstrong avidly typed or wrote on whatever stationery was at hand, recording instant takes on music, sex, food, childhood memories, his heavy \"medicinal\" marijuana use, and even his bowel movements, which Armstrong gleefully described.\nSocial organizations.\nLouis Armstrong was not, as claimed, a Freemason. Although he has been cited as a Montgomery Lodge No. 18 (Prince Hall) member in New York, no such lodge ever existed. In his autobiography, Armstrong stated that he was a member of the Knights of Pythias of North America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa and Australia, an African American non-Masonic fraternal organization. During the krewe's 1949 Mardi Gras parade, Armstrong presided as King of the Zulu Social Aid &amp; Pleasure Club, for which he was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine.\nMusic.\nHorn playing and early jazz.\nIn his early years, Armstrong was best known for his virtuosity with the cornet and trumpet. Along with his \"clarinet-like figurations and high notes in his cornet solos\", Armstrong was also known for his \"intense rhythmic 'swing', a complex conception involving accented upbeats, upbeat to downbeat slurring, and complementary relations among rhythmic patterns. The most lauded recordings on which Armstrong plays trumpet include the Hot Five and Hot Seven sessions, as well as those of the Red Onion Jazz Babies. Armstrong's improvisations, while unconventionally sophisticated for that era, were also subtle and highly melodic. The solo that Armstrong plays during the song \"Potato Head Blues\" has long been considered his best solo of that series.\nPrior to Armstrong, most collective ensembles playing in jazz, along with its occasional solos, simply varied the melodies of the songs. He was virtually the first to create significant variations based on the chord harmonies of the songs instead of merely on the melodies. This opened a rich field for creation and improvisation, and significantly changed the music into a soloist's art form.\nOften, Armstrong re-composed pop tunes he played, simply with variations that made them more compelling to jazz listeners of the era. At the same time, Armstrong's oeuvre includes many original melodies, creative leaps, and relaxed or driving rhythms. His playing technique, honed by constant practice, extended the range, tone, and capabilities of the trumpet. In his records, Armstrong almost single-handedly created the role of the jazz soloist, taking what had been essentially a piece of collective folk music and turning it into an art form with tremendous possibilities for individual expression.\nArmstrong was one of the first artists to use recordings of his performances to improve himself. Armstrong was an avid audiophile. He had a large collection of recordings, including reel-to-reel tapes, which he took on the road with him in a trunk during his later career. Armstrong enjoyed listening to his own recordings, and comparing his performances musically. In the den of his home, Armstrong had the latest audio equipment and would sometimes rehearse and record along with his older recordings or the radio.\nVocal popularity.\nAs Armstrong's music progressed and popularity grew, his singing also became very important. Armstrong was not the first to record scat singing, but he was masterful at it and helped popularize it with the first recording on which he scatted, \"Heebie Jeebies.\" At a recording session for Okeh Records, when the sheet music supposedly fell on the floor, and the music began before Armstrong could pick up the pages, he simply started singing nonsense syllables while Okeh President E.A. Fearn, who was at the session, kept telling him to continue. Armstrong did, thinking the track would be discarded, but that was the version that was pressed to disc, sold, and became an unexpected hit. Although the story was thought to be apocryphal, Armstrong himself confirmed it in at least one interview as well as in his memoirs. On a later recording, Armstrong also sang out \"I done forgot the words\" in the middle of recording \"I'm A Ding Dong Daddy From Dumas.\"\nSuch records were hits, and scat singing became a major part of his performances. Long before this, Armstrong was playing around with his vocals, shortening and lengthening phrases, interjecting improvisations, and using his voice as creatively as his trumpet. Armstrong once told Cab Calloway that his scat style was derived \"from the Jews \"rockin\"\", an Orthodox Jewish style of chanting during prayer.\nComposing.\nArmstrong was a gifted composer who wrote more than 50 songs, some of which have become jazz standards (e.g., \"Gully Low Blues\", \"Potato Head Blues\", and \"Swing That Music\").\nColleagues and followers.\nDuring his long career, Armstrong played and sang with some of the most important instrumentalists and vocalists of the time, including Bing Crosby, Duke Ellington, Fletcher Henderson, Earl Hines, Jimmie Rodgers, Bessie Smith, and Ella Fitzgerald. His influence upon Crosby is particularly important with regard to the subsequent development of popular music. Crosby admired and copied Armstrong, as is evident on many of his early recordings, notably \"Just One More Chance\" (1931). The \"New Grove Dictionary of Jazz\" describes Crosby's debt to Armstrong in precise detail, although it does not acknowledge Armstrong by name:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Crosby ... was important in introducing into the mainstream of popular singing an Afro-American concept of song as a lyrical extension of speech ... His techniques\u2014easing the weight of the breath on the vocal cords, passing into a head voice at a low register, using forward production to aid distinct enunciation, singing on consonants (a practice of black singers), and making discreet use of appoggiaturas, mordents, and slurs to emphasize the text\u2014were emulated by nearly all later popular singers.\nArmstrong recorded two albums with Ella Fitzgerald, \"Ella and Louis\" and \"Ella and Louis Again\", for Verve Records. The sessions featured the backing musicianship of the Oscar Peterson Trio with drummer Buddy Rich on the first album and Louie Bellson on the second. Norman Granz then had the vision for Ella and Louis to record \"Porgy and Bess\".\nArmstrong's two recordings for Columbia Records, \"Louis Armstrong Plays W.C. Handy\" (1954) and \"Satch Plays Fats\" (all Fats Waller tunes) (1955), were both considered masterpieces, as well as moderately well selling. In 1961, the All-Stars participated in two albums, \"The Great Summit\" and \"The Great Reunion\" (now together as a single disc) with Duke Ellington. The albums feature many of Ellington's most famous compositions (as well as two exclusive cuts) with Duke sitting in on piano. Armstrong's participation in Dave Brubeck's high-concept jazz musical \"The Real Ambassadors\" (1963) was critically acclaimed and features \"Summer Song\", one of Armstrong's most popular vocal efforts.\nIn the week beginning May 9, 1964, Armstrong's recording of the song \"Hello, Dolly!\" went to number one. An album of the same title was quickly created around the song, and also shot to number one, knocking The Beatles off the top of the chart. The album sold very well for the rest of the year, quickly going \"Gold\" (500,000). His performance of \"Hello, Dolly!\" won for best male pop vocal performance at the 1964 Grammy Awards.\nHits and later career.\nArmstrong had 19 \"Top Ten\" records including \"Stardust\", \"What a Wonderful World\", \"When The Saints Go Marching In\", \"Dream a Little Dream of Me\", \"Ain't Misbehavin'\", \"You Rascal You\", and \"Stompin' at the Savoy\". \"We Have All the Time in the World\" was featured on the soundtrack of the James Bond film \"On Her Majesty's Secret Service\", and enjoyed renewed popularity in the UK in 1994 when it was featured on a Guinness advertisement. It reached number 3 in the charts on being re-released.\nIn 1964, Armstrong knocked The Beatles off the top of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart with \"Hello, Dolly!\", which gave the 63-year-old performer a U.S. record as the oldest artist to have a number one song. His 1964 song \"Bout Time\" was later featured in the film \"Bewitched\".\nIn February 1968, Armstrong appeared with Lara Saint Paul on the Italian RAI television channel, where he performed \"Grassa e Bella\", a track Armstrong sang in Italian for the Italian market and C.D.I. label.\nIn 1968, Armstrong scored one last popular hit in the UK with \"What a Wonderful World\", which topped the British charts for a month. Armstrong appeared on the October 28, 1970, \"Johnny Cash Show\", where he sang Nat King Cole's hit \"Ramblin' Rose\" and joined Cash to re-create his performance backing Jimmie Rodgers on \"Blue Yodel No. 9\".\nStylistic range.\nArmstrong enjoyed many types of music, from blues to the arrangements of Guy Lombardo, to Latin American folksongs, to classical symphonies and opera. Armstrong incorporated influences from all these sources into his performances, sometimes to the bewilderment of fans who wanted him to stay in convenient narrow categories. Armstrong was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as an \"early influence\". Some of his solos from the 1950s, such as the hard rocking version of \"St. Louis Blues\" from the \"WC Handy\" album, show that the influence went in both directions.\nFilm, television, and radio.\nArmstrong appeared in more than a dozen Hollywood films, usually playing a bandleader or musician. His most familiar role was as the bandleader \"cum\" narrator in the 1956 musical \"High Society\", starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra, and Celeste Holm. Armstrong appears throughout the film, sings the title song, and performs the duet \"Now You Has Jazz\" with Crosby. In 1947, Armstrong played himself in the movie \"New Orleans\" opposite Billie Holiday, which chronicled the demise of the Storyville district and the ensuing exodus of musicians from New Orleans to Chicago. In the 1959 film \"The Five Pennies\", Armstrong played himself, sang, and played several classic numbers. He performed a duet of \"When the Saints Go Marching In\" with Danny Kaye, during which Kaye impersonated Armstrong. He had a part in the film alongside James Stewart in \"The Glenn Miller Story\".\nIn 1937, Armstrong was the first African American to host a nationally broadcast radio show. In 1969, he had a cameo role in Gene Kelly's film version of \"Hello, Dolly!\" as the bandleader Louis where he sang the title song with actress Barbra Streisand. Armstrong's solo recording of \"Hello, Dolly!\" is one of his most recognizable performances. Armstrong was heard on such radio programs as \"The Story of Swing\" (1937) and \"This Is Jazz\" (1947), and he also made television appearances, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, including appearances on \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\".\nIn 1949, Armstrong's life was dramatized by scriptwriter Richard Durham in the Chicago WMAQ radio series \"Destination Freedom\".\nArgentine writer Julio Cort\u00e1zar, a self-described Armstrong admirer, asserted that a 1952 Louis Armstrong concert at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris played a significant role in inspiring him to create the fictional creatures called Cronopios that are the subject of a number of Cort\u00e1zar's short stories. Cort\u00e1zar once called Armstrong himself \"Grand\u00edsimo Cronopio\" (The Great Cronopio).\nThere is a pivotal scene in \"Stardust Memories\" (1980) in which Woody Allen is overwhelmed by a recording of Armstrong's \"Stardust\" and experiences a nostalgic epiphany.\nIn 2022, Armstrong was subject of the documentary film \"Louis Armstrong's Black &amp; Blues\".\nDeath.\nAgainst his doctor's advice, Armstrong played a two-week engagement in March 1971 at the Waldorf-Astoria's Empire Room. At the end of it, he was hospitalized for a heart attack. Armstrong was released from the hospital in May and quickly resumed practicing his trumpet playing. Still hoping to get back on the road, Armstrong died of a heart attack in his sleep on July 6, 1971. Armstrong was residing in Corona, Queens, New York City, at the time of his death.\nArmstrong was interred in Flushing Cemetery, Flushing, in Queens, New York City.\nHis honorary pallbearers included Bing Crosby, Ella Fitzgerald, Duke Ellington, Dizzy Gillespie, Pearl Bailey, Count Basie, Harry James, Frank Sinatra, Ed Sullivan, Earl Wilson, Benny Goodman, Alan King, Johnny Carson and David Frost. Peggy Lee sang \"The Lord's Prayer\" at the services while Al Hibbler sang \"Nobody Knows the Trouble I've Seen\" and Fred Robbins, a long-time friend, gave the eulogy.\nAwards and honors.\nGrammy Awards.\nArmstrong was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1972 by the Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. This Special Merit Award is presented by vote of the Recording Academy's National Trustees to performers who, during their lifetimes, have made creative contributions of outstanding artistic significance to the recording field.\nGrammy Hall of Fame.\nRecordings of Armstrong were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance.\"\nRock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nThe Rock and Roll Hall of Fame listed Armstrong's \"West End Blues\" on the list of 500 songs that shaped Rock and Roll.\nInductions and honors.\nIn 1995, the U.S. Post Office issued a Louis Armstrong 32-cent commemorative postage stamp.\nFilm honors.\nIn 1999, Armstrong was nominated for inclusion in the American Film Institute's 100 Years ... 100 Stars.\nLegacy.\nIn 1950, Bing Crosby, the most successful vocalist of the first half of the 20th century, said, \"He is the beginning and the end of music in America.\" Duke Ellington, DownBeat magazine in 1971, said, \"If anybody was a master, it was Louis Armstrong. He was and will continue to be the embodiment of jazz.\" Though Armstrong is widely recognized as a pioneer of scat singing, Ethel Waters and others preceded his scatting on record in the 1920s according to Gary Giddins and others.\nAccording to literary critic Harold Bloom, \"The two great American contributions to the world's art, in the end, are Walt Whitman and, after him, Armstrong and jazz ... If I had to choose between the two, ultimately, I wouldn't. I would say that the genius of this nation at its best is indeed Walt Whitman and Louis Armstrong\".\nIn 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Armstrong at No. 39 on their list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nIn 1991, an asteroid was named 9179 Satchmo in Armstrong's honor. In the summer of 2001, in commemoration of the centennial of his birth, New Orleans's main airport was renamed Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. The entrance to the airport's former terminal building houses a statue depicting Armstrong playing his cornet. In 2002, the Louis Armstrong's Hot Five and Hot Seven recordings (1925\u20131928) were preserved in the United States National Recording Registry, a registry of recordings selected yearly by the National Recording Preservation Board for preservation in the National Recording Registry of the Library of Congress. The US Open tennis tournament's former main stadium was named Louis Armstrong Stadium in honor of Armstrong who had lived a few blocks from the site.\nCongo Square was a common gathering place for blacks in New Orleans for dancing and performing music. The park where Congo Square is located was later renamed Louis Armstrong Park. Dedicated in April 1980, the park includes a statue of Armstrong, trumpet in hand.\n\"A Wonderful World\", a musical based on his life story, had its world premiere run at Miami New Drama from December 4, 2021, to January 16, 2021, after mounting previews beginning March 5, 2020 and canceling opening night (March 14) due to COVID concerns. Mirroring Armstrong's musical journey, the show stars James Monroe Iglehart and makes \"pre-Broadway\" stops in New Orleans on October 1\u20138, 2023, and Chicago on October 11\u201329, 2023. The new musical charts the rise of Armstrong from the perspective of his four wives. It is conceived by Drama Desk Award winner and Tony Award nominee Christopher Renshaw and novelist Andrew Delaplaine, and directed by Renshaw, \"A Wonderful World\" features an original book by Aurin Squire. The show will debut on Broadway in 2024.\nThe Louis Armstrong House Museum.\nThe house where Armstrong lived for almost 28 years was declared a National Historic Landmark and opened to the public for guided tours in 2003. The Louis Armstrong House Museum, at 34\u201356 107th Street between 34th and 37th avenues in Corona, Queens, presents concerts and educational programs, operates as a historic house museum and makes materials in its archives of writings, books, recordings and memorabilia available to the public for research. The museum is administered by the Queens College, City University of New York, following the dictates of Lucille Armstrong's will and is operated by the nonprofit Louis Armstrong House Museum. The museum opened to the public on October 15, 2003. A new visitors center opened across the street from the Armstrong home in the summer of 2023. The Museum website also includes the digitized Armstrong Archives, searchable to the public 24 hours a day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18315", "revid": "1839637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18315", "title": "Long Island", "text": "Populous island in southeastern New York\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLong Island is a densely populated continental island in southeastern New York state, extending into the Atlantic Ocean. It constitutes a significant share of the New York metropolitan area in both population and land area. The island extends from New York Harbor eastward into the ocean with a maximum north\u2013south width of . With a land area of , it is the largest island in the contiguous United States and the 11th largest island in the U.S.\nLong Island is divided among four counties with Kings (Brooklyn), Queens, and Nassau counties occupying its western third and Suffolk County its eastern two-thirds. To what extent Brooklyn and Queens are considered with Long Island is a matter of debate. Geographically, both Kings and Queens county are located on the Island, but some argue they are culturally separate from Long Island. Long Island may refer both to the main island and the surrounding outer barrier islands. Long Island is separated from Manhattan Island and the Bronx by the East River tidal estuary in the west part of the island. North of the island is Long Island Sound, across which lie Westchester County, New York, and the state of Connecticut. Across the Block Island Sound to the northeast is the state of Rhode Island. Block Island, which is part of Rhode Island, and numerous smaller islands extend farther into the Atlantic Ocean. To the extreme southwest, Long Island, at Brooklyn, is separated from Staten Island and the state of New Jersey by Upper New York Bay, The Narrows, and Lower New York Bay.\nWith a population of 8,063,232 residents as of the 2020 U.S. census, Long Island constitutes 40% of the state's population. Long Island is the most populous island in any U.S. state or territory, the third-most populous island in the Americas after Hispaniola and Cuba, and the 18th-most populous island in the world ahead of Ireland, Jamaica, and Hokkaid\u014d. Its population density is . Long Island is culturally and ethnically diverse, featuring some of the wealthiest and most expensive neighborhoods in the world near the shorelines, as well as a variety of working-class areas in all four counties.\nAs of 2022, Kings, Queens, Nassau, and Suffolk counties collectively had a gross domestic product of approximately $600 billion. Median household income on the island significantly exceeds $100,000, and the median home price is approximately $600,000, with Nassau County approximating $700,000. Among residents over the age of 25, 42.6% hold a college degree or higher educational degree. Unemployment on Long Island stays consistently below 4%. Biotechnology companies, engineering, and scientific research play a significant role in Long Island's economy, including research facilities at Brookhaven National Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Stony Brook University, New York Institute of Technology, Plum Island Animal Disease Center, the New York University Tandon School of Engineering, the Zucker School of Medicine, and the Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research.\nAs a hub of commercial aviation, Long Island is home to two of the nation's and New York metropolitan area's busiest airports, JFK International Airport and LaGuardia Airport. Also located on Long Island are Long Island MacArthur Airport and two major air traffic control radar facilities, New York TRACON and New York ARTCC. Long Island has nine major bridges and thirteen traffic tunnels, which connect Brooklyn and Queens to the three other boroughs of New York City. Ferries connect Suffolk County northward across Long Island Sound to Connecticut. Long Island Rail Road is the busiest commuter railroad in North America and operates continuously.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nAs the last Ice Age waned with Wisconsin glaciation, early Paleo-Indians ventured into the evolving landscapes of present-day Long Island, marking a significant environmental shift and laying the groundwork for the region's rich ecosystems. The nomadic hunter-gatherers, equipped with stone tools, navigated the newly emerging landscapes, hunting large game and gathering from the abundant natural resources.\nAfter the Paleo-Indian period, the Archaic Period marked a broadening of subsistence strategies. The inhabitants of Long Island diversified their diet, exploiting the rich marine and terrestrial environments. The main source of protein came from the sea, consisting of fish and shellfish, with oysters being of particular importance. Deer and other wild game and various plant foods also became part of their regular diet.\nThe archaeological record also reveals a shift towards a more settled lifestyle, with small bands forming seasonal settlements.\nThe indigenous peoples in the Early and Middle Woodland period began developing horticulture as well as more efficient strategies for hunting and gathering. They established year-round settlements. Pottery emerged as a widespread technological innovation during this era, serving not only practical storage and cooking purposes but also functioning as a medium for cultural expression. The stylistic variations in pottery across different sites on Long Island suggest a rich diversity of cultural identities and the exchange of ideas among various groups. Additionally, this period was marked by participation in trade networks with other Northeastern Indigenous communities.\nDuring the Late Woodland Period, there was a noticeable intensification of agriculture, with maize becoming a staple crop alongside beans and squash. This agricultural advancement supported larger populations and led to the establishment of more permanent villages characterized by substantial dwellings, mostly wigwams and longhouses. The increased reliance on farming did not eliminate hunting and gathering, which continued to play a crucial role in the subsistence economy.\nThe Long Island natives lived in villages of differing sizes, and their governing style, because of a lack of evidence, can only be guessed. However, anthropological models suggest that the leaders did not have overarching authority over the rest of the village. Rather, the leaders often sought advice from the elders. The early settlers of Long Island were likely tied by kinship and did not identify themselves as distinct tribes. These tribes were designated by the Europeans as a method of identifying borders. However, there seems to be two overlapping but different cultures. Western Long Island natives probably spoke the Delaware-Munsee dialect. The eastern group's language is less well-founded, but it is most likely related to the southern New England Algonquian dialect. The kinship system likely kept Long Island natives together with clans in present-day New Jersey, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island.\nGiovanni da Verrazzano was the first European to record an encounter with the Lenape people, after entering what is now New York Bay in 1524; however, it is unclear whether he encountered Native Americans from Long Island.\n17th century.\nIn 1609, the English navigator Henry Hudson explored the harbor and purportedly landed at present-day Coney Island. Dutch explorer Adriaen Block followed in 1615 and is credited as the first European to determine that both Manhattan and Long Island are islands.\nThe first recorded encounters between the Algonquian peoples of Long Island and Europeans occurred with the arrival of explorers in the early 17th century, first contacted by Henry Hudson and his crew. These interactions were initially characterized by curiosity and tentative exchanges, but conflicts later emerged between them. Despite this, mutually beneficial trade ensued, with the Algonquian trading fur for clothing, metal, guns, and alcohol.\nThe Dutch, recognizing the value of New England's fur market, forged long-term alliances with the Algonquians in 1613, ushering in permanent settlements. By 1621, the Dutch West India Company established itself in the Northeast. The Dutch West India Company established a foothold in the Northeast, initiating a lucrative trade in wampum\u2014beads of significant cultural and economic importance to Native tribes across the Northeast. The wampum was primarily made by Long Island Native Americans. The Dutch would thus engage in a triangular trade: purchasing large quantities of wampum from Long Island, exchanging wampum for fur with inland tribes, and shipping the fur back to Europe. This triangular trade created peace amongst the Europeans and the Native Americans for decades.\nIn 1636, Charles I of England, a Stuart, rewarded Scottish courtier, diplomat, and colonial governor William Alexander's service to the Crown by creating him Lord Alexander of Tullibody and Viscount of Stirling. On April 22 of that year Charles told the Plymouth Colony, which had laid claim to Long Island but had not settled it, to cede it to Alexander. When his agent James Farret arrived in New Amsterdam in 1637 to present his claim of English sovereignty, he was arrested and imprisoned in Holland, but later escaped from prison.\nThe Pequot War, a struggle over between the Pequot tribe of Connecticut, who exerted control over eastern Long Island, and the English New England Colonies, reshaped alliances and power dynamics in the region. The defeat of the Pequots left a void in eastern Long Island's political landscape, who were historically under the influence of the Connecticut Pequots for trade and protection. Indigenous leaders such as Uncas and Ninigret, alongside the New England Colonies, vied to fill this vacuum, with the colonists eventually prevailing over their indigenous rivals. In 1639, Lion Gardiner secured the first purchase of eastern Long Island land, an islet off of present-day East Hampton.\nThe period between 1636 and 1648 marked a time of land acquisition in Long Island by Dutch and English colonists. The Dutch occupied a small portion of western Long Island while the English settled on the eastern side, buying land from any sachems who were willing to sell to them. The perspectives on these land purchases likely varied significantly between Native Americans and Europeans. Europeans viewed land transactions as opportunities for exclusive ownership and permanent settlement, while the Algonquian peoples viewed the transaction as temporary and communal. Additionally, the Native Americans governance style of weak leadership and undefined hunting grounds, did not align with the European's need for strict boundaries. This confusion resulted in conflict and boundary disputes for many years after.\nIn 1640, English colonists attempted to settle Cow Bay in what is present-day Port Washington. After an alert by Native leader Penhawitz, the colonists were arrested by the Dutch but released after saying they were mistaken about the title.\nThrough Farret, who received Shelter Island and Robins Island, Alexander in turn sold most of the eastern island to the New Haven and Connecticut colonies.\nAs European settlers proliferated on Long Island, the ecosystem underwent significant transformation, and the dynamics between Native Americans and Europeans shifted. The Europeans cleared vast areas of traditional hunting grounds and introduced livestock that damaged Native crops. Europeans also began to encroach on Native land, and this growing proximity heightened tensions. This culminated in Kieft's War, initiated by a devastating attack that killed 80 Native Americans.\nDespite shifting claims to title and absentee land sales, European settlers continued to purchase land directly from indigenous people. In 1655, they split the acquired land amongst themselves and continued to search the island for more land for settlement. On June 10, 1664, other parts of indigenous land were bought, including present-day Brookhaven, Bellport, and South Haven, in exchange for four coats and 6 pounds 10 shillings \u2013 a value that, accounting for monetary inflation through 2017, is currently worth approximately $840.\nDuring King Philip's War in 1675, the governor of New York, Edmund Andros, ordered that all canoes east of Hell Gate be confiscated. This was done to prevent local indigenous people from helping their Native allies on the mainland, who were attacking New England settlers there. Notable sachems, such as Tackapousha of the Massapequa, saw their influence wane post-King Philip's War in 1675. In the face of escalating tensions between French and English settlers, these Indigenous figures endeavored to mediate and protect their communities. However efforts to maintain land rights were undermined by disease, deceit, infringements of land patents, and cultural misunderstandings.\nAfter the Dutch began to colonize Manhattan, many indigenous people moved to Pennsylvania and Delaware. Many of those who stayed behind died from smallpox, which spread to North America via European colonists and resulted in large scale deaths due to lack of antibodies and natural resistance which Eurasian peoples had gained with their exposure to the disease.\nNative American land deeds recorded by the Dutch from 1636 state that the Indians referred to Long Island as '. ' and ' were other spellings in the transliteration of the Lenape. ' was one of the terms for wampum, commemorative stringed shell beads, for a while also used as currency by colonists in trades with the Lenape, and is also translated as \"loose\" or \"scattered\", which may refer either to the wampum or to Long Island. The name \"'t Lange Eylandt alias Matouwacs\" appears in Dutch maps from the 1650s, with \"'t Lange Eylandt\" translating it to \"Long Island\" from Old Dutch. The English referred to Long Island as \"Nassau Island\", after the House of Nassau of the Dutch Prince William of Nassau, Prince of Orange (who later also ruled as King William III of England). It is unclear when the name \"Nassau Island\" was discontinued. Another indigenous name from colonial time, Paumanok, comes from the Native American name for Long Island and means \"the island that pays tribute.\"\nThe very first European settlements on Long Island were by settlers from England and its colonies in present-day New England. Lion Gardiner settled nearby Gardiners Island. The first settlement on the geographic Long Island itself was on October 21, 1640, when Southold was established by the Rev. John Youngs and settlers from New Haven, Connecticut. Peter Hallock, one of the settlers, drew the long straw and was granted the honor to step ashore first. He is considered the first New World settler on Long Island. Southampton was settled in the same year. Hempstead followed in 1644, East Hampton in 1648, Huntington in 1653, Brookhaven in 1655, and Smithtown in 1665.\nWhile the eastern region of Long Island was first settled by the English, the western portion of Long Island was settled by the Dutch; until 1664, the jurisdiction of Long Island was split between the Dutch and English, roughly at the present border between Nassau County and Suffolk County. The Dutch founded six towns in present-day Brooklyn beginning in 1645. These included: Brooklyn, Gravesend, Flatlands, Flatbush, New Utrecht, and Bushwick. The Dutch had granted an English settlement in Hempstead, New York (now in Nassau County) in 1644, but after a boundary dispute, they drove out English settlers from the Oyster Bay area. However, in 1664, the English returned to take over the Dutch colony of New Netherland, including Long Island.\nThe 1664 land patent granted to the Duke of York included all islands in Long Island Sound. The Duke of York held a grudge against Connecticut, as New Haven had hidden three of the judges (John Dixwell, Edward Whalley and William Goffe) who sentenced the Duke's father, King Charles I, to death in 1649. Settlers throughout Suffolk County pressed to stay part of Connecticut, but Governor Sir Edmund Andros threatened to eliminate the settlers' rights to land if they did not yield, which they did by 1676.\nAll of Long Island along with islands between Long Island and Connecticut became part of the Province of New York within the Shire of York. Present-day Suffolk County was designated as the \"East Riding\" (of Yorkshire), present-day Brooklyn was part of the \"West Riding\", and present-day Queens and Nassau were part of the larger \"North Riding\". In 1683, Yorkshire was dissolved and the three original counties on Long Island were established: Kings, Queens, and Suffolk.\n18th century.\nFollowing the European colonization of the Americas that included Long Island, the Algonquian peoples found themselves increasingly marginalized, their ancient hunting grounds cleared for agriculture, and their economic systems integrated into the European market, particularly through their labor and the dwindling fur and wampum trades. By the 18th century, most native lands had been seized, leaving only small parcels, and many Indigenous people were relegated to roles as domestics, laborers, guides, and seamen.\nWilliam Floyd was born on Long Island on December 17, 1734. In 1654, his family emigrated to North America. By the time of Floyd's birth, the family was established and wealthy. He was a member of the Suffolk County Militia in the beginning of the American Revolution, and rose to the rank of Major General. In 1774, he was chosen as a representative from New York to the First Continental Congress. After the battle of Long Island, his estate was confiscated by the British army and was used as a cavalry base. In 1789, Floyd was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he served until 1791. Francis Lewis from Brookhaven on Long Island, another signer of the Declaration of Independence, had his home destroyed and his wife Elizabeth arrested by the British after the battle of Long Island. George Washington managed her release by having the wives of two wealthy Loyalists from Philadelphia arrested, and then exchanging the two for Mrs. Lewis.\nMarinus Willett, of Jamaica, Queens enlisted in the colonial militia after the French and Indian War broke out in 1754. He participated in the Ticonderoga campaign and the capture of Fort Frontenac in 1758. Joining the revolutionary Sons of Liberty in the 1770s, Willett shortly thereafter enlisted in the Continental Army in 1775. Serving in the 1st New York, he took part in the Invasion of Quebec before transferring to the 3rd New York in 1776. Seeing action at Monmouth, Willett then participated in the 1778 Sullivan Campaign. He was made the colonel of the 5th New York in 1780 and the Tryon County militia in 1781, where he fought at Johnstown. On August 22, 1830, Willett died and was buried in the graveyard of Trinity Church. The Willets Point and the accompanying Mets-Willets Point station is named in his honor.\nEarly in the American Revolutionary War, the island was captured by the British from American troops under George Washington in the battle of Long Island, a major battle after which Washington narrowly evacuated his troops from Brooklyn Heights under a dense fog. After the British victory on Long Island, many Patriots withdrew, leaving mostly Loyalists behind. The island was a British stronghold until the end of the war in 1783.\nGeneral Washington based his intelligence activities on Long Island, due to the western part of the island's proximity to the British military headquarters in New York City. The Culper Ring included agents operating between Setauket and Manhattan. This ring alerted Washington to valuable British secrets, including the treason of Benedict Arnold and a plan to use counterfeiting to induce economic sabotage.\nLong Island's colonists supported both Loyalist and Patriot causes, with many prominent families divided among both sides. During the occupation, British forces utilized a number of civilian structures for defense and were also at times quartered in local homes. A number of structures from this era remain. Among these are Raynham Hall, the Oyster Bay home of patriot spy Robert Townsend, and the Caroline Church in Setauket, which contains bullet holes from a skirmish known as the Battle of Setauket. Also in existence is a reconstruction of Brooklyn's Old Stone House, on the site of the Maryland 400's celebrated last stand during the Battle of Long Island.\n19th century.\nIn the 19th century, Long Island was still mainly rural and devoted to agriculture. The predecessor to the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) began service in 1836 from the South Ferry in Brooklyn, through the remainder of Brooklyn, to Jamaica in Queens. The line was completed to the east end of Long Island in 1844, as part of a plan for transportation to Boston. Competing railroads, soon absorbed by the LIRR, were built along the south shore to accommodate travelers from those more populated areas. For the century from 1830 until 1930, total population roughly doubled every twenty years, with more dense development in areas near Manhattan. Several cities were incorporated, such as the \"City of Brooklyn\" in Kings County, and Long Island City in Queens.\nUntil completion of the Brooklyn Bridge in 1883, the only means of travel between Long Island and the rest of the United States was by boat or ship. As other bridges and tunnels were constructed, areas of the island began to be developed as residential suburbs, first around the railroads that offered commuting into the city. On January 1, 1898, Kings County and portions of Queens County were consolidated into the City of Greater New York, abolishing all cities and towns within them. The easternmost of Queens County, which were not part of the consolidation plan,\nseparated from Queens in 1899 to form Nassau County.\nAt the close of the 19th century, wealthy industrialists who made vast fortunes during the Gilded Age began to construct large \"baronial\" country estates in Nassau County communities along the North Shore of Long Island, favoring the many properties with water views. Proximity to Manhattan attracted such men as J. P. Morgan, William K. Vanderbilt, and Charles Pratt, whose estates led to this area being nicknamed the Gold Coast. This period and the area was immortalized in fiction, such as F. Scott Fitzgerald's \"The Great Gatsby\", which has also been adapted in films.\n20th century.\nThe gradual decline in Indigenous authority reached a critical point when it led to the formal obliteration of acknowledgement for many tribes. A poignant example of this phenomenon occurred in 1910, when a legal decree by the Judiciary of New York pronounced the Montaukett \"tribe\" extinct, ignoring the presence and testimonies of its members in court. Such decrees were used to facilitate the encroachment on Native American lands with greater ease, granting legal legitimacy to the acts of settler colonialism. In the absence of legally recognized Indigenous territories, settlers could assert ownership over Native lands without engaging in negotiations or offering compensation. This act represented the final stage in the thorough domination and displacement of Native American communities on Long Island.\nCharles Lindbergh lifted off from Roosevelt Field with his \"Spirit of St. Louis\" for his historic 1927 solo flight to Europe, one of the events that helped to establish Long Island as an early center of aviation during the 20th century. Other famous aviators such as Wiley Post originated notable flights from Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn, which became the first major airport serving New York City before it was superseded by the opening of La Guardia Airport in 1939. Long Island was also the site of Mitchel Air Force Base and was a major center of military aircraft production by companies such as Grumman and Fairchild Aircraft during World War II and for some decades afterward. Aircraft production on Long Island extended all the way into the Space Age. Grumman was one of the major contractors that helped to build the early lunar flight and Space Shuttle vehicles. Although the aircraft companies eventually ended their Long Island operations and the early airports were all later closed. Roosevelt Field, for instance, became the site of a major shopping mall, the Cradle of Aviation Museum on the site of the former Mitchel Field documents the Island's key role in the history of aviation.\nFrom the 1920s to the 1940s, Long Island began the transformation from backwoods and farms as developers created numerous suburbs. Numerous branches of the Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) already enabled commuting from the suburbs to Manhattan. Robert Moses engineered various automobile parkway projects to span the island, and developed beaches and state parks for the enjoyment of residents and visitors from the city. Gradually, development also followed these parkways, with various communities springing up along the more traveled routes.\nAfter World War II, suburban development increased with incentives under the G.I. Bill, and Long Island's population skyrocketed, mostly in Nassau County and western Suffolk County. Second and third-generation children of immigrants moved out to eastern Long Island to settle in new housing developments built during the post-war boom. Levittown became noted as a suburb, where housing construction was simplified to be produced on a large scale. These provided opportunities for white World War II military veterans returning home to buy houses and start a family. In his 1966 book, \"My Private America\" (\"Moja prywatna Ameryka\"), Kazimierz Wierzy\u0144ski, a Polish poet who could not go back to Poland after World War II, describes Polish farmers living there, as \"walking novels\".\n21st century.\nAt the beginning of the 21st century, a number of Long Island communities had converted their assets from industrial uses to post-industrial roles. Brooklyn reversed decades of population decline and factory closings to resurface as a globally renowned cultural and intellectual hotbed. Gentrification has impacted much of Brooklyn and a portion of Queens, relocating a sizeable swath of New York City's population. On eastern Long Island, Port Jefferson, Patchogue, and Riverhead evolved from inactive shipbuilding and mill towns into tourist-centric commercial centers with cultural attractions.\nThe descendants of late 19th and early 20th-century immigrants from southern and Eastern Europe, and Black migrants from the South, were followed by more recent immigrants from Asia and Latin America. Long Island has many ethnic Irish, Jews, and Italians. In later immigration trends, Asians, Hispanics, Afghans, Arabs, and Indians arrived on Long Island.\nGeography.\nThe westernmost end of Long Island contains the New York City boroughs of Brooklyn (Kings County) and Queens (Queens County). The central and eastern portions contain the suburban Nassau and Suffolk counties. However, colloquial usage of the term \"Long Island\" usually refers only to Nassau and Suffolk counties. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has a district named \"Long Island (Nassau-Suffolk Metro Division).\" At least as late as 1911, locations in Queens were still commonly referred to as being on Long Island. Some institutions in the New York City section of the island use the island's names, like Long Island University and Long Island Jewish Medical Center.\nIn 1985, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in \"United States v. Maine\" that Long Island is integrally related to the mainland enough that Long Island Sound and the western part of Block Island Sound constitute a \"juridical bay\" for the purpose of determining maritime state boundaries. In the popular media, this has been often misinterpreted as a ruling that Long Island is legally not an island. The United States Board on Geographic Names still considers Long Island an island, because it is surrounded by water.\nThere are few tall buildings on Long Island. Nassau County is more densely developed than Suffolk County. While affluent overall, Nassau County has pockets of more pronounced wealth with estates covering greater acreage within the Gold Coast of the North Shore and the Five Towns area on the South Shore. South Shore communities are built along protected wetlands of the island and contain white sandy beaches of Outer Barrier Islands fronting on the Atlantic Ocean. Dutch and English settlers from the time before the American Revolutionary War, as well as communities of Native Americans, populated the island. The 19th century saw the infusion of the wealthiest Americans in the so-called Gold Coast of the North Shore, where wealthy Americans and Europeans in the Gilded Age built lavish country homes.\nEast of Riverhead in Suffolk County, Long Island splits into two peninsulas (colloquially referred to as \"Forks\"), which are separated by the Peconic Bay. The easternmost point of the North Fork is Orient Point, and the easternmost point of the South Fork (and all of Long Island) is Montauk Point. Long Island's East End remains semi-rural, as in Greenport on the North Fork and some of the periphery of the area prominently known as The Hamptons, although summer tourism swells the population in those areas. The North Fork has developed a burgeoning wine region. In addition, the South Fork is known for beach communities, including the Hamptons, and for the Montauk Point Lighthouse at the eastern tip of the island. The Pine Barrens is a preserved pine forest encompassing much of eastern Suffolk County.\nGeology.\nA detailed geomorphological study of Long Island provides evidence of glacial history of the kame and terminal moraines of the island which were formed by the advance and retreat of two ice sheets. Long Island, as part of the Outer Lands region, is formed largely of two spines of glacial moraine, with a large, sandy outwash plain beyond. These moraines consist of gravel and loose rock left behind during the two most recent pulses of Wisconsin glaciation during the ice ages some 21,000 years ago (19,000 BC). The northern moraine, which directly abuts the North Shore of Long Island at points, is known as the Harbor Hill moraine. The more southerly moraine, known as the Ronkonkoma moraine, forms the \"backbone\" of Long Island; it runs primarily through the very center of Long Island, roughly coinciding with the length of the Long Island Expressway.\nThe land to the south of this moraine to the South Shore is the outwash plain of the last glacier. One part of the outwash plain was known as the Hempstead Plains, and this land contained one of the few natural prairies to exist east of the Appalachian Mountains. The glaciers melted and receded to the north, resulting in the difference between the topography of the North Shore beaches and the South Shore beaches. The North Shore beaches are rocky from the remaining glacial debris, while the South Shore's are crisp, clear, outwash sand. Jayne's Hill, at , within Suffolk County near its border with Nassau County, is the highest hill along either moraine; another well-known summit is Bald Hill in Brookhaven Town, not far from its geographical center at Middle Island. The glaciers also formed Lake Ronkonkoma in Suffolk County and Lake Success in Nassau County, each a deep kettle lake.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Long Island lies in a transition zone between a humid subtropical climate (Cfa) and a hot-summer humid continental climate (Dfa). The climate features hot, usually humid summers with occasional thunderstorms, mild spring and fall weather, and cool winters with a mix of snow and rain and stormier conditions. Spring can be cool due to the relatively cooler temperatures of the Atlantic Ocean and occasional blocking. Thunderstorms rarely form directly over Long Island, but can form over inland areas and then move eastward. Some storms may weaken as they approach Long Island due to the moderating effects of the Atlantic Ocean. The ocean also brings afternoon sea breezes to the immediate South Shore areas (within ) that temper the heat in the warmer months. The temperatures south of Sunrise Highway (NY Route 27) tend to be significantly cooler than the rest of Long Island in the spring and summer months because of the relatively cooler temperatures of the Atlantic Ocean. Long Island has a moderately sunny climate, averaging 2,400 to 2,800 hours of sunshine annually.\nDue to its coastal location, Long Island winter temperatures are milder than most of the state. The coldest month is January, when average temperatures range from , and the warmest month is July, when average temperatures range from . Temperatures seldom fall below or rise above . Coldest temp ever recorded on Long Island was on January 22, 1961. Long Island temperatures vary from west to east, with the western part (Nassau County, Queens, and Brooklyn) generally 2 to 3 degrees F (1 to 2 degrees C) warmer than the east (Suffolk County). This is due to several factors: the western part is closer to the mainland and more densely developed, causing the \"urban heat island\" effect, and Long Island's land mass veers northward as one travels east. Also, daytime high temperatures on the eastern part of Long Island are cooler on most occasions, due to the moderating effect of the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound. On dry nights with no clouds or wind, the Central Part of Suffolk County and Pine Barrens forest of eastern Suffolk County can be almost 5 to 10 F (3 to 5 C) cooler than the rest of the island, due to radiational cooling. Average dew points, a measure of atmospheric moisture, typically lie in the range during July and August.\nPrecipitation is distributed uniformly throughout the year, with approximately on average during each month. Average yearly snowfall totals range from approximately , with the north shore and western parts averaging more than the immediate south shore (South of Sunrise Hwy) and the east end. In any given winter, however, some parts of the island can see up to of snow or more. There are also milder winters, in which much of the island see less than of snow.\nOn August 13, 2014, flash flooding occurred in western-central Suffolk County after a record-setting rainfall deposited more than three months' worth of precipitation on the area within a few hours.\nLong Island is somewhat vulnerable to tropical cyclones. While it lies north of where most tropical cyclones turn eastward and out to sea (most landfalls on the East Coast of the U.S. occur from North Carolina southward), several tropical cyclones have struck Long Island, including a devastating Category 3, the 1938 New England hurricane (also known as the \"Long Island Express\"), and another Category 3, Hurricane Carol in 1954. Other 20th-century storms that made landfall on Long Island at hurricane intensity include the 1944 Great Atlantic hurricane, Hurricane Donna in 1960, Hurricane Belle in 1976, and Hurricane Gloria in 1985. Also, the eyewall of Hurricane Bob in 1991 brushed the eastern tip. In August 2011, portions of Long Island were evacuated in preparation for Hurricane Irene, a Category 1 hurricane which weakened to a tropical storm before it reached Long Island.\nOn October 29, 2012, Hurricane Sandy caused extensive damage to low-lying coastal areas of Nassau and Suffolk counties, Brooklyn, and Queens, destroying or severely damaging thousands of area homes and other structures by ocean and bay storm surges. Hundreds of thousands of residents were left without electric power for periods of time ranging up to several weeks while the damage was being repaired. The slow-moving \"Superstorm Sandy\" (so-nicknamed because it merged with a nor'easter before it made landfall) caused 90% of Long Island households to lose power and an estimated $18\u00a0billion in damages in Nassau and Suffolk counties alone. The storm also had a devastating impact on coastal communities in the Brooklyn and Queens portions of the island, including Coney Island in Brooklyn and the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens, although estimates of monetary damages there are usually calculated as part of the overall losses suffered in New York City as a whole. When allowance is made for inflation, the extent of Sandy's damages is second only to that of those caused by the 1938 Long Island Express. Although a lower central pressure was recorded in Sandy, the National Hurricane Center estimates that the 1938 hurricane had a lower pressure at landfall. Hurricane Sandy and its profound impacts have prompted the discussion of constructing seawalls and other coastal barriers around the shorelines of Long Island and New York City to minimize the risk of destructive consequences from another such event in the future.\nAdditional islands.\nSeveral smaller islands, though geographically distinct, are in proximity to Long Island and are often grouped with it. These islands include Fire Island, the largest of the outer barrier islands that parallels the southern shore of Long Island for approximately ; Plum Island, which was home to the Plum Island Animal Disease Center, a biological weapons research facility; Fishers Island and smaller islands Wicopesset Island, North Dumpling Island, South Dumpling Island, and Flat Hammock; as well as Robins Island, Gardiners Island, Long Beach Barrier Island, Jones Beach Island, Great Gull Island, Little Gull Island, and Shelter Island.\nEnvironmental degradation.\nLong Island is a region affected by environmental degradation resulting from urban and suburban expansion beginning at the start of the 20th century. With the Long Island Sound to the north and the Atlantic Ocean to the south and east, Long Island is home to a diverse range of habitats including salt marshes, coastal grasslands, beaches, rocky intertidal zones, tidal flats, pine barrens, estuaries, deciduous forests and many more. Each of these habitats faces unique challenges in terms of environmental degradation but a few common issues can be found in each of them.\nOne of the most common forms of environmental degradation is eutrophication of lakes and ponds due to nutrient pollution. Nearly all of the bodies of water on Long Island have been affected by nutrient pollution in the form of nitrogen and phosphorus. Fertilizer containing high levels of nitrogen and phosphorus is washed into nearby surface water, accelerating the process of eutrophication. Common signs of eutrophication include murky green water and foul odor. Nutrient pollution is also responsible for harmful algal blooms which can be toxic to aquatic organisms, birds and mammals, including humans.\nChemical pollution is common on Long Island with it being home to 38 Superfund sites both closed and active. The four counties of Long Island have had chemical pollution, but Nassau County has the most out of the group with 18 superfund sites. Most famously from 1942 to 1996 Northrop Grumman and the United States Navy owned 600 acres where they manufactured military aircraft. Disposal practices of both parties resulted in a plume of VOCs or volatile organic compounds that contaminated groundwater in an area extending 4.3 miles north and south and 2.1 miles east and west. Restoration efforts have been on going since 2019 but concern over water quality still remains. Chemical pollution on Long Island often follows a similar pattern of negligence with hazardous chemicals that leak into groundwater and soil. Long Island drinking water is sourced from a large aquifer which is at risk of contamination if chemical pollution continues.\nLong Island is one of the most developed areas in the United States with a majority of the high intensity development located closer to New York City and lower intensity development moving east across the island. High intensity development makes up 10% of the land cover on Long Island. Medium intensity development makes up 17%, and low intensity development makes up 17%. Developed open spaces account for 19% making the total percent of developed land around 63%. Most of the undeveloped land is found in Suffolk County which is made up of 46% undeveloped land. This level of development means most of the original habitats on Long Island have been destroyed or segmented by housing developments or roads. Tidal wetlands are the victims of the most habitat destruction due development of coastal land. New York has lost almost half of its tidal wetlands along the Long Island Sound. These tidal wetlands act as a natural barrier from flooding. As they are destroyed and developed the chances of flooding increase.\nClimate change will affect Long Islanders in a number of ways in the future. It is estimated that at current rates by the year 2100 water levels will rise about four feet causing the relocation and destruction of neighborhoods along the coast of the island. As well as rising water levels, Long Islanders will have to deal with the effects of ever stronger hurricane seasons, and more catastrophic storms like Hurricane Sandy in 2012. Rising temperatures will also exacerbate the algal bloom problems, as algae tends to thrive in warmer waters. Restoration of coast lines and marsh habitats may provided some protection against flooding from large storms, but Long Island is largely unprepared for the increasing intensity of storms in the years to come.\nDemographics.\nLong Island is the most populous island and one of the most densely populated regions in the United States. At the 2020 U.S. census, the total population of all four counties of Long Island was 8,063,232, comprising 40% of the population of the State of New York. As of 2020, the proportion of New York City residents (total 8,804,190) living on Long Island had risen to 58.4%, given the 5,141,538 residents living in Brooklyn and Queens. Furthermore, the proportion of New York State's population residing on Long Island has also been increasing, with Long Island's census-estimated population increasing 6.5% since 2010, to 8,063,232 in 2020, representing 40% of New York State's census 2020-enumerated population of 20,215,751 and with a population density of on Long Island; the island is more populous than most of the 50 U.S. states.\nAt the 2020 census, the combined population of Nassau and Suffolk counties was 2,921,694 people, Suffolk County's share being 1,525,920 and Nassau County's 1,395,774. Nassau County had a larger population for many decades, but Suffolk County surpassed it in the 1990 census as growth and development continued to spread eastward. As Suffolk County has more than three times the land area of Nassau County, the latter still has a much higher population density, given its proximity to New York City. According to the U.S. Census Bureau's 2008 American Community Survey, Nassau and Suffolk counties had the 10th and 26th highest median household incomes in the nation, respectively. Long Island lost over 111,000 residents to other states between 2017 and 2022. An exception was in 2020 during the pandemic, when Long Island saw a small net increase as city residents left for more space. Those who leave Long Island are generally younger than the median resident and less likely to have a four-year degree, children, or high income. Florida, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina are the biggest recipients of ex-Long Islanders. The Island has seen a net increase from New Yorkers leaving other parts of the state, and a net decrease of Long Islanders leaving for other areas in New York.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhites are the largest racial group in all four counties, and are in the majority in Nassau and Suffolk counties. In 2002, \"The New York Times\" cited a study by the non-profit group ERASE Racism, which determined that Nassau and Suffolk counties constitute the most racially segregated suburbs in the United States.\nIn contrast, Queens is the most ethnically diverse county in the United States and the most diverse urban area in the world.\nAccording to a 2000 report on religion, which asked congregations to respond, Catholics are the largest religious group on Long Island, with non-affiliated in second place. Catholics make up 52% of the population of Nassau and Suffolk, versus 22% for the country as a whole, with Jews at 16% and 7%, respectively, versus 1.7% nationwide. Only a small percentage of Protestants responded, 7% and 8% respectively, for Nassau and Suffolk counties. This is in contrast with 23% for the entire country on the same survey, and 50% on self-identification surveys.\nA growing population of nearly half a million Chinese Americans now live on Long Island. Rapidly expanding Chinatowns have developed in Brooklyn and Queens, with Chinese immigrants also moving into Nassau County, as did earlier European immigrants, such as the Irish and Italians. The busy intersection of Main Street, Kissena Boulevard, and 41st Avenue defines the center of Downtown Flushing and the Flushing Chinatown, known as the \"Chinese Times Square\" or the \"Chinese Manhattan\". The segment of Main Street between Kissena Boulevard and Roosevelt Avenue, punctuated by the Long Island Rail Road trestle overpass, represents the cultural heart of the Flushing Chinatown. Housing over 30,000 individuals born in China alone, the largest by this metric outside Asia, Flushing has become home to the largest and fastest-growing Chinatown in the world and home to one of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections, as the heart of over 250,000 ethnic Chinese in Queens, representing the largest Chinese population of any U.S. municipality other than New York City in total. Conversely, the Flushing Chinatown has also become the epicenter of organized prostitution in the United States, importing women from China, Korea, Thailand, and Eastern Europe to sustain the underground North American sex trade. Flushing is undergoing rapid gentrification with investment by Chinese transnational entities.\nMore recently, a Little India community has emerged in Hicksville, Nassau County, spreading eastward from the more established Little India enclaves in Queens. Rapidly growing Chinatowns have developed in Brooklyn and Queens, as did earlier European immigrants, such as the Irish and Italians. As of 2019, the Asian population in Nassau County had grown by 39% since 2010 to an estimated 145,191 individuals, including approximately 50,000 Indian Americans and 40,000 Chinese Americans, as Nassau County has become the leading suburban destination in the U.S. for Chinese immigrants. Likewise, the Long Island Koreatown originated in Flushing, Queens, and is expanding eastward along Northern Boulevard and into Nassau County.\nLong Island is home to two Native American reservations, Poospatuck Reservation, and Shinnecock Reservation, both in Suffolk County. Numerous island place names are Native American in origin.\nA 2010 article in \"The New York Times\" stated that the expansion of the immigrant workforce on Long Island has not displaced any jobs from other Long Island residents. Half of the immigrants on Long Island hold white-collar positions.\nThe counties of Nassau and Suffolk have been long renowned for their affluence. Long Island is home to some of the wealthiest communities in the United States, including The Hamptons, on the East End of the South Shore of Suffolk County; the Gold Coast, in the vicinity of the island's North Shore, along Long Island Sound; and increasingly, the western shoreline of Brooklyn, facing Manhattan. In 2016, according to \"Business Insider\", the 11962 zip code encompassing Sagaponack, within Southampton, was listed as the most expensive in the U.S., with a median home sale price of $8.5\u00a0million.\nEconomy.\nLong Island has played a prominent role in scientific research and in engineering. It is the home of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in nuclear physics and Department of Energy research. Long Island is also home to the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, which was directed for 35 years by James D. Watson (who, along with Francis Crick and Rosalind Franklin, discovered the double helix structure of DNA). Companies such as Sperry Corporation, Computer Associates (headquartered in Islandia), Zebra Technologies (now occupying the former headquarters of Symbol Technologies, and a former Grumman plant in Holtsville), have made Long Island a center for the computer industry. Stony Brook University and New York Institute of Technology conduct advanced medical and technological research.\nLong Island is home to the East Coast's largest industrial park, the Hauppauge Industrial Park, hosting over 1,300 companies which employ more than 71,000 individuals. Companies in the park and abroad are represented by the Hauppauge Industrial Association. As many as 20% of Long Islanders commute to jobs in Manhattan. The island's eastern end is still partly agricultural. Development of vineyards on the North Fork has spawned a major viticultural industry, replacing potato fields. Pumpkin farms have been added to traditional truck farming. Farms allow fresh fruit picking by Long Islanders for much of the year. Fishing continues to be an important industry, especially at Huntington, Northport, Montauk, and other coastal communities of the East End and South Shore.\nFrom about 1930 to about 1990, Long Island was considered one of the aerospace manufacturing centers of the United States, with companies such as Grumman, Republic, Fairchild, and Curtiss having their headquarters and factories on Long Island. These operations have largely been phased out or significantly diminished.\nGovernment and politics.\nNassau County and Suffolk County each have their own governments, with a County Executive leading each. Each has a county legislature and countywide-elected officials, including district attorney, county clerk, and county comptroller. The towns in both counties have their own governments as well, with town supervisors and a town council. Nassau County is divided into three towns and two small incorporated cities (Glen Cove and Long Beach). Suffolk County is divided into ten towns.\nBrooklyn and Queens, on the other hand, do not have official county governments and are represented only by the Kings County and Queens County District Attorneys, respectively, who work for the State of New York. As boroughs of New York City, both have borough presidents, which have been largely ceremonial offices since the shutdown of the New York City Board of Estimate. The respective Borough Presidents are responsible for appointing individuals to the Brooklyn Community Boards and Queens Community Boards, each of which serves an advisory function on local issues. Brooklyn's sixteen members and Queens' fourteen members represent the first and second largest borough contingents of the New York City Council.\nLaw enforcement.\nQueens and Brooklyn are patrolled by the New York City Police Department. Nassau and Suffolk counties are served by the Nassau County Police Department and Suffolk County Police Department, respectively, although several dozen villages and the two cities in Nassau County have their own police departments. The Nassau County Sheriff's Department and Suffolk County Sheriff's Office handle civil procedure, evictions, warrant service and enforcement, prisoner transport and detention, and operation of the county jails. The Suffolk County Sheriff also has a patrol division, and in 2008, had patrol duties along the Long Island Expressway, when the County Executive briefly disbanded the Suffolk County Police Highway Patrol Division. The Suffolk County Sheriff's Office is the oldest law enforcement agency in the State of New York, founded in the year 1683. New York State Police patrol state parks and parkways. The several SUNY colleges and universities are patrolled by the New York State University Police.\nStatehood proposals.\nThe secession of Nassau and Suffolk counties on Long Island from New York State was proposed as early as 1896, but talk was revived towards the latter part of the twentieth century. On March 28, 2008, Suffolk County Comptroller Joseph Sawicki proposed a plan that would make Nassau and Suffolk counties on Long Island the 51st state of the United States of America. Sawicki claimed all of Nassau and Suffolk taxpayers' money would remain locally, rather than the funds being dispersed all over the entire state of New York, with these counties sending to Albany over three billion dollars more than they receive. The state of Long Island would have included nearly 3\u00a0million people (a larger population than that of fifteen other states). Nassau County executive Ed Mangano came out in support of such a proposal in April 2010 and commissioned a study on it.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nMany public and private high schools on Long Island are ranked among the best in the United States. Nassau and Suffolk counties are the home of 125 public school districts containing 656 public schools. Brookhaven Public Schools is the largest district. It also hosts private schools such as Friends Academy, Chaminade High School, Kellenberg Memorial High School, St. Anthony's High School, and North Shore Hebrew Academy. There also are many parochial schools on Long Island, including several operated by the Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre.\nIn contrast, all of Brooklyn and Queens are served by the New York City Department of Education, the largest school district in the United States. Three of the nine specialized high schools in New York City are in the two Long Island boroughs, those being Brooklyn Latin School, Brooklyn Technical High School (one of the original three specialized schools), and Queens High School for the Sciences. Like Nassau and Suffolk counties, they are home to private schools such as Poly Prep Country Day School, Packer Collegiate Institute, and Saint Ann's School, and Berkeley Carroll School, and parochial schools operated by the Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn.\nColleges and universities.\nLong Island is home to a range of higher education institutions, both public and private. Brooklyn and Queens contain five of eleven senior colleges within CUNY, the public university system of New York City and one of the largest in the country. Among these are the notable institutions of Brooklyn College and Queens College. Brooklyn also contains private colleges such as Pratt Institute and the New York University Tandon School of Engineering, the engineering school of New York University.\nSeveral colleges and universities within the State University of New York system are on Long Island, including Stony Brook University, Nassau Community College, and Suffolk County Community College. Notable private universities on Long Island include Molloy University in Rockville Centre, the New York Institute of Technology in Old Westbury, Hofstra University in Hempstead, Adelphi University in Garden City, Long Island University (with its C.W. Post campus on a former Gold Coast estate in Brookville and a satellite campus in downtown Brooklyn), the Webb Institute, a small naval architecture college in Glen Cove, and the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, a U.S. service academy in Kings Point, on the North Shore.\nCulture.\nMusic.\nMusic on Long Island (Nassau and Suffolk) is strongly influenced by the proximity to New York City and by the youth culture of the suburbs.\nPsychedelic rock was widely popular in the 1960s as flocks of disaffected youth travelled to NYC to participate in protest and the culture of the time. Rhythm and blues also has a history on Long Island, most notably Huntington-born Mariah Carey, one of the top-selling musicians of all time. In the late 1970s through the 1980s, the influence of radio station WLIR made Long Island one of the first places in the nation to hear and embrace European New Wave bands, including Depeche Mode, Pet Shop Boys, and Culture Club. In the 1990s, hip hop music became popular. Rap pioneers Rakim, EPMD, De La Soul, MF Doom, and Public Enemy grew up on Long Island. Long Island was the home of a bustling emo scene in the 2000s, with bands such as Brand New, Taking Back Sunday, Straylight Run, From Autumn to Ashes and As Tall as Lions.\nRock bands from Long Island include the Rascals, the Ramones (from Queens), Dream Theater, Blue \u00d6yster Cult, Twisted Sister, and guitar virtuosos Donald (Buck Dharma) Roeser, John Petrucci, Steve Vai, and Joe Satriani, and drummer Mike Portnoy. Rock and pop singer Billy Joel grew up in Hicksville, and his music references Long Island and his youth.\nNassau Coliseum and Jones Beach Theater are venues used by national touring acts as performance spaces for concerts. Jones Beach Theater is a popular place to view summer concerts that feature new and classic artists. It also hosts a large Fourth of July fireworks show annually.\nLong Island is also known for its school music programs. Many schools in both Nassau and Suffolk County have distinguished music programs, with high numbers of students who are accepted into the statewide All-State music groups, or even the National All-Eastern Coast music groups. Both the Suffolk County and Nassau County Music Educator's Associations are recognized by The National Association for Music Education (NAfME),\nand host numerous events, competitions, and other music-related activities.\nCuisine.\nLong Island has historically been a center for fishing and seafood. This legacy continues in the Blue Point oyster, a now ubiquitous variety originally harvested on the Great South Bay that was the favorite oyster of Queen Victoria. Clams are also a popular food and clam digging a popular recreational pursuit, with Manhattan clam chowder reputed to have Long Island origins.\nOf land-based produce, Long Island duck has a history of national recognition since the 19th century, with four duck farms continuing to produce 2\u00a0million ducks a year as of 2013[ [update]]. Two symbols of Long Island's duck farming heritage are the Long Island Ducks minor-league baseball team and the Big Duck, a 1931 duck-shaped building that is a historic landmark and tourist attraction. In addition to Long Island's duck industry, Riverhead contains one of the largest buffalo farms on the East coast.\nLong Island is well known for its production of alcoholic beverages. Eastern Long Island is a significant producer of wine. Vineyards are most heavily concentrated on Long Island's North Fork, which contains 38 wineries. Most of these contain tasting rooms, which are popular attractions for visitors from across the New York metropolitan area. Long Island has also become a producer of diverse craft beers, with 15 microbreweries across Nassau and Suffolk counties as of 2013[ [update]]. The largest of these is Blue Point Brewing Company, best known for its \"toasted lager\". Long Island is also globally known for its signature cocktail, the Long Island Iced Tea, which was purportedly invented at the popular Babylon Town \"Oak Beach Inn\" nightclub in the 1970s.\nLong Island's eateries are largely a product of the region's local ethnic populations. Asian cuisines, Italian cuisine, Jewish cuisine, and Latin American cuisines were the most popular ethnic cuisines on Long Island as of the second decade of the 2000s. Asian cuisines are predominantly represented by East Asian, South Asian, and Middle Eastern cuisines. Italian cuisine is found in ubiquitous pizzerias throughout the island, with the region hosting an annual competition, the Long Island Pizza Festival &amp; Bake-Off. Jewish cuisine is likewise represented by delicatessens and bagel stores. Latin American cuisines span their geographical origins, from Brazilian rodizios to Mexican taquerias.\nFolklore and urban legends.\nLong Island has inspired numerous local legends over the centuries from the distant past to the present. For instance, numerous historic buildings and other locations on Long Island are rumored to be haunted including the Fire Island Lighthouse, Lake Ronkonkoma, Mount Misery Road, Country House Restaurant, and Raynham Hall. However, the most prominent and supposedly haunted location on Long Island is the Amityville Horror House which has inspired numerous books and horror movies.\nThe Montauk Monster is at the center of numerous conspiracy theories. Long Island is also home to other stories of conspiracies and government cover-ups mainly centered around Camp Hero State Park and the Montauk Project. Peter Moon's book \"Pyramids of Montauk\" explores these theories, suggesting connections between Montauk and ancient civilizations. These conspiracy stories also helped inspire the hit Netflix show Stranger Things. Additionally, it is rumored that a UFO crash in Southaven County Park was covered up in 1992.\nSports.\nMajor league sports.\nThe New York Mets of Major League Baseball play at Citi Field in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens. Their former stadium, Shea Stadium, was also home for the New York Jets of the National Football League from 1964 until 1983. The new stadium has an exterior fa\u00e7ade and main entry rotunda inspired by Brooklyn's famous Ebbets Field.\nThe Barclays Center, a sports arena, business, and residential complex built partly on a platform over the Atlantic Yards at Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, is the home of the Brooklyn Nets and New York Liberty basketball teams. The move from New Jersey in the summer of 2012 marked the return to Long Island for the Nets franchise, which played at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale from 1972 to 1977. The New York Islanders hockey team played at Nassau Coliseum from their 1972 inception through 2015, and then splitting time between Nassau Coliseum and Barclays Center from 2017 to 2021, playing their last full season at the Nassau Coliseum during the 2020\u201321 NHL Season. The Islanders moved full-time to UBS Arena at Belmont Park, in Elmont, New York, in November 2021.\nNew York City FC, a Major League Soccer (MLS) team established in 2015, has played some home matches at Citi Field when Yankee Stadium, their primary venue, is unavailable. The team began construction of a new stadium, Etihad Park, adjacent to Citi Field in 2024. It is scheduled to open in 2027 and will have a capacity of 25,000 seats.\nHistorical professional teams.\nEbbets Field, which stood in Brooklyn from 1913 until its demolition in 1960, was the home of the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team, who moved to Los Angeles after the 1957 Major League Baseball season to become the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Dodgers won several National League pennants in the 1940s and 1950s, losing several times in the World Series, often called the Subway Series, to their Bronx rivals, the New York Yankees. The Dodgers won their lone championship in Brooklyn in the 1955 World Series versus the Yankees.\nDespite this success during the latter part of the team's stay in Brooklyn, they were a second-division team with an unspectacular winning record for much of their history there \u2013 but nonetheless became legendary for the almost-fanatical devotion of the Brooklynites who packed the relatively small ballpark to vigorously root for the team they affectionately called, \"Dem Bums\". Loss of the Dodgers to California was locally considered a civic tragedy that negatively affected the community far more than the similar moves of other established teams to new cities in the 1950s, including the Dodgers' long-time arch-rival New York Giants, who also left for California after 1957.\nMinor league sports.\nLong Island is home to the Long Island Ducks independent league team of the Atlantic League. Their stadium, Bethpage Ballpark, is in Central Islip. The Brooklyn Cyclones minor league baseball team, affiliated with the New York Mets, plays in the High-A classification South Atlantic League. The Cyclones play at MCU Park just off the Coney Island Boardwalk in the New York City borough of Brooklyn. The New York Dragons of the Arena Football League played their home games at Nassau Coliseum. The two main rugby union teams are the Long Island RFC in East Meadow and the Suffolk Bull Moose in Stony Brook.\nThe Brooklyn Cyclones are a minor league baseball team, affiliated with the New York Mets. The Cyclones play at MCU Park just off the boardwalk on Coney Island in Brooklyn. An artificial turf baseball complex named Baseball Heaven is in Yaphank.\nThe New York Sharks is a women's American football team that is a member of the Women's Football Alliance. The New York Sharks home field is at Aviator Sports Complex in Brooklyn. The New York Mets planned to move their Double-A farm team to Long Island, as part of the ambitious but now-defunct plan for Nassau County called The Lighthouse Project.\nLong Island's professional soccer club, the New York Cosmos, played in the Division 2 North American Soccer League at James M. Shuart Stadium in Hempstead until 2020.\nLong Island has historically been a hotbed of lacrosse at the youth and college level, which made way for a Major League Lacrosse team in 2001, the Long Island Lizards. The Lizards play at Mitchel Athletic Complex in Uniondale.\nCollegiate sports.\nThe Stony Brook Seawolves represent Stony Brook University, and have had a bevy of athletic accomplishments such as reaching the 2012 College World Series as an underdog after defeating the LSU Tigers in a best-of-3 series.\nOther sports.\nLong Island has a wide variety of golf courses found all over the island. Two of the most well-known are the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club and the public Bethpage Black Course that has hosted multiple U.S. Open tournaments and several other top level international championships. Queens also hosts one of the four tennis grand slams, the US Open. Every August (September, in Olympic years) the best tennis players in the world travel to Long Island to play the championships held at the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, adjacent to Citi Field in Flushing Meadows Park. The complex also contains the biggest tennis stadium in the world, the Arthur Ashe Stadium.\nLong Island also has two horse racing tracks, Aqueduct Racetrack in Ozone Park, Queens and Belmont Park on the Queens/Nassau border in Elmont, home of the Belmont Stakes. The longest dirt thoroughbred racecourse in the world is also at Belmont Park. Another category of sporting events popular in this region involves firematic racing events, involving many local volunteer fire departments.\nTransportation.\nMany major forms of transportation serve Long Island, including aviation via John F. Kennedy International Airport, LaGuardia Airport, and Long Island MacArthur Airport, and multiple smaller airports; rail transportation via the Long Island Rail Road and the New York City Subway; bus routes via MTA Regional Bus Operations, Nassau Inter-County Express, and Suffolk County Transit; ferry service via NYC Ferry and multiple smaller ferry companies; and several major highways. There are historic and modern bridges, and recreational and commuter trails, serving various parts of Long Island.\nThere are eleven road crossings out of Long Island, all but one providing Brooklyn-Manhattan, Queens-Manhattan, and Queens-Bronx connections across the East River, with the Triborough Bridge providing two connections from Queens, one each to Manhattan and the Bronx. The single non-East River crossing is the Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge, connecting Brooklyn to Staten Island across The Narrows. Plans for a Long Island Sound link at locations in Nassau and Suffolk counties (a proposed bridge or tunnel that would link Long Island to the south with Westchester County, New York or Connecticut to the north across Long Island Sound) have been discussed for decades, but there are no plans to construct such a crossing.\nPublic transportation.\nThe Metropolitan Transportation Authority operates mass transportation for the New York metropolitan area including all five boroughs of New York City, the suburban counties of Dutchess, Nassau, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Suffolk, and Westchester, all of which together are the \"Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District (MCTD)\".\nThe MTA considers itself to be the largest regional public transportation provider in the Western Hemisphere. As of 2018[ [update]], MTA agencies move about 8.6\u00a0million customers per day (translating to 2.65\u00a0billion rail and bus customers a year). The MTA's systems carry over 11\u00a0million passengers on an average weekday systemwide, and over 850,000 vehicles on its seven toll bridges and two tunnels per weekday.\nRail.\nThe Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) is North America's busiest commuter railroad system, carrying an average of 282,400 passengers each weekday on 728 daily trains. Chartered on April 24, 1834, and operating continuously since, it is also the oldest railroad in the U.S. that still operates under its original charter and name. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has operated the LIRR as one of its two commuter railroads since 1966, and the LIRR is one of the few railroads worldwide that provides service all the time, year round. A $2\u00a0billion plan to add a third railroad track to the LIRR Main Line between the Floral Park and Hicksville stations in Nassau County was completed in 2022, and an expansion of the Ronkonkoma Branch from one to two tracks was completed in 2018. Five \"readiness projects\" across the LIRR system, which cost a combined $495 million, were built in preparation for expanded peak-hour LIRR service after the completion of East Side Access, which brings LIRR trains to Grand Central Madison in Manhattan.\nBus.\nNassau Inter-County Express (NICE) provides bus service in Nassau County, while Suffolk County Transit, an agency of the Suffolk County government, provides bus service in Suffolk County. In 2012, NICE replaced the former MTA's Long Island Bus in transporting Long Islanders across Nassau County while allowing them to use MTA MetroCards as payment.\nRoads.\nThe Long Island Expressway, Northern State Parkway, and Southern State Parkway, all products of the automobile-centered planning of Robert Moses, are the island's primary east\u2013west high-speed controlled-access highways.\nGround transportation.\nSeveral hundred transportation companies service the Long Island and New York City areas. Winston Airport Shuttle, the oldest of these companies in business since 1973, was the first to introduce door-to-door shared-ride service to and from the major airports, which almost all transportation companies now use.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18316", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18316", "title": "Lower Pennisula of Michigan", "text": ""}
{"id": "18317", "revid": "32320434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18317", "title": "Lower Peninsula of Michigan", "text": "Region of U.S. state\nThe Lower Peninsula of Michigan, also known as Lower Michigan, is the larger, southern and less-elevated of the two major landmasses that make up the U.S. state of Michigan. It is separated from the Upper Peninsula by the Straits of Mackinac. The Lower Peninsula is surrounded by water on all sides except its southern border, which it shares with Indiana and Ohio. \nAlthough the Upper Peninsula is commonly referred to as the \"U.P.\", it is uncommon for the Lower Peninsula to be called the L.P. Because of its recognizable shape, the Lower Peninsula is nicknamed The Mitten, with the eastern region identified as \"The Thumb\". This has led to several folkloric creation myths for the area, one being that it is the handprint of Paul Bunyan, a giant lumberjack and popular European-American folk character in Michigan. When asked where they live, peninsula residents may hold up their right hand and point to a spot on the palmar side to indicate the location.\nThe peninsula is sometimes divided into the Northern Lower Peninsula\u2014which is more sparsely populated and largely forested\u2014and the Southern Lower Peninsula\u2014which is largely urban or farmland. Southern Lower Michigan is sometimes further divided into economic and cultural subregions.\nThe more populated and culturally diverse Lower Peninsula dominates Michigan politics, and maps of it without the Upper Peninsula are sometimes mistakenly presented as the whole of Michigan, which contributes to resentment by Yoopers (residents of the U.P.). Yoopers jokingly refer to residents of the Lower Peninsula as \"flat-landers\" (referring to the region's less-rugged terrain) or \"trolls\" (because, being south of the Mackinac Bridge, they \"live under the bridge\").\nGeography.\nThe Lower Peninsula is bounded on the west by Lake Michigan and on the northeast by Lake Huron, which connect at the Straits of Mackinac. In the southeast, the waterway consisting of the St. Clair River, Lake St. Clair, Detroit River, and Lake Erie separates it from the province of Ontario, Canada. It is bounded on the south by the states of Indiana and Ohio. The southern border is irregular: the border with Indiana was moved 10 miles northward from its territorial position to give Indiana more access to Lake Michigan, and its slightly angled border with Ohio was part of the compromise which ended the Toledo War. The peninsula is a part of the Great Lakes Plain, which includes large parts of Wisconsin and Ohio.\nAt its widest points, the peninsula is long from north to south and from east to west. It contains nearly two-thirds of Michigan's total land area. The surface of the peninsula is generally level, broken by conical hills and glacial moraines usually not more than a few hundred feet tall, most common in the north. The highest point in the peninsula is not definitely established, but is either Briar Hill at above sea level, or one of several points nearby in the vicinity of Cadillac. The lowest point is at the shore of Lake Erie at . The western coast features extensive sandy beaches and dunes produced by Lake Michigan and the prevailing winds from the west. The relatively shallow Saginaw Bay is surrounded by a similarly shallow drainage basin. Several large river systems flow into the adjacent Great Lakes, including the Kalamazoo, Grand, Muskegon, and Manistee rivers (Lake Michigan), and the Au Sable and Tittabawassee\u2013Shiawassee\u2013Saginaw rivers (Lake Huron). Because of the networks of rivers and numerous lakes, no point on land is more than from one of these bodies of water, and at most from one of the Great Lakes (near Lansing).\nFlora and fauna.\nThe American Bird Conservancy and the National Audubon Society have designated several locations on the peninsula as internationally Important Bird Areas.\nGeology.\nThe Lower Peninsula is dominated by a geological basin known as the Michigan Basin. The basin is a nearly circular pattern of sedimentary strata in the area, with a nearly uniform structural dip toward the center of the peninsula. The basin is centered on Gladwin County, where the Precambrian-age basement rocks are deep. Around the margins, such as under Mackinaw City, the Precambrian layer is around down. This contour of the bedrock clips the northern part of the peninsula and continues under Lake Michigan to the west. It crosses the southern counties of Michigan and continues on to the north beneath Lake Huron.\nClimate.\nMost monthly temperatures in the peninsula range from a low of 14 degrees to a high of 84 degrees Fahrenheit.\nRegions.\nThe peninsula can be divided into four main regions based on geological and geographical differences; the amount of urban areas or rural areas; minority populations; and agriculture. The four principal regions listed below can further be separated into sub-regions and overlapping areas:\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nInterstate Highways in the region include:\nU.S. Highways in the region include:\nThe Great Lakes Circle Tour is a designated scenic road system connecting all of the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River.\nPassenger rail.\nThe peninsula is served by three Amtrak routes that travel up to , namely the \"Wolverine\", \"Pere Marquette\", and \"Blue Water\" routes.\nIntercity bus.\nVarious intercity buses transport people across the peninsula, including the Michigan Flyer that travels from Lansing to the Detroit Metro Airport with stops in Brighton and Ann Arbor, and the D2A2 nonstop bus from Detroit to Ann Arbor.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18318", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18318", "title": "Lake Toba", "text": "Volcanic lake located in North Sumatra Province, Indonesia\nLake Toba (, Toba Batak: \u1bd6\u1bc0\u1bec \u1bd6\u1bec\u1bc5; romanized: \"Tao Toba\") is a large natural lake in North Sumatra, Indonesia, occupying the caldera of the Toba supervolcano. The lake is located in the middle of the northern part of the island of Sumatra, with a surface elevation of about , the lake stretches from to . The lake is about long, wide, and up to deep. It is the largest lake in Indonesia and the largest volcanic lake in the world. Toba Caldera is one of twenty geoparks in Indonesia, and was recognised in July 2020 as one of the UNESCO Global Geoparks.\nLake Toba is the site of a supervolcanic eruption estimated at VEI 8 that occurred 69,000 to 77,000 years ago, representing a climate-changing event. Recent advances in dating methods suggest a more accurate eruption date of 74,000 years ago. It is the largest-known explosive eruption on Earth in the last 25 million years. According to the Toba catastrophe theory, the eruption had global consequences for human populations as it killed most humans living at that time and is believed to have created a population bottleneck in central east Africa and India, which affects the genetic make-up of the human worldwide population to the present. A recent study has cast doubt on this theory and found no evidence of substantial changes in global population.\nIt was also suggested that the eruption of the Toba Caldera led to a volcanic winter with a worldwide decrease in temperature between , and up to at higher latitudes. Additional studies in Lake Malawi in East Africa show significant amounts of ash being deposited from the Toba Caldera eruptions, even at that great distance, but little indication of a significant climatic effect in East Africa.\nGeology.\nThe Toba Caldera in North Sumatra comprises four overlapping volcanic craters that adjoin the Sumatran \"volcanic front\". At it is the world's largest Quaternary caldera, and the fourth and youngest caldera. It intersects the three older calderas. An estimated of dense-rock equivalent pyroclastic material, known as the youngest Toba tuff, was released during one of the largest explosive volcanic eruptions in recent geological history. Following this eruption, a resurgent dome formed within the new caldera, joining two half-domes separated by a longitudinal graben.\nAt least four cones, four stratovolcanoes, and three craters are visible in the lake. The Tandukbenua cone on the northwestern edge of the caldera has only sparse vegetation, suggesting a young age of several hundred years. Also, the Pusubukit (Hill Center) volcano ( above sea level) on the south edge of the caldera is solfatarically active.\nMajor eruption.\nThe \"Toba eruption\" (the \"Toba event\") occurred at what is now Lake Toba about 73,700\u00b1300 years ago. It was the last in a series of at least four caldera-forming eruptions at this location, with the earlier known caldera having formed around 1.2 million years ago. This last eruption had an estimated VEI of 8, making it the largest-known explosive volcanic eruption in the Quaternary.\nBill Rose and Craig Chesner of Michigan Technological University have estimated that the total amount of material released in the eruption was at least \u2014about of ignimbrite that flowed over the ground, and approximately that fell as ash mostly to the west. However, as more outcrops become available, Toba possibly erupted of ignimbrite and co-ignimbrite. The pyroclastic flows of the eruption destroyed an area of least , with ash deposits as thick as by the main vent. The eruption was large enough to have deposited an ash layer approximately thick over all of South Asia; at one site in central India, the Toba ash layer today is up to thick and parts of Malaysia were covered with of ash fall.\nThe subsequent collapse formed a caldera that filled with water, creating Lake Toba. The island in the center of the lake is formed by a resurgent dome.\nThe exact year of the eruption is unknown, but the pattern of ash deposits suggests that it occurred during the northern summer because only the summer monsoon could have deposited Toba ashfall in the South China Sea. The eruption lasted perhaps two weeks, and the ensuing volcanic winter resulted in a decrease in average global temperatures by for several years. Ice cores from Greenland record a pulse of starkly reduced levels of organic carbon sequestration. Very few plants or animals in southeast Asia would have survived, and it is possible that the eruption caused a planet-wide die-off. However, the global cooling has been discussed by Rampino and Self. Their conclusion is that the cooling had already started before Toba's eruption. This conclusion was supported by Lane and Zielinski who studied the lake-core from Africa and GISP2. They concluded that there was no volcanic winter after the Toba eruption and that high H2SO4 deposits do not cause long-term effects. Furthermore, due to the low solubility of sulfur in the magma, the emission of volatiles and climate impacts are likely limited.\nEvidence from studies of mitochondrial DNA suggests that humans may have passed through a genetic bottleneck around this time that reduced genetic diversity below what would be expected given the age of the species. According to the Toba catastrophe theory, proposed by Stanley H. Ambrose of the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign in 1998, the effects of the Toba eruption may have decreased the size of human populations to only a few tens of thousands of individuals. However, this hypothesis is not widely accepted because similar effects on other animal species have not been observed, and paleoanthropology suggests there was no population bottleneck. The genetic bottleneck is now recognized to be the Out-of-Africa founder effect, rather than an actual reduction in population.\nMore recent activity.\nSince the major eruption ~70,000 years ago, eruptions of smaller magnitude have also occurred at Toba. The small cone of Pusukbukit formed on the southwestern margin of the caldera and lava domes. The most recent eruption may have been at Tandukbenua on the northwestern caldera edge, suggested by a lack of vegetation that could be due to an eruption within the last few hundred years.\nSome parts of the caldera have shown uplift due to partial refilling of the magma chamber, for example, pushing Samosir Island and the Uluan Peninsula above the surface of the lake. The lake sediments on Samosir Island show that it has risen by at least since the cataclysmic eruption. Such uplifts are common in very large calderas, apparently due to the upward pressure of below-ground magma. Toba is probably the largest resurgent caldera on Earth. Large earthquakes have recently occurred in the vicinity of the volcano, notably in 1987 along the southern shore of the lake at a depth of . Such earthquakes have also been recorded in 1892, 1916, and 1920\u20131922.\nIn 2016, a study revealed that the Toba Supervolcano has a magma chamber containing of eruptible magma, about underground. This makes the supervolcano's magma chamber more than four times larger than the volume of Lake Superior in North America, and also larger than the magma chamber underneath Yellowstone.\nLake Toba lies near the Great Sumatran fault, which runs along the centre of Sumatra in the Sumatra fracture zone. The volcanoes of Sumatra and Java are part of the Sunda Arc, a result of the northeasterly movement of the Indo-Australian plate, which is sliding under the eastward-moving Eurasian plate. The subduction zone in this area is very active: the seabed near the west coast of Sumatra has had several major earthquakes since 1995, including the 9.1 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 8.7 2005 Nias\u2013Simeulue earthquake, the epicenters of which were around from Toba.\nPeople.\nMost of the people who live around Lake Toba are ethnically Bataks. Traditional Batak houses are noted for their distinctive roofs (which curve upwards at each end, as a boat's hull does) and their colorful decor.\nTransportation.\nParapat is located on the edge of the lake, which is the transit point to travel the lake and Samosir Island. Medan is about 173\u00a0km by road from the town and is connected via the Trans-Sumatran Highway to Pematang Siantar by a 48\u00a0km road. Sisingamangaraja XII International Airport is located about 76\u00a0km from Parapat.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe flora of the lake includes various types of phytoplankton, emerged macrophytes, floating macrophytes, and submerged macrophytes, while the surrounding countryside is rainforest including areas of Sumatran tropical pine forests on the higher mountainsides.\nThe fauna includes several species of zooplankton and benthic animals. Since the lake is oligotrophic (nutrient-poor), the native fish fauna is relatively scarce, and the only endemics are \"Rasbora tobana\" (strictly speaking near-endemic, since also found in some tributary rivers that run into the lake) and \"Neolissochilus thienemanni\", locally known as the Batak fish. The latter species is threatened by deforestation (causing siltation), pollution, changes in water level and the numerous fish species that have been introduced to the lake. Other native fishes include species such as \"Aplocheilus panchax\", \"Nemacheilus pfeifferae\", \"Homaloptera gymnogaster\", \"Channa gachua\", \"Channa striata\", \"Clarias batrachus\", \"Barbonymus gonionotus\", \"Barbonymus schwanenfeldii\", \"Danio albolineatus\", \"Osteochilus vittatus\", \"Puntius binotatus\", \"Rasbora jacobsoni\", \"Tor tambra\", \"Betta imbellis\", \"Betta taeniata\" and \"Monopterus albus\". Among the many introduced species are \"Anabas testudineus\", \"Oreochromis mossambicus\", \"Oreochromis niloticus\", \"Ctenopharyngodon idella\", \"Cyprinus carpio\", \"Osphronemus goramy\", \"Trichogaster pectoralis\", \"Trichopodus trichopterus\", \"Poecilia reticulata\" and \"Xiphophorus hellerii\".\nSinking of MV \"Sinar Bangun\".\nOn 18 June 2018, Lake Toba was the scene of a ferry disaster, in which over 160 people drowned. MV \"Sinar Bangun\" was an irregular operating vessel on the lake which capsized with many passengers on board. The incident caused the death of 167 people and injuries to a number of others. Preliminary reports found the vessel was in operation with irregularities. Ignoring overloading on the vessel and operating in rough weather conditions were concluded to be the main reasons leading to the disaster.\nIn popular culture.\n\"The Origin of Lake Toba\" is a folk story about the lake, in which once upon a time, there was a fisherman who caught a golden fish. Samosir Island is believed to be the golden fish's son.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18320", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18320", "title": "Lens", "text": "Optical device which transmits and refracts light\nA lens is a transmissive optical device that focuses or disperses a light beam by means of refraction. A simple lens consists of a single piece of transparent material, while a compound lens consists of several simple lenses (\"elements\"), usually arranged along a common axis. Lenses are made from materials such as glass or plastic and are ground, polished, or molded to the required shape. A lens can focus light to form an image, unlike a prism, which refracts light without focusing. Devices that similarly focus or disperse waves and radiation other than visible light are also called \"lenses\", such as microwave lenses, electron lenses, acoustic lenses, or explosive lenses.\nLenses are used in various imaging devices such as telescopes, binoculars, and cameras. They are also used as visual aids in glasses to correct defects of vision such as myopia and hypermetropia.\nHistory.\nThe word \"lens\" comes from , the Latin name of the lentil (a seed of a lentil plant), because a double-convex lens is lentil-shaped. The lentil also gives its name to a geometric figure.\nSome scholars argue that the archeological evidence indicates that there was widespread use of lenses in antiquity, spanning several millennia. The so-called Nimrud lens is a rock crystal artifact dated to the 7th century BCE which may or may not have been used as a magnifying glass, or a burning glass. Others have suggested that certain Egyptian hieroglyphs depict \"simple glass meniscal lenses\".\nThe oldest certain reference to the use of lenses is from Aristophanes' play \"The Clouds\" (424 BCE) mentioning a burning-glass. \nPliny the Elder (1st century) confirms that burning-glasses were known in the Roman period.\nPliny also has the earliest known reference to the use of a corrective lens when he mentions that Nero was said to watch the gladiatorial games using an emerald (presumably concave to correct for nearsightedness, though the reference is vague). Both Pliny and Seneca the Younger (3 BC\u201365 AD) described the magnifying effect of a glass globe filled with water.\nPtolemy (2nd century) wrote a book on \"Optics\", which however survives only in the Latin translation of an incomplete and very poor Arabic translation.\nThe book was, however, received by medieval scholars in the Islamic world, and commented upon by Ibn Sahl (10th century), who was in turn improved upon by Alhazen (\"Book of Optics\", 11th century). The Arabic translation of Ptolemy's \"Optics\" became available in Latin translation in the 12th century (Eugenius of Palermo 1154). Between the 11th and 13th century \"reading stones\" were invented. These were primitive plano-convex lenses initially made by cutting a glass sphere in half. The medieval (11th or 12th century) rock crystal Visby lenses may or may not have been intended for use as burning glasses.\nSpectacles were invented as an improvement of the \"reading stones\" of the high medieval period in Northern Italy in the second half of the 13th century. This was the start of the optical industry of grinding and polishing lenses for spectacles, first in Venice and Florence in the late 13th century, and later in the spectacle-making centres in both the Netherlands and Germany.\nSpectacle makers created improved types of lenses for the correction of vision based more on empirical knowledge gained from observing the effects of the lenses (probably without the knowledge of the rudimentary optical theory of the day). The practical development and experimentation with lenses led to the invention of the compound optical microscope around 1595, and the refracting telescope in 1608, both of which appeared in the spectacle-making centres in the Netherlands.\nWith the invention of the telescope and microscope there was a great deal of experimentation with lens shapes in the 17th and early 18th centuries by those trying to correct chromatic errors seen in lenses. Opticians tried to construct lenses of varying forms of curvature, wrongly assuming errors arose from defects in the spherical figure of their surfaces. Optical theory on refraction and experimentation was showing no single-element lens could bring all colours to a focus. This led to the invention of the compound achromatic lens by Chester Moore Hall in England in 1733, an invention also claimed by fellow Englishman John Dollond in a 1758 patent.\nDevelopments in transatlantic commerce were the impetus for the construction of modern lighthouses in the 18th century, which utilize a combination of elevated sightlines, lighting sources, and lenses to provide navigational aid overseas. With maximal distance of visibility needed in lighthouses, conventional convex lenses would need to be significantly sized which would negatively affect the development of lighthouses in terms of cost, design, and implementation. Fresnel lens were developed that considered these constraints by featuring less material through their concentric annular sectioning. They were first fully implemented into a lighthouse in 1823.\nConstruction of simple lenses.\nMost lenses are \"spherical lenses\": their two surfaces are parts of the surfaces of spheres. Each surface can be \"convex\" (bulging outwards from the lens), \"concave\" (depressed into the lens), or \"planar\" (flat). The line joining the centres of the spheres making up the lens surfaces is called the \"axis\" of the lens. Typically the lens axis passes through the physical centre of the lens, because of the way they are manufactured. Lenses may be cut or ground after manufacturing to give them a different shape or size. The lens axis may then not pass through the physical centre of the lens.\nToric or sphero-cylindrical lenses have surfaces with two different radii of curvature in two orthogonal planes. They have a different focal power in different meridians. This forms an astigmatic lens. An example is eyeglass lenses that are used to correct astigmatism in someone's eye.\nTypes of simple lenses.\nLenses are classified by the curvature of the two optical surfaces. A lens is \"biconvex\" (or \"double convex\", or just \"convex\") if both surfaces are convex. If both surfaces have the same radius of curvature, the lens is \"equiconvex\". A lens with two concave surfaces is \"biconcave\" (or just \"concave\"). If one of the surfaces is flat, the lens is \"plano-convex\" or \"plano-concave\" depending on the curvature of the other surface. A lens with one convex and one concave side is \"convex-concave\" or \"meniscus\". Convex-concave lenses are most commonly used in corrective lenses, since the shape minimizes some aberrations.\nFor a biconvex or plano-convex lens in a lower-index medium, a collimated beam of light passing through the lens converges to a spot (a \"focus\") behind the lens. In this case, the lens is called a \"positive\" or \"converging\" lens. For a thin lens in air, the distance from the lens to the spot is the focal length of the lens, which is commonly represented by f in diagrams and equations. An extended hemispherical lens is a special type of plano-convex lens, in which the lens's curved surface is a full hemisphere and the lens is much thicker than the radius of curvature.\nAnother extreme case of a thick convex lens is a ball lens, whose shape is completely round. When used in novelty photography it is often called a \"lensball\". A ball-shaped lens has the advantage of being omnidirectional, but for most optical glass types, its focal point lies close to the ball's surface. Because of the ball's curvature extremes compared to the lens size, optical aberration is much worse than thin lenses, with the notable exception of chromatic aberration.\nFor a biconcave or plano-concave lens in a lower-index medium, a collimated beam of light passing through the lens is diverged (spread); the lens is thus called a \"negative\" or \"diverging\" lens. The beam, after passing through the lens, appears to emanate from a particular point on the axis in front of the lens. For a thin lens in air, the distance from this point to the lens is the focal length, though it is negative with respect to the focal length of a converging lens.\nThe behavior reverses when a lens is placed in a medium with higher refractive index than the material of the lens. In this case a biconvex or plano-convex lens diverges light, and a biconcave or plano-concave one converges it.\nConvex-concave (meniscus) lenses can be either positive or negative, depending on the relative curvatures of the two surfaces. A \"negative meniscus\" lens has a steeper concave surface (with a shorter radius than the convex surface) and is thinner at the centre than at the periphery. Conversely, a \"positive meniscus\" lens has a steeper convex surface (with a shorter radius than the concave surface) and is thicker at the centre than at the periphery.\nAn ideal thin lens with two surfaces of equal curvature (also equal in the sign) would have zero optical power (as its focal length becomes infinity as shown in the lensmaker's equation), meaning that it would neither converge nor diverge light. All real lenses have a nonzero thickness, however, which makes a real lens with identical curved surfaces slightly positive. To obtain exactly zero optical power, a meniscus lens must have slightly unequal curvatures to account for the effect of the lens' thickness.\nFor a spherical surface.\nFor a single refraction for a circular boundary, the relation between object and its image in the paraxial approximation is given by\nformula_1\nwhere R is the radius of the spherical surface, \"n\"2 is the refractive index of the material of the surface, \"n\"1 is the refractive index of medium (the medium other than the spherical surface material), formula_2 is the on-axis (on the optical axis) object distance from the line perpendicular to the axis toward the refraction point on the surface (which height is \"h\"), and formula_3 is the on-axis image distance from the line. Due to paraxial approximation where the line of \"h\" is close to the vertex of the spherical surface meeting the optical axis on the left, formula_2 and formula_3 are also considered distances with respect to the vertex.\nMoving formula_3 toward the right infinity leads to the first or object focal length formula_7 for the spherical surface. Similarly, formula_2 toward the left infinity leads to the second or image focal length formula_9.\nformula_10\nApplying this equation on the two spherical surfaces of a lens and approximating the lens thickness to zero (so a thin lens) leads to the lensmaker's formula.\nDerivation.\nApplying Snell's law on the spherical surface, formula_11\nAlso in the diagram,formula_12, and using small angle approximation (paraxial approximation) and eliminating i, r, and \u03b8,\nformula_13\nLensmaker's equation.\nThe (effective) focal length formula_14 of a spherical lens in air or vacuum for paraxial rays can be calculated from the lensmaker's equation:\nformula_15\nwhere\nThe focal length formula_20 is with respect to the principal planes of the lens, and the locations of the principal planes formula_21 and formula_22 with respect to the respective lens vertices are given by the following formulas, where it is a positive value if it is right to the respective vertex.\nformula_23formula_24\nThe focal length formula_25 is positive for converging lenses, and negative for diverging lenses. The reciprocal of the focal length, formula_26 is the optical power of the lens. If the focal length is in metres, this gives the optical power in dioptres (reciprocal metres).\nLenses have the same focal length when light travels from the back to the front as when light goes from the front to the back. Other properties of the lens, such as the aberrations are not the same in both directions.\nSign convention for radii of curvature \"R\"1 and \"R\"2.\nThe signs of the lens' radii of curvature indicate whether the corresponding surfaces are convex or concave. The sign convention used to represent this varies, but in this article a \"positive\" R indicates a surface's center of curvature is further along in the direction of the ray travel (right, in the accompanying diagrams), while \"negative\" R means that rays reaching the surface have already passed the center of curvature. Consequently, for external lens surfaces as diagrammed above, \"R\"1 &gt; 0 and \"R\"2 &lt; 0 indicate \"convex\" surfaces (used to converge light in a positive lens), while \"R\"1 &lt; 0 and \"R\"2 &gt; 0 indicate \"concave\" surfaces. The reciprocal of the radius of curvature is called the curvature. A flat surface has zero curvature, and its radius of curvature is infinite.\nSign convention for other parameters.\nThis convention is used in this article. Other conventions such as the http:// change the form of the equations.\nThin lens approximation.\nIf d is small compared to \"R\"1 and \"R\"2 then the &lt;dfn &gt;thin lens&lt;/dfn&gt; approximation can be made. For a lens in air, f\u2009 is then given by\nformula_27\nDerivation.\nThe spherical thin lens equation in paraxial approximation is derived here with respect to the right figure. The 1st spherical lens surface (which meets the optical axis at formula_28 as its vertex) images an on-axis object point \"O\" to the virtual image \"I\", which can be described by the following equation,formula_29 For the imaging by second lens surface, by taking the above sign convention, formula_30 and formula_31 Adding these two equations yields formula_32 For the thin lens approximation where formula_33 the 2nd term of the RHS (Right Hand Side) is gone, so\nformula_34\nThe focal length formula_25 of the thin lens is found by limiting formula_36\nformula_37\nSo, the Gaussian thin lens equation is\nformula_38\nFor the thin lens in air or vacuum where formula_39 can be assumed, formula_20 becomes\nformula_41\nwhere the subscript of 2 in formula_42 is dropped.\nImaging properties.\nAs mentioned above, a positive or converging lens in air focuses a collimated beam travelling along the lens axis to a spot (known as the focal point) at a distance f from the lens. Conversely, a point source of light placed at the focal point is converted into a collimated beam by the lens. These two cases are examples of image formation in lenses. In the former case, an object at an infinite distance (as represented by a collimated beam of waves) is focused to an image at the focal point of the lens. In the latter, an object at the focal length distance from the lens is imaged at infinity. The plane perpendicular to the lens axis situated at a distance f from the lens is called the \"&lt;dfn &gt;focal plane&lt;/dfn&gt;\".\nLens equation.\nFor paraxial rays, if the distances from an object to a spherical thin lens (a lens of negligible thickness) and from the lens to the image are \"S\"1 and \"S\"2 respectively, the distances are related by the (Gaussian) thin lens formula:\nformula_43\nThe right figure shows how the image of an object point can be found by using three rays; the first ray parallelly incident on the lens and refracted toward the second focal point of it, the second ray crossing the optical center of the lens (so its direction does not change), and the third ray toward the first focal point and refracted to the direction parallel to the optical axis. This is a simple ray tracing method easily used. Two rays among the three are sufficient to locate the image point. By moving the object along the optical axis, it is shown that the second ray determines the image size while other rays help to locate the image location.\nThe lens equation can also be put into the \"Newtonian\" form:\nformula_44\nwhere formula_45 and formula_46 formula_47 is positive if it is left to the front focal point formula_48, and formula_49 is positive if it is right to the rear focal point formula_50. Because formula_51 is positive, an object point and the corresponding imaging point made by a lens are always in opposite sides with respect to their respective focal points. (formula_47 and formula_49 are either positive or negative.)\nThis Newtonian form of the lens equation can be derived by using a similarity between triangles \"P\"1\"P\"O1\"F\"1 and \"L\"3\"L\"2\"F\"1 and another similarity between triangles \"L\"1\"L\"2\"F\"2 and \"P\"2\"P\"02\"F\"2 in the right figure. The similarities give the following equations and combining these results gives the Newtonian form of the lens equation.\nformula_54\nThe above equations also hold for thick lenses (including a compound lens made by multiple lenses, that can be treated as a thick lens) in air or vacuum (which refractive index can be treated as 1) if formula_55, formula_56, and formula_57 are with respect to the principal planes of the lens (formula_57 is the effective focal length in this case). This is because of triangle similarities like the thin lens case above; similarity between triangles \"P\"1\"P\"O1\"F\"1 and \"L\"3\"H\"1\"F\"1 and another similarity between triangles \"L\"1\"'H\"2\"F\"2 and \"P\"2\"P\"02\"F\"2 in the right figure. If distances \"S\"1 or \"S\"2 pass through a medium other than air or vacuum, then a more complicated analysis is required.\nIf an object is placed at a distance \"S\"1 &gt; \"f\" from a positive lens of focal length f, we will find an image at a distance \"S\"2 according to this formula. If a screen is placed at a distance \"S\"2 on the opposite side of the lens, an image is formed on it. This sort of image, which can be projected onto a screen or image sensor, is known as a \"real image\". This is the principle of the camera, and also of the human eye, in which the retina serves as the image sensor.\nThe focusing adjustment of a camera adjusts \"S\"2, as using an image distance different from that required by this formula produces a defocused (fuzzy) image for an object at a distance of \"S\"1 from the camera. Put another way, modifying \"S\"2 causes objects at a different \"S\"1 to come into perfect focus.\nIn some cases, \"S\"2 is negative, indicating that the image is formed on the opposite side of the lens from where those rays are being considered. Since the diverging light rays emanating from the lens never come into focus, and those rays are not physically present at the point where they appear to form an image, this is called a virtual image. Unlike real images, a virtual image cannot be projected on a screen, but appears to an observer looking through the lens as if it were a real object at the location of that virtual image. Likewise, it appears to a subsequent lens as if it were an object at that location, so that second lens could again focus that light into a real image, \"S\"1 then being measured from the virtual image location behind the first lens to the second lens. This is exactly what the eye does when looking through a magnifying glass. The magnifying glass creates a (magnified) virtual image behind the magnifying glass, but those rays are then re-imaged by the lens of the eye to create a \"real image\" on the retina.\nUsing a positive lens of focal length f, a virtual image results when \"S\"1 &lt; \"f\", the lens thus being used as a magnifying glass (rather than if \"S\"1 \u226b \"f\" as for a camera). Using a negative lens (\"f\" &lt; 0) with a real object (\"S\"1 &gt; 0) can only produce a virtual image (\"S\"2 &lt; 0), according to the above formula. It is also possible for the object distance \"S\"1 to be negative, in which case the lens sees a so-called \"virtual object\". This happens when the lens is inserted into a converging beam (being focused by a previous lens) before the location of its real image. In that case even a negative lens can project a real image, as is done by a Barlow lens.\nFor a given lens with the focal length \"f\", the minimum distance between an object and the real image is 4\"f\" (\"S\"1 = \"S\"2 = 2\"f\"). This is derived by letting \"L\" = \"S\"1 + \"S\"2, expressing \"S\"2 in terms of \"S\"1 by the lens equation (or expressing \"S\"1 in terms of \"S\"2), and equating the derivative of \"L\" with respect to \"S\"1 (or \"S\"2) to zero. (Note that \"L\" has no limit in increasing so its extremum is only the minimum, at which the derivate of \"L\" is zero.) \nMagnification.\nThe linear \"magnification\" of an imaging system using a single lens is given by\nformula_59\nwhere M is the magnification factor defined as the ratio of the size of an image compared to the size of the object. The sign convention here dictates that if M is negative, as it is for real images, the image is upside-down with respect to the object. For virtual images M is positive, so the image is upright.\nThis magnification formula provides two easy ways to distinguish converging (\"f\" &gt; 0) and diverging (\"f\" &lt; 0) lenses: For an object very close to the lens (0 &lt; \"S\"1 &lt; |\"f\"|), a converging lens would form a magnified (bigger) virtual image, whereas a diverging lens would form a demagnified (smaller) image; For an object very far from the lens (\"S\"1 &gt; |\"f\"| &gt; 0), a converging lens would form an inverted image, whereas a diverging lens would form an upright image.\nLinear magnification M is not always the most useful measure of magnifying power. For instance, when characterizing a visual telescope or binoculars that produce only a virtual image, one would be more concerned with the angular magnification\u2014which expresses how much larger a distant object appears through the telescope compared to the naked eye. In the case of a camera one would quote the plate scale, which compares the apparent (angular) size of a distant object to the size of the real image produced at the focus. The plate scale is the reciprocal of the focal length of the camera lens; lenses are categorized as long-focus lenses or wide-angle lenses according to their focal lengths.\nUsing an inappropriate measurement of magnification can be formally correct but yield a meaningless number. For instance, using a magnifying glass of focal length, held from the eye and from the object, produces a virtual image at infinity of infinite linear size: \"M\" = \u221e. But the \"&lt;dfn &gt;angular magnification&lt;/dfn&gt;\" is 5, meaning that the object appears 5 times larger to the eye than without the lens. When taking a picture of the moon using a camera with a lens, one is not concerned with the linear magnification \"M\" \u2248 / = . Rather, the plate scale of the camera is about , from which one can conclude that the image on the film corresponds to an angular size of the moon seen from earth of about 0.5\u00b0.\nIn the extreme case where an object is an infinite distance away, \"S\"1 = \u221e, \"S\"2 = \"f\" and \"M\" = \u2212\"f\"/\u221e = 0, indicating that the object would be imaged to a single point in the focal plane. In fact, the diameter of the projected spot is not actually zero, since diffraction places a lower limit on the size of the point spread function. This is called the diffraction limit.\nAberrations.\nLenses do not form perfect images, and always introduce some degree of distortion or \"aberration\" that makes the image an imperfect replica of the object. Careful design of the lens system for a particular application minimizes the aberration. Several types of aberration affect image quality, including spherical aberration, coma, and chromatic aberration.\nSpherical aberration.\n\"Spherical aberration\" occurs because spherical surfaces are not the ideal shape for a lens, but are by far the simplest shape to which glass can be ground and polished, and so are often used. Spherical aberration causes beams parallel to, but laterally distant from, the lens axis to be focused in a slightly different place than beams close to the axis. This manifests itself as a blurring of the image. Spherical aberration can be minimised with normal lens shapes by carefully choosing the surface curvatures for a particular application. For instance, a plano-convex lens, which is used to focus a collimated beam, produces a sharper focal spot when used with the convex side towards the beam source.\nComa.\n\"Coma\", or \"comatic aberration\", derives its name from the comet-like appearance of the aberrated image. Coma occurs when an object off the optical axis of the lens is imaged, where rays pass through the lens at an angle to the axis \u03b8. Rays that pass through the centre of a lens of focal length f are focused at a point with distance \"f\" tan \"\u03b8\" from the axis. Rays passing through the outer margins of the lens are focused at different points, either further from the axis (positive coma) or closer to the axis (negative coma). In general, a bundle of parallel rays passing through the lens at a fixed distance from the centre of the lens are focused to a ring-shaped image in the focal plane, known as a \"comatic circle\" (see each circle of the image in the below figure). The sum of all these circles results in a V-shaped or comet-like flare. As with spherical aberration, coma can be minimised (and in some cases eliminated) by choosing the curvature of the two lens surfaces to match the application. Lenses in which both spherical aberration and coma are minimised are called \"bestform\" lenses.\nChromatic aberration.\n\"Chromatic aberration\" is caused by the dispersion of the lens material\u2014the variation of its refractive index, n, with the wavelength of light. Since, from the formulae above, f is dependent upon n, it follows that light of different wavelengths is focused to different positions. Chromatic aberration of a lens is seen as fringes of colour around the image. It can be minimised by using an achromatic doublet (or \"achromat\") in which two materials with differing dispersion are bonded together to form a single lens. This reduces the amount of chromatic aberration over a certain range of wavelengths, though it does not produce perfect correction. The use of achromats was an important step in the development of the optical microscope. An apochromat is a lens or lens system with even better chromatic aberration correction, combined with improved spherical aberration correction. Apochromats are much more expensive than achromats.\nDifferent lens materials may also be used to minimise chromatic aberration, such as specialised coatings or lenses made from the crystal fluorite. This naturally occurring substance has the highest known Abbe number, indicating that the material has low dispersion.\nOther types of aberration.\nOther kinds of aberration include \"field curvature\", \"barrel \"and \"pincushion distortion\", and \"astigmatism\".\nAperture diffraction.\nEven if a lens is designed to minimize or eliminate the aberrations described above, the image quality is still limited by the diffraction of light passing through the lens' finite aperture. A diffraction-limited lens is one in which aberrations have been reduced to the point where the image quality is primarily limited by diffraction under the design conditions.\nCompound lenses.\nSimple lenses are subject to the optical aberrations discussed above. In many cases these aberrations can be compensated for to a great extent by using a combination of simple lenses with complementary aberrations. A \"compound lens\" is a collection of simple lenses of different shapes and made of materials of different refractive indices, arranged one after the other with a common axis.\nIn a multiple-lens system, if the purpose of the system is to image an object, then the system design can be such that each lens treats the image made by the previous lens as an object, and produces the new image of it, so the imaging is cascaded through the lenses. As shown above, the Gaussian lens equation for a spherical lens is derived such that the 2nd surface of the lens images the image made by the 1st lens surface. For multi-lens imaging, 3rd lens surface (the front surface of the 2nd lens) can image the image made by the 2nd surface, and 4th surface (the back surface of the 2nd lens) can also image the image made by the 3rd surface. This imaging cascade by each lens surface justifies the imaging cascade by each lens.\nFor a two-lens system the object distances of each lens can be denoted as formula_60 and formula_61, and the image distances as and formula_62 and formula_63. If the lenses are thin, each satisfies the thin lens formula\nformula_64\nIf the distance between the two lenses is formula_65, then formula_66. (The 2nd lens images the image of the first lens.)\nFFD (Front Focal Distance) is defined as the distance between the front (left) focal point of an optical system and its nearest optical surface vertex. If an object is located at the front focal point of the system, then its image made by the system is located infinitely far way to the right (i.e., light rays from the object is collimated after the system). To do this, the image of the 1st lens is located at the focal point of the 2nd lens, i.e., formula_67. So, the thin lens formula for the 1st lens becomes\nformula_68\nBFD (Back Focal Distance) is similarly defined as the distance between the back (right) focal point of an optical system and its nearest optical surface vertex. If an object is located infinitely far away from the system (to the left), then its image made by the system is located at the back focal point. In this case, the 1st lens images the object at its focal point. So, the thin lens formula for the 2nd lens becomes\nformula_69\nA simplest case is where thin lenses are placed in contact (formula_70). Then formula_71, so the combined focal length f of the lenses is given by\nformula_72\nSince 1/\"f\" is the power of a lens with focal length f, it can be seen that the powers of thin lenses in contact are additive. The general case of multiple thin lenses in contact is\nformula_73\nwhere formula_74 is the number of lenses.\nIf two thin lenses are separated in air by some distance d, then the focal length for the combined system is given by\nformula_75\nAs d tends to zero, the focal length of the system tends to the value of f given for thin lenses in contact. It can be shown that the same formula works for thick lenses if d is taken as the distance between their principal planes.\nIf the separation distance between two lenses is equal to the sum of their focal lengths (\"d\" = \"f\"1 + \"f\"2), then the FFD and BFD are infinite. This corresponds to a pair of lenses that transforms a parallel (collimated) beam into another collimated beam. This type of system is called an \"afocal system\", since it produces no net convergence or divergence of the beam. Two lenses at this separation form the simplest type of optical telescope. Although the system does not alter the divergence of a collimated beam, it does alter the (transverse) width of the beam. The magnification of such a telescope is given by\nformula_76\nwhich is the ratio of the output beam width to the input beam width. Note the sign convention: a telescope with two convex lenses (\"f\"1 &gt; 0, \"f\"2 &gt; 0) produces a negative magnification, indicating an inverted image. A convex plus a concave lens (\"f\"1 &gt; 0 &gt; \"f\"2) produces a positive magnification and the image is upright. For further information on simple optical telescopes, see Refracting telescope \u00a7 Refracting telescope designs.\nNon spherical types.\nCylindrical lenses have curvature along only one axis. They are used to focus light into a line, or to convert the elliptical light from a laser diode into a round beam. They are also used in motion picture anamorphic lenses.\nAspheric lenses have at least one surface that is neither spherical nor cylindrical. The more complicated shapes allow such lenses to form images with less aberration than standard simple lenses, but they are more difficult and expensive to produce. These were formerly complex to make and often extremely expensive, but advances in technology have greatly reduced the manufacturing cost for such lenses.\nA Fresnel lens has its optical surface broken up into narrow rings, allowing the lens to be much thinner and lighter than conventional lenses. Durable Fresnel lenses can be molded from plastic and are inexpensive.\nLenticular lenses are arrays of microlenses that are used in lenticular printing to make images that have an illusion of depth or that change when viewed from different angles.\nBifocal lens has two or more, or a graduated, focal lengths ground into the lens.\nA gradient index lens has flat optical surfaces, but has a radial or axial variation in index of refraction that causes light passing through the lens to be focused.\nAn axicon has a conical optical surface. It images a point source into a line along the optic axis, or transforms a laser beam into a ring.\nDiffractive optical elements can function as lenses.\nSuperlenses are made from negative index metamaterials and claim to produce images at spatial resolutions exceeding the diffraction limit. The first superlenses were made in 2004 using such a metamaterial for microwaves. Improved versions have been made by other researchers. As of 2014[ [update]] the superlens has not yet been demonstrated at visible or near-infrared wavelengths.\nA prototype flat ultrathin lens, with no curvature has been developed.\nUses.\nA single convex lens mounted in a frame with a handle or stand is a magnifying glass.\nLenses are used as prosthetics for the correction of refractive errors such as myopia, hypermetropia, presbyopia, and astigmatism. (See corrective lens, contact lens, eyeglasses, intraocular lens.) Most lenses used for other purposes have strict axial symmetry; eyeglass lenses are only approximately symmetric. They are usually shaped to fit in a roughly oval, not circular, frame; the optical centres are placed over the eyeballs; their curvature may not be axially symmetric to correct for astigmatism. Sunglasses' lenses are designed to attenuate light; sunglass lenses that also correct visual impairments can be custom made.\nOther uses are in imaging systems such as monoculars, binoculars, telescopes, microscopes, cameras and projectors. Some of these instruments produce a virtual image when applied to the human eye; others produce a real image that can be captured on photographic film or an optical sensor, or can be viewed on a screen. In these devices lenses are sometimes paired up with curved mirrors to make a catadioptric system where the lens's spherical aberration corrects the opposite aberration in the mirror (such as Schmidt and meniscus correctors).\nConvex lenses produce an image of an object at infinity at their focus; if the sun is imaged, much of the visible and infrared light incident on the lens is concentrated into the small image. A large lens creates enough intensity to burn a flammable object at the focal point. Since ignition can be achieved even with a poorly made lens, lenses have been used as burning-glasses for at least 2400 years. A modern application is the use of relatively large lenses to concentrate solar energy on relatively small photovoltaic cells, harvesting more energy without the need to use larger and more expensive cells.\nRadio astronomy and radar systems often use dielectric lenses, commonly called a lens antenna to refract electromagnetic radiation into a collector antenna.\nLenses can become scratched and abraded. Abrasion-resistant coatings are available to help control this.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18322", "revid": "16416757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18322", "title": "Lamorna Birch", "text": "English painter (1869\u20131955)\nSamuel John \"Lamorna\" Birch, RA, RWS (7 June 1869 \u2013 7 January 1955) was an English artist in oils and watercolours. At the suggestion of fellow artist Stanhope Forbes, Birch adopted the \"soubriquet\" \"Lamorna\" to distinguish himself from Lionel Birch, an artist who was also working in the area at that time.\nBiography.\nLamorna Birch was born in Egremont, Cheshire, England. He was self-taught as an artist, except for a brief period of study at the Acad\u00e9mie Colarossi in Paris during 1895.\nBirch settled in Lamorna, Cornwall in 1892, initially lodging at nearby Boleigh Farm. Many of his most famous pictures date from this time and the beautiful Lamorna Cove is usually their subject matter. He was attracted to Cornwall by the Newlyn group of artists but he ended up starting a second group based around his adopted home of Lamorna. He married Houghton (Mouse) Emily Vivian, the daughter of a mining agent from Camborne and they lived at Flagstaff Cottage, Lamorna.\nIn 1936, Birch embarked on an extensive painting and lecture tour in New Zealand. He was accompanied on his visit by fellow artists Kathleen Airini Vane and Russell Clark. Birch would paint many of the scenic areas of Northland together with Vane, and embark on skiing expeditions with Clark. At the end of his visit, Vane would present several works by Birch to the Christchurch Art Gallery which remain in its collection.\nPersonal life.\nGreta Valentine met Birch when she was 28 and she was on holiday with her parents in Cornwall. Lamorna was married but he was intrigued by Greta. He would write her poetry and create paintings for her. Symbolism within the paintings expressed his love for her.\nExhibitions.\nHe exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1893, was elected as an Associate (ARA) in 1926 and made a Royal Academician (RA) in 1934, and showed more than two hundred paintings there. He held his first one-man exhibition at the Fine Art Society in 1906 and is said to have produced more than 20,000 pictures. Like a number of his contemporaries, he was profiled as an 'Artist of Note' in \"The Artist\" magazine, by Richard Seddon, in the June 1944 edition.\nToday.\nBirch has paintings at Penlee House and in the collection of Derby Art Gallery. Christchurch Art Gallery also holds the aforementioned works presented by Kathleen Airini Vane and works acquired through other means.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18323", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18323", "title": "LDP", "text": "LDP may mean:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18325", "revid": "19089174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18325", "title": "Labour", "text": "Labour or labor may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "18327", "revid": "50865122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18327", "title": "Library of Congress Classification", "text": "System of library classification\nThe Library of Congress Classification (LCC) is a system of library classification developed by the Library of Congress in the United States, which can be used for shelving books in a library. LCC is mainly used by large research and academic libraries, while most public libraries and small academic libraries use the Dewey Decimal Classification system. The classification was developed in 1897 by James Hanson (chief of the Catalog Department), with assistance from Charles Martel while they were working at the Library of Congress. It was designed specifically for the purposes and collection of the Library of Congress, to replace the fixed location system developed by Thomas Jefferson.\nLCC has been criticized for lacking a sound theoretical basis; many of the classification decisions were driven by the practical needs of that library rather than epistemological considerations. Although it divides subjects into broad categories, it is essentially enumerative in nature. That is, it provides a guide to the books actually in one library's collections, not a classification of the world.\nHistory.\nThe central core of the modern Library of Congress was formed from books sold to the government by Thomas Jefferson after the original collection was burned by the British in the War of 1812. As a result, the original classification system used by the library was of Jefferson's invention. However, by the end of the nineteenth century, the collection had grown to over a million volumes and his system was deemed too unwieldy.\nJohn Russell Young, the seventh Librarian of Congress, hired James Hanson and Charles Martel in 1897, who began the development of a new classification system that would more accurately describe the collections the library held. Young's tenure as Librarian ended with his death in 1899, and his successor, Herbert Putnam, continued to implement the updates to the catalog through his long stay in the office. By the time he departed from his post in 1939, all the classes except K (Law) were well developed.\nIn creating their classification system, Hanson and Martel evaluated several systems already in existence, including the Dewey Decimal System, Charles Ammi Cutter's Cutter Expansive Classification, the Index Medicus, and the Putnam Classification System (developed while Putnam was head librarian at the Minneapolis Public Library). The one closest to their needs was Cutter's; however, he died before the completion of his system. Hanson and Martel thus decided to develop their own unique system, strongly based on his ideas. They published their first outline of the classification scheme in 1904. Development of the classes continued throughout the twentieth century. The last class to be developed was K (Law): the first K schedule was published in 1969 and not completed until the 2004 publication of KB.\nFrom 1996 onwards, the LCC schedules were available online, and since 2013, there have been no new print editions of the classification system. All updates are now distributed by the Library's Cataloging Distribution Service entirely online.\nDesign and organization.\nLCC divides all knowledge into twenty-one basic classes, each given a single letter of the alphabet as an identifier. Most of these classes are divided further into two and three level sub-classes. With these sub-classes, numerical ranges are assigned to topics, going from more general to more specific. Unlike in the Dewey Decimal Classification, where the numbers assigned to a topic iterate throughout the system (e.g., the \".05\" tag indicated a periodical publication on the topic), the LCC numerical ranges are strictly hierarchal, only corresponding to their level on the outline. LCC is enumerative, meaning that it lists all the classes in officially published schedules, which are updated as needed by the Library of Congress.\nAfter the range of numbers making up the topical division, call numbers often also include one or more Cutter numbers, modeled after the unfinished Cutter Expansive Classification index. The full LCC schedules contain tables that describe Cutter numbers for certain types of media, collections of work, and geographical areas. Cutter numbers also can take the form of an author-specific code, containing a letter and several numbers corresponding to the author's last name. This serves to further distinguish publications and nominally alphabetize volumes within a topic section. The final component of a typical LCC call-number is the publication year, in full. Library collections can add modifiers to distinguish specific volumes, such as \"Copy 1.\"\nLCC should not be confused with Library of Congress Control Numbers (LCCN), which are assigned to all books (and authors) and defines online catalog entries. Library of Congress Classification is also distinct from Library of Congress Subject Headings, the system of labels such as \"Glaciers\" and \"Glaciers\u2014Fiction\" that describe contents systematically.\nOne variation from the original LCC system is the National Library of Medicine classification system (NLM), which uses the initial letters \"W\" and \"QS\"\u2013\"QZ\", which are not used by LCC. Some libraries use NLM in conjunction with LCC, eschewing LCC's R, QM, and QP, which overlap with NLM's schema. Another is the Canadian Universities and the Canadian National Library using FC for Canadian History, a subclass that LCC has not officially adopted, but which it has agreed not to use for anything else.\nUse and criticism.\nTogether, the Dewey Decimal System (DDC) and LCC make up the two main classification systems used in U.S. libraries. LCC is favored by large academic and research libraries.\nSystems of classification can be evaluated on several metrics, including expressiveness (the ability of the numeration system to express the hierarchal and correlative relationships between topics), hospitality (the ability of the system to accommodate new subjects), and brevity (length of call numbers). While LCC is significantly less expressive than DDC, it is extremely hospitable, mainly in the fact that five classes (I, O, W, X, and Y) lack any assignment to topics. LCC call numbers also tend to be shorter than those in DDC.\nThe main difference between DDC and LCC is their approach to classifying. Dewey's system is a comprehensive classification to all topics, with no regard to the actual collections a library might hold. While this has allowed it to be successfully adapted into more modern classification systems for use outside of libraries, such as the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), it does make it more unwieldy for large or specialized collections. On the other hand, Hanson and Martel designed LCC specifically for library use, which means while it does not completely enumerate the world, it does more reflect what books a library might hold.\nBecause LCC was designed around the collections of the Library of Congress, it has an American, European, and Christian bias, as reflected mainly in the earlier developed schedules of D (World History), E and F (History of the Americas), and B (Philosophy, Psychology, Religion). On the other hand, the later-developed K (Law) gives fairly even weight to global law. Today, the various schedules are maintained and revised by the Library's Policy and Standards Division, in conjunction with experts in each field. However, updating various schedules with classification biases is generally assumed to be impractical due to the massive workload that would result in, especially as the \"discipline\" based classes of LCC have been entrenched in the average library user's mind.\nLike all classification systems, LCC struggles with catering to interdisciplinary scholars and topics, as ultimately, a book can only be shelved in a single location. Additionally, LCC has a problem with \"othering\" marginalized groups, making works related to or authored by members of these groups particularly difficult to locate. This is not a new issue, and libraries with more specialized collections about minority groups or issues sometimes eschew LCC, with one example alternative classification being the Harvard\u2013Yenching Classification, specifically developed for Chinese language materials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18328", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18328", "title": "Library classification", "text": "Systems of coding and organizing documents or library materials\nA library classification is a system used within a library to organize materials, including books, sound and video recordings, electronic materials, etc., both on shelves and in catalogs and indexes. Each item is typically assigned a call number, which identifies the location of the item within the system. Materials can be arranged by many different factors, typically in either a hierarchical tree structure based on the subject or using a faceted classification system, which allows the assignment of multiple classifications to an object, enabling the classifications to be ordered in many ways.\nDescription.\nLibrary classification is an important and crucial aspect in library and information science. It is distinct from scientific classification in that it has as its goal to provide a useful ordering of documents rather than a theoretical organization of knowledge. Although it has the practical purpose of creating a physical ordering of documents, it does generally attempt to adhere to accepted scientific knowledge. Library classification helps to accommodate all the newly published literature in an already created order of arrangement in a filial sequence.\nLibrary classification can be defined as the arrangement of books on shelves, or description of them, in the manner which is most useful to those who read with the ultimate aim of grouping similar things together. Library classification is meant to achieve these four purposes: ordering the fields of knowledge in a systematic way, bring related items together in the most helpful sequence, provide orderly access on the shelf, and provide a location for an item on the shelf.\nLibrary classification is distinct from the application of subject headings in that classification organizes knowledge into a systematic order, while subject headings provide access to intellectual materials through vocabulary terms that may or may not be organized as a knowledge system.\nThe characteristics that a bibliographic classification demands for the sake of reaching these purposes are: a useful sequence of subjects at all levels, a concise memorable notation, and a host of techniques and devices of number synthesis.\nHistory.\nLibrary classifications were preceded by classifications used by bibliographers such as Conrad Gessner. The earliest library classification schemes organized books in broad subject categories. The earliest known library classification scheme is the Pinakes by Callimachus, a scholar at the Library of Alexandria during the third century BC. During the Renaissance and Reformation era, \"Libraries were organized according to the whims or knowledge of individuals in charge.\" This changed the format in which various materials were classified. Some collections were classified by language and others by how they were printed.\nAfter the printing revolution in the sixteenth century, the increase in available printed materials made such broad classification unworkable, and more granular classifications for library materials had to be developed in the nineteenth century.\nIn 1627 Gabriel Naud\u00e9 published a book called \"Advice on Establishing a Library\". At the time, he was working in the private library of Pr\u00e9sident \u00e0 mortier Henri de Mesmes II. Mesmes had around 8,000 printed books and many more Greek, Latin and French written manuscripts. Although it was a private library, scholars with references could access it. The purpose of \"Advice on Establishing a Library\" was to identify rules for private book collectors to organize their collections in a more orderly way to increase the collection's usefulness and beauty. Naud\u00e9 developed a classification system based on seven different classes: theology, medicine, jurisprudence, history, philosophy, mathematics, and the humanities. These seven classes would later be increased to twelve. \"Advice on Establishing a Library\" was about a private library, but within the same book, Naud\u00e9 encouraged the idea of public libraries open to all people regardless of their ability to pay for access to the collection. One of the most famous libraries that Naud\u00e9 helped improve was the in Paris. Naud\u00e9 spent ten years there as a librarian. Because of Naud\u00e9's strong belief in free access to libraries to all people, the Biblioth\u00e8que Mazarine became the first public library in France around 1644.\nAlthough libraries created order within their collections from as early as the fifth century BC, the Paris Bookseller's classification, developed in 1842 by Jacques Charles Brunet, is generally seen as the first of the modern book classifications. Brunet provided five major classes: theology, jurisprudence, sciences and arts, belles-lettres, and history. Classification can now be seen as a provider of subject access to information in a networked environment.\nTypes.\nThere are many standard systems of library classification in use, and many more have been proposed over the years. However, in general, classification systems can be divided into three types depending on how they are used:\n Covers all subjects, e.g. the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC), Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), and Colon Classification (CC).\n Covers particular subjects or types of materials, e.g. Iconclass (art), British Catalogue of Music Classification, and Dickinson classification (music), or the NLM Classification (medicine).\n Specially created for certain countries, e.g. Swedish library classification system, SAB (Sveriges Allm\u00e4nna Biblioteksf\u00f6rening). The Library of Congress Classification was designed around the collection of the US Library of Congress and has an American, European, and Christian bias. Nevertheless, it is used widely in large academic and research libraries.\nNational schemes.\nIn terms of functionality, classification systems are often described as:\n Subject headings are listed alphabetically, with numbers assigned to each heading in alphabetical order.\n Subjects are divided hierarchically, from most general to most specific.\n Subjects are divided into mutually exclusive orthogonal facets.\nFaceted/analytico-synthetic.\nThere are few completely enumerative systems or faceted systems; most systems are a blend but favouring one type or the other. The most common classification systems, LCC and DDC, are essentially enumerative, though with some hierarchical and faceted elements (more so for DDC), especially at the broadest and most general level. The first true faceted system was the colon classification of S. R. Ranganathan.\nMethods or systems.\nClassification types denote the classification or categorization according to the form or characteristics or qualities of a classification scheme or schemes. Method and system has similar meaning. Method or methods or system means the classification schemes like Dewey Decimal Classification or Universal Decimal Classification. The types of classification is for identifying and understanding or education or research purposes while classification method means those classification schemes like DDC, UDC.\nEnglish language universal classification systems.\nThe most common systems in English-speaking countries are:\nOther systems include:\nUniversal classification systems that rely on synthesis (faceted systems).\nNewer classification systems tend to use the principle of synthesis (combining codes from different lists to represent the different attributes of a work) heavily, which is comparatively lacking in LC or DDC.\nPractice.\nLibrary classification is associated with library (descriptive) cataloging under the rubric of \"cataloging and classification\", sometimes grouped together as \"technical services\". The library professional who engages in the process of cataloging and classifying library materials is called a \"cataloger\" or \"catalog librarian\". Library classification systems are one of the two tools used to facilitate subject access. The other consists of alphabetical indexing languages such as Thesauri and Subject Headings systems.\nThe practice of library classification is a form of the more general task of classification. The work consists of two steps. Firstly, the subject or topic of the material is ascertained. Next, a call number (essentially a book's address) based on the classification system in use at the particular library will be assigned to the work using the notation of the system.\nUnlike subject heading or thesauri where multiple terms can be assigned to the same work, in library classification systems, each work can only be placed in one class. This is due to shelving purposes: A book can have only one physical place. However, in classified catalogs one may have main entries as well as added entries. Most classification systems like the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) and Library of Congress Classification also add a cutter number to each work which adds a code for the main entry (primary access point) of the work (e.g. author).\nClassification systems in libraries generally play two roles. Firstly, they facilitate subject access by allowing the user to find out what works or documents the library has on a certain subject. Secondly, they provide a known location for the information source to be located (e.g. where it is shelved).\nUntil the 19th century, most libraries had closed stacks, so the library classification only served to organize the subject catalog. In the 20th century, libraries opened their stacks to the public and started to shelve library material itself according to some library classification to simplify subject browsing.\nSome classification systems are more suitable for aiding subject access, rather than for shelf location. For example, Universal Decimal Classification, which uses a complicated notation of pluses and colons, is more difficult to use for the purpose of shelf arrangement but is more expressive compared to DDC in terms of showing relationships between subjects. Similarly faceted classification schemes are more difficult to use for shelf arrangement, unless the user has knowledge of the citation order.\nDepending on the size of the library collection, some libraries might use classification systems solely for one purpose or the other. In extreme cases, a public library with a small collection might just use a classification system for location of resources but might not use a complicated subject classification system. Instead all resources might just be put into a couple of wide classes (travel, crime, magazines etc.). This is known as a \"mark and park\" classification method, more formally called \"reader interest classification\".\nComparing library classification systems.\nAs a result of differences in notation, history, use of enumeration, hierarchy, and facets, classification systems can differ in the following ways:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18329", "revid": "50812970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18329", "title": "Lexus", "text": "Japanese luxury vehicle brand owned by Toyota\n is the luxury vehicle division of the Japanese automaker Toyota Motor Corporation. The Lexus brand is marketed in more than 90 countries and territories worldwide and is Japan's largest-selling make of premium cars. It has ranked among the 10 largest Japanese global brands in market value. Lexus has been headquartered in Shimoyama, Aichi, in Japan since 2024. Operational centers are located in Brussels, Belgium, and Plano, Texas, United States.\nCreated about the same time that Japanese rivals Honda and Nissan created their Acura and Infiniti luxury divisions respectively, Lexus originated from a corporate project to develop a new premium sedan, code-named F1, which began in 1983 and culminated in the launch of the Lexus LS in 1989. Subsequently, the division added sedan, coup\u00e9, convertible and SUV models. Lexus did not exist as a brand in its home market until 2005, and all vehicles marketed internationally as Lexus from 1989 to 2005 were released in Japan under the Toyota marque and an equivalent model name. In 2005, a hybrid version of the RX crossover debuted and additional hybrid models later joined the division's lineup. Lexus launched its own F marque performance division in 2007 with the debut of the IS F sport sedan, followed by the LFA supercar in 2009.\nLexus vehicles are largely produced in Japan, with manufacturing centered in the Ch\u016bbu and Ky\u016bsh\u016b regions, and in particular at Toyota's Tahara, Aichi, Ch\u016bbu and Miyata, Fukuoka, Ky\u016bsh\u016b plants. Assembly of the first Lexus produced outside the country, the Canadian-built RX 330, began in 2003. Following a corporate reorganization from 2001 to 2005, Lexus began operating its own design, engineering and manufacturing centers.\nSince the 2000s, Lexus has increased sales outside its largest market, the United States. The division inaugurated dealerships in the Japanese domestic market in 2005, becoming the first Japanese premium car marque to launch in its country of origin. The brand has since debuted in Southeast Asia, Latin America, Europe and other regions, and has introduced hybrid vehicles in many markets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1980s: The F1 project.\nThe Lexus brand was created around the same time as Japanese rivals Nissan and Honda developed their Infiniti and Acura premium brands. The Japanese government imposed voluntary export restraints for the U.S. market, so it was more profitable for Japanese automakers to export more expensive cars to the U.S.\nIn 1983, Toyota chairman Eiji Toyoda issued a challenge to build the world's best car. The project, code-named F1 (\"Flagship One\") developed the Lexus LS 400 to expand Toyota's product line in the premium segment. The F1 project followed the Toyota Supra sports car and the premium Toyota Mark II models. Both the Supra and Mark II were rear-wheel drive cars with a powerful 7M-GE or 7M-GTE inline-six engine. The largest sedan Toyota built at the time was the limited-production, 1960s-vintage Toyota Century, a domestic, hand-built limousine, and V8-powered model, followed by the inline-six-engined Toyota Crown premium sedan. The Century was conservatively styled for the Japanese market and along with the Crown not slated for export after a restyle in 1982. The F1 designers targeted their new sedan at international markets and began development on a new V8 engine.\nJapanese manufacturers exported more expensive models in the 1980s due to voluntary export restraints negotiated by the Japanese government and U.S. trade representatives that restricted mainstream car sales. In 1986, Honda launched its Acura marque in the U.S., influencing Toyota's plans for a luxury division. The initial Acura model was an export version of the Honda Legend, called the Acura Legend, itself launched in Japan in 1985 as a rival to the Toyota Crown, Nissan Cedric/Gloria and Mazda Luce. In 1987, Nissan unveiled its plans for a premium brand, Infiniti, and revised its Nissan President sedan in standard wheelbase form for export as the Infiniti Q45, which it launched in 1990. Mazda began selling the Luce as the Mazda 929 in North America in 1988 and later began plans to develop an upscale marque to be called Amati, but its plans did not come to fruition.\nToyota researchers visited the U.S. in May 1985 to conduct focus groups and market research on luxury consumers. During that time, several F1 designers rented a home in Laguna Beach, California, to observe the lifestyles and tastes of American upper class consumers. Meanwhile, F1 engineering teams conducted prototype testing on locations ranging from the German autobahn to U.S. roads. Toyota's market research concluded that a separate brand and sales channel were needed to present its new sedan, and plans were made to develop a new network of dealerships in the U.S. market.\nBrand development.\nIn 1986, Toyota's longtime advertising agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi formed a specialized unit, Team One, to handle marketing for the new brand. Image consulting firm Lippincott &amp; Margulies was hired to develop a list of 219 prospective names; Vectre, Verone, Chaparel, Calibre and Alexis were chosen as top candidates. While Alexis quickly became the front runner, concerns were raised that the name applied to people more than cars (being associated with the Alexis Carrington character on the popular 1980s prime time drama \"Dynasty\"). As a result, the first letter was removed and the \"i\" replaced with a \"u\" to morph the name to Lexus.\nTheories of the etymology of the Lexus name have suggested it is the combination of the words \"luxury\" and \"elegance\", and that it is an acronym for \"luxury exports to the U.S.\" According to Team One interviews, the brand name has no specific meaning and simply evokes a luxurious and technological image. Prior to the release of the first vehicles, database service LexisNexis obtained a temporary injunction forbidding the name Lexus from being used because it might cause product confusion. The injunction threatened to delay the division's launch and marketing efforts. The U.S. appeals court lifted the injunction, deciding that there was little likelihood of confusion between the two products.\nThe original Lexus slogan, developed after Team One representatives visited Lexus designers in Japan and noted an obsessive attention to detail, became \"The Relentless Pursuit of Perfection.\" Three firms were involved in the final phase of logo development: Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, Molly Designs and Hunter/Korobkin, Inc. The finished logo was a combination of two firms' final designs: the Lexus logo typeface came from Saatchi &amp; Saatchi and the \"L\" was Hunter/Korobkin, Inc.'s design. According to Toyota, the automaker made some refinements so the logo would be easier to manufacture, rendering it using a mathematical formula. The first teaser ads featuring the Lexus name and logo appeared at the Chicago, Los Angeles and New York auto shows in 1988.\nLaunch.\nThe F1 project was completed in 1989, involving 60 designers, 24 engineering teams, 1,400 engineers, 2,300 technicians, 220 support workers, approximately 450 prototypes and more than $1 billion in costs. The resulting car, the Lexus LS 400, had a design that shared no major elements with previous Toyota vehicles, with a new 4.0 L V8 gasoline engine and rear-wheel drive. The car debuted in January 1989 at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit and official sales of the vehicle began the following September at a network of 81 new Lexus dealerships in the U.S. The LS 400 was sold along with the smaller ES 250, a rebadged version of the Japanese market Toyota Camry Prominent/Toyota Vista. The launch of Lexus was accompanied by a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign.\nThe LS 400 was praised for its quietness, well-appointed and ergonomic interior, engine performance, build quality, aerodynamics, fuel economy and value. However, it was criticized by some automobile columnists for derivative styling and a suspension regarded as too compromising of handling for ride comfort. In some markets it was priced against mid-size, six-cylinder Mercedes-Benz and BMW models. It was rated by \"Car and Driver\" magazine as better than the higher-priced Mercedes-Benz 420 SEL and BMW 735i in terms of ride, handling and performance. The LS 400 also won motoring awards from automotive publications including \"Automobile Magazine\" and \"Wheels Magazine\". Lexus quickly established customer loyalty and its debut was generally regarded as a shock to existing luxury marques. BMW's and Mercedes-Benz's U.S. sales figures dropped 29 percent and 19 percent, respectively, with BMW executives accusing Lexus of dumping in that market, while 35 percent of Lexus buyers traded in a Lincoln or Cadillac.\nIn December 1989, Lexus initiated a voluntary recall of all 8,000 LS 400s based upon two customer complaints over defective wiring and an overheated brake light. A 20-day operation to replace the parts on affected vehicles included technicians to pick up, repair and return cars to customers free of charge, and also flying personnel and renting garage space for owners in remote locations. This response was covered in media publications and helped establish the marque's early reputation for customer service.\nBy the end of 1989, a total of 16,392 LS 400 and ES 250 sedans were sold in the four months following the U.S. launch. Although sales had begun at a slower pace than expected, the final tally matched the division's target of 16,000 units for that year. Following initial models, plans called for the addition of a sports coupe along with a redesigned ES sedan.\n1990s: Growth and expansion.\nIn 1990, during its first full year of sales, Lexus sold 63,594 LS 400 and ES 250 sedans in the U.S., the majority being the LS model. That year, Lexus also began limited exports to the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Canada and Australia. In 1991, Lexus launched its first sports coupe, the SC 400, which shared the LS 400s V8 engine and rear-wheel drive design. This was followed by the second generation ES 300 sedan, which succeeded the ES 250 and became Lexus' top seller. At the conclusion of 1991, Lexus had become the top-selling premium car import in the U.S., with sales reaching 71,206 vehicles. That year, Lexus ranked highest in J.D. Power and Associates' studies on initial vehicle quality, customer satisfaction and sales satisfaction for the first time. The marque also began increasing U.S. model prices past those of comparable American premium makes, but still below high-end European models. By 1992, the LS 400's base price had risen 18 percent.\nIn 1993, Lexus launched the mid-size GS 300 sports sedan, based on the Toyota Aristo using the Toyota \"S\" platform from the Toyota Crown, which had sold for two years prior in Japan. The GS 300 was priced below the LS 400 in the marque's lineup. That same year, Lexus became one of the first marques to debut a certified pre-owned program, with the aim of improving trade-in model values. The marque introduced the second generation LS 400 in 1994. In May 1995, sales were threatened by the U.S. government's proposal of 100 percent tariffs on upscale Japanese cars in response to the widening U.S.-Japan trade deficit. SUVs were exempt from the proposed sanctions. Normal sales operations resumed by late 1995 when the Japanese auto manufacturers collectively agreed to greater American investments and the tariffs were not enacted.\nIn 1996, Lexus debuted its first sport utility vehicle, the LX 450, followed by the third generation ES 300 sedan, and the second generation GS 300 and GS 400 sedans in 1997. The marque's plans for developing an SUV model had accelerated during the U.S.-Japan tariff discussions of 1995. Lexus added the first luxury-branded crossover SUV, the RX 300 in 1998. The RX crossover targeted suburban buyers who desired an upmarket SUV but did not need the LX's off-road capability. It was particularly successful, eventually becoming the marque's top-selling model ahead of the ES sedan. The same year, Lexus made its debut in South America's most populous country when it launched sales in Brazil. In 1999, the IS was introduced, an entry-level sport sedan. Lexus also recorded its 1 millionth vehicle sold in the U.S. market, being ranked as the top-selling premium car maker in the U.S. overall.\n2000s: Global reorganization.\nIn July 2000, Lexus introduced the IS 300 in North America, following global launch in 1999 (as the IS 200) and the third generation LS 430. In 2001, the first convertible was introduced, as well as the SC 430 and a redesigned ES 300. The GX 470 mid-size SUV debuted in 2002, followed by the second generation RX 330 in 2003. The following year, Lexus recorded its 2 millionth U.S. vehicle sale, and the first luxury-branded production hybrid SUV, the RX 400h. This vehicle used Toyota's Hybrid Synergy Drive system that combined gasoline and electric motors.\nIn 2005, Lexus completed an organizational separation from parent company Toyota, with dedicated design, engineering, training, and manufacturing centers working exclusively for the division. This effort coincided with Lexus' launch in its home market of Japan and an expanded global launch of the brand in markets such as China. Executives aimed to increase Lexus sales outside of its largest market in the U.S. To accompany this expansion, next generation Lexus vehicles were redesigned as \"global models\" for international release. In the European market, where Lexus had long faced struggling sales owing to low brand recognition, few dedicated dealerships, and 1990s import quotas, the marque announced plans to introduce hybrid and diesel powertrains, increase the number of Lexus dealerships, and expand operations in emerging markets such as Russia.\nLexus' arrival in the Japanese market in July 2005 marked the first introduction of a Japanese premium car marque in the domestic market. New generation LS, IS, ES, GS, and RX models subsequently became available in Japan along with the SC 430, ending domestic sales of Toyota-branded models under the Celsior, Altezza, Windom, Aristo, Harrier, and Soarer nameplates, respectively. The Altezza and Aristo were previously exclusive to Japanese Toyota retail sales channels called Toyota Vista Store, the Windom was exclusive to Toyota Corolla Store, the Celsior and Harrier were exclusive to Toyopet Store, and the Soarer was previously available at both Toyota Store and Toyopet Store locations. Lexus models sold in Japan featured higher specifications and a price premium compared with their discontinued Toyota counterparts. Sales for the first half-year were slower than expected, affected by the contraction of the domestic auto market and price increases, but improved in subsequent months with an expanded lineup.\nThrough the mid-2000s, Lexus experienced sales successes in South Korea and Taiwan, becoming the top-selling import make in both markets in 2005; the marque also sold well in the Middle East, where it ranked first or second among rivals in multiple countries, and in Australia, where Lexus reached third in luxury car sales in 2006. Division executives in 2006 announced an expansion goal from 68 countries to 76 worldwide by 2010. By the end of the decade, this expansion resulted in official launches in Malaysia and South Africa in 2006, Indonesia in 2007, Chile in 2008, and the Philippines in 2009.\nHybrids and F models.\nIn 2006, Lexus began sales of the GS 450h, a V6 hybrid performance sedan, and launched the fourth generation LS line, comprising both standard- and long-wheelbase V8 (LS 460 and LS 460 L) and hybrid (LS 600h and LS 600h L) versions. The fifth generation ES 350 also debuted in the same year. The LS 600h L subsequently went on sale as the most expensive sedan ever produced in Japan. By the end of 2006, Lexus' annual sales had reached 475,000 vehicles worldwide. In January 2007, Lexus announced a new F marque performance division, which would produce racing-inspired versions of its performance models. The IS F, made its debut at the 2007 North American International Auto Show, accompanied by a concept car, the LF-A.\nIn October 2007, Lexus entered the Specialty Equipment Market Association show in the U.S. for the first time with the IS F, and announced its F-Sport performance trim level and factory-sanctioned accessory line. Increased emphasis on sporty models was an effort to target rivals from Mercedes-Benz's AMG and BMW's M divisions. Models such as the SC 400 and GS 400 had received favorable reactions from sport luxury buyers, most Lexus models had been characterized as favoring comfort over sporty road feel and handling, compared with European rivals. By the end of 2007, Lexus annual worldwide sales had surpassed 500,000 vehicles, and the marque ranked as the top-selling premium import in China for the first time. The largest sales markets in order of size for 2007 were the U.S., Japan, the UK, China, Canada, and Russia.\nIn 2008, amidst the late-2000s recession and a weakened world car market, global sales fell 16 percent to 435,000, with declines in markets such as the U.S. and Europe where deliveries fell by 21 percent and 27.5 percent, respectively. In 2009, the marque launched the HS 250h, a dedicated hybrid sedan for North America and Japan, the RX 450h, the second generation hybrid SUV replacing the earlier RX 400h, and later that year debuted the US$ production LFA exotic coupe. In late 2009, citing higher sales of hybrid models over their petrol counterparts, Lexus announced plans to become a hybrid-only marque in Europe. By the end of the decade, Lexus ranked as the fourth-largest premium car make in the world by volume, and was the number one selling premium car marque in the U.S. for 10 consecutive years.\n2010s\u20132020s: Recent developments.\nIn 2010, Lexus underwent a gradual sales recovery in North America and Asia as the marque focused on adding hybrids and new model derivatives. Sales in the U.S. held steady despite the 2009\u20132010 Toyota vehicle recalls, several of which included Lexus models. The ES 350 and certain IS models were affected by a recall for potentially jamming floor mats, while parent company Toyota bore the brunt of negative publicity amid investigations over its series of product recalls and problem rates per-vehicle. The redesigned GX 460 was also voluntarily recalled in April 2010 for a software update, one week after \"Consumer Reports\" issued a recommendation not to buy the SUV, citing a possible rollover risk following the slow stability control response to a high-speed emergency turn. Although the publication knew of no reported incidents, the GX 460 received updated stability control software.\nIn late 2010 and early 2011, Lexus began sales of the CT 200h, a compact four-door hybrid hatchback designed for Europe, in multiple markets. Sales of lower-displacement regional models were also expanded, beginning with the ES 240 in China followed by the RX 270; Japan, Russia, and Taiwan were among markets which received model variants intended for reduced emissions or import taxes. In March 2011, the T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami caused severe disruption to Lexus' Japan-based production lines, hindering the marque's near-term sales prospects. Lexus' U.S. executives stated that due to vehicle shortages amidst close competition from BMW, Mercedes-Benz, and Audi, the marque would not remain the country's top-selling premium car brand.\nCumulative sales results for 2011 indicated a 14 percent sales drop in the U.S. market, along with sales increases of 40 percent and 27 percent in Europe and Japan respectively, for a global sales total of 410,000 units. Lexus' streak of 11 consecutive years as the best-selling luxury marque in the U.S. ended that year, with the title going to BMW followed by Mercedes-Benz. While 45 percent of Lexus sales in the U.S. in 2011 relied upon the RX luxury crossover SUV, rival Mercedes-Benz's best-selling offering was the E-Class mid-luxury sedan, which commands considerably higher prices. Subsequently, Toyota chairman Akio Toyoda vowed to restore passion to the marque and further increase its organizational independence, admitting that \"...back then we did not regard Lexus as a brand, but as a distribution channel\". As a result of Toyoda's organizational changes, Lexus senior managers report directly to the chairman for the first time in the marque's history.\nIn January 2012, the marque began sales of the fourth generation GS line, including GS 350 and GS 450h variants, as well as a lower-displacement GS 250 model for select markets. In April 2012, the sixth generation ES line, including ES 350 and ES 300h variants, debuted at the New York International Auto Show.\nIn April 2014, Lexus unveiled the five-seater NX crossover. The vehicle features a very first for a Lexus vehicle: a turbocharger. Its nomenclature is denoted as the 200t. In August 2014, Toyota announced it would be cutting its Lexus spare parts prices in China by up to 35 percent. The company admitted the move was in response to a probe foreshadowed earlier in the month by China's National Development and Reform Commission of Lexus spare parts policies, as part of an industry-wide investigation into what the Chinese regulator considers exorbitantly high prices being charged by automakers for spare parts and after-sales servicing.\nIn March 2016, Lexus announced that it will be producing a new flagship vehicle: the two-door LC 500. The vehicle will be produced for late 2017 in a V8 version putting out 467 horsepower. The LC 500h, a V6 hybrid variant, could potentially become available in late 2017 or early 2018.\nIn April 2019, Lexus announced that a rebadged limousine version of the third-generation Toyota Alphard would be sold as the Lexus LM. It was also announced that Lexus would finally enter the market in Mexico in 2021 with some of the vehicles in their lineup. In October 2019, Lexus announced that it will be launching the brand's first all-battery electric vehicle in 2020, which is the UX 300e. In June 2023, Lexus introduced its first vehicle in the B-segment, the LBX, which went on sale in Europe, Japan, Australia and Southeast Asia.\nCorporate affairs.\nOperations.\nLexus International coordinates the worldwide operations of Toyota's luxury division from the brand's global headquarters, located in Nagoya, Aichi. Corporate entities further include the brand's Japan Sales and Marketing and global Product and Marketing Planning divisions. While organizationally separate from its parent company, Lexus International reports directly to Toyota chief executive officer Akio Toyoda. In the U.S., brand operations are managed by the U.S. Lexus division, which is headquartered in Plano, Texas. In Europe, Lexus operations are managed by Lexus Europe, located in Brussels. Companion design facilities are located in Southern California and central Japan, with the head design studio devoted entirely to Lexus models in Toyota City, Aichi.\nLexus sales operations vary in structure by region. In many markets, such as the U.S., the dealership network is a distinct organization from corporate headquarters, with separately owned and operated Lexus showrooms. By contrast, in Japan all 143 dealerships in the country are owned and operated by Lexus. Several markets have a designated, third party regional distributor; for example, in the United Arab Emirates, sales operations are managed by Al-Futtaim Motors LLC, and in Costa Rica, Lexus vehicles are sold via regional distributor Purdy Motors S.A. Other officially sanctioned regional distributors have sold Lexus models prior to the launch of, or in absence of, a dedicated dealership network.\nThe Lexus brand launched in the Indian market in 2017, with the models RX450h, LX450d, LX570, ES300h, NX, LS. Dealerships in Mumbai, Delhi, Gurgaon, and Bangalore became operational in March 2017, when the brand began sales in India with a second set of dealerships opening in Chandigarh, Kochi, and Chennai toward the end of 2017. This made Lexus the fifth luxury brand to be launched in India, after Mercedes-Benz, Porsche, BMW, and Audi.\nSales.\nGlobal sales of Lexus vehicles reached an all-time high in 2007, with a total of 518,000. Sales decreased in subsequent years due to the effects of the 2008 recession and the Japanese tsunami of 2011. Following this, sales recovered and reached a new high of 523,000 in 2013.\nIn 2014, the Lexus brand set a new global sales record after selling 582,000 vehicles. This made Lexus the fourth best selling luxury brand in the world, trailing BMW, Audi and Mercedes-Benz.\nGlobal sales of Lexus vehicles increased by 12 percent in 2015 to reach another annual sales record with 652,000 units sold worldwide.\nGlobal cumulative sales of Lexus brand hybrid electric cars reached the 500,000 mark in November 2012. The 1\u00a0million sales milestone was achieved in March 2016. The Lexus RX 400h/RX 450h ranks as the top selling Lexus hybrid with 335,000 units delivered worldwide as of \u00a02016[ [update]], followed by the Lexus CT 200h with 267,000 units.\nLexus has not sold as well in Europe as it has in the rest of the world where it is marketed. This is allegedly due to suffering from smaller brand recognition, image, and a less-developed dealership network. In European markets, the Lexus LS has ranked behind BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Audi, and Jaguar in flagship luxury car sales. Automotive analysts have suggested a possible rationale for the sales disparity, in that European buyers place less emphasis on vehicle reliability and have more brand loyalty to established domestic marques. In contrast, the Lexus LS has ranked second in sales to the Mercedes-Benz S-Class (and ahead of rivals from BMW, Audi, and Jaguar) in markets outside Europe, such as South Africa.\nCurrently all of Lexus's models for the US market are imported from Japan, with the exception of the RX and NX, which are also produced in Cambridge, Ontario, for North America, and the ES, which is also produced in Georgetown, Kentucky. The RX midsized crossover is Lexus's best selling model in the United States, while the ES mid-sized car is the most popular sedan in the line-up.\nFinancial performance.\nFinancial data of Lexus operations are not disclosed publicly. However, automotive analysts estimate that the Lexus division contributes a disproportionate share of Toyota's profits, relative to its limited production and sales volume. Interviews with retired division officials indicate that depending on sales volume, vehicle product development cycles, and exchange rates, Lexus sales have accounted for as much as half of Toyota's annual U.S. profit in certain years. Division executives have employed pricing strategies aimed at sustaining profit margins rather than sales volume, with historically fewer price incentives than rival brands. In 2006, Lexus entered Interbrand's list of the Top 100 Global Brands for the first time, with an estimated brand value of approximately $3 billion annually. In 2009, Interbrand ranked Lexus as Japan's seventh largest brand, between Panasonic and Nissan, based on revenue, earnings, and market value.\nAutomobiles.\nVehicle lineup.\nThe global Lexus lineup features sedans of different size classes, including the compact IS model, mid-size ES models, and the full-size LS. The 2-door coupe range consists of the RC and the LC. Former convertibles include the SC and IS C models. Sport-utility vehicles range in size from the subcompact UX, compact NX and mid-size RX crossovers, to the full-size GX and LX, the discontinued HS and GS, and variants of the IS, ES, LS, RC, LC, LBX, UX, NX, RX, TX and LM. The F marque line formerly produced a variant of the IS, GS and the LFA and currently produces a variant of the RC coupe.\nF marque.\nLexus produces its highest-performance models under its F marque division. The name refers to Flagship and Fuji Speedway in Japan, whose first corner, 27R, inspired the shape of the \"F\" emblem. F marque models are developed by the Lexus Vehicle Performance Development Division. The first F marque model, the IS F, went on sale in 2007, followed by the LFA in 2009. A related F-Sport performance trim level and factory-sanctioned accessory line is available for standard Lexus models such as the IS 250 and IS 350. The F-Sport trim level commonly includes cosmetic upgrades to the exterior and interior, and in some vehicles, mechanical upgrades such as an adaptive variable suspension. F-Sport succeeded an earlier in-house tuning effort, the TRD-based L-Tuned, which had offered performance packages on the IS and GS sedans in the early 2000s (decade).\nAdditions to the performance F Sport marque include the Lexus RC F Sport and Lexus GS F Sport and Lexus LS F Sport.\nModel nomenclature.\nLexus production models are named alphanumerically using two-letter designations followed by three digits. The first letter indicates relative status in the Lexus model range (ranking), and the second letter refers to car body style or type (e.g. LS for 'luxury sedan'). The three digits commonly indicate engine displacement in liters multiplied by a factor of one hundred (e.g. 350 for a 3.5 L engine), except in the case of turbocharged and hybrid vehicles, for which the digits correspond to the displacement of a naturally aspirated engine with equivalent output (on hybrids, the three digits refer to the combined gasoline-electric output). A space is used between the letters and numbers. The same letter may be used differently depending on the model; 'S' can refer to 'sedan' or 'sport' (e.g. in LS and SC), while 'X' refers to 'luxury utility vehicle' or SUV. For certain models, a lower case letter placed after the alphanumeric designation indicates powerplant type ('h' for hybrid, 'd' for diesel, 't' for turbocharged), while capital letter(s) placed at the end indicates a class subtype (e.g. 'L' for long-wheelbase, 'C' for coupe, 'AWD' for all-wheel drive). On F marque models, the two-letter designation and the letter 'F' are used with no numbers or hyphens (e.g. IS F).\nDesign and technology.\nLexus design has traditionally placed an emphasis on targeting specific vehicle development standards. Since the marque's inception, design targets have ranged from aerodynamics and ride quality to interior ergonomics. The backronym \"IDEAL\" (\"Impressive, Dynamic, Elegant, Advanced, and Lasting\") is used in the development process. Each vehicle is designed according to approximately 500 specific product standards, known as \"Lexus Musts\", on criteria such as leather seat stitching. Design elements from the marque's concept vehicle line, the LF series (including the 2003 LF-S and 2004 LF-C), have been incorporated in production models.\nVehicle cabins have incorporated electroluminescent Optitron gauges, SmartAccess, a smart key entry and startup system, and multimedia features. Beginning with the 2010 RX and HS models, the Remote Touch system, featuring a computer mouse-like controller with haptic feedback, was introduced; other models have featured touchscreen controls (through the 2009 model year) as a navigation screen interface. 2014 saw the introduction of the next version of Lexus' remote-touch innovations\u2014the Remote Touch Interface Touchpad in the new RC Coupe.\nIn 1989, Lexus became among the first premium car marques to equip models with premium audio systems, in partnership with stereo firm Nakamichi. Since 2001, optional surround sound systems are offered via high-end audio purveyor Mark Levinson. For reduced cabin noise, the first LS 400 introduced sandwich steel plating, and later models added acoustic glass. In 2006, the LS 460 debuted the first ceiling air diffusers and infrared body temperature sensors in a car. Telematics services include G-Book with G-Link in Asia and Lexus Enform in North America.\nIn 2006, Lexus incorporated the first production eight-speed automatic transmission in an automobile with the LS 460, and the gearbox was later adapted for the GS 460 and IS F models. Continuously variable transmissions, regenerative brakes, and electric motors have been used on all Lexus hybrid models. In 2007, Lexus executives signaled intentions to equip further models with hybrid powertrains, catering to demands for a decrease in both carbon pollution and oil reliance. Hybrid models have been differentiated by separate badging and lighting technology; in 2008, the LS 600h L became the first production vehicle to use LED headlamps.\nSafety features on Lexus models range from stability and handling programs (Vehicle Stability Control and Vehicle Dynamics Integrated Management) to backup cameras, swivel headlights, and sonar warning systems. The Lexus Pre-Collision System (PCS) integrates multiple safety systems. In 2007, Lexus introduced the first car safety systems with infrared and pedestrian detection capabilities, lane keep assist, a Driver Monitoring System with facial recognition monitoring of driver attentiveness, and rear pre-collision whiplash protection, as part of the LS 460 PCS. As a safety precaution, Lexus GPS navigation systems in many regions feature a motion lockout when the vehicle reaches a set speed; to prevent distraction, navigation inputs are limited, while voice input and certain buttons are still accessible. This safety feature has attracted criticism because passengers cannot use certain functions when the vehicle is in motion. Pre-2007 models came with a hidden manufacturer override option, and updated European models allow operation in motion.\nProduction models in development have included convertibles, crossovers, and dedicated hybrids. Under the F marque, Lexus plans to produce high-performance vehicles with its first expressions being the IS F and the LFA. Lexus officials have also discussed standard production model usage of varying platforms. The LS uses a dedicated platform, while the entry-level Lexus ES had been criticized for being too similar to the Toyota Camry, with which it shared platforms until its sixth generation, in both styling and powertrain design. The N\u00fcrburgring test track in Germany has also seen Lexus prototype testing.\nL-finesse.\nLexus introduced a new design language known as \"L-finesse\" in the mid-2000s with its LF series concepts and the 2006 Lexus GS. L-finesse is represented by three Japanese kanji characters which translate as \"Intriguing Elegance, Incisive Simplicity, and Seamless Anticipation\". Design characteristics, including a fastback profile, lower-set grille, and the use of both convex and concave surfaces, are derived from Japanese cultural motifs (e.g. the phrase \"kirikaeshi\" in arrowhead shapes). While earlier Lexus models were criticized for reserved and derivative styling, and often mistaken for understated domestic market cars, automotive design analyses described L-finesse as adding a distinctive nature and embrace of Japanese design identity.\nOpinions varied for L-finesse's debut on the GS; \"Sports Car International\"'s analysis praised the vehicle's in-person appearance; \"Automobile Magazine\" criticized the daring of its forward styling, and compared subsequent rival models for design similarities. In 2012, the arrival of the redesigned fourth generation Lexus GS featured the introduction of a spindle-shaped grille design, intended to be used on all forthcoming Lexus models. L-finesse exhibitions were presented at Milan's Salone del Mobile from 2005 through 2009.\nProduction.\nAssembly plants.\nThe first Lexus vehicles were manufactured in Toyota's Tahara plant, a computerized manufacturing plant in Japan. Through the 2000s, most Lexus sedan and SUV production has occurred in Japan at the Tahara plant in Aichi and the Miyata plant in Fukuoka. In addition to the Tahara factory, over time Lexus vehicles have been produced at the Miyata plant (Toyota Motor Kyushu) in Miyawaka, Fukuoka; the Higashi-Fuji plant (Kanto Auto Works) in Susono, Shizuoka; and the Yoshiwara plant (Araco, later Toyota Auto Body) in Toyota City, Aichi. Front-wheel drive cars, such as the ES and HS, have been produced in the Fukuoka Prefecture.\nToyota Motor Kyushu's Kokura plant in Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, which opened in 2008, is a dedicated hybrid production site for hybrid systems used in Lexus models such as the gasoline-electric RX. The North American\u2013market RX 350 (since the 2004 model year) is produced at the Cambridge plant (Toyota Canada, Inc.) in the city of Cambridge, in Ontario, Canada, which is the first Lexus production site located outside Japan. In late 2015, Lexus started to assemble North American-spec ES 350 sedans at the Georgetown plant (TMMK, Inc.). In January 2020, Toyota Kirloskar Motor of India started assembling the ES sedan in its Bidadi plant. Toyota planned to produce Lexus-branded EVs in its Shanghai factory beginning in 2027, which will be wholly owned (the second after Tesla's Gigafactory Shanghai and the first by a Japanese automaker).\nRelative to Toyota models, Lexus vehicles are built according to different quality control standards, including more stringent body panel fit tolerances and paint quality requirements. Their manufacture involves different assembly lines, molds, welding processes, and manufacturing equipment. Lexus plant workers also undergo a more selective screening process. Production vehicles are given visual inspections for flaws, individually test-driven at high speeds, and subjected to vibration tests.\nQuality rankings.\nIn the 2000s (decade), \"Consumer Reports\" named Lexus among the top five most reliable brands in its Annual Car Reliability Surveys of over one million vehicles across the U.S.\nService.\nLexus has become known for efforts to provide an upscale image, particularly with service provided after the sale. The waiting areas in service departments are replete with amenities, ranging from refreshment bars to indoor putting greens. Dealerships typically offer complimentary loaner cars or \"courtesy cars\" and free car washes, and some have added on-site cafes and designer boutiques. Service bays are lined with large picture windows for owners to watch the servicing of their vehicle. In 2005, Lexus also began reserving parking lots at major sporting arenas, entertainment events, and shopping malls, with the only requirement for free entry being the ownership of a Lexus vehicle. An online owner publication, \"Lexus Magazine\", features automotive and lifestyle articles and is published online monthly and on a mobile site.\nSince 2002, Lexus has scored consecutive top ratings in the \"Auto Express\" and 76,000-respondent \"Top Gear\" customer satisfaction surveys in the UK. Lexus has also repeatedly topped the Luxury Institute, New York surveys in the U.S. To improve customer service, employees are instructed to follow the \"Lexus Covenant\", the marque's founding promise (which states that \"Lexus will treat each customer as we would a guest in our home\"), and some dealerships have incorporated training at upscale establishments such as Nordstrom department stores and Ritz-Carlton hotels.\nMotorsport.\nLexus first entered the motorsport arena in 1999 when its racing unit, Team Lexus, fielded two GS 400 race vehicles in the Motorola Cup North American Street Stock Championship touring car series. In its 1999 inaugural season, Team Lexus achieved its first victory with its sixth race at Road Atlanta. Led by Sports Car Club of America and International Motor Sports Association driver Chuck Goldsborough, based in Baltimore, Maryland, Team Lexus capitalized on the debut of the first generation Lexus IS by entering three IS 300s in the third race of the 2001 Grand-Am Cup season at Phoenix, Arizona. Team Lexus won its first IS 300 victory that year at the Virginia International Raceway. In 2002, Team Lexus' competitive efforts in the Grand-Am Cup ST1 (Street Tuner) class achieved victories in the Drivers' and Team Championships, as well as a sweep of the top three finishes at Circuit Mont-Tremblant in Quebec, Canada.\nAfter the release of the Lexus brand in the Japanese domestic market in 2005, Lexus sanctioned the entry of four SC 430 coupes in the Super GT series of the All Japan Grand Touring Car Championship in the GT500 class. In the first race of the 2006 series, an SC 430 took the chequered flag, and drivers Andr\u00e9 Lotterer and Juichi Wakisaka raced the SC 430 to capture the GT500 championship for that year. In 2007, another SC 430 won the GT500 opening round race. In 2006, Lexus raced a hybrid vehicle for the first time, entering a GS 450h performance hybrid sedan in partnership with Sigma Advanced Racing Development at the 24 Hours of Tokachi race in Hokkaido, Japan. Lexus Canada also entered the GS 450h in 2007's Targa Newfoundland event. In 2009, Lexus Super GT Team SC 430 and IS 350 racers won the GT500 and GT300 championships, respectively.\nLexus' participation in endurance racing further includes the Rolex 24 Hours of Daytona, sanctioned by the Grand American Road Racing Association. After entering the Rolex Sports Car Series in 2004, Lexus has won over 15 Rolex Series event races. In 2005, Lexus was runner-up, and in 2006, it won the championship. Although Toyota has won this race in the past, it was the first time that its luxury arm emerged as the winner. In 2007, six Lexus-powered Daytona prototypes were entered in the Rolex 24 Hours of Daytona event at the Daytona International Speedway. Lexus was a repeat winner of the event, with a Lexus-Riley prototype driven by Scott Pruett, Juan Pablo Montoya, and Salvador Dur\u00e1n of Chip Ganassi Racing finishing first; Lexus-Riley prototypes also took three of the top ten spots. In 2008, Lexus won its third consecutive win at Daytona. For the 2010 season, Lexus departed from the Rolex Sports Car Series, and Ganassi Racing switched to BMW/Dinan engines.\nThe LF-A prototype also competed on the N\u00fcrburgring from 2008 to 2011 in VLN endurance races and in the 24 Hours N\u00fcrburgring, also with the IS F. On 14 May 2011, a CT 200h tuned up by Gazoo Racing competed in the Adenauer ADAC Rundstrecken-Trophy, a six-hour endurance race.\n3GT Racing, a partnership of Lexus and Paul Gentilozzi, entered two Lexus RC F GT3 at the N.American 2017 WeatherTech SportsCar Championship in the GT Daytona class. Their first win came in the 2018 WeatherTech SportsCar Championship with Dominik Baumann and Kyle Marcelli at Mid-Ohio before winning again with the same pairing at Virginia International Raceway. Lexus finished in 8th in their first season in 2017 in the GT Daytona Manufacturer's Championship. They then improved to 5th in 2018 with the #14 achieving 5th and the #15 getting 10th in the Team's Championship.\nFor the 2019 WeatherTech SportsCar Championship, the running of the Lexus GT3 cars has been transferred to AIM Vasser Sullivan, which is a debuting partnership, where the driver pairing of Jack Hawksworth and Richard Heistand have currently achieved 2 wins at Mid-Ohio before winning the next race at Belle Isle. As of the result of Lime Rock Park, Lexus are second in the 2019 Manufacturer's Championship and the #12 is third with the #14 in 5th despite that being the winning car.\nMarketing.\nFrom its inception, Lexus has been advertised to luxury consumers using specific marketing strategies, with a consistent motif used for the marque's advertisements. Beginning in 1989, television ads were narrated by actor James Sloyan (the voice of \"Mr. Lexus\" until 2009), and accompanied by vehicles that performed unusual stunts onscreen. The first decade of Lexus commercials (1989\u201399) consisted primarily of disjunctive verbal descriptions, such as \"relentless\", \"pursuit\", and \"perfection\", while vehicles were used to claim superiority in precision, idling, and interior quiet and comfort on camera. Examples included the champagne glass \"Balance\" (1989) and rolling \"Ball Bearing\" (1992).\nIn the 2000s (decade), commercials included descriptions of features, or a narration of the events onscreen, and were often targeted at the marque's German competitors. An annual \"December to Remember\" campaign featured scenes of family members surprising loved ones with the gift of a new Lexus. The marque returned to the champagne glass theme in a 2006 LS 460 spot showing the sedan maneuvering between two stacks of glasses using its self-parking system, and in a 2010 LFA spot showing its engine sound shattering a glass via resonance frequency.\nIndustry observers have attributed Lexus' early marketing successes to higher levels of perceived quality and lower prices than competitors, which have enabled the marque to attract customers upgrading from mass-market cars. A reputation for dependability, bolstered by reliability surveys, also became a primary factor in attracting new customers from rival premium makes. Lexus has since grown to command higher price premiums than rival Japanese makes, with new models further increasing in price and reaching the more than $100,000 ultra-luxury category long dominated by rival European marques.\nAutomotive analysts have also noted Lexus' relative newcomer status as a marketing challenge for the brand, although some have debated the requirement of a long history. European rivals have marketed their decades of heritage and pedigree, whereas Lexus' reputation rests primarily upon its perceived quality and shared history with parent company Toyota. Several analysts have stated that Lexus will have to develop its own heritage over time by highlighting technological innovations and producing substantial products.\nLexus' marketing efforts have extended to sporting and charity event sponsorships, including the U.S. Open tennis Grand Slam event from 2005 to 2009, and the United States Golf Association's U.S. Open, U.S. Women's Open, U.S. Senior Open, and U.S. Amateur tournaments since 2007. Lexus has organized an annual Champions for Charity golf series in the U.S. since 1989. Endorsement contracts have also been signed with professional athletes Hideki Matsuyama, Andy Roddick, Annika S\u00f6renstam, and Peter Jacobsen.\nSince 2008, Lexus has run the video website L Studio. Shows on L Studio include \"Web Therapy\".\nLexus unveiled its new \"Experience Amazing\" tagline in the U.S. in a 60-second advertisement at the February 2017 Super Bowl LI. The new tagline replaced Lexus's previous slogans, \"Amazing in Motion\" and \"The Pursuit of Perfection\".\nOn 30 March 2018, Lexus premiered a fake partnership with 23 and Me during a spot on \"Saturday Night Live\", for a pretend program that allows buyers to customize vehicles based on their DNA, as an April Fool's Day joke. \nLexus has renewed its sponsorship of the Esports Awards on 23 October 2024. As part of the partnership, Lexus will present awards for \"Esports Content Creator of the Year\" and \"Esports Organization of Year\" during the second half of the awards ceremony, which will take place in November 2024. The first half of the awards was presented in July 2024 during the Esports World Cup in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Financial terms of this continued partnership were not disclosed.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18330", "revid": "46639318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18330", "title": "Legal status of transgender people", "text": "Rights of transgender individuals\nThe legal status of transgender people varies significantly around the world. Some countries have enacted laws protecting the rights of transgender individuals, but others have criminalized their gender identity or expression. In many cases, transgender individuals face discrimination in employment, housing, healthcare, and other areas of life.\nA transgender person is someone whose gender identity is not consistent with the sex they were assigned at birth and also with the gender role that is associated with that sex. They may have, or may intend to establish, a new gender status that accords with their gender identity. \"Transsexual\" is generally considered a subset of \"transgender\", but some transsexual people reject being labelled \"transgender\".\nGlobally, most legal jurisdictions recognize the two traditional gender identities and social roles, man and woman, but tend to exclude any other gender identities and expressions. People assigned male at birth are usually legally recognized as men, and people assigned female at birth are usually legally recognized as women, in jurisdictions that distinguish between the two. However, there are some countries which recognize, by law, a third gender. That third gender is often associated with being nonbinary. There is now a greater understanding of the breadth of variation outside the typical categories of \"man\" and \"woman\", and many self-descriptions are now entering the literature, including \"pangender\", \"genderqueer\", \"polygender\", and \"agender\". Medically and socially, the term \"transsexualism\" is being replaced with \"gender incongruence\" or \"gender dysphoria\", and terms such as \"transgender people\", \"trans men\", and \"trans women\", and \"non-binary\" are replacing the category of transsexual people.\nMany of the issues regarding transgender rights are generally considered a part of family law, especially the issues of marriage and the question of a transgender person benefiting from a partner's insurance or social security.\nThe degree of legal recognition provided to transgender people varies widely throughout the world. Many countries now legally recognize sex reassignments by permitting a change of legal gender on an individual's birth certificate. Many transsexual people have permanent surgery to change their body, gender-affirming surgery or semi-permanently change their body by hormonal means, transgender hormone therapy. The legal status of such healthcare varies. In many countries, some of these modifications are required for legal recognition. In a few, the legal aspects are directly tied to health care; i.e. the same bodies or doctors decide whether a person can move forward in their treatment and the subsequent processes automatically incorporate both matters. In others, these medical procedures are illegal.\nThe Yogyakarta Principles (2006) and Yogyakarta +10 (2017) affirm the right to self-determination and protection from medical abuses for trans and gender-diverse people.\nAccording to one study, opposition to transgender rights was correlated with a preference for obedience and conformity regardless of partisan affiliation.\nIn some jurisdictions, transgender people (who are considered non-transsexual) can benefit from the legal recognition given to transsexual people. In some countries, an explicit medical diagnosis of \"transsexualism\" is (at least formally) necessary. In others, a diagnosis of \"gender dysphoria\", or simply the fact that one has established a non-conforming gender role, can be sufficient for some or all of the legal recognition available. The DSM-5 recognizes gender dysphoria as an official diagnosis. Not all transgender or transsexual people feel gender dysphoria or gender incongruence, but in many countries a diagnosis is required for legal recognition, if transgender people are legally recognized at all.\nAfrica.\nBotswana.\nIn September 2017, the Botswana High Court ruled that the refusal of the Registrar of National Registration to change a transgender man's gender marker was \"unreasonable and violated his constitutional rights to dignity, privacy, freedom of expression, equal protection of the law, freedom from discrimination and freedom from inhumane and degrading treatment\". LGBT activists celebrated the ruling, describing it as a great victory. At first, the Botswana Government announced it would appeal the ruling, but decided against it in December, supplying the trans man in question with a new identity document that reflects his gender identity.\nA similar case, where a transgender woman sought to change her gender marker to female, was heard in December 2017. The High Court ruled that the Government must recognise her gender identity. She dedicated her victory to \"every single trans diverse person in Botswana\".\nEgypt.\nTransgender people face significant existing societal stigma against the LGBT+ community in Egypt, a conservative Muslim nation. The procedure for gender reassignment is not illegal in Egypt, however, the complication and stigmatisation has put transgender people through mental and physical assault along with torture, as per Human Rights Watch. Reportedly, the statistics of criminal acts committed against the transgender community have not been available because they have had a history of going unreported.\nKenya.\nIn August 2025, the High Court of Kenya ruled in favor of transgender rights, and ruled that certain rights had been violated against a specific transgender person, \"including freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, equality and non-discrimination, dignity, freedom and security of the person, and privacy were unconstitutional.\" The court ordered the national parliament to implement \"the enactment of the Transgender Protection Rights Act, or, in the alternative, the amendments of the Intersex Persons Bill 2024\".\nSouth Africa.\nThe Constitution of South Africa forbids discrimination on the basis of sex, gender and sexual orientation (amongst other grounds). The Constitutional Court has indicated that \"sexual orientation\" includes transsexuality.\nIn 2003 Parliament enacted the Alteration of Sex Description and Sex Status Act, which allows a transgender person who has undergone medical or surgical gender reassignment to apply to the Department of Home Affairs to have the sex description altered on their birth record. Once the birth record is altered they can be issued with a new birth certificate and identity document, and are considered \"for all purposes\" to be of the new sex.\nAsia.\nChina.\nAccording to a survey conducted by Peking University, Chinese trans female students face strong discrimination in many areas of education. Sex segregation is found everywhere in Chinese schools and universities: student enrollment (for some special schools, universities and majors), appearance standards (hairstyles and uniforms included), private spaces (bathrooms, toilets and dormitories included), physical examinations, military trainings, conscription, PE classes, PE exams and physical health tests. Chinese students are required to attend all the activities according to their legal gender marker, otherwise they will be punished. It is also difficult to change the gender information of educational attainments and academic degrees in China, even after sex reassignment surgery, which results in discrimination against well-educated trans women.\nHong Kong.\nThe Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal ruled that a transsexual woman has the right to marry her boyfriend. The ruling was made on 13 May 2013.\nOn 16 September 2013, Eliana Rubashkyn, a transgender woman claimed that she was discriminated and sexually abused by the customs officers, including being subjected to invasive body searches and denied usage of a female toilet, although Hong Kong officers denied the allegations. After being released, she applied for and was granted refugee status by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), rendering her effectively stateless awaiting acceptance to a third country.\nIn February 2023, the Court of Final Appeal ruled that the government's requirement of full sex reassignment surgery in order to update gender identity on ID cards was unconstitutional and unacceptably burdensome. As of May 2023[ [update]], the ruling has yet to be implemented.\nIndia.\nIn April 2014, the Supreme Court of India declared transgender to be a 'third gender' in Indian law. The transgender community in India (made up of Hijras and others) has a long history in India and in Hindu mythology.\nThe Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019, was passed by Parliament in November 2019, and came into effect on 11 January 2020. It protects transgender individuals against discrimination in education, employment and healthcare. It recognizes the gender identity of the individual, and there are provisions in the law for a certificate to be issued with their new gender identity. There have been reservations among some in the transgender community, both regarding the difficulty of obtaining a certificate, and because of lack of awareness and lack of sensitivity to the issue among local public officials. LGBTQ protests against the bill have occurred, with claims that the bill hurts the transgender community instead of helping it. Protesters noted the provision for certification, but criticized the fact that this would require people to register with the government in order to be recognized as transgender. They also criticized the inequality inherent in the vast differences in punishment for the same crime, such as sexual abuse, committed against violating a transgender or cisgender individual.\nIran.\nBeginning in the mid-1980s, transgender individuals were officially recognized by the government and allowed to undergo sex reassignment surgery.\nOfficially the leader of Iran's Islamic Revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, issued a fatwa declaring sex reassignment surgery permissible for \"diagnosed transsexuals\". The government provides up to half the cost for those needing financial assistance, and a sex change is recognised on the birth certificate. Despite this, Iran's transgender people face discrimination in society. Founded in 2007 by Maryam Khatoon Molkara the Iranian Society to Support Individuals with Gender Identity Disorder (\u0627\u0646\u062c\u0645\u0646 \u062d\u0645\u0627\u06cc\u062a \u0627\u0632 \u0628\u06cc\u0645\u0627\u0631\u0627\u0646 \u0645\u0628\u062a\u0644\u0627 \u0628\u0647 \u0627\u062e\u062a\u0644\u0627\u0644\u0627\u062a \u0647\u0648\u06cc\u062a \u062c\u0646\u0633\u06cc \u0627\u06cc\u0631\u0627\u0646) is Iran's main transsexual organization.\nAdditionally, the Iranian government's response to homosexuality is to pressure lesbian and gay individuals, who are not in fact transsexual, towards sex reassignment surgery. Eshaghian's documentary, \"Be Like Others\", chronicles a number of stories of Iranian gay men who feel transitioning is the only way to avoid further persecution, jail, or execution. Maryam Khatoon Molkara\u2014who convinced Khomeini to issue the fatwa on transsexuality\u2014confirmed that some people who undergo operations are gay rather than transsexual.\nJapan.\nOn 10 July 2003, the National Diet of Japan unanimously approved a new law that enables transsexual people to amend their legal sex. It is called \"\" (Act on Special Cases in Handling Gender for People with Gender Identity Disorder) The law, effective on 16 July 2004, however, has controversial conditions which demand the applicants be both unmarried and childless. On 28 July 2004, Naha Family Court in Okinawa Prefecture returned a verdict to a transsexual woman in her 20s, allowing the sex on her family registry record or koseki to be amended from male to female. It is generally believed to be the first court approval under the new law. Since 2018 sex reassignment surgeries are paid for by the Japanese government, which are covered by the Japanese national health insurance as long as patients are not receiving hormone treatment and do not have any other pre-existing conditions. However applicants are required to be at least 20 years old, single, sterile, have no children under 20 (the age of majority in Japan), as well as to undergo a psychiatric evaluation to receive a diagnosis of \"Gender Identity Disorder\", also known as gender dysphoria in western countries. Once completed the patient has to only pay 30% of the surgery costs.\nMalaysia.\nThere is no legislation expressly allowing transsexuals to legally change their gender in Malaysia. The relevant legislations are the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1957 and National Registration Act 1959. Therefore, judges currently exercise their discretion in interpreting the law and defining the gender. There are conflicting decisions on this matter. There is a case in 2003 where the court allowed a transsexual to change her gender indicated in the identity card, and granted a declaration that she is a female. However, in 2005, in another case, the court refused to amend the gender of a transsexual in the identity card and birth certificate. Both cases applied the United Kingdom case of \"Corbett v Corbett\" in defining legal gender.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, some members of the LGBT community have started undergoing acts of sex reassignment surgery to change their sex. There are situations where such cases have caused media attention. A 2008 ruling at Pakistan's Lahore High Court gave permission to Naureen, 28, to have a sex change operation, although the decision was applicable only towards individuals who were diagnosed with gender dysphoria.\nIn 2009, the Pakistan Supreme Court made a ruling in favor of the transgender community. The landmark ruling stated that as citizens they were entitled to the equal benefit and protection of the law and called upon the Pakistani government to take steps to protect transgender people from discrimination and harassment. Pakistan's chief justice, Iftikhar Chaudhry, was the architect of major extension of rights to Pakistan's transgender community during his term. There are also anti-discrimination laws in the provision of goods and services for transgender or transsexual individuals (known as Khuwaja Sira, formerly hijra, or Third Gender) in Pakistani.\nIn 2018, the Pakistani government passed the Transgender Person (Protection of Rights) Act which officially established the legal right of transgender people in Pakistan to identify themselves as such and instituted anti-discrimination laws. These include recognition of transgender identity in legal documents such as passports, identity card, and drivers licences, along with prohibiting discrimination in employment, schools, workplaces, public transit, healthcare, etc. The bill also included the right for inheritance in accordance to their chosen gender. Furthermore, the bill obligates the Pakistani government to build protection centers and safe houses for the specific purpose of being used by the transgender community in Pakistan.\nJordan.\nThe Court of Cassation, the highest court in Jordan allowed a transsexual woman to change her legal name and sex to female in 2014 after she brought forth medical reports from Australia. The head of the Jordanian Department of civil Status and Passports stated that two to three cases of change of sex reach the department annually, all based on Medical Reports and Court orders.\nLebanon.\nIn January 2016, the Court of Appeals of Beirut confirmed the right of a transgender man to change his official papers, granting him access to necessary treatment and privacy. Transgender people are required to undergo sex reassignment surgery in order to change their legal gender.\nPhilippines.\nThe Supreme Court of the Philippines Justice Leonardo Quisumbing on 12 September 2008, allowed Jeff Cagandahan, 27, to change his birth certificate, gender and name:We respect respondent's congenital condition and his mature decision to be a male. Life is already difficult for the ordinary person. We cannot but respect how respondent deals with his unordinary state and thus help make his life easier, considering the unique circumstances in this case. In the absence of a law on the matter, the court will not dictate on respondent concerning a matter so innately private as one's sexuality and lifestyle preferences, much less on whether or not to undergo medical treatment to reverse the male tendency due to rare medical condition, congenital adrenal hyperplasia. In the absence of evidence that respondent is an 'incompetent,' and in the absence of evidence to show that classifying respondent as a male will harm other members of society ... the court affirms as valid and justified the respondent's position and his personal judgment of being a male.\nCourt records showed that at age six, he had small ovaries; at 13, his ovarian structure was minimized, he had no breasts and did not menstruate. The psychiatrist testified that \"he has both male and female sex organs, but was genetically female, and that since his body secreted male hormones, his female organs did not develop normally.\" The Philippines National Institutes of Health said \"people with congenital adrenal hyperplasia lack an enzyme needed by the adrenal gland to make the hormones cortisol and aldosterone.\nThis ruling, however, only applied to cases involving congenital adrenal hyperplasia and other intersex situations. The Philippine Supreme Court has also ruled that Filipino citizens do not have the right to legally change their sex on official documents (driver's license, passport, birth certificate, Social Security records, etc.) if they are transsexual and have undergone sexual reassignment surgery. In 2007, the Court overruled a lower court decision and found that another individual could not legally change name and sex from male to female, as it would have \"serious and wide-ranging legal and public policy consequences,\" citing the institution of marriage in particular.\nSouth Korea.\nIn South Korea, it is possible for transgender individuals to change their legal gender, although it depends on the decision of the judge for each case. Since the 1990s, however, it has been approved in most of the cases. The legal system in Korea does not prevent marriage once a person has changed their legal gender.\nIn 2006, the Supreme Court of Korea ruled that transsexuals have the right to alter their legal papers to reflect their reassigned sex. A trans woman can be registered, not only as female, but also as being \"born as a woman\".\nWhile same-sex marriage is not approved by South Korean law, a transsexual woman obtains the marital status of 'female' automatically when she marries to a man, even if she has previously been designated as \"male\".\nIn 2013 a court ruled that transgender people can change their legal sex without undergoing genital surgery.\nTaiwan.\nTransgender people in Taiwan need to undergo genital surgery (removal of primary sex organs) in order to register gender change on both the identity card and the birth certificate. The surgery requires approval of two psychiatrists, and the procedure is \"not\" covered by the National Health Insurance. The government conducted public consultations on the elimination of surgery requirements back in 2015, but no concrete changes have been made since then.\nIn 2018, the government unveiled the new chip-embedded identity card, scheduled to be issued in late 2020. Gender will not be explicitly displayed on the physical card, although the second digit of national identification number reveals gender information anyway (\"1\" for male; \"2\" for female). With the inception of new identity card, a third gender option (using digit \"7\" as the second digit of national identification number) will be available to transgender persons alike. However, it raises concerns that the practice could stigmatize transgender persons, instead of respecting their gender identity. Details of the third-gender option policy are yet to be released.\nAfter same-sex marriage law became effective on 24 May 2019, transgender persons could marry a person of the same registered gender.\nEurope.\nA majority of countries in Europe give transgender people the right to at least change their first name, most of which also provide a way of changing birth certificates. Several European countries recognize the right of transgender people to marry in accordance with their post-operative sex. Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Sweden, Spain, and the United Kingdom all recognize this right. The Convention on the recognition of decisions regarding a sex change provides regulations for mutual recognition of sex change decisions and has been signed by five European countries and ratified by Spain and the Netherlands.\nFinland.\nBefore 2023, people wishing to change their legal gender in Finland had to be sterilized or be found infertile. A recommendation from the UN Human Rights Council to eliminate the sterilization requirement was rejected by the Finnish government in 2017. In 2023, Finland changed its gender identity law in 2023 so that it no longer requires sterilization and is instead based on self-identification.\nFrance.\nIn France, the change of the first name can be done by registry office or tribunal. The change of sex can be done by tribunal. In both cases there is no need for psychiatric reports or sex reassignment surgery.\nGermany.\nIn 1908, Imperial Germany (with the help of sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld and the WhK) issued a very limited number of 'transvestite passes' \u2013 \"transvestite\" at this time referring to crossdressers as well as transgender and gender non-conforming people \u2013 which enabled individuals to dress in clothes which were seen as discordant with their sex. This ended in 1933.\nSince 1980, Germany has a law that regulates the change of first names and legal gender. It is called (Law about the change of first name and determination of gender identity in special cases (Transsexual law \u2013 TSG)). Requirements that applicants for a change in gender were infertile post-surgery declared unconstitutional by a supreme court ruling in 2011.\nIn April 2024, the German parliament has passed a self-identification law making it easier for individuals within Germany to legally change gender on documents. It went into legal effect on November 1, 2024.\nGreece.\nOn 10 October 2017, the Greek Parliament passed, by a comfortable majority, the \"Legal Gender Recognition Bill\" which grants the transgender people in Greece the right to change their legal gender freely by abolishing any conditions and requirements, such as undergoing any medical interventions, sex reassignment surgeries or sterilisation procedures to have their gender legally recognized on their IDs. The bill grants this right to anyone aged 17 and older. Although, individuals aged between 15 and 17 will have access to the legal gender recognition process, but under certain conditions, such as obtaining a certificate from a medical council. The bill was opposed by the Holy Synod of the Orthodox Church, the Communist Party of Greece, Golden Dawn and New Democracy.\nThe Legal Gender Recognition Bill followed a 20 July 2016 decision of the County Court of Athens, which ruled that a person who wants to change their legal gender on the Registry Office files is no longer obliged to already have undergone a sex reassignment surgery. This decision was applied by the Court on a case-by-case basis.\nRepublic of Ireland.\nIn Ireland, it was not possible for a transsexual person to alter their birth certificate until 2015. The High Court took a case by Lydia Foy in 2002 that was turned down, as a birth certificate was deemed to be a historical document.\nOn 15 July 2015 Ireland passed the Gender Recognition Act, which allows legal gender changes without the requirement of medical intervention or assessment by the state. Such change is possible through self-determination for any person aged 18 or over resident in Ireland and registered on Irish registers of birth or adoption. Persons aged 16 to 18 years must secure a court order to exempt them from the normal requirement to be at least 18. At the time, Ireland was one of four legal jurisdictions in the world where people may legally change gender through self-determination.\nMalta.\nMalta passed the 'Gender Identity, Gender Expression, and Sex Characteristics Act in 2015. This bill states that all citizens of Malta have the right to\nThis act protects the gender identity of a person at all times. It also states that \"person shall not be required to provide proof of a surgical procedure for total or partial genital reassignment, hormonal therapies or any other psychiatric, psychological or medical treatment to make use of the right to gender identity.\" The act allows parents to postpone listing gender on a child's birth certificate and prohibits \"non-medically necessary treatments on the sex characteristics of a person.\"\nNordic countries.\nThe Nordic model approach to transgender rights emphasizes the human rights of transgender people and is based on legal equality and self-identification, which has been adopted in countries such as Denmark, Greenland, Norway and Iceland. In 2014, the Danish Parliament voted 59\u201352 to remove the requirement of a mental disorder diagnosis and surgery with irreversible sterilization for transgender people who wish to change their legal gender. A similar act was adopted in Greenland in 2016. In Norway the Gender Recognition Act, that introduced self-identification, was introduced by the Conservative-led government of Erna Solberg and adopted in 2016. The act received widespread support from most political parties, the LGBTIQ+ rights movement and the feminist movement, including the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights. Transgender people are also protected against discrimination and hate speech under discrimination and criminal law. Iceland adopted the Gender Autonomy Act that introduced self-identification and a third legal gender option in 2019, which received widespread support, including from the Icelandic Women's Rights Association. The women's rights movement in the Nordic countries strongly supports transgender rights. In 2021 the Icelandic Women's Rights Association in cooperation with the International Alliance of Women organized a forum on how the women's movement could counter \"anti-trans voices.\" Sweden has had a gender identity law since 1972, widely regarded as the first in the world. Since 2013, neither sterilization nor other treatment is required for trans people who need to change their legal sex, but a diagnosis is required. In April 2024, Sweden passed laws coming into effect on 1 July 2025. The minimum age for changing one's legal gender is reduced to 16, and a diagnosis of gender dysphoria is no longer required. Surgical procedures will no longer require the approval of the National Board of Health and Welfare. Finland changed its gender identity law in 2023 so that it no longer requires sterilization and is instead based on self-identification.\nPoland.\nThe first milestone sentence in the case of gender shifting was given by Warsaw's Voivode Court in 1964. The court reasoned that it be possible, in face of civil procedure and acting on civil registry records, to change one's legal gender after their genital reassignment surgery had been conducted. In 1983, the Supreme Court ruled that in some cases, when the attributes of the individual's preferred gender were predominant, it is possible to change one's legal gender even before genital reassignment surgery.\nIn 2011, Anna Grodzka, the first transgender MP in the history of Europe who underwent a genital reassignment operation was appointed. In the Polish Parliamentary Election 2011 she gained 19,337 votes (45,079 voted for her party in the constituency) in the City of Krak\u00f3w and came sixth in her electoral district (928,914 people, voter turnout 55.75%). Grodzka was reportedly the only transgender person with ministerial responsibilities in the world since 10 November 2011 (as of 2015).\nPortugal.\nThe law allows adults aged 18 or older to change their legal gender without any requirements. Persons aged 16 and 17 are able to change gender with parental consent and a psychological opinion, confirming that their decision has been taken freely and without any outside pressure. The law also prohibits both direct and indirect discrimination based on gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics, and bans non-consensual sex assignment treatment and/or surgical intervention on intersex children.\nRomania.\nIn Romania it is legal for transgender people to change their first name to reflect their gender identity based on personal choice. Since 1996, it has been possible for someone who has gone through genital reassignment surgery to change their legal gender in order to reflect their post-operative sex. Transgender people then have the right to marry in accordance with their post-operative sex.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe Sex Discrimination Act 1975 made it illegal to discriminate on the ground of anatomical sex in employment, education, and the provision of housing, goods, facilities and services. The Equality Act 2006 introduced the Gender Equality Duty in Scotland, which required public bodies to take seriously the threat of harassment or discrimination against transsexual people in various situations. In 2008 the Sex Discrimination (Amendment of Legislation) Regulations extended existing regulation to outlaw discrimination when providing goods or services to transsexual people. The Equality Act 2010 added \"gender reassignment\" as a \"protected characteristic\".\nThe Gender Recognition Act 2004 effectively granted full legal recognition for binary transgender people. The gender recognition process under the Act does not require applicants to be post-operative but there must be significant medical explanation as to why an individual has not undergone sex reassignment surgery. They need to demonstrate that they have suffered gender dysphoria, have lived as their affirmed gender (i.e. the gender to which they are transitioning) for two years, and intend to continue doing so until death.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nJurisdiction over legal classification of sex in Canada is assigned to the provinces and territories. This includes legal change of gender classification.\nOn 19 June 2017 Bill C-16, after having passed the legislative process in the House of Commons of Canada and the Senate of Canada, became law upon receiving Royal Assent which put it into immediate force. The law updated the Canadian Human Rights Act and the Criminal Code to include \"gender identity and gender expression\" as protected grounds from discrimination, hate publications and advocating genocide. The bill also added \"gender identity and expression\" to the list of aggravating factors in sentencing, where the accused commits a criminal offence against an individual because of those personal characteristics. Similar transgender laws also exist in all the provinces and territories. Bill C-4 reached Royal assent on December 8, 2021, criminalizing the practice of conversion therapy throughout Canada.\nMexico.\nJurisdiction over legal classification of sex in Mexico is assigned to the states and Mexico City. This includes legal change of gender classification.\nOn 13 March 2004, amendments to the Mexico City Civil Code that allow transgender people to change their gender and name on their birth certificates, took effect.\nIn September 2008, the PRD-controlled Mexico City Legislative Assembly approved a law, in a 37\u201317 vote, making gender changes easier for transgender people.\nOn 13 November 2014, the Legislative Assembly of Mexico City unanimously (46\u20130) approved a gender identity law. The law makes it easier for transgender people to change their legal gender. Under the new law, they simply have to notify the Civil Registry that they wish to change the gender information on their birth certificates. Sex reassignment surgery, psychological therapies or any other type of diagnosis are no longer required. The law took effect in early 2015. On 13 July 2017, the Michoac\u00e1n Congress approved (22\u20131) a gender identity law. Nayarit approved (23\u20131) a similar law on 20 July 2017.\nUnited States.\nOn 15 June 2020, the Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) ruled in Bostock v. Clayton County that for the purposes of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, discrimination on the basis of transgender status is also discrimination because of sex.\nRegardless of the legal sex classification determined by a state or territory, the federal government may make its own determination of sex classification for federally issued documents. For instance, the U.S. Department of State requires a medical certification of \"appropriate clinical treatment for transition to the updated gender (male or female)\" to amend the gender designation on a U.S. passport, but sex reassignment surgery is not a requirement to obtain a U.S. passport in the updated gender. This leaves transgender Americans subject to inconsistent regulations when seeking surgery and hormone treatment.\nAs of September 19, 2025, a total of 616 'anti-trans bills' have been considered this year, of which 71 have been passed across 23 states. These bills aim to re-define sex, restrict access to gender affirming care, to education, to sports, to bathrooms, and to marriage and military positions. One such bill is Florida's \"Parental Rights in Education Act\" law, with a stated purpose to \"prohibit classroom discussion about sexual orientation or gender identity.\" introduced by Joe Harding and Dennis Baxley, both members of the Florida House of Representatives that would allow a teacher or school counsellor to be charged with a felony if they support a social transition. Supporting or encouraging a social transition can be as simple as using preferred names or pronouns. The teacher or school counsellor would also need to register as a sex offender if found guilty.\nIn January 2025, Executive Order 14168, titled \u201cDefending Women from Gender Ideology Extremism and Restoring Biological Truth to the Federal Government\u201d, was issued by President Donald Trump. The order directs federal agencies to recognize only two sexes\u2014male and female\u2014defined by biological characteristics, removes references to \u201cgender identity\u201d from federal policy, and instructs agencies to align documents and forms accordingly.\nSouth America.\nSouth America has some of the most progressive legislation in the world regarding transgender rights. Bolivia and Ecuador are among the few countries worldwide that offer constitutional protection against discrimination based on gender identity. Transgender persons are allowed to change their name and gender on legal documents in a majority of countries. Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Uruguay allow individuals to change their name and gender without undergoing medical treatment, sterilization or judicial permission. In Peru a judicial order is required.\nArgentina.\nIn 2012 the Argentine Congress passed the Ley de G\u00e9nero (Gender Law), which allows individuals over 18 to change the gender marker in their DNI (national ID) on the basis of a written declaration only. Argentina thus became the first country to adopt a gender recognition policy based entirely on individual autonomy, without any requirement for third party diagnosis, surgeries or obstacles of any type.\nBolivia.\nThe Gender Identity law allows individuals over 18 to legally change their name, gender and photography on legal documents. No surgeries or judicial order are required. The law took effect on 1 August 2016.\nBrazil.\nIn 1971, Dr. Roberto Farina performed the first male-to-female gender-affirming surgery in Brazil.\nChanging legal gender assignment in Brazil is legal according to the Superior Court of Justice of Brazil, as stated in a decision rendered on 17 October 2009.\nAnd in 2008, Brazil's public health system started providing free sexual reassignment operations in compliance with a court order. Federal prosecutors had argued that sexual reassignment surgery was covered under a constitutional clause guaranteeing medical care as a basic right.\nPatients must be at least 18 years old and diagnosed as transsexuals with no other personality disorders, and must undergo psychological evaluation with a multidisciplinary team for at least two years, begins with 16 years old.\nThe national average is of 100 surgeries per year, according to the Ministry of Health of Brazil.\nIn December 2020, a bill was introduced that defines biological sex as the only factor in determining gender.\nChile.\nChile bans all discrimination and hate crimes based on gender identity and gender expression. The Gender Identity Law, in effect since 2019, recognizes the right to self-perceived gender identity, allowing people over 14 years to change their name and gender on all official documents without prohibitive requirements. Since 1974, the change of gender had been possible in the country through a judicial process.\nColombia.\nSince 2015, a Colombian person may change their legal gender and name manifesting their solemn will before a notary, no surgeries or judicial order required.\nEcuador.\nSince 2016, Ecuadorians are allowed to change their birth name and gender identity (instead of the sex assigned at birth) on legal documents and national ID cards. The person who wants to change the word \"sex\" for \"gender\" in the identity card shall present two witnesses to accredit the self-determination of the applicant.\nPeru.\nIn Peru transgender persons can change their legal gender and name after complying with certain requirements that may become psychological and psychiatric evaluations, a medical intervention or sex reassignment surgery. A judicial permission is required.\nIn November 2016, the Constitutional Court of Peru determined that transsexuality is not a pathology and recognized the right to gender identity. However, favorable judicial decisions on gender change have been appealed.\nUruguay.\nSince 2019, transgender people can self-identify their gender and update their legal name, without approval from a judge after the approval of the Comprehensive Law for Trans Persons. The new law creates scholarships for trans people to access education, a monthly pension for transgender people born before 1975 and also requires government services to employ a minimum of 1% of the transgender population. It also now acknowledges the self-identification of non-binary people.\nIn October 2009, lawmakers passed the Gender identity law allowing transgender people over the age of 18 to change their name and legal gender on all official documents. Surgery, diagnosis or hormone therapy were not a requirement but a judicial permission was required.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nBirth certificates are regulated by the states and territories, whereas marriage and passports are matters for federal law. All Australian jurisdictions now recognise the affirmed sex of an individual, with varying requirements. In the landmark case \"New South Wales Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages v Norrie\" [2014] the High Court of Australia held that the \"Births Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1995\" (NSW) did not require a person having undergone genital reassignment surgery to identify as either a man or a woman. The ruling permits a gender registration of \"non-specific\".\nPassports are issued in the preferred gender, without requiring a change to birth certificates or citizenship certificates. A letter is needed from a medical practitioner which certifies that the person has had or is receiving appropriate treatment.\nAustralia was the only country in the world to require the involvement and approval of the judiciary (Family Court of Australia) with respect to allowing transgender children access to hormone replacement therapy. This ended in late 2017, when the Family Court issued a landmark ruling establishing that, in cases where there is no dispute between a child, their parents, and their treating doctors, hormone treatment can be prescribed without court permission.\nFiji.\nThe Constitution of Fiji which was promulgated in September 2013 includes a provision banning discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity or expression.\nGuam.\nGender changes are legal in Guam. In order for transgender people to change their legal gender in Guam, they must provide the Office of Vital Statistics a sworn statement from a physician that they have undergone sex reassignment surgery. The Office will subsequently amend the birth certificate of the requester.\nNew Zealand.\nCurrently, the Human Rights Act 1993 does not explicitly prohibit discrimination on the basis of gender. Whilst it is believed that gender identity is protected under the laws preventing discrimination on the basis of either sex or sexual orientation, it is not known how this applies to those who have not had, or will not have, gender reassignment surgery.\nNorthern Mariana Islands.\nTransgender persons in the Northern Mariana Islands may change their legal gender following sex reassignment surgery and a name change. The \"Vital Statistics Act of 2006\", which took effect in March 2007, states that: \"Upon receipt of a certified copy of an order of the CNMI Superior Court indicating the sex of an individual born in the CNMI has been changed by surgical procedure and whether such individual's name has been changed, the certificate of birth of such individual shall be amended as prescribed by regulation.\"\nSamoa.\nIn Samoa crimes motivated by sexual orientation and/or gender identity are criminalized under Section 7(1)(h) of the \"Sentencing Act 2016\".\nTable and world map of legal status.\n Some of the data are provided by Spartacus Gay Travel Index and highlights the legal status of gender identity change and expression.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18331", "revid": "49309287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18331", "title": "Ligase", "text": "Class of enzymes that can form bonds between molecules\nIn biochemistry, a ligase is an enzyme that can catalyze the joining (ligation) of two molecules by forming a new chemical bond. This is typically via hydrolysis of a small pendant chemical group on one of the molecules, typically resulting in the formation of new C-O, C-S, or C-N bonds. For example, DNA ligase can join two complementary fragments of nucleic acid by forming phosphodiester bonds, and repair single stranded breaks that arise in double stranded DNA during replication.\nIn general, a ligase catalyzes the following dehydration reaction, thus joining molecules A and B:\nA-OH + B-H \u2192 A\u2013B + H2O\nNomenclature.\nThe naming of ligases is inconsistent and so these enzymes are commonly known by several different names. Generally, the common names of ligases include the word \"ligase\", such as in DNA ligase, an enzyme commonly used in molecular biology laboratories to join together DNA fragments. However, many common names use the term \"synthetase\" or \"synthase\" instead, because they are used to synthesize new molecules. There are also some ligases that use the name \"carboxylase\" to indicate that the enzyme specifically catalyzes a carboxylation reaction.\nTo note: biochemical nomenclature has sometimes distinguished synthetases from synthases and sometimes treated the words as synonyms. Commonly, the two terms are used interchangeably and are both used to describe ligases.\nClassification.\nLigases are classified as EC 6 in the EC number classification of enzymes. Ligases can be further classified into six subclasses:\nMembrane-associated ligases.\nSome ligases associate with biological membranes as peripheral membrane proteins or anchored through a single transmembrane helix, for example certain ubiquitin ligase related proteins.\nEtymology and pronunciation.\nThe word \"ligase\" uses combining forms of \"lig-\" (from the Latin verb \"lig\u0101re\", \"to bind\" or \"to tie together\") + \"-ase\" (denoting an enzyme), yielding \"binding enzyme\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18334", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18334", "title": "Logo (programming language)", "text": "Computer programming language\nLogo is an educational programming language, designed in 1967 by Wally Feurzeig, Seymour Papert, and Cynthia Solomon. The name was coined by Feurzeig while he was at Bolt, Beranek and Newman, and derives from the Greek \"logos\", meaning 'word' or 'thought'.\nA general-purpose language, Logo is widely known for its use of turtle graphics, in which commands for movement and drawing produced line or vector graphics, either on screen or with a small robot termed a turtle. The language was conceived to teach concepts of programming related to Lisp and only later to enable what Papert called \"body-syntonic reasoning\", where students could understand, predict, and reason about the turtle's motion by imagining what they would do if they were the turtle. There are substantial differences among the many dialects of Logo, and the situation is confused by the regular appearance of turtle graphics programs that are named Logo.\nLogo is a multi-paradigm adaptation and dialect of Lisp, a functional programming language. There is no standard Logo, but UCBLogo has the facilities for handling lists, files, I/O, and recursion in scripts, and can be used to teach all computer science concepts, as UC Berkeley lecturer Brian Harvey did in his \"Computer Science Logo Style\" trilogy.\nLogo is usually an interpreted language, although compiled Logo dialects (such as Lhogho and Liogo) have been developed. Logo is not case-sensitive but retains the case used for formatting purposes.\nHistory.\nLogo was created in 1967 at Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN), a Cambridge, Massachusetts, research firm, by Wally Feurzeig, Cynthia Solomon, and Seymour Papert. Its intellectual roots are in artificial intelligence, mathematical logic and developmental psychology. For the first four years of Logo research, development and teaching work was done at BBN. The first implementation of Logo, called Ghost, was written in LISP on a PDP-1. The goal was to create a mathematical land where children could play with words and sentences. Modeled on LISP, the design goals of Logo included accessible power and informative error messages. The use of virtual Turtles allowed for immediate visual feedback and debugging of graphic programming.\nThe first working Logo turtle robot was created in 1969. A display turtle preceded the physical floor turtle. Modern Logo has not changed very much from the basic concepts predating the first turtle. The first turtle was a tethered floor roamer, not radio-controlled or wireless. At BBN Paul Wexelblat developed a turtle named Irving that had touch sensors and could move forwards, backwards, rotate, and ding its bell. The earliest year-long school users of Logo were in 1968\u201369 at Muzzey Jr. High in Lexington, Massachusetts. The virtual and physical turtles were first used by fifth-graders at the Bridge School in the same city in 1970\u201371.\nTurtle and graphics.\nLogo's most-known feature is the turtle (derived originally from a robot of the same name), an on-screen \"cursor\" that shows output from commands for movement and small retractable pen, together producing line graphics. It has traditionally been displayed either as a triangle or a turtle icon (though it can be represented by any icon). Turtle graphics were added to the Logo language by Seymour Papert in the late 1960s to support Papert's version of the turtle robot, a simple robot controlled from the user's workstation that is designed to carry out the drawing functions assigned to it using a small retractable pen set into or attached to the robot's body.\nAs a practical matter, the use of turtle geometry instead of a more traditional model mimics the actual movement logic of the turtle robot. The turtle moves with commands that are relative to its own position, \"LEFT 90\" means spin left by 90 degrees. Some Logo implementations, particularly those that allow the use of concurrency and multiple turtles, support collision detection and allow the user to redefine the appearance of the turtle cursor, essentially allowing the Logo turtles to function as sprites.\nTurtle geometry is also sometimes used in environments other than Logo as an alternative to a strictly coordinate-addressed graphics system. For instance, the idea of turtle graphics is also useful in Lindenmayer system for generating fractals.\nImplementations.\nSome modern derivatives of Logo allow thousands of independently moving turtles. There are two popular implementations: Massachusetts Institute of Technology's StarLogo and Northwestern University Center for Connected Learning's (CCL) NetLogo. They allow exploring emergent phenomena and come with many experiments in social studies, biology, physics, and other areas. NetLogo is widely used in agent-based simulation in the biological and social sciences.\nAlthough there is no agreed-upon standard, there is a broad consensus on core aspects of the language. In March 2020, there were counted 308 implementations and dialects of Logo, each with its own strengths. Most of those 308 are no longer in wide use, but many are still under development. Commercial implementations widely used in schools include \"MicroWorlds Logo\" and \"Imagine Logo\".\nLegacy and current implementations include:\nInfluence.\nLogo was a primary influence on the Smalltalk programming language. It is also the main influence on the Etoys educational programming environment and language, which is essentially a Logo variant written in Squeak (itself a variant of Smalltalk). Logo influenced the procedure/method model in AgentSheets and AgentCubes to program agents similar to the notion of a turtle in Logo. Logo provided the underlying language for Boxer. Boxer was developed at University of California, Berkeley and MIT and is based on a \"literacy model\", making it easier to use for nontechnical people.\nKTurtle is a variation of Logo implemented at Qt for the KDE environment loosely based on Logo.\nTwo more results of Logo's influence are Kojo, a variant of Scala, and Scratch, a visual, drag-and-drop language which runs in a web browser.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18337", "revid": "50697960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18337", "title": "Last rites", "text": "Christian prayers and ministrations given before death\nThe last rites, also known as the Commendation of the Dying, are the last prayers and ministrations given to an individual of Christian faith, when possible, shortly before death. The Commendation of the Dying is practiced in liturgical Christian denominations, such as the Roman Catholic Church and the Lutheran Church. They may be administered to those mortally injured, terminally ill, or awaiting execution. Last rites cannot be performed on someone who has already died. Last rites, in sacramental Christianity, can refer to multiple sacraments administered concurrently in anticipation of an individual's passing (such as Holy Absolution and Holy Communion).\nCatholic Church.\n \nThe Latin Church of the Catholic Church defines last rites as Viaticum (Holy Communion administered to someone who is dying), and the ritual prayers of Commendation of the Dying, and Prayers for the Dead.\nThe sacrament of Anointing of the Sick is usually postponed until someone is near death. Anointing of the Sick has been thought to be exclusively for the dying, though it can be received at any time. Extreme Unction (Final Anointing) is the name given to Anointing of the Sick when received during last rites. If administered to someone who is not just ill but near death, Anointing of the Sick is generally accompanied by celebration of the sacraments of penance and Viaticum. \nThe order of the three is important and should be given in the order of penance (confessing one's sins), then Anointing of the Sick, and finally the Viaticum. The principal reason penance is administered first to the seriously ill and dying is because the forgiveness of one's sins, and most especially one's mortal sins, is for Catholics necessary for being in a state of grace (in a full relationship with God). Dying while in the state of grace ensures that a Catholic will go to heaven (if they are in a state of grace but still attached to sin, they will eventually make it to heaven but must first go through a spiritual cleansing process called purgatory). \nAlthough these three (penance, Anointing of the sick, and Viaticum) are not, in the proper sense, the last rites, they are sometimes spoken of as such; the Eucharist given as Viaticum is the only sacrament essentially associated with dying. \"The celebration of the Eucharist as Viaticum is the sacrament proper to the dying Christian\".\nIn the Roman Ritual's \"Pastoral Care of the Sick: Rites of Anointing and Viaticum\", Viaticum is the only sacrament dealt with in \"Part II: Pastoral Care of the Dying\". Within that part, the chapter on Viaticum is followed by two more chapters, one on \"Commendation of the Dying\", with short texts, mainly from the Bible, a special form of the litany of the saints, and other prayers, and the other on \"Prayers for the Dead\". A final chapter provides \"Rites for Exceptional Circumstances\", namely, the \"Continuous Rite of Penance, Anointing, and Viaticum\", \"Rite for Emergencies\", and \"Christian Initiation for the Dying\". The last of these concerns the administration of the sacraments of Baptism and Confirmation to those who have not received them.\nIn addition, the priest has authority to bestow a blessing in the name of the Pope on the dying person, to which a plenary indulgence is attached.\nOrthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church and those Eastern Catholic Churches which follow the Byzantine Rite, the last rites consist of the Sacred Mysteries (sacraments) of confession and the reception of Holy Communion.\nFollowing these sacraments, when a person dies, there are a series of prayers known as \"The Office at the Parting of the Soul From the Body\". This consists of a blessing by the priest, the usual beginning, and after the Lord's Prayer, Psalm 50. Then a Canon to the Theotokos is chanted, entitled, \"On behalf of a man whose soul is departing, and who cannot speak\". This is an elongated prayer speaking in the person of the one who is dying, asking for forgiveness of sin, the mercy of God, and the intercession of the saints. The rite is concluded by three prayers said by the priest, the last one being said \"at the departure of the soul.\"\nThere is an alternative rite known as \"The Office at the Parting of the Soul from the Body When a Man has Suffered for a Long Time\". The outline of this rite is the same as above, except that Psalm 71 (70) and Psalm 144 (143) precede Psalm 51 (50), and the words of the canon and the prayers are different.\nThe rubric in the Book of Needs (priest's service book) states, \"With respect to the Services said at the parting of the soul, we note that if time does not permit to read the whole Canon, then customarily just one of the prayers, found at the end of the Canon, is read by the Priest at the moment of the parting of the soul from the body.\"\nAs soon as the person has died the priest begins \"The Office After the Departure of the Soul From the Body\" (also known as \"The First Pannikhida\").\nIn the Orthodox Church Holy Unction is not considered to be solely a part of a person's preparation for death, but is administered to any Orthodox Christian who is ill, physically or spiritually, to ask for God's mercy and forgiveness of sin. There is an abbreviated form of Holy Unction to be performed for a person in imminent danger of death, which does not replace the full rite in other cases.\nLutheran Churches.\nIn the Lutheran Churches, last rites are formally known as the Commendation of the Dying, in which the priest \"opens in the name of the triune God, includes a prayer, a reading from one of the psalms, a litany of prayer for the one who is dying, [and] recites the Lord\u2019s Prayer\". The dying individual is then anointed with oil and receives the sacraments of Holy Absolution and Holy Communion.\nAnglican Communion.\nThe proposed 1928 revision of the Church of England's \"Book of Common Prayer\" would have permitted reservation of the Blessed Sacrament for use in communing the sick, including during last rites. This revision failed twice in the Parliament of the United Kingdom's House of Commons.\nIn the Episcopal Church in the United States a rite is found in the 1979 Book of Common Prayer called the Ministration at the Time of Death. This rite consists of \"a prayer for a person near death,\" a \"litany at the time of death\" asking God to deliver the person from evil, sin, and tribulation, and to grant them forgiveness and peace. This litany is followed by the Lord's Prayer and a commendation of the Soul to God. After death, prayers for the person's eternal rest are offered. \nThis rite is oftentimes administered alongside Unction, and Holy Communion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18338", "revid": "12971673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18338", "title": "Lamorna", "text": "Village in Cornwall, England\nLamorna () is a village, valley and cove in west Cornwall, England, UK. It is on the Penwith peninsula approximately south of Penzance. Lamorna became popular with the artists of the Newlyn School, including Alfred Munnings, Laura Knight and Harold Knight, and is also known for former residents Derek and Jean Tangye who farmed land and wrote \"The Minack Chronicles\".\nToponymy.\nFirst recorded as \"Nansmorno\" (in 1305), than \"Nansmurnou\" (1309), \"Nansmorne\" (1319), \"Nansmornou\" (1339), \"Nansmorna\" (1387) and \"Namorna\" (1388). In Cornish \"Nans\" means valley, and the 2nd element is possibly \"mor\", which means sea.\nGeography.\nLamorna Cove is at the SE end of a north-west to south-east valley. The cove is delineated by Carn-du (Black Rock) on the eastern side and Lamorna Point on the western side. The valley is privately owned from The Wink (public house) down to the cove, which is reached by a narrow lane to the car park and quay. The small village, half a mile inland, was originally known as Nantewas. The South West Coast Path passes around the cove.\nLamorna lies within the Cornwall Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB); almost a third of Cornwall has AONB designation, with the same status and protection as a National Park.\nHistory.\nThe first record of tin streaming is in the 1380s when Alan Hoskyn was killed (murder was not proven) during a dispute with Trewoofe, after the stream was diverted. Mounds along the stream are evidence of past activity. Kemyel Mill was operated by the Hoskyn family from at least the 14th century until the 1920s, but is now a gift shop under different ownership. There were two mills: one milled corn for animal feed, and the other flour. Both mills are grade II listed buildings.\nIn the 17th century a privateer vessel owned by the Penrose family was regularly moored in the cove and was wrecked during a storm. At one time five cannon were on the sea floor in of water, and one is now at Stoney Cove, Leicestershire where it is used at an underwater archaeological training area. A number of silver coins found in 1984 and 1985 include one dated 1653. The wreck is a popular diving site.\nA school for fifty to sixty infant boys and girls opened for the first time in the village in March 1881. The schoolroom, with a screen at the eastern end, was paid for by Canon Coulson and built on land on which he owned the freehold. The room converted to a mission room for Anglicans by removing a screen to reveal a chancel; the converted chapel had a capacity of 70\u201380 for services. Previously children had to go to St Buryan, some 4\u00a0km away, for schooling.\nThe valley is now tree-covered, but until around the 1950s the stream- and hillside were grazed by cows, horses and pigs. On the slopes, daffodils and early potatoes were grown; the flowers were sent to markets at Covent Garden (London), Birmingham and Wales.\nCommunity radio.\nThe local community radio station is Coast FM (formerly Penwith Radio), which broadcasts on 96.5 and 97.2 FM.\nQuarries.\nWaste tips on the eastern side of the cove are a reminder of the granite quarries first opened by John Freeman, on St Aubyn land, in 1849 and continued working until 1911. Famous buildings and constructions include Admiralty Pier at Dover, London County Council offices, the Thames Embankment and Portland Breakwater. Stone from the cove was also used locally to build the Bishop Rock Lighthouse, Mousehole north pier and the Wolf Rock Lighthouse. Granite was dragged by chains to an iron pier, where the stream enters the sea, and transported by ship. A plinth weighing 20 tons was sent to The Great Exhibition of 1851 by sea but eventually, due to the hazards of loading ships, granite was sent by road via Kemyal and Paul Hill through Newlyn, to the cutting yards in Wherrytown. The present quay was built in the late 19th century, possibly rebuilt on an older quay, and is a grade II listed building. A quarry on the west side of the cove failed due to the high quartz content of the granite. An area of and known as the \u2033Lamorna Harbour Works\u2033 was put up for auction at the Mart, Tokenhouse Yard, City of London on 16 June 1881. The property, on both sides of the valley, included \u2033the exceedingly valuable\u2033 granite quarry with harbour, wharf and pier, a powder magazine, lime and mill house, carpenter's shops, 12\u00a0horse-power water-wheel, foreman's residence and a \"substantial and superior\" dwelling-house. Despite the 1881 sale claiming the granite quarry was \u2033exceeding valuable\u2033, Freeman and Sons only employed four men at the quarry two years later and the average-sized blocks were of inferior quality compared with the quarry at nearby Sheffield.\nThe Lamorna Cove Hotel, built in the 1870s and known as Cliffe House, was originally the quarry manager's home, and had a school and chapel (with bell tower) for the quarry workers and their families. It was first used as a hotel in the 1920s. During the Second World War the hotel was occupied by seven French fishing families who fished out of Newlyn.\nNewlyn School of Art and the Lamorna Colony.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries Lamorna became popular with artists of the Newlyn School. It is particularly associated with the artist S J \"Lamorna\" Birch who lived there from 1908. The colony included Birch, Alfred Munnings, Laura Knight and Harold Knight. This period is dramatised in the 1998 novel \"Summer in February\" by Jonathan Smith, which was adapted for the 2013 movie directed by Christopher Menaul. Lamorna was also the home of the jeweller Ella Naper and her husband, the painter Charles, who built Trewoofe House. The Lamorna Arts Festival was launched in 2009 to celebrate the original Lamorna Colony and today's Lamorna art community.\nLamorna in culture.\nLamorna has been immortalised in the song \"Way Down to Lamorna\", about a wayward husband receiving his comeuppance from his wife. The song is beloved of many Cornish singers, including Brenda Wootton.\nThe actor Robert Newton (1905\u20131956) was educated in Lamorna and his ashes were scattered in the sea off Lamorna by his son, Nicholas Newton.\nThe authors Derek Tangye and Jean Tangye lived above Lamorna where he wrote his famous books \"The Minack Chronicles\". A piece of land called \"Oliver Land\" has been preserved as a wildlife sanctuary in memory of the couple. Lamorna was the village used in the novel \"The Memory Garden\" by Rachel Hore (2007) and was a location used for the shooting of Sam Peckinpah's 1971 thriller \"Straw Dogs\". \"Lamorna Cove\" was the title of a poem by W. H. Davies published in 1929.\nThe name of Lamorna's pub, The Wink, alludes to smuggling, \"the wink\" being a signal that contraband could be obtained. The pub is the subject of a novel by Martha Grimes, entitled \"The Lamorna Wink\". The interior contains an important collection of maritime artefacts.\nThe Lamorna Pottery was founded in 1947 by Christopher James Ludlow (known as Jimmy) and Derek Wilshaw. It is currently a working pottery, gift shop and caf\u00e9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18339", "revid": "1306961217", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18339", "title": "Law of multiple proportions", "text": "1804 observation in physical chemistry\nIn chemistry, the law of multiple proportions states that in compounds which contain two particular chemical elements, the amount of Element A per measure of Element B will differ across these compounds by ratios of small whole numbers. For instance, the ratio of the hydrogen content in methane (CH4) and ethane (C2H6) per measure of carbon is 4:3. This law is also known as \"Dalton's Law\", named after John Dalton, the chemist who first expressed it. The discovery of this pattern led Dalton to develop the modern theory of atoms, as it suggested that the elements combine with each other in multiples of a basic quantity. Along with the law of definite proportions, the law of multiple proportions forms the basis of stoichiometry.\nThe law of multiple proportions often does not apply when comparing very large molecules. For example, if one tried to demonstrate it using the hydrocarbons decane (C10H22) and undecane (C11H24), one would find that 100\u00a0grams of carbon could react with 18.46\u00a0grams of hydrogen to produce decane or with 18.31\u00a0grams of hydrogen to produce undecane, for a ratio of hydrogen masses of 121:120, which is hardly a ratio of \"small\" whole numbers.\nHistory.\nIn 1804, Dalton explained his atomic theory to his friend and fellow chemist Thomas Thomson, who published an explanation of Dalton's theory in his book \"A System of Chemistry\" in 1807. According to Thomson, Dalton's idea first occurred to him when experimenting with \"olefiant gas\" (ethylene) and \"carburetted hydrogen gas\" (methane). Dalton found that \"carburetted hydrogen gas\" contains twice as much hydrogen per measure of carbon as \"olefiant gas\", and concluded that a molecule of \"olefiant gas\" is one carbon atom and one hydrogen atom, and a molecule of \"carburetted hydrogen gas\" is one carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms. In reality, an ethylene molecule has two carbon atoms and four hydrogen atoms (C2H4), and a methane molecule has one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms (CH4). In this particular case, Dalton was mistaken about the formulas of these compounds, and it wasn't his only mistake. But in other cases, he got their formulas right. The following examples come from Dalton's own books \"A New System of Chemical Philosophy\" (in two volumes, 1808 and 1817):\nExample 1 \u2014 tin oxides: Dalton identified two types of tin oxide. One is a grey powder that Dalton referred to as \"the protoxide of tin\", which is 88.1% tin and 11.9% oxygen. The other is a white powder which Dalton referred to as \"the deutoxide of tin\", which is 78.7% tin and 21.3% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in the grey powder there is about 13.5\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of tin, and in the white powder there is about 27\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of tin. 13.5 and 27 form a ratio of 1:2. These compounds are known today as tin(II) oxide (SnO) and tin(IV) oxide (SnO2). In Dalton's terminology, a \"protoxide\" is a molecule containing a single oxygen atom, and a \"deutoxide\" molecule has two. Tin oxides are actually crystals, they don't exist in molecular form.\nExample 2 \u2014 iron oxides: Dalton identified two oxides of iron. There is one type of iron oxide that is a black powder which Dalton referred to as \"the protoxide of iron\", which is 78.1% iron and 21.9% oxygen. The other iron oxide is a red powder, which Dalton referred to as \"the intermediate or red oxide of iron\" which is 70.4% iron and 29.6% oxygen. Adjusting these figures, in the black powder there is about 28\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of iron, and in the red powder there is about 42\u00a0g of oxygen for every 100\u00a0g of iron. 28 and 42 form a ratio of 2:3. These compounds are iron(II) oxide (Fe2O2) and iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3). Dalton described the \"intermediate oxide\" as being \"2 atoms protoxide and 1 of oxygen\", which adds up to two atoms of iron and three of oxygen. That averages to one and a half atoms of oxygen for every iron atom, putting it midway between a \"protoxide\" and a \"deutoxide\". As with tin oxides, iron oxides are crystals. \nExample 3 \u2014 nitrogen oxides: Dalton was aware of three oxides of nitrogen: \"nitrous oxide\", \"nitrous gas\", and \"nitric acid\". These compounds are known today as nitrous oxide, nitric oxide, and nitrogen dioxide respectively. \"Nitrous oxide\" is 63.3% nitrogen and 36.7% oxygen, which means it has 80 g of oxygen for every 140 g of nitrogen. \"Nitrous gas\" is 44.05% nitrogen and 55.95% oxygen, which means there are 160 g of oxygen for every 140 g of nitrogen. \"Nitric acid\" is 29.5% nitrogen and 70.5% oxygen, which means it has 320 g of oxygen for every 140 g of nitrogen. 80\u00a0g, 160\u00a0g, and 320\u00a0g form a ratio of 1:2:4. The formulas for these compounds are N2O, NO, and NO2.\nThe earliest definition of Dalton's observation appears in an 1807 chemistry encyclopedia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...where two bodies combine in different proportions, if the quantity of one of them be assumed as a fixed number, the proportions of the other body that unite to it are in the simplest possible ratio to each other, being produced by multiplying the lowest proportion by a simple integral number as 2, 3, 4, &amp;c. [...] in all cases the simple elements of bodies are disposed to unite atom to atom singly; or if either is in excess, it exceeds by a ratio to be expressed by some simple multiple of the number of its atoms.\nThe first known writer to refer to this principle as the \"doctrine of multiple proportions\" was J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius in 1813.\nDalton's atomic theory garnered widespread interest but not universal acceptance shortly after he published it because the law of multiple proportions by itself was not complete proof of the existence of atoms. Over the course of the 19th century, other discoveries in the fields of chemistry and physics would give atomic theory more credence, such that by the end of the 19th century it had found universal acceptance.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18340", "revid": "181746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18340", "title": "Law of averages", "text": "Fallacy in probability\nThe law of averages is the commonly held belief that a particular outcome or event will, over certain periods of time, occur at a frequency that is similar to its probability. Depending on context or application it can be considered a valid common-sense observation or a misunderstanding of probability. This notion can lead to the gambler's fallacy when one becomes convinced that a particular outcome must come soon simply because it has not occurred recently (e.g. believing that because three consecutive coin flips yielded \"heads\", the next coin flip must be virtually guaranteed to be \"tails\").\nAs invoked in everyday life, the \"law\" usually reflects wishful thinking or a poor understanding of statistics rather than any mathematical principle. While there is a real theorem, the law of large numbers, that a random variable will reflect its underlying probability over a very large sample, the law of averages typically assumes that an unnatural short-term \"balance\" must occur. Typical applications also generally assume no bias in the underlying probability distribution, which is frequently at odds with the empirical evidence.\nExamples.\nGambler's fallacy.\nThe gambler's fallacy is a particular misapplication of the law of averages in which the gambler believes that a particular outcome is more likely because it has not happened recently, or (conversely) that because a particular outcome has recently occurred, it will be less likely in the immediate future.\nAs an example, consider a roulette wheel that has landed on red in three consecutive spins. An onlooker might apply the law of averages to conclude that on its next spin it is guaranteed (or at least is much more likely) to land on black. Of course, the wheel has no memory and its probabilities do not change according to past results. So even if the wheel has landed on red in ten or a hundred consecutive spins, the probability that the next spin will be black is still no more than 48.6% (assuming a \"fair\" European wheel with only one green zero; it would be exactly 50% if there were no green zero and the wheel were fair, and 47.4% for a fair American wheel with one green \"0\" and one green \"00\"). Similarly, there is no statistical basis for the belief that lottery numbers which haven't appeared recently are due to appear soon. (There is some value in choosing lottery numbers that are, in general, less \"popular\" than others \u2014 not because they are any more or less likely to come up, but because the largest prizes are usually shared among all of the people who chose the winning numbers. The unpopular numbers are just as likely to come up as the popular numbers are, and in the event of a big win, one would likely have to share it with fewer other people. See parimutuel betting.)\nExpectation values.\nAnother application of the law of averages is a belief that a sample's behaviour must line up with the expected value based on population statistics. For example, suppose a fair coin is flipped 100 times. Using the law of averages, one might predict that there will be 50 heads and 50 tails. While this is the single most likely outcome, there is only an 8% chance of it occurring according to formula_1 of the binomial distribution. Predictions based on the law of averages are even less useful if the sample does not reflect the population.\nRepetition of trials.\nIn this example, one tries to increase the probability of a rare event occurring at least once by carrying out more trials. For example, a job seeker might argue, \"If I send my r\u00e9sum\u00e9 to enough places, the law of averages says that someone will eventually hire me.\" Assuming a non-zero probability, it is true that conducting more trials increases the overall likelihood of the desired outcome. However, there is no particular number of trials that guarantees that outcome; rather, the probability that it will already have occurred approaches but never quite reaches 100%.\nChicago Cubs.\nThe Steve Goodman song \"A Dying Cub Fan's Last Request\" mentions the law of averages in reference to the Chicago Cubs lack of championship success. At the time Goodman recorded the song in 1981, the Cubs had not won a National League championship since 1945, and had not won a World Series since 1908. This futility would continue until the Cubs would finally win both in 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18341", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18341", "title": "Outline of linguistics", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to linguistics\nThe following outline is provided as an overview and topical guide to linguistics:\nLinguistics is the scientific study of language. Someone who engages in this study is called a linguist. Linguistics can be theoretical or applied.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBranches of linguistics.\nSubfields of linguistics.\nSubfields, by linguistic structures studied.\nSub-fields of structure-focused linguistics include:\nHistory of linguistics.\nTimeline of discovery of basic linguistics concepts.\n\"When were the basic concepts first described and by whom?\"\nBasic concepts.\n\"What basic concepts / terms do I have to know to talk about linguistics?\"\nLinguistics scholars.\n\"People who had a significant influence on the development of the field\"\nThe placement of linguistics within broader frameworks.\nLinguistics can be described as an academic discipline and, at least in its theoretical subfields, as a field of science, being a widely recognized category of specialized expertise, embodying its own terminology, nomenclature, and scientific journals. Many linguists, such as David Crystal, conceptualize the field as being primarily scientific.\nLinguistics is a multi-disciplinary field of research that combines tools from natural sciences, social sciences, formal sciences, and the humanities.\nHistorically, there has been some lack of consensus on the disciplinary classification of linguistics, particularly theoretical linguistics. Linguistic realists viewed linguistics as a formal science; linguistic nominalists (the American structuralists) viewed linguistics as an empirical or even physical science; linguistic conceptualists viewed linguistics as a branch of psychology and therefore a social science; others yet have argued for viewing linguistics as a mixed science.\nLinguistics is heterogeneous in its methods of research, so that each area of theoretical linguistics may resemble methodologically either formal science or empirical science, to different degrees. For example, phonetics uses empirical approaches to study the physical acoustics of spoken language. On the other hand, semantically and grammatically, the usability of a formal or natural language is dependent on a formal and arbitrary axiomatization of rules or norms. Furthermore, as studied in pragmatics and semiotics, linguistic meaning is influenced by social context.\nTo enable communication by upholding a lexico-semantic norm, the speakers of a shared language need to agree on the meaning of a sequence of phonemes; for instance, \"aunt\" () would be acknowledged to signify \"parent's sister or parent's sister-in-law\", instead of \"drummer\" or \"guest\". Likewise, grammatically, it may be necessary for the interlocutors to agree on the morphological and syntactic properties of the sequence; say, that the sequence (/\u00e6/, /n/, /t/) would be treated as a singular noun convertible morphologically to plurality by the addition of the suffix , or that as a noun it must not be modified syntactically by an adverb (for instance, \"Let's call our immediately aunt\" would thus be recognized as a grammatically incoherent structure, in a manner similar to a mathematically undefined expression).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18342", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18342", "title": "Outline of law", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to law\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and introduction to law:\nLaw is the set of rules and principles (laws) by which a society is governed, through enforcement by governmental authorities. Law is also the field that concerns the creation and administration of laws, and includes any and all legal systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNature of law.\nLaw can be described as all of the following:\nBranches of law.\nPublic law.\nPublic law\nHistory.\nHistory of law\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis article includes . &lt;br&gt; If an [ internal link] incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article."}
{"id": "18344", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18344", "title": "Law of constant composition", "text": ""}
{"id": "18345", "revid": "46546788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18345", "title": "Outline of literature", "text": "Written works of art\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to literature:\nLiterature \u2013 prose, written or oral, including fiction and non-fiction, drama, and poetry.\n \"See also the Outline of poetry.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat type of thing is literature?\nLiterature can be described as all of the following:\nForms of literature.\nOral literary genres.\nOral literature\nWritten literary genres.\nNon-fiction.\nNon-fiction\nFiction genres.\nFiction\nInspirational fiction (religious literature) \u2013\nHistory of literature.\nHistory of literature\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18349", "revid": "968290184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18349", "title": "Laws of Motion", "text": ""}
{"id": "18352", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18352", "title": "AvtoVAZ", "text": "Russian automobile manufacturing company\nAvtoVAZ (Russian: , ) is a Russian automobile manufacturing company owned by the state. It was formerly named as VAZ (), an acronym for Volga Automotive Plant in Russian (). AvtoVAZ is best known for its flagship series of Lada vehicles. In the Soviet Union, its products used various names, including Zhiguli, Oka, and Sputnik, which were phased out in the 1990s and replaced by Lada for the Russian market. From December 2019 to August 2020, AvtoVAZ sold Niva cars with Chevrolet branding.\nAvtoVAZ was established in 1966 by the Soviet government as a state-run car manufacturer. It was privatized in the 1990s and was a subsidiary of Renault from October 2016 to May 2022. In May 2022, it was re-acquired by the Russian government. The company is indirectly owned by Russian state enterprises through Lada Auto Holding.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe VAZ plant was established in 1966 by the Soviet government in cooperation with the Italian car manufacturer Fiat. Viktor Nikolaevich Polyakov (later Minister of Automobile Industry) was named as director, and Vladimir Solovyov as chief designer. The plant intended to produce popular economy cars that would meet the growing demand for personal transport. It was built on the banks of the Volga in 1966. A new town, Tolyatti, named after Italian Communist Party leader Palmiro Togliatti, was built around the plant. The cost of the VAZ plant was estimated at $800 million in 1970 (equivalent to $ billion in 2024).\nThe cars to be produced (designated as \"Zhiguli\") were envisaged as a \"people's car\" like the Citro\u00ebn 2CV or the VW Type 1. Production was intended to be 220,000 units a year, beginning in 1971 (other sources listed 300,000 in 1971); car production actually began before the plant was finished in 1970. The VAZ trademark, at first, was a silver Volga boat on a red pentagonal background, with \"Togliatti\" superimposed in Cyrillic (\u0422\u043e\u043b\u044c\u044f\u0442\u0442\u0438); the first badges, manufactured in Turin, mistakenly had the Cyrillic \"\u042f\" rendered \"R\", instead (\u0422\u043e\u043b\u044c\u0280\u0442\u0442\u0438), making them collector's items.\nThe company was not as vertically integrated as other Soviet enterprises; for example, it purchased components from a variety of suppliers over which it exerted little control; in the early years of the company certain parts and subassemblies were imported from Fiat's suppliers in Italy until they could be locally sourced.\n1970s.\nThe first car, the VAZ-2101 (a slightly modified and rebadged Fiat 124), was produced on 22 April 1970, the 100th anniversary of Lenin's birth. About 22,000 VAZ-2101s were built in 1970, with capacity at the end of 1973 reaching 660,000 a year; 21 December, the one-millionth 2101 was built. A third production line was added in October 1974, boosting output to 2,230 cars a day. The same year, total VAZ production reached 1.5 million.\nThe VAZ plant trialled many of the new automation systems that Fiat was planning to introduce in its own factories, and was described as \"ultra-modern\" by the \"Chicago Tribune\" in a 1973 article. Production reached 750,000 cars a year in 1975, making the Tolyatti plant the third-most productive in the world. Between 1977 and 1981, AvtoVAZ acquired 30 welding robots from Japanese firms.\nIn 1974, VAZ was given permission to begin producing Wankel engines under licence from NSU. Work began in 1976, with a single-rotor Lada appearing in 1978; the first 250 of these went on sale in the summer of 1980.\nAfter having built a number of prototypes and experimental vehicles, AvtoVAZ designers launched the first car entirely of their own design, the VAZ-2121 Niva, in 1977. This highly popular and innovative sport utility vehicle (SUV) was made with off-road use in mind, featuring a gearbox with a central differential lock lever, as well as a low- and high-range selector lever.\nThe VAZ-2105, based on the Fiat 124 mechanicals, but modernised and restyled, was introduced in 1979 and marketed outside the Soviet Union under the Riva or Laika trade names, depending on the country. Square headlights and new body panels distinguish this car from the earlier models. The 2105 was third-best selling automobile platform after the Volkswagen Beetle and the Ford Model T, and one of the longest production run platforms alongside the Volkswagen Beetle, the Hindustan Ambassador, and the Volkswagen Type 2.\nIn 1993, TTS, signed a contract with AvtoVAZ. In 1995, the first full\u2014fledged LADA car center was opened in the city of Naberezhnye Chelny and started direct deliveries from the automobile plant. In 1995, an office was opened in Kazan. Until 1997, cars were driven from Naberezhnye Chelny. After that, they were transported by rail.\n1980s.\nIn May 1980, a series of mass strikes at the Togliatti plant involving hundreds of thousands of workers was reported by the western press.\nBased on the success of the Niva, the design department prepared a new family of front-wheel drive models by 1984, which was of a completely domestic design. Production started with the VAZ-2108 \"Sputnik\" three-door hatchback, the series was commercially known as Samara. It was the first front-wheel drive serial car built in the Soviet Union after the LuAZ-\n969V.\nA white 2108 became the nine-millionth Lada built, on 24 May 1985, with the ten-millionth, on 9 October 1986, also a 2108. The twelve-millionth, a right-hand drive 2109, was produced 6 July 1989.\nBy the late 1980s, AvtoVAZ was suffering from the deterioration of its capital goods, such as tools and machinery, resulting from insufficient levels of investment over a long period. Unproductive and antiquated management techniques also contributed to the decline, as did the absence of market competition. The first privately owned AvtoVAZ dealership was established by Boris Berezovsky in 1989. Dealerships quickly turned into criminal rackets that at times simply stole cars from the factory.\nAfter privatization.\nIn June 1991, Bear Stearns was hired by the Soviet government to conduct an appraisal of AvtoVAZ and negotiate a venture with a Western partner, in preparation for the privatization of the company. An independent trade union was started during the same year, as workers deemed the traditional trade union to be too close to the interests of management.\nIn January 1993, AvtoVAZ was re-established as a joint-stock company under Russian law. The company came to be controlled by the management, including Vladimir Kadannikov, head of AvtoVAZ. It was listed on the Moscow Exchange. As with many other privatized post-Soviet companies, the financial situation at AvtoVAZ was dire, with workers being unpaid for months at a time.\nIn 1994, Boris Berezovsky's dealership company, called (), accounted for nearly 10% of the domestic sales of AvtoVAZ. Despite the state of the Russian economy at the time, demand for AvtoVAZ cars remained buoyant, but widespread corruption in the distribution network led the company to accumulate massive debts.\nThe 110-series sedan was introduced in 1995, two years after its original 1993 deadline. Development costs for the car were estimated at $2 billion. The 2111 station wagon followed in 1998 and the 2112 hatchback completed the range in 2001.\nBy 1995, car sales, distribution, and spare parts at AvtoVAZ were all controlled by criminal organizations. This situation was made possible by the close relationship that existed between the criminals and part of the management. Additionally, gangsters were used to control the workers and break strikes.\nBy late 1996, AvtoVAZ had become the country's largest tax debtor, owing $2.4 billion in unpaid taxes. In 1997, the Ministry of Internal Affairs launched Operation Cyclone, an investigation that ultimately uncovered evidence that gangsters connected to AvtoVAZ had carried out at least 65 murders of company managers, dealers, and business rivals.\nThe 1998 Russian financial crisis improved the company's market position, by improving the effectiveness of export sales and making imported cars too expensive for most Russians. The VAZ-2120 Nadezhda, a minivan based on the Lada Niva, was introduced in 1998. In the second half of the 1990s, some efforts were made to improve the quality of production, but in 1999, nearly 50,000 cases of cars were still being assembled with missing parts.\nIn 2001, GM-AvtoVAZ, a joint venture with General Motors, was established. Increased competition from foreign car manufacturers had the company's share of the Russian market fall to 49% in 2002, compared to 56% four years earlier. In 2003, VAZ presented the concept car Lada Revolution, an open single-seater sports car powered by a 1.6-L engine producing . Production of the Wankel engine used on some Lada models (mostly the police versions) stopped in 2004.\nThe introduction of the new Kalina B-segment lineup to the market occurred in 2005. AutoVAZ built a new modern plant for this model and was hoping to sell some 200,000 cars annually. The Kalina had been originally designed in the early 1990s, and its launch was repeatedly delayed, exemplifying the company's difficulty in bringing products to market in time. In October 2005, control of the company, which had until then been exercised by subsidiaries of AvtoVAZ connected to Kadannikov, was transferred to Rosoboronexport. March 2007 had the start of production of Lada Priora, a restyled and modernised 110-series model.\nIn 2005 it was estimated in a documentary created by Channel One Russia that about 500 people were killed between 1990 and 2005 during conflicts between police and criminals related to AvtoVAZ.\nThe Documentary was released same year when Rosoboronexport took over AvtoVAZ with the support of 300 police officers during the extraordinary general meeting. Though Rosoboronexport was not listed as company shareholder at the time, no objections were raised by other parties, such as official shareholders. Rosoboronexport action was supported by Vladimir Putin publicly.\nInvolvement of Renault-Nissan.\nIn March 2008, Renault purchased a 25% stake in AvtoVAZ in a US$1 billion deal, with Rostec retaining most of the remaining 75%. The deal was agreed at a time when the Russian car market was booming.\nThe onset of the Great Recession caused considerable problems to the company. By April 2009, AvtoVAZ was on the verge of bankruptcy, which was only avoided because of a $600 million bailout from the Russian government. As an anticrisis measure, the Russian government introduced a car scrappage scheme in March 2010. Avtovaz sales doubled in the second quarter of 2010 as a result, and the company returned to profit. By the end of 2010, automotive production in Russia had returned to precrisis levels.\nIn 2011, production of the classic Fiat 124-based 2105 and 2107 series models was completely moved from the Togliatti plant to the IzhAvto plant near Izhevsk, to make space for the company's forthcoming 2016 model. In April 2012, AvtoVAZ confirmed the end of the model 2107 (Lada Riva or Lada Nova), after more than 40 years.\nSales of the Lada Granta, a subcompact car developed in collaboration with Renault, started in December 2011. The Lada Largus was launched in the Russian market in the middle of July 2012. In August 2012, the Lada XRAY concept car was launched at the Moscow International Automobile Salon. The XRAY was designed by chief designer Steve Mattin, formerly of Volvo and Mercedes-Benz. The second generation of the Lada Kalina, basically a facelifted first generation, was also revealed at the 2012 Moscow International Motor Show. The Kalina was also produced with a more powerful version named Lada Kalina Sport. On 3 May 2012, the Renault-Nissan alliance signed a letter of intent to raise its stake in Avtovaz to 51.01%. On 12 December 2012, the Renault\u2013Nissan Alliance formed a joint venture with Roste (Alliance Rostec Auto BV) with the aim of becoming the long-term controlling shareholder of AvtoVAZ. In the same year, it was announced that Avtovaz and Sollers planned to jointly produce vehicles in Kazakhstan. The plant was set to open in 2016 and built in Ust-Kamenogorsk, in the eastern part of the country, to produce around 120,000 cars a year.\nLater developments.\nIn November 2013, Bo Andersson joined AvtoVAZ as CEO, the first non-Russian to head the company. He became involved in conflicts with local suppliers, which he accused of supplying low-quality products.\nThe takeover of AvtoVAZ was completed in June 2014, and the two companies of the Renault-Nissan Alliance took a combined 67.1% stake of Alliance Rostec, which in turn acquired 74.5% of AvtoVAZ, thereby giving Renault and Nissan indirect control over the Russian manufacturer.\nIn 2014, AvtoVAZ sold 448,114 vehicles, down 16.3% comparing to the previous year, due to the overall market slowdown in Russia. The total production capacity of the Togliatti factory is 910,000 vehicles. By 2014, the company's liabilities exceeded assets by 68 billion rubles, for UK-based Ernst &amp; Young to express \"significant doubt\" about the company's \"ability to continue as a going concern\". In 2014, the Largus got a new modification, the Lada Largus Cross. In the fall of 2014 AvtoVAZ began production of a new Kalina model, the Lada Kalina Cross.\nProduction of the Lada Vesta, based on a new b\\C platform developed by AvtoVAZ in cooperation with Renault-Nissan Alliance, started on September 25, 2015, at Lada Izhevsk manufacturing site. For the first time in Lada history, only a year had passed between concept car and start of production. Lada XRAY was the first compact city crossover in company's history. Starts of sales was held on February 14, 2016.\nTotal Lada sales in 2015 amounted to 269,096 cars, of which 207,389 were built by AvtoVAZ in Tolyatti, while the rest were made by Lada Izhevsk, giving the company a 17.9% share of the Russian automotive market.\nIn March 2016, Nicolas Maure became the company's CEO. In April 2016, Carlos Ghosn, Renault-Nissan Chairman, ceded his AvtoVAZ chairmanship position to Sergey Skvortsov, Deputy General Director of Rostec, the minority shareholder in Avtovaz. Despite massive layoffs since 2008, in 2016, the company remained unprofitable.\nGroupe Renault takeover.\nIn October 2016, Renault invested $1.33 billion in another recapitalization of AvtoVAZ, this time without involvement from Nissan, making the company a subsidiary of the French group. In September 2017, Nissan sold its AvtoVAZ stake to Renault for \u20ac45 million.\nIn December 2018, Renault and Rostec completed the acquisition of all AvtoVAZ shares through their Alliance Rostec venture. The company then delisted from the Moscow Exchange. In 2018, AvtoVAZ posted a net profit of $90.5 million, its first positive result in a decade. In June 2019, Rostec announced it would eventually reduce its stake in AvtoVAZ to 25%. In December 2021, Renault and Rostec transferred its shares from the Netherlands-registered Alliance Rostec to the Russia-registered Lada Auto Holding. The new holding kept the same Renault-Rostec shareholding ratio as its Dutch predecessor. In March 2022, following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and international pressure to do so, Renault said it was \"assessing\" its AvtoVAZ ownership.\nIn December 2019, AvtoVAZ acquired General Motors' stake in their GM-AvtoVAZ joint venture. As part of the deal, AvtoVAZ used Chevrolet branding for the Niva models until August 2020, before replacing it with Lada.\nIn January 2021, following a company revamp, Renault said it would integrate Lada and sister Dacia brands into a new business unit. AvtoVAZ was made part of the business unit structure. In 2021, the company's revenue amounted to 301 billion rubles.\nEffects stemming from the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nOn 3 March 2022 AvtoVAZ announced the suspension of the assembly of cars in Tolyatti and Izhevsk from 5 March. The company issued a press release blaming 'the ongoing crisis in the supply of electronic components.'\nRe-nationalization.\nOn 16 May 2022, Renault said it had sold its controlling stake in AvtoVAZ to the Central Research and Development Automobile and Engine Institute (NAMI), a state-owned research center, for one rouble. The agreement has a buyback option for Renault within six years after the sale.\nIn November 2022, the controlling shareholder of AvtoVAZ, NAMI, acquired Nissan's Saint Petersburg facilities (including its assembly plant) for a \"symbolic price\" with a six-year buyback option. In February 2023, NAMI sold 99% of them in turn to AvtoVAZ for \u20ac. AvtoVAZ plans to use the plant to assemble C and D-segment vehicle kits from other manufacturers, under the Lada badging.\nCompany structure.\nOwnership.\nAfter its re-establishment as a joint stock company in January 1993, the ownership structure of AvtoVAZ became opaque, with two different management groups controlling the majority of the shares, one led by company chairman Kadannikov, holding 33.2% through the AVVA company, while another group held 19.2% through the AFC company. AvtoVAZ, in turn, owned over 80% of AVVA, which was said to be under the influence of Boris Berezovsky.\nAs of May 2022[ [update]], AvtoVAZ's owner is Lada Auto Holding, which is a joint venture between two state enterprises, NAMI and Rostec.\nSubsidiaries and affiliates.\nVarious AvtoVAZ's subsidiaries and affiliates produce vehicles within Russia. The main plant is the one in Tolyatti, with three assembly lines, which assembled 312,000 cars in 2016. Lada West Togliatti is a car manufacturing plant within the Tolyatti complex, formerly owned by GM-AvtoVAZ.\nAs of July 2021[ [update]], its production has been halted. Lada Izhevsk, a company established in 1965 and that adopted its present name in 2017, has one assembly line and produced 96,000 cars in 2016. VIS-AVTO is a company established in 1991. It converts AvtoVAZ cars into commercial vehicles and produces Bronto-badged Nivas. It assembled 4,146 vehicles in 2015. Lada Sport is AvtoVAZ's motorsport and performance subsidiary which produced 3,153 cars in 2015. AvtoVAZ also controls Lada Saint Petersburg, the Saint Petersburg plant operated by Nissan until 2022.\nApart from its own facilities, AvtoVAZ has associated companies for production. CJSC Super-Avto, a company associated to AvtoVAZ and established in 1997, is focused on the modification of Lada cars. In 2015, it converted 569 of them. In June 2016, the company filed for bankruptcy, but it resumed business by late 2016. ChechenAvto, a state-owned enterprise based in Argun, produced 6,700 cars in 2016. AvtoVAZ has had overseas partners for assembly in Egypt, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan\u00a0 and other countries.\nAs of December 2020[ [update]], other relevant AvtoVAZ subsidiaries include JSC Lada-Service (a holding of the AvtoVAZ-controlled dealerships which exists in its present form since 2007), JSC Lada-Image (official spare parts distributor in Russia, established in 2003), PPPO LLC, ZAK LLC, LIN LLC, Sockultbilt-AvtoVAZ LLC, and Lada International Ltd.\nAvtoVAZ financial affiliate is Auto Finance Bank. The first financial affiliate for AvtoVAZ was AvtoVAZbank, which operated as such from 1988 to 1996. In 1997, it was replaced by Lada-Credit (originally named Automotive Banking House).\nExport.\nExports of AvtoVAZ vehicles to the West began in 1974; Ladas were sold as in several Western nations during the 1970s and 1980s, though trade sanctions banned their export to the United States.\nEconomic instability in the former Soviet Union in the 1990s, combined with tightening emissions regulations and increasing stringency of safety legislation, triggered the withdrawal of AvtoVAZ from most Western markets by late 1997.\nIn later years, Lada again began exporting vehicles. Lada products are marketed in Russia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Chile, Egypt, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Lebanon, Moldova, Slovakia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Serbia, Syria, Peru, and Jordan.\nIn 2015, 28,461 Lada cars were exported, mostly to Kazakhstan (14,278 vehicles), Azerbaijan (4,690), Belarus (2,360), Egypt (2,128), and Germany (1,515).\nMotorsport.\nIn 1970, AvtoVAZ CEO Viktor Polyakov set the task to create sport versions of the Lada 2101. The engines were built in Italy, whereas fine tuning was done by engineers in Togliatti. In 1971, three sport cars based on the 2101 model took part in the Soviet Winter Rally Championship. Later in the same year, a VAZ-Autoexport team earned their first prize, the Silver Cup in the 1971 Tour d'Europe.\nIn the 1970s\u20131980s, the Autoexport racing team, using different Lada models, participated in different motorsport competitions. A special Zhiguli class was created for the Soviet Rally Championship. There were different rally and track races featuring Avtovaz sports cars. In 1978, a Lada Niva took part in the famous Dakar Rally. It was also successful in a number of international competitions. In 1981, Guy Moerenhout Racing made two special models for Lada Belgium: Lada 21011 RS Sport, model with two Weber carburetors and special sport equipment, and Lada Niva Dream, with big wing extension, special colours and larger wheels. In the late 1990s, Lada Canada supported a rally operation in the Canadian Rally Championship, winning in the 'Production 1750' class on numerous occasions.\nIn 2012, the Lada Granta Cup was launched. The first stage of the new race series began in Moscow on the Myachkovo race track.\nWorld Touring Car Championship.\nIn the 2013 season, AvtoVAZ returned to the WTCC championship through Lada Sport. The team used a new car: the Lada Granta WTCC, driven by WTCC World Champion Robert Huff.\nThe team returned for the 2014 World Touring Car Championship season, again fielding a Granta. Since the beginning of 2015, the Lada team took part in the WTCC as Lada Sport Rosneft. Starting in the 2015 season, Lada Sport used Lada Vestas. The official Lada Sport team left the category at the end of the 2016 season, although an unofficial entry by the RC Competition team kept the Vesta on the grid for another year. In 2021, Lada Sport had a one-off entry for the final race of the TCR-spec World Touring Car Cup at the Sochi Autodrom.\nSponsorship.\nLada sponsored the Renault F1 Team in 2010 after they signed Russia's first Formula One driver Vitaly Petrov.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18353", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18353", "title": "Lundy", "text": "English island in the Bristol Channel\nLundy is an English island in the Bristol Channel. It forms part of the district of Torridge in the county of Devon.\nAbout long and wide, Lundy has had a long and turbulent history, frequently changing hands between the British crown and various usurpers. In the 1920s, the island's owner, Martin Harman, tried to issue his own coinage and was fined. In 1941, two German Heinkel He 111 bombers crash landed on the island, and their crews were captured.\nIn 1969, Lundy was purchased by British millionaire Jack Hayward, who donated it to the National Trust. It is now managed by the Landmark Trust, a conservation charity that derives its income from day trips and holiday lettings, most visitors arriving by boat from Bideford or Ilfracombe. A local tourist curiosity is the special \"Puffin\" postage stamp, a category known by philatelists as \"local carriage labels\", a collector's item.\nAs a steep, rocky island, often shrouded by fog, Lundy has been the scene of many shipwrecks, and the remains of its old lighthouse installations are of both historic and scientific interest. Its present-day lighthouses, one of which is solar-powered, are fully automated. Lundy has a rich bird life, as it lies on major migration routes, and attracts many vagrant as well as indigenous species. It also boasts a variety of marine habitats, with rare seaweeds, sponges and corals. In 2010, the island became Britain's first Marine Conservation Zone.\nProfile.\nLundy is the largest island in the Bristol Channel. It lies off the coast of Devon, about a third of the distance across the channel from Devon to Pembrokeshire in Wales. Lundy gives its name to a British sea area. Lundy is included in the district of Torridge in Devon. In 2007, it had a resident population of 28 people. These include a warden, a ranger, an island manager, a farmer, bar and housekeeping staff, and volunteers. Most live in and around the village at the south of the island. Visitors include day-trippers and holiday makers staying overnight in rental properties or camping.\nIn a 2005 opinion poll of \"Radio Times\" readers, Lundy was named as Britain's tenth greatest natural wonder. The island has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest and it was England's first statutory Marine Nature reserve, and the first Marine Conservation Zone, because of its unique flora and fauna. It is managed by the Landmark Trust on behalf of the National Trust.\nEtymology.\nThe place-name \"Lundy\" is first attested in 1189 in the \"Records of the Templars in England\", where it appears as . It appears in the Charter Rolls as \"Lundeia\" again in 1199, and as \"Lunday\" in 1281. The name is Scandinavian and means 'puffin island', from the Old Norse meaning 'puffin' (compare the three Lundey islands in Iceland); it appears in the 12th-century \"Orkneyinga saga\" as .\nLundy is known in Welsh as , 'Gwair's Island', in reference to an alternative name for the wizard Gwydion.\nHistory.\nLundy has evidence of visitation or occupation from the Mesolithic period onward, with Neolithic flintwork, Bronze Age burial mounds, four inscribed gravestones from the early medieval period, and an early medieval monastery (possibly dedicated to St Elen or St Helen).\nBeacon Hill Cemetery.\nBeacon Hill Cemetery was excavated by Charles Thomas in 1969. The cemetery contains four inscribed stones, dated to the 5th or 6th century AD. The site was originally enclosed by a curvilinear bank and ditch, which is still visible in the southwest corner, however, the other walls were moved when the Old Light was constructed in 1819. Celtic Christian enclosures of this type were common in Western Britain and are known as in Welsh and in Cornish. There are surviving examples in Luxulyan, in Cornwall; Mathry, Meidrim and Clydau in the south of Wales; and Stowford, Jacobstowe, Lydford and Instow, in Devon.\nThomas proposed the following sequence of site usage:\nTwenty-three cist graves were found during this excavation. Considering that the excavation only uncovered a small area of the cemetery, there may be as many as 100 graves.\nInscribed stones.\nFour Celtic inscribed stones have been found in Beacon Hill Cemetery:\nKnights Templar.\nLundy was granted to the Knights Templar by Henry II in 1160. The Templars were a major international maritime force at this time, with interests in North Devon, and almost certainly an important port at Bideford or on the River Taw in Barnstaple. This was probably because of the increasing threat posed by the Norse sea raiders; however, it is unclear whether they ever took possession of the island. Ownership was disputed by the Marisco family who may have already been on the island during King Stephen's reign. The Mariscos were fined, and the island was cut off from necessary supplies. Evidence of the Templars' weak hold on the island came when King John, on his accession in 1199, confirmed the earlier grant.\nMarisco family.\nIn 1235, William de Marisco was implicated in the murder of Henry Clement, a messenger of Henry III. Three years later, an attempt was made to kill Henry III by a man who later confessed to being an agent of the Marisco family. William de Marisco fled to Lundy where he lived as a virtual king. He built a stronghold in the area now known as Bulls' Paradise with walls thick.\nIn 1242, Henry III sent troops to the island. They scaled the island's cliff and captured William de Marisco and 16 of his \"subjects\". Henry III built the castle (sometimes referred to as the Marisco Castle) in an attempt to establish the rule of law on the island and its surrounding waters. In 1275, the island is recorded as being in the Lordship of King Edward I but by 1322 it was in the possession of Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster and was among the large number of lands seized by Edward II following Lancaster's execution for rebelling against the King. At some point in the 13th century the monks of the Cistercian order at Cleeve Abbey in Somerset held the rectory of the island.\nPiracy.\nOver the next few centuries, the island was hard to govern. Trouble followed as both English and foreign pirates and privateers\u00a0\u2013 including other members of the Marisco family\u00a0\u2013 took control of the island for short periods. Ships were forced to navigate close to Lundy because of the dangerous shingle banks in the fast flowing River Severn and Bristol Channel, with its tidal range of , one of the greatest in the world. This made the island a profitable location from which to prey on passing Bristol-bound merchant ships bringing back valuable goods from overseas.\nIn 1627, a group known as the Sal\u00e9 Rovers, from the Republic of Sal\u00e9 (now Sal\u00e9 in Morocco) occupied Lundy for five years. These Barbary pirates, under the command of a Dutch renegade named Jan Janszoon, flew a Moorish flag over the island. Slaving raids were made embarking from Lundy by the Barbary Pirates, and captured Europeans were held on Lundy before being sent to Sal\u00e9 and Algiers to be sold as slaves as part of the Barbary coast slave trade.\nFrom 1628 to 1634, in addition to the Barbary Pirates, the island was plagued by privateers of French, Basque, English and Spanish origin targeting the lucrative shipping routes passing through the Bristol Channel. These incursions were eventually ended by John Penington, but in the 1660s and as late as the 1700s the island still fell prey to French privateers.\nCivil war.\nIn the English Civil War, Thomas Bushell held Lundy for King Charles I, rebuilding Marisco Castle and garrisoning the island at his own expense. He was a friend of Francis Bacon, a strong supporter of the Royalist cause and an expert on mining and coining. It was the last Royalist territory held between the first and second civil wars. After receiving permission from Charles I, Bushell surrendered the island on 24 February 1647 to Richard Fiennes, representing General Fairfax. In 1656, the island was acquired by Lord Saye and Sele.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe late 18th and early 19th centuries were years of lawlessness on Lundy, particularly during the ownership of Thomas Benson (1708\u20131772), a Member of Parliament for Barnstaple in 1747 and Sheriff of Devon, who notoriously used the island for housing convicts whom he was supposed to be deporting. Benson leased Lundy from its owner, John Leveson-Gower, 1st Earl Gower (1694\u20131754) (who was an heir of the Grenville family of Bideford and of Stowe, Kilkhampton in Cornwall), at a rent of \u00a360 per annum and contracted with the Government to transport a shipload of convicts to Virginia, but diverted the ship to Lundy to use the convicts as his personal slaves. Later Benson was involved in an insurance swindle. He purchased and insured the ship \"Nightingale\" and loaded it with a valuable cargo of pewter and linen. Having cleared the port on the mainland, the ship put into Lundy, where the cargo was removed and stored in a cave built by the convicts, before setting sail again. Some days afterwards, when a homeward-bound vessel was sighted, the \"Nightingale\" was set on fire and scuttled. The crew were taken off the stricken ship by the other ship, which landed them safely at Clovelly.\nSir Vere Hunt, 1st Baronet of Curragh, a rather eccentric Irish politician and landowner, and unsuccessful man of business, purchased the island from John Cleveland in 1802 for \u00a35,270. Hunt planted in the island a small, self-contained Irish colony with its own constitution and divorce laws, coinage, and stamps. The tenants came from Hunt's Irish estate and they experienced agricultural difficulties while on the island. This led Hunt to seek someone who would take the island off his hands, failing in his attempt to sell the island to the British government as a base for troops.\nAfter the 1st Baronet's death his son, Sir Aubrey (Hunt) de Vere, 2nd Baronet, also had great difficulty in securing any profit from the property. In the 1820s, John Benison agreed to purchase the island for \u00a34,500 but then refused to complete the sale, as he felt that de Vere could not make out a good title in respect of the sale terms, namely that the island was free from tithes and taxes.\nWilliam Hudson Heaven purchased Lundy in 1834, as a summer retreat and for hunting, at a cost of 9,400 guineas (\u00a39,870). He claimed it to be a \"free island\", and successfully resisted the jurisdiction of the mainland magistrates. Lundy was in consequence sometimes referred to as \"the kingdom of Heaven\". It belonged in law to the county of Devon, and had long been part of the hundred of Braunton. Many of the buildings on the island, including St. Helen's Church, designed by the architect John Norton, and Millcombe House (originally known simply as \"the Villa\"), date from the Heaven period. The Georgian-style villa was built in 1836. However, the expense of building the road from the beach (no financial assistance being provided by Trinity House, despite their frequent use of the road following the construction of the lighthouses), maintaining the villa, and the general cost of running the island had a ruinous effect on the family's finances, which had been diminished by reduced profits from their sugar plantations, rum production, and livestock rearing in Jamaica.\nIn 1957, a message in a bottle from one of the seamen of was washed ashore between Babbacombe and Peppercombe in Devon. The letter, dated 15 August 1843, read: \"Dear Brother, Please e God i be with y against Michaelmas. Prepare y search Lundy for y Jenny ivories. Adiue William, Odessa\". The bottle and letter are on display at the Portledge Hotel at Fairy Cross, in Devon, England. was a three-masted full-rigged ship reputed to be carrying ivory and gold dust that was wrecked on Lundy on 20 January 1797 at a place thereafter called Jenny's Cove. Some ivory was apparently recovered some years later but the leather bags supposed to contain gold dust were never found.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nWilliam Heaven was succeeded by his son the Reverend Hudson Grosset Heaven who, thanks to a legacy from Sarah Langworthy (n\u00e9e Heaven), was able to fulfill his life's ambition of building a stone church on the island. St Helen's was completed in 1896, and stands today as a lasting memorial to the Heaven period. It has been designated by English Heritage a Grade II listed building. He is said to have been able to afford either a church or a new harbour. His choice of the church was not however in the best financial interests of the island. The unavailability of the money for re-establishing the family's financial soundness, coupled with disastrous investment and speculation in the early 20th century, caused severe financial hardship.\nHudson Heaven died in 1916, and was succeeded by his nephew, Walter Charles Hudson Heaven. With the outbreak of the First World War, matters deteriorated seriously, and in 1918 the family sold Lundy to Augustus Langham Christie. In 1924, the Christie family sold the island along with the mail contract and the MV \"Lerina\" to the businessman Martin Coles Harman. Harman issued two coins of Half Puffin and One Puffin denominations in 1929, nominally equivalent to the British halfpenny and penny, resulting in his prosecution under the United Kingdom's Coinage Act of 1870. His case was heard by Devon magistrates in April 1930, and he was fined \u00a35 and ordered to pay \u00a315 15 shillings (\u00a315.75 in decimal currency) costs. He appealed to the King's Bench Division of the High Court of Justice in 1931, but the appeal was dismissed. The coins were withdrawn and became collector's items. In 1965, a \"fantasy\" restrike four-coin set, a few in gold, was issued to commemorate 40 years since Harman purchased the island. Harman's son, John Pennington Harman was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross during the Battle of Kohima, India in 1944. There is a memorial to him at the VC Quarry on Lundy. Martin Coles Harman died in 1954.\nResidents did not pay taxes to the United Kingdom and had to pass through customs when they travelled to and from Lundy Island. Although the island was ruled as a virtual fiefdom, its owner never claimed to be independent of the United Kingdom, in contrast to later territorial \"micronations\".\nFollowing the death of Harman's son Albion in 1968, Lundy was put up for sale in 1969. Jack Hayward, a British millionaire, purchased the island for \u00a3150,000 (\u00a3 today) and gave it to the National Trust, who leased it to the Landmark Trust. The Trust has managed the island since then, deriving its income from arranging day trips, letting out holiday cottages and from donations. In May 2015 a sculpture by Antony Gormley was erected on Lundy. It is one of five life-sized sculptures, \"Land\", placed near the centre and at four compass points of the UK in a commission by the Landmark Trust, to celebrate its 50th anniversary. The others are at Lowsonford (Warwickshire), Saddell Bay (Scotland), the Martello Tower (Aldeburgh, Suffolk), and Clavell Tower (Kimmeridge Bay, Dorset).\nThe island is visited by over 20,000 day trippers a year, but during September 2007 had to be closed for several weeks owing to an outbreak of norovirus.\nAn inaugural Lundy Island half-marathon took place on 8 July 2018 with 267 competitors.\nWrecked ships and aircraft.\nWreck of \"Jenny\".\nNear the end of a voyage from Africa to Bristol, the British merchant ship \"Jenny\" was wrecked on the coast of Lundy on 20 January 1797. Only the first mate survived. The site of the tragedy () has since been known as Jenny's Cove.\nWreck of Battleship \"Montagu\".\nSteaming in heavy fog, the Royal Navy battleship ran hard aground near Shutter Rock on Lundy's southwest corner at about 2:00\u00a0a.m. on 30 May 1906. Thinking they were aground at Hartland Point on the English mainland, a landing party went ashore for help, only finding out where they were after encountering the lighthouse keeper at the island's north light.\nStrenuous efforts by the Royal Navy to salvage the badly damaged battleship during the summer of 1906 failed, and in 1907 it was decided to give up and sell her for scrap. \"Montagu\" was scrapped at the scene over the next fifteen years. Diving clubs still visit the site, where armour plating remains among the rocks and kelp.\nRemains of a German Heinkel 111H bomber.\nDuring the Second World War two German Heinkel He 111 bombers crash landed on the island in 1941. The first was on 3 March, when all the crew survived and were taken prisoner.\nThe second was on 1 April when the pilot was killed and the other crew members were taken prisoner. This plane had bombed a British ship and one engine was damaged by anti aircraft fire, forcing it to crash land. Most of the metal was salvaged, although a few remains can be found at the crash site to date. Reportedly, to avoid reprisals, the crew concocted the story that they were on a reconnaissance mission.\nGeography.\nThe island of Lundy is long from north to south by a little over wide, with an area of . The highest point on Lundy is Beacon Hill, above sea level. A few yards off the northeastern coast is Seal's Rock which is so called after the seals which rest on and inhabit the islet. It is less than wide. Near the jetty is a small pocket beach. One of the Meteorological Office's 31 sea areas announced on the BBC Radio 4 shipping forecast is named Lundy.\nGeology.\nThe island is primarily composed of granite of 59.8\u2009\u00b1\u20090.4\u2009\u2013\u200958.4\u2009\u00b1\u20090.4 million years (from the Palaeocene epoch), with slate at the southern end; the plateau soil is mainly loam, with some peat. Among the igneous dykes cutting the granite are a small number composed of a unique orthophyre. This was given the name Lundyite in 1914, although the term\u00a0\u2013 never precisely defined\u00a0\u2013 has since fallen into disuse. It is possible, based on emplacement of magmas of the basalt, trachyte and rhyolite types at a high levels in Earth's crust, that a volcano system existed above Lundy.\nClimate.\nLundy lies on the line where the North Atlantic Ocean and the Bristol Channel meet, so it has quite a mild climate. The island has cool, wet winters and mild, wet summers. It is often windy and fog is frequently experienced. The record high temperature is on 2 August 1990, and the record low temperature is recorded just six months later on 8 February 1991. Lundy is in the USDA 9a plant hardiness zone.\nEcology.\nFlora.\nThe vegetation on the plateau is mainly dry heath, with an area of waved Calluna heath; the northern end of the island is largely bare rock. This area is also rich in lichens, such as \"Teloschistes flavicans\" and several species of Cladonia and Parmelia.\nOther areas are either a dry heath/acidic grassland mosaic, characterised by heaths and western gorse (\"Ulex gallii\"), or semi-improved acidic grassland in which Yorkshire fog (\"Holcus lanatus\") is abundant. Tussocky (Thrift) (Holcus/Armeria) communities occur mainly on the western side, and some patches of bracken (\"Pteridium aquilinum\") on the eastern side.\nThere is one endemic plant species, the Lundy cabbage \"(Coincya wrightii)\", a species of primitive brassica.\nBy the 1980s, the eastern side of the island had become overgrown by rhododendrons (\"Rhododendron ponticum\") which had spread from a few specimens planted in the garden of Millcombe House in Victorian times, but in recent years significant efforts have been made to eradicate this non-native plant.\nFauna.\nTerrestrial invertebrates.\nTwo invertebrate taxa are endemic to Lundy, with both feeding on the endemic Lundy cabbage (\"Coincya wrightii\"). These are the Lundy cabbage flea beetle (\"Psylliodes luridipennis\"), a species of leaf beetle (family Chrysomelidae) and the Lundy cabbage weevil (\"Ceutorhynchus contractus\u200a\" var. \"pallipes\"), a variety of true weevil (family Curculionidae). In addition, the Lundy cabbage is the main host of a flightless form of \"Psylliodes napi\" (another species of flea beetle) and a wide variety of other invertebrate species which are not endemic to the island. Another resident invertebrate of note is \"Atypus affinis\", the only British species of purseweb spider.\nBirds.\nThe population of puffins (\"Fratercula arctica\") on the island declined in the late 20th and early 21st centuries as a consequence of depredations by brown and black rats (\"Rattus rattus\") and possibly also as a result of commercial fishing for sand eels, the puffins' principal prey. Since the elimination of rats in 2006, seabird numbers have increased. By 2023 the number of puffins had risen to 1,355 and the number of Manx shearwater to 25,000, representing 95% of England's breeding population of this seabird. The island has since 2014 become colonised by European storm petrel.\nAs an isolated island on major migration routes, Lundy has a rich bird life and is a popular site for birdwatching. Large numbers of black-legged kittiwake (\"Rissa tridactyla\") nest on the cliffs, as do razorbill (\"Alca torda\"), common guillemot (\"Uria aalge\"), European herring gull (\"Larus argentatus\"), lesser black-backed gull (\"Larus fuscus\"), northern fulmar (\"Fulmarus glacialis\"), European shag (\"Phalacrocorax aristotelis\"), Eurasian oystercatcher (\"Haematopus ostralegus\"), Eurasian skylark (\"Alauda arvensis\"), meadow pipit (\"Anthus pratensis\"), common blackbird (\"Turdus merula\"), European robin (\"Erithacus rubecula\"), and linnet (\"Carduelis cannabina\"). There are also smaller populations of peregrine falcon (\"Falco peregrinus\") and raven (\"Corvus corax\").\nLundy has attracted many vagrant birds, in particular species from North America. As of 2007, the island's bird list totals 317 species. This has included the following species, each of which represents the sole British record: Ancient murrelet, eastern phoebe, and eastern towhee. Records of bimaculated lark, American robin, and common yellowthroat were also firsts for Britain (American robin has also occurred two further times on Lundy). Veerys in 1987 and 1997 were Britain's second and fourth records, a R\u00fcppell's warbler in 1979 was Britain's second, an eastern Bonelli's warbler in 2004 was Britain's fourth, and a black-faced bunting in 2001 Britain's third.\nOther British Birds rarities that have been sighted (single records unless otherwise indicated) are: little bittern; gyrfalcon (3 records); little and Baillon's crakes; collared pratincole; semipalmated (5 records), least (2 records), white-rumped, and Baird's (2 records) sandpipers; Wilson's phalarope; laughing gull; bridled tern; Pallas's sandgrouse; great spotted, black-billed, and yellow-billed (3 records) cuckoos; European roller; olive-backed pipit; citrine wagtail; Alpine accentor; thrush nightingale; red-flanked bluetail; western black-eared (2 records) and desert wheatears; White's, Swainson's (3 records), and grey-cheeked (2 records) thrushes; Sardinian (2 records), Arctic (3 records), Radde's, and western Bonelli's warblers; Isabelline and lesser grey shrikes; red-eyed vireo (7 records); two-barred crossbill; yellow-rumped and blackpoll warblers; yellow-breasted (2 records) and black-headed buntings (3 records); rose-breasted grosbeak (2 records); bobolink; and Baltimore oriole (2 records).\nMammals.\nLundy is home to an unusual range of introduced mammals, including a distinct breed of wild pony, the Lundy pony, as well as Soay sheep (\"Ovis aries\"), sika deer (\"Cervus nippon\"), feral goats (\"Capra aegagrus hircus\"), and European rabbit, some of which are melanistic.\nOther mammals which have made the island their home include the grey seal (\"Halichoerus grypus\") and the Eurasian pygmy shrew (\"Sorex minutus\"). Until their elimination in 2006, in order to protect the nesting seabirds, Lundy was one of the few places in the UK where the black rat (\"Rattus rattus\") could be found regularly.\nMarine habitat.\nIn 1971, a proposal was made by the Lundy Field Society to establish a marine reserve, and the survey was led by Dr Keith Hiscock, supported by a team of students from Bangor University. Provision for the establishment of statutory Marine Nature Reserves was included in the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, and on 21 November 1986 the Secretary of State for the Environment announced the designation of a statutory reserve at Lundy.\nThere is an outstanding variety of marine habitats and wildlife, and a large number of rare and unusual species in the waters around Lundy, including some species of seaweed, branching sponges, sea fans, and cup corals.\nIn 2003, the first statutory No Take Zone (NTZ) for marine nature conservation in the UK was set up in the waters to the east of Lundy island. In 2008, this was declared as having been successful in several ways including the increasing size and number of lobsters within the reserve, and potential benefits for other marine wildlife. However, the no take zone has received a mixed reaction from local fishermen.\nOn 12 January 2010 the island became Britain's first Marine Conservation Zone designated under the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009, designed to help to preserve important habitats and species.\nThree species of cetacean are regularly seen from the island; them being the bottlenose dolphin (\"Tursiops truncatrus\"), common dolphin (\"Delphinus delphis\"), and harbour porpoise (\"Phocoena phocoena\"). Other cetacean species that are sighted from Lundy, albeit more rarely, are the minke whale (\"Balaenoptera acutorostrata\"), Risso's dolphin (\"Grampus griseus\"), and long-finned pilot whale (\"Globicephala melas\"). Basking sharks (\"Cetorhinus maximus\"), ocean sunfish (\"Mola mola\"), and leatherback sea turtles (\"Dermochelys coriacea\") are also seen around Lundy, especially off the more sheltered eastern coast and only during the warmer months. Furthermore, there is a grey seal (\"Halichoerus grypus\") colony consisting of roughly 60 animals that live around the island.\nTransport.\nTo the island.\nThere are two ways to get to Lundy, depending on the time of year. In the summer months (April to October) visitors are carried on the Landmark Trust's own vessel, MS \"Oldenburg\", which sails from both Bideford and Ilfracombe. Sailings are usually three days a week, on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, with additional sailings on Wednesdays during July and August. The voyage takes on average two hours, depending on ports, tides and weather. The \"Oldenburg\" was first registered in Bremen, Germany, in 1958 and has been sailing to Lundy since being bought by the Lundy Company Ltd in 1985. In the winter months (November to March) the island is served by a scheduled helicopter service from Hartland Point. The helicopter operates on Mondays and Fridays. A grass runway of is available, allowing access to small STOL aircraft.\nOn the island.\nIn 2007, Derek Green, Lundy's general manager, launched an appeal to raise \u00a3250,000 to save the Beach Road, which had been damaged by heavy rain and high seas. The road was built in the first half of the 19th century to provide people and goods with safe access to the top of the island, above the only jetty. The fund-raising was completed on 10 March 2009.\nLighthouses.\nThe island has a pair of active lights built in 1897, and an older lighthouse no longer in service.\nFlags.\nA number of flags have been used to represent Lundy. Since 2010, the Landmark Trust management has flown a 1954 flag to represent Lundy, being a white capital L on the hoist of a blue field.\nHistory.\nThe first flag of Lundy was introduced in 1932 by Martin Coles Harman, as part of his assertion that the island was \"a self-governing dominion of the British Empire\". The flag was a simple red capital L on a white field with a blue border.\nThe single flag would eventually rot, and a new one would be made by Harman at least before 1945. The new flag displayed a puffin on a white background with an outer blue and inner red border, and was named the 'Puffin Flag'.\nThat flag, too, would rot, and Harman would fly the flag of Iceland from the end of World War Two. Tony Langham, who wrote a number of books on the topic of Lundy, wrote in 1989 that he believed Harman's son, John Pennington Harman, who died in the war in 1944, may have been gifted the flag as a \"keen flag flyer\".\nIn 1954, a new flag design was produced which displayed a white capital L on the hoist of a blue field.\nIn 1969, after the death of Albion Harman, the island ended up in the management of the Landmark Trust, which opted to instead fly the flag of England. However, in 2010, the trust restored the 1954 flag.\nNaval ensign.\nThe MS \"Oldbenburg\" has flown an ensign displaying a puffin on a white circle on a red background since June 2000.\nElectricity supply.\nThere is a small power station comprising three Cummins B and C series diesel engines, offering an approximately 150 kVA 3-phase supply to most of the island buildings. Waste heat from the engine jackets is used for a district heating pipe. There are also plans to collect the waste heat from the engine exhaust heat gases to feed into the district heat network to improve the efficiency further. The power is normally switched off between 00:00 and 06:30.\nAdministration.\nThe island is an unparished area of Torridge district in the county of Devon. It forms part of the ward of Clovelly Bay. It is part of the constituency electing the Member of Parliament for Torridge and Tavistock and was from 1999 to 2020 part of the South West England constituency for the European Parliament.\nIn 2013, the island became a separate Church of England ecclesiastical parish.\nStamps.\nOwing to a decline in population and lack of interest in the mail contract, the GPO ended its presence on Lundy at the end of 1927. For the next two years Harman handled the mail to and from the island without charge.\nOn 1 November 1929, he decided to offset the expense by issuing two postage stamps (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 puffin in pink and 1 puffin in blue). One puffin is equivalent to one English penny. The printing of Puffin stamps continues to this day and they are available at face value from the Lundy Post Office. One used to have to stick Lundy stamps on the back of the envelope; but from 1962 Royal Mail allowed their use on the front of the envelope, but placed on the left side, with the right side reserved for the Royal Mail postage stamp or stamps. Lundy stamps are cancelled by a circular Lundy hand stamp. In 1974, the face value of the Lundy Island stamps was increased to include Royal Mail charges in addition to the charge for transporting mail to the mainland and so from that year it has not been necessary to affix a separate Royal Mail postage stamp.\nLundy stamps are a type of postage stamp known to philatelists as \"local carriage labels\" or \"local stamps\". Issues of increasing value were made over the years, including air mail, featuring a variety of subjects. The market value of the early issues has risen substantially over the years. For the many thousands of annual visitors Lundy stamps have become part of the collection of the many British Local Posts collectors. The first catalogues of these stamps included Gerald Rosen's 1970 \"Catalogue of British Local Stamps\". Later specialist catalogues include \"Stamps of Lundy Island\" by Stanley Newman, first published in 1984, \"Phillips Modern British Locals CD Catalogue\", published since 2003, and \"Labbe's Specialised Guide to Lundy Island Stamps\", published since 2005 and now in its 11th Edition. Labbe's Guide is considered the gold standard of Lundy catalogues owing to its extensive approach to varieties, errors, specialised items, and \"fantasy\" issues.\nThere is a comprehensive collection of these stamps in the Chinchen Collection, donated by Barry Chinchen to the British Library Philatelic Collections in 1977 and now held by the British Library. This is also the home of the Landmark Trust Lundy Island Philatelic Archive which includes artwork, texts and essays as well as postmarking devices and issued stamps.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18356", "revid": "20126179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18356", "title": "Lindow Man", "text": "Bog body of an Iron Age man found in England\nLindow Man, also known as Lindow\u00a0II and (in jest) as Pete Marsh, is the preserved bog body of a man discovered in a peat bog at Lindow Moss near Wilmslow in Cheshire, North West England. The remains were found on 1 August 1984 by commercial peat cutters. Lindow Man is not the only bog body to have been found in the moss; Lindow Woman was discovered the year before, and other body parts have also been recovered. The find was described as \"one of the most significant archaeological discoveries of the 1980s\" and caused a media sensation. It helped invigorate the study of British bog bodies, which had previously been neglected.\nDating the body has proven problematic, but it is thought that he was deposited into Lindow Moss, face down, sometime between 2\u00a0BC and 119\u00a0AD, in either the Iron Age or Romano-British period. At the time of death, Lindow Man was a healthy male in his mid-20s, and may have been of high social status as his body shows little evidence of having done heavy or rough physical labour during his lifetime. There has been debate over the reason for his death; his death was violent and perhaps ritualistic.\nThe recovered body has been preserved by freeze-drying and is on permanent display at the British Museum, although it occasionally travels to other venues such as the Manchester Museum.\nBackground.\nLindow Moss.\nLindow Moss is a peat bog in Lindow, an area of Wilmslow, Cheshire, which has been used as common land since the medieval period. It formed after the last ice age, one of many such peat bogs in north-east Cheshire and the Mersey basin that formed in hollows caused by melting ice. Investigations have not yet discovered settlement or agricultural activity around the edge of Lindow Moss that would have been contemporary with Lindow Man, but analysis of pollen in the peat suggests there was some cultivation in the vicinity.\nOnce covering over , the bog has now shrunk to a tenth of its original size. It is a dangerous place and an 18th-century writer recorded people drowning there. For centuries, the peat from the bog was used as fuel, and it continued to be extracted until the 1980s, by which time the process had been mechanised. Lindow Moss is a lowland raised mire, a type of peat bog which often produces the best-preserved bog bodies, allowing more detailed analysis. Lowland raised mires occur mainly in northern England and extend south to the Midlands. Lindow Man is one of 27 bodies to be recovered from such areas.\nPreservation of bog bodies.\nThe preservation of bog bodies is dependent on a set of specific physical conditions, which can occur in peat bogs. A sphagnum moss bog must have a temperature lower than 4\u00a0\u00b0C at the time of deposition of the body. The subsequent average annual temperature must be lower than 10\u00a0\u00b0C. Moisture must be stable in the bog year-round: it cannot dry out.\nSphagnum moss affects the chemistry of nearby water, which becomes highly acidic (a pH of roughly 3.3 to 4.5) relative to a more ordinary environment. The concentration of dissolved minerals also tends to be low. Dying moss forms layers of sediment and releases sugars and humic acids which consume oxygen. Since the surface of the water is covered by living moss, water becomes anaerobic. As a result, human tissues buried in the bog tend to tan rather than decay.\nLindow Woman.\nOn 13 May 1983, two peat workers at Lindow Moss, Andy Mould and Stephen Dooley, noticed an unusual object\u2014about the size of a football\u2014on the elevator taking peat to the shredding machine. They removed the object for closer inspection, joking that it was a dinosaur egg. Once the peat had been removed, their discovery turned out to be a decomposing, incomplete human head with one eye and some hair intact.\nForensics identified the skull as belonging to a European woman, probably aged 30\u201350. \nPolice initially thought the skull was that of Malika Reyn-Bardt, who had disappeared in 1960 and was the subject of an ongoing investigation. While in prison on another charge, her husband, Peter Reyn-Bardt, had boasted that he had killed his wife and buried her in the back garden of their bungalow, which was on the edge of the area of mossland where peat was being dug. The garden had been examined but no body was found. When Reyn-Bardt was confronted with the discovery of the skull from Lindow Moss, he confessed to the murder of his wife.\nThe skull was later radiocarbon dated, revealing it to be nearly 2,000\u00a0years old. \"Lindow Woman\", as it became known, dated from around 210\u00a0AD. This emerged shortly before Reyn-Bardt went to trial, but he was convicted on the evidence of his confession.\nDiscovery.\nA year later, a further discovery was made at Lindow Moss, just southwest of the Lindow Woman. On 1 August 1984, Andy Mould, who had been involved in the discovery of Lindow Woman, took what he thought was a piece of wood off the elevator of the peat-shredding machine. He threw the object at Eddie Slack, his workmate. When it hit the ground, peat fell off the object and revealed it to be a human foot. The police were called, and the foot was taken away for examination.\nAt the same time Rachel Pugh, a trainee journalist for \"The Wilmslow World\", was tipped off about the discovery. At the urging of her editor, she cycled out to the site of the discovery and persuaded the two men to show her where the foot had been excavated. Recognising the possible historical significance of the find, she told the diggers to stop work at once, and alerted Rick Turner, the Cheshire County Archaeologist, who subsequently succeeded in finding the rest of the body, which later became known as Lindow Man. Some skin had been exposed and had started to decay, so to prevent further deterioration of the body, it was re-covered with peat. The complete excavation of the block containing the remains was performed on 6 August. Until it could be dated, it was moved to the Macclesfield District General Hospital for storage. As the body of Malika Reyn-Bardt had still not been found, it was initially thought possible the body might be hers, until it was determined to be male, and radiocarbon dated.\nThe owners of the land where Lindow Man was found donated the body to the British Museum, and on 21 August it was transported to London. At the time, the body was dubbed \"Pete Marsh\" by Middlesex Hospital radiologists, a name subsequently adopted by local journalists, as was the similar \"Pete Bogg\".\nThe find was announced to the press during the second week of the investigation. As the best-preserved bog body found in Britain, its discovery caused a domestic media sensation and received global coverage. Sparking excitement in the country's archaeological community, who had long expected such a find, it was hailed as one of the most important archaeological discoveries of the 1980s. A \"Q.E.D.\" documentary about Lindow Man broadcast by the BBC in 1985 attracted 10\u00a0million viewers.\nLindow Man's official name is Lindow\u00a0II, as there are other finds from the area: Lindow\u00a0I (Lindow Woman) refers to a human skull, Lindow\u00a0III to a \"fragmented headless body\", and Lindow\u00a0IV to the upper thigh of an adult male, possibly that of Lindow Man. After the discovery of Lindow Man, there were no further archaeological excavations at Lindow Moss until 1987. A large piece of skin was found by workmen on the elevator on 6 February 1987. On this occasion, the police left the investigation to the archaeologists. Over 70\u00a0pieces were found, constituting Lindow\u00a0III. Although the bone was not as well preserved as that of Lindow Man, the other tissues survived in better condition. The final discovery was that of Lindow\u00a0IV on 14 June 1988. Part of a left leg and buttocks were found on the elevator, from a site just west of where Lindow Man was found. Nearly three months later, on 12 September, a right thigh was discovered in the peat on the bucket of a digger. The proximity of the discovery sites, coupled with the fact that the remains were shown to come from an adult male, means that Lindow\u00a0IV is probably part of Lindow Man.\nRemains and investigation.\nLindow Man marked the first discovery in Britain of a well-preserved bog body; its condition was comparable to that of Grauballe Man and Tollund Man from Denmark. Before Lindow Man was found, it was estimated that 41\u00a0bog bodies had been found in England and Wales and 15 in Scotland. Encouraged by the discovery of Lindow Man, a gazetteer was compiled, which revealed a far higher number of bog bodies: over 85 in England and Wales and over 36 in Scotland. Prior to the discovery of the bodies in Lindow Moss, British bog bodies had been a relatively neglected subject compared to European examples. The interest caused by Lindow Man led to more in-depth research of accounts of discoveries in bogs since the 17th\u00a0century; by 1995, the numbers had changed to 106 in England and Wales and 34 in Scotland. The remains covered a large time frame.\nIn life, Lindow Man would have been between 5'6\" and 5'8\" (168 and 173\u00a0cm) tall and weighed about . It was possible to ascertain that his age at death was around the mid-20s. The body retains a trimmed beard, moustache, and sideburns of brown hair, as well as healthy teeth with no visible cavities, and manicured fingernails, indicating he did little heavy or rough work. Apart from a fox-fur armband, Lindow Man was discovered completely naked. When he died, Lindow Man was suffering from slight osteoarthritis and an infestation of whipworm and maw worm. As a result of the decalcification of the bones and pressure from the peat under which Lindow Man was buried, his skull was distorted. While some preserved human remains may contain DNA, peat bogs such as Lindow Moss are generally poor for such a purpose, and it is unlikely that DNA could be recovered from Lindow Man.\nLindow Man and Lindow\u00a0III were found to have elevated levels of copper on their skin. The cause for this was uncertain as there could have been natural causes, although a study by Pyatt \"et al.\" proposed that the bodies may have been painted with a copper-based pigment. To test this, skin samples were taken from places likely to be painted and tested against samples from areas where painting was unlikely. It was found that the copper content of the skin of the torso was higher than the control areas, suggesting that the theory of Pyatt \"et al.\" may have been correct. However, the conclusion was ambiguous as the overall content was above that expected of a male, and variations across the body may have been due to environmental factors. Similarly, green deposits were found in the hair, originally thought to be a copper-based pigment used for decoration, but it was later found to be the result of a reaction between the keratin in the hair and the acid of the peat bog.\nDating Lindow Man is problematic as samples from the body and surrounding peat have produced dates spanning a 900-year period. Although the peat encasing Lindow Man has been radiocarbon dated to about 300\u00a0BC, Lindow Man himself has a different date. Early tests at different laboratories returned conflicting dates for the body; later tests suggested a date between 2\u00a0BC and 119\u00a0AD. There has been a tendency to ascribe the body to the Iron Age period rather than Roman due to the interpretation that Lindow Man's death may have been a ritual sacrifice or execution. Explanations for why the peat in which he was found is much older have been sought. Archaeologist P.\u00a0C.\u00a0Buckland suggests that as the stratigraphy of the peat appears undisturbed, Lindow Man may have been deposited into a pool that was already some 300\u00a0years old. Geographer K.\u00a0E.\u00a0Barber has argued against this hypothesis, saying that pools at Lindow Moss would have been too shallow, and suggests that the peat may have been peeled back to allow the burial and then replaced, leaving the stratigraphy apparently undisturbed.\nLindow Man's last meal was preserved in his stomach and intestines and was analysed in some detail. It was hoped that investigations into the contents of the stomach would shed light on the contemporary diet, as was the case with Grauballe Man and Tollund Man in the 1950s. The analysis of the contents of the digestive system of bog bodies had become one of the principal endeavours of investigating such remains. Analysis of the grains present revealed his diet to be mostly of cereals. He probably ate slightly charred bread, although the burning may have had ritual significance rather than being an accident. Some mistletoe pollen was also found in the stomach, indicating that Lindow Man died in March or April.\nOne of the conclusions of the study was that the people buried in Lindow Moss may have had a less varied diet than their European counterparts. According to Jody Joy, curator of the Iron Age collection at the British Museum, the importance of Lindow Man lies more in how he lived rather than how he died, as the circumstances surrounding his demise may never be fully established.\nCause of death.\nAs the peat was cleaned off the body in the laboratory, it became clear that Lindow Man had suffered a violent death. The injuries included a V-shaped, cut on top of his head; a possible laceration at the back of the head, ligature marks on the neck where a sinew cord was found, a possible wound on the right side of the neck, a possible stab wound in the upper right chest, a broken neck, and a fractured rib. Xeroradiography revealed that the blow on top of the head (causing the V-shaped cut) was caused by a relatively blunt object; it had fractured the skull and driven fragments into the brain. Swelling along the edges of the wound indicated that Lindow Man had lived after being struck. The blow, possibly from a small axe, would have caused unconsciousness, but the victim could have survived for several hours afterwards. The ligature marks on the neck were caused by tightening the sinew cord found around his neck, possibly a garrotte or necklace.\nIt is not possible to confirm whether some injuries took place before or after death, due to the body's state of decay. This is the case for the wound in the upper right chest and the laceration on the back of the skull. The cut on the right of the neck may have been the result of the body becoming bloated, causing the skin to split, but the straight edges of the wound suggest that it may have been caused by a sharp instrument, such as a knife. The ligature marks on the neck may have occurred after death. In some interpretations of Lindow Man's death, the sinew is a garrotte used to break the victim's neck. However, Robert Connolly, a lecturer in physical anthropology, suggests that the sinew may have been ornamental and that ligature marks may have been caused by the body swelling when submerged. The rib fracture may also have occurred after death, perhaps during the discovery of the body, but is included in some narratives of the Lindow Man's death. The broken neck would have proven the fatal injury, whether caused by the sinew cord tightening around the neck or by blows to the back of the head. After death, Lindow Man was deposited into Lindow Moss face down.\nHypothesis.\nArchaeologist Don Brothwell considered that many of the older bodies need re-examining with modern techniques, such as those used in the analysis of Lindow Man. The study of bog bodies, including those found in Lindow Moss, has contributed to a wider understanding of well-preserved human remains, helping to develop new methods of analysis and investigation. The use of sophisticated techniques, such as computed tomography (CT) scans, has marked the investigation of the Lindow bodies as particularly important. Such scans allow the reconstruction of the body and internal examination. Of the 27\u00a0bodies recovered from lowland raised mires in England and Wales, only those from Lindow Moss and the remains of Worsley Man have survived, together with a shoe from another body. The remains have a date range from the early 1st to the 4th\u00a0centuries. Investigation into the other bodies relies on contemporary descriptions of the discovery.\nThe physical evidence allows a general reconstruction of how Lindow Man was killed, although some details are debated, but it does not explain why he was killed. In North West England, there is little evidence for religious or ritual activity in the Iron Age period. What evidence does survive is usually in the form of artefacts recovered from peat bogs. Late Iron Age burials in the region often took the form of a crouched inhumation, sometimes with personal ornaments. Although dated to the mid-1st century\u00a0AD, the type of burial of Lindow Man was more common in the pre-historic period. In the latter half of the 20th\u00a0century, scholars widely believed that bog bodies demonstrating injuries to the neck or head area were examples of ritual sacrifice. Bog bodies were associated with Germanic and Celtic cultures, specifically related to head worship.\nAccording to Brothwell, Lindow Man is one of the most complex examples of \"overkill\" in a bog body, and possibly has ritual meaning as it was \"extravagant\" for a straightforward murder. Archaeologists John Hodgson and Mark Brennand suggest that bog bodies may have been related to religious practice, although there is division in the academic community over this issue. In the case of Lindow Man, scholars debate whether the killing was murder or done as part of ritual. Anne Ross, an expert on Iron Age religion, proposed that the death was an example of human sacrifice and that the \"triple death\" (throat cut, strangled, and hit on the head) was an offering to several different gods. The wide date range for Lindow Man's death (2\u00a0BC to 119\u00a0AD) means he may have met his demise after the Romans conquered northern England in the 60s\u00a0AD. As the Romans outlawed human sacrifice, such timing would open up other possibilities. This conclusion was emphasised by historian Ronald Hutton, who challenged the interpretation of sacrificial death. Connolly suggests that as Lindow Man was found naked, he could have been the victim of a violent robbery.\nJoy said\nThe jury really is still out on these bodies, whether they were aristocrats, priests, criminals, outsiders, whether they went willingly to their deaths or whether they were executed \u2013 but Lindow was a very remote place in those days, an unlikely place for an ambush or a murder\nAccording to Anne Ross, a scholar of Celtic history, and Don Robins, a chemist at the University of London, Lindow Man was likely a sacrifice victim of extraordinary importance. They identified his stomach contents as including the undigested remains of a partially burned barley griddle cake of a kind used by the ancient Celts to select victims for sacrifice. Such cakes were torn into fragments and placed in a sack, after which all candidates for sacrifice would withdraw a piece, with the one withdrawing the burnt piece being the one who would be sacrificed. They argued that Lindow Man was likely a high-ranking Druid who was sacrificed in a last-ditch effort to call upon the aid of three Celtic gods to stop a Roman offensive against the Celts in AD 60.\nConservation.\nEnvironment and situation are the crucial factors that determine how corpses decay. For instance, corpses will decay differently depending on the weather, the way they are buried, and the medium in which they are buried. Peat slows the decay of corpses. It was feared that, once Lindow Man was removed from that environment, which had preserved the body for nearly 2,000\u00a0years, the remains would rapidly start to deteriorate, so steps were taken to ensure preservation. After rejecting methods that had been used to maintain the integrity of other bog bodies, such as the \"pit-tanning\" used on Grauballe Man, which took a year and a half, scientists settled on freeze-drying. In preparation, the body was covered in a solution of 15% polyethylene glycol 400 and 85% water to prevent it from becoming distorted. The body was then frozen solid and the ice vaporised to ensure Lindow Man did not shrink. Afterwards, Lindow Man was put in a specially constructed display case to control the environment, maintaining the temperature at and the humidity at 55%.\nLindow Man is held in the British Museum. Before the remains were transferred there, people from North West England launched an unsuccessful campaign to keep the body in Manchester. The bog body has been on temporary display in other venues: at the Manchester Museum on three occasions, April to December 1987, March to September 1991, and April 2008 to April 2009; and at the Great North Museum in Newcastle from August to November 2009. The 2008\u201309 Manchester display, titled \"Lindow Man: A Bog Body Mystery Exhibition at the Manchester Museum\", won the category \"Best Archaeological Innovation\" in the 2010 British Archaeological Awards, run by the Council for British Archaeology.\nCritics have complained that, by museum display of the remains, the body of Lindow Man has been objectified rather than treated with the respect due to the dead. This is part of a wider discussion about the scientific treatment of human remains and museum researchers and archaeologists using them as information sources.\nCultural references.\nBritish archaeologist and anthropologist Don Brothwell's \"The Bog Man and the Archaeology of People\" provides an account of the modern scientific techniques employed to conserve and analyse Lindow Man. Celtic history, language and lore scholar Anne Ross and archaeological chemist Don Robins's \"The Life and Death of a Druid Prince\" provides an account of the circumstances surrounding Lindow Man's life and death, in part hypothesising that he had lived as a highborn, perhaps even as a druid who was sacrificed to the gods at the time of the Menai Massacre and Boudica's rebellion.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"This article is about an item held in the British Museum. The object reference is https://.\""}
{"id": "18359", "revid": "13008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18359", "title": "Louis Saint Laurent", "text": ""}
{"id": "18360", "revid": "30911873", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18360", "title": "Lombok", "text": "Island in West Nusa Tenggara, Indonesia\nLombok is an island in West Nusa Tenggara province, Indonesia. It forms part of the chain of the Lesser Sunda Islands, with the Lombok Strait separating it from Bali to the west and the Alas Strait between it and Sumbawa to the east. It is roughly circular, with a \"tail\" (Sekotong Peninsula) to the southwest, about across and a total area of about including smaller offshore islands. The provincial capital and largest city on the island is Mataram.\nLombok is somewhat similar in size and density, and shares some cultural heritage with the neighboring island of Bali to the west. However, it is administratively part of West Nusa Tenggara, along with the larger but less densely populated island of Sumbawa to the east. Lombok is surrounded by a number of smaller islands locally called Gili.\nThe island was home to some 3,168,692 people as recorded in the decennial 2010 census and 3,758,631 in the 2020 Census; the official estimate as at 2024 was 4,056,621. \"Lomboq\" is Sasak for \"straight, honest\".\nAdministration.\nLombok is under the administration of the Governor of the province of West Nusa Tenggara (\"Nusa Tenggara Barat\"). The province is administered from the provincial capital of Mataram in West Lombok.\nThe island is administratively divided into four \"kabupaten\" (regencies) and one \"kota\" (city). They are as follows, with their administrative capitals, their areas, and their populations at the 2010 census and the 2020 census, together with the official estimates as at mid 2024.\nHistory.\nThe 14th century Majapahit manuscript Nagarakretagama canto 14 mentioned \"Lombok Mirah\" as one of island identified under Majapahit suzerainty. Other than the \"Babad Lombok\" document which records the 1257 Samalas eruption, little is known about Lombok before the seventeenth century. Before this time it was made up of numerous competing and feuding petty states, each of which was presided over by a Sasak 'prince'. This disunity was taken advantage of by the neighbouring Balinese who took control of western Lombok in the early seventeenth century.\nThe Makassarese meanwhile invaded eastern Lombok from their colonies in neighbouring Sumbawa. The Dutch had first visited Lombok in 1674 and the Dutch East India Company concluded its first treaty with the Sasak Princess of Lombok. The Balinese had managed to take over the whole island by 1750, but Balinese infighting resulted in the island being split into four feuding Balinese kingdoms. In 1838, the Mataram kingdom brought its rivals under control.\nRelations between the Sasak and Balinese in western Lombok were largely harmonious and intermarriage was common. In the island's east, however, relations were less cordial and the Balinese maintained control from garrisoned forts. While Sasak village government remained in place, the village head became little more than a tax collector for the Balinese. Villagers became a kind of serf and Sasak aristocracy lost much of its power and land holdings.\nDuring one of the many Sasak peasant rebellions against the Balinese, Sasak chiefs sent envoys to the Dutch in Bali and invited them to rule Lombok. In June 1894, the governor general of the Dutch East Indies, Van der Wijck, signed a treaty with Sasak rebels in eastern Lombok. He sent a large army to Lombok and the Balinese raja capitulated to Dutch demands. (see Dutch intervention in Lombok) The younger princes however overruled the raja and attacked and pushed back the Dutch. The Dutch counterattacked overrunning Mataram and the raja surrendered. The entire island was annexed to the Netherlands East Indies in 1895. The Dutch ruled over Lombok's 500,000 people with a force of no more than 250 by cultivating the support of the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy. The Dutch are remembered in Lombok as liberators from Balinese hegemony.\nDuring World War II a Japanese invasion force comprising elements of the 2nd Southern Expeditionary Fleet invaded and occupied the Lesser Sunda Islands, including the island of Lombok. They sailed from Soerabaja harbour at 09:00 hrs on 8 March 1942 and proceeded towards Lombok Island. On 9 March 1942 at 17:00 hrs the fleet sailed into port of Ampenan on Lombok Island. The Dutch defenders were soon defeated and the island occupied.\nFollowing the cessation of hostilities the Japanese forces occupying Indonesia were withdrawn and Lombok returned temporarily to Dutch control. Following the subsequent Indonesian independence from the Dutch, the Balinese and Sasak aristocracy continued to dominate Lombok. In 1958, the island was incorporated into the province of West Nusa Tenggara with Mataram becoming the provincial capital. Mass killings of communists occurred across the island following the abortive coup attempt in Jakarta and Central Java. During President Suharto's New Order administration (1967\u20131998), Lombok experienced a degree of stability and development but not to the extent of the boom and wealth in Java and Bali. Crop failures led to famine in 1966 and food shortages in 1973. The national government's \"transmigrasi\" program moved a lot of people out of Lombok. The 1980s saw external developers and speculators instigate a nascent tourism boom although local's share of earnings was limited. Indonesia's political and economic crises of the late 1990s hit Lombok hard. In January 2000, riots broke out across Mataram with Christians and ethnic Chinese the main victims, with alleged \"agents provocateur\" from outside Lombok. Tourism slumped, but in recent years has seen a renewed growth.\n2018 earthquakes.\nThe July 2018 Lombok earthquake killed 20 people and injured hundreds more. The earthquake caused significant damage to Lombok island and was the foreshock of a larger earthquake that followed eight days later. The 5 August 2018 Lombok earthquake had a moment magnitude of 7.0, and it caused catastrophic damage to North Lombok and also caused damage to nearby Bali. In total, it caused over 550 deaths and more than 7000 were injured. Another Lombok earthquake occurred on 19 August 2018, killing 13 people and damaging 1800 buildings.\nInitially, the Indonesian National Board for Disaster Management refused international aid, claiming \"earthquakes did not constitute a national emergency\" and that locals were capable enough to respond without help. However, the infrastructure for disaster management and relief was not adequately in place in and around Lombok; therefore, the first responders to the disaster were stretched local government agencies such as police &amp; military personnel, domestic and foreign volunteers and business owners in the parts of Lombok that were less affected by the quakes, including the Gili islands. Small scale international fundraising initiatives were organised through social networks and the web to help source basic resources such as food &amp; clean water, and begin assisting with temporary and permanent shelter. This was vital in the early stages of the disaster, before larger scale government assistance arrived.\nGeography.\nThe island is to the immediate east of the Lombok Strait which marks the biogeographical division between the fauna of the Indomalayan realm and the distinctly different fauna of Australasia; this distinction, known as the \"Wallace Line\" (or \"Wallace's Line\") takes its name from Alfred Russel Wallace (1823\u20131913), who was the first person to comment on the division between the two regions, as well as on the abrupt boundary between the two biomes. Lombok is part of the Lesser Sundas deciduous forests ecoregion.\nTo the east of Lombok lies the Alas Strait, a narrow body of water separating the island of Lombok from the nearby island of Sumbawa.\nThe island's topography is dominated by the centrally located stratovolcano Mount Rinjani, the second-highest volcano in Indonesia, which rises to , making Lombok the 8th-highest island. The most recent eruption of Rinjani occurred in September 2016 at Gunung Barujari. In a 2010 eruption, ash was reported as rising into the atmosphere from the Barujari cone in Rinjani's caldera lake of Segara Anak. Lava flowed into the caldera lake, raising its temperature, while ash fall damaged crops on the slopes of Rinjani. The volcano and its crater lake, Segara Anak (child of the sea), are protected by the Gunung Rinjani National Park established in 1997. Recent evidence indicates an ancient volcano, Mount Samalas, of which now only a caldera remains, was the source of the 1257 Samalas eruption, one of the largest volcanic eruptions in recorded history, which caused worldwide changes in weather.\nThe highlands of Lombok are forest-clad and mostly undeveloped. The lowlands are highly cultivated. Rice, soybeans, coffee, tobacco, cotton, cinnamon, cacao, cloves, cassava, corn, coconuts, copra, bananas and vanilla are the major crops grown in the fertile soils of the island. The southern part of the island is fertile but drier, especially toward the southern coastline.\nList of islands.\nLombok is surrounded by many islets, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWater problem.\nThe water supply in Lombok is stressed and this places strain both upon the water supply of the provincial capital, Mataram, and upon that of the island in general. The southern and central areas are reported to be the most critically affected. West Nusa Tenggara province in general is threatened with a water crisis caused by increasing forest and water table damage and degradation, and increased human population demands. 160 thousand hectares of a total of 1960 thousand hectares are thought to have been affected. The Head of Built Environment and Security Forest Service Forest West Nusa Tenggara Andi Pramari stated in Mataram on Wednesday, May 6, 2009, that, \"If this situation is not addressed it can be expected that within five years it may be difficult for people to obtain water in this part of NTB (West Nusa Tenggara). Not only that, the productivity of agriculture in value added will fall, and the residents are experiencing water deficiency in their wells\". High cases of timber theft in the region of NTB are contributing to this problem.\nIn September 2010 in Central Lombok, some villagers reportedly walked for several hours to fetch a single pail of water. Nieleando, a small coastal village about 50 kilometers from the provincial capital, Mataram, has seen dry wells for years. Occasionally this problem escalates sufficiently for disputes and fighting between villagers to occur. The problems have been reported to be most pronounced in the districts of Jonggat, Janapria, Praya Timur, Praya Barat, Praya Barat Daya and Pujut. In 2010 provincial authorities declared all six districts drought areas. Sumbawa, the other main island of the province, also experienced severe drought in 2010, making it a province-wide issue.\nAreas in southern Lombok Island were classified as arid and prone to water shortages due to low rainfall and lack of water sources. In May 2011, groundbreaking began on Pandanduri dam construction, which will span about 430 hectares and cost an estimated Rp.800\u00a0billion ($92.8\u00a0million). When finished, the dam will accommodate about 25.7\u00a0million cubic meters of water and be able to irrigate 10,350 hectares of farmland. Project construction was expected to last five years.\nDemographics.\nThe island's inhabitants are 85% Sasak, whose ancestors are thought to have migrated from Java in the first millennium BC. Other residents include an estimated 10\u201315% Balinese, with the small remainder being Chinese-Peranakan Indonesians, Javanese, Sumbawa and Arab Indonesians.\nThe Sasak population are culturally and linguistically closely related to the Balinese, but unlike the Hindu Balinese, the majority are Muslim and the landscape is punctuated with mosques and minarets. Islamic traditions and holidays influence the Island's daily activities.\nIn 2008 the Island of Lombok had 866,838 households and an average of 3.635 persons per household. The 2020 census recorded a population of 5,320,092 people in the province of NTB; the official estimate as at mid 2022 was 5,590,359 of which over 70.9% reside on Lombok, giving it a population of 3,963,842 at that date.\nReligion.\nThe island's indigenous Sasak people are predominantly Muslim. However, before the arrival of Islam Lombok experienced a long period of Hindu and Buddhist influence that reached the island through Java. A minority Balinese Hindu culture remains in Lombok. Islam may have first been brought to Lombok by traders arriving from Sumbawa in the 17th century who then established a following in eastern Lombok. Other accounts describe the first influences arriving in the first half of the sixteenth century. The palm leaf manuscript Babad Lombok which contains the history of Lombok describes how Sunan Prapen was sent by his father The Susuhunan Ratu of Giri on a military expedition to Lombok and Sumbawa in order to convert the population and propagate the new religion. However, the new religion took on a highly syncretistic character, frequently mixing animist and Hindu-Buddhist beliefs and practices with Islam.\nA more orthodox version of Islam increased in popularity in the early twentieth century. The Indonesian government religionization programs (acquiring of a religion) in Lombok during 1967 and 1968 led to a period of some considerable confusion in religious allegiances and practices. These religionization programs later led to the emergence of more conformity in religious practices in Lombok. The Hindu minority religion is still practised in Lombok alongside the majority Muslim religion.\nHinduism is followed by ethnic Balinese and by a minority of the indigenous Sasak. All the main Hindu religious ceremonies are celebrated in Lombok and there are many villages throughout Lombok that have a Hindu majority population. According to local legends two of the oldest villages on the island, Bayan, and Sembalun, were founded by a prince of Majapahit. According to the 2010 population census declared adherents of Hinduism numbered 101,000 people with the highest concentration in the Mataram Regency where they accounted for 14% of the population. The Ditjen Bimas Hindu (DBH)/ Hindu Religious Affairs Directorate's own analysis conducted in close association with Hindu communities throughout the country found that the number of Hindus in the population is much higher than counted in the government census. The survey carried out in 2012 found the Hindu population of Lombok to be 445,933. This figure is more in line with the commonly stated view that 10\u201315% of the Islands population is Hindu.\nThe Nagarakertagama, the 14th-century palm leaf poem that was found on Lombok places the island as one of the vassals of the Majapahit empire. This manuscript contained detailed descriptions of the Majapahit Kingdom and also affirmed the importance of Hindu-Buddhism in the Majapahit empire by describing temple, palaces and several ceremonial observances.\nChristianity is practised by a small minority including some ethnic Chinese and immigrants from Bali and East Nusa Tenggara. There are Roman Catholic churches and parishes in Ampenan, Mataram, Praya and Tanjung. There is a catholic hospital in Mataram as well. Two Buddhist temples can be visited in and around Tanjung where about 800 Buddhists live.\nThe history of a small Arab community in Lombok has history dating back to early settlement by traders from Yemen. The community is still evident mainly in Ampenan, the old Port of Mataram. Due to the siting of a UNHCR refugee centre in Lombok some refugees from middle eastern countries have intermarried with Lombok people.\nA non-orthodox Islamic group found only on Lombok are the Wektu Telu (\"Three times\"), who performed three obligatory daily prayers (Salah) instead of five observed by majority of Muslim elsewhere. Waktu Telu beliefs are entwined with animism, and is influenced not only by Islam, but also Hinduism and pantheistic beliefs. There are also remnants of Boda who maintain native Sasak beliefs and could be representative of an original Sasak culture, undiluted by later Islamic influences.\nMany influences of animist belief prevail within the Sasak people, most of whom believe in the existence of spirits or \"ghosts\". They regard both food and prayer as indispensable whenever they seek to communicate with spirits, including the dead and ritualistic traditional practices endure. Traditional magic is practised to ward off evil and illness and to seek solutions to disputations and antipathy. Magic may be practised by an individual alone but normally a person experienced in such things is sought out to render a service. Normally money or gifts are made to this person and the most powerful practitioners are treated with considerable respect.\nEconomy and politics.\nMany of the visitors to Lombok and much of the islands goods come across the Lombok Strait by sea or air links from Bali. Only separate the two islands. Lombok is often marketed as \"an unspoiled Bali,\" or \"Bali's sister island.\" With support from the central government, Lombok and Sumbawa are being developed as Indonesia's second destination for international and domestic tourism. Lombok has retained a more natural, uncrowded and undeveloped environment, which attract travelers who come for its relaxed pace and the opportunity to explore the island's unspoiled natural environment. The more contemporary marketing campaigns for Lombok/Sumbawa seek to differentiate from Bali and promote the island of Lombok as a standalone destination. The opening of the Lombok International Airport on 1 October 2011 assisted in this endeavor.\nNusa Tenggara Barat and Lombok may be considered economically depressed by First World standards and a large majority of the population live in poverty. Still, the island is fertile, has sufficient rainfall in most areas for agriculture, and possesses a variety of climate zones. Consequently, food in abundant quantity and variety is available inexpensively at local farmer's markets, though locals still suffer from famine due to drought and subsistence farming. A family of 4 can eat rice, vegetables, and fruit for as little as US$0.50. Even though a family's income may be as small as US$1.00 per day from fishing or farming, many families are able to live a contented and productive life on a low income. However, the people of Lombok are coming under increasing pressure from rising food and fuel prices. Access to housing, education and health services remains difficult for many of the island's indigenous population although public education is free throughout the province and an attempt is made to provide elementary schools even in remote areas.\nThe percentage of the population living in poverty in urban areas of Nusa Tenggara Barat in 2008 was 29.47% and in 2009 it was 28.84%. For those living in rural areas in 2008 it was 19.73% and in 2009 it reduced marginally to 18.40%. For combined urban and village the figures were 23.81% and in 2009 it fell slightly to 22.78%.\nIn Mataram in 2008 the percentage of the population that was unmarried was 40.74%, married 52.01%, divorced 2.51% and widowed 4.75%.\nIllegal cage bird trade has been observed in the city of Mataram and during five market visits in 2018 and 2019, 10,326 birds of 108 species were observed, with 18 of these species being nationally protected and many others harvested from the wild in violation of national harvest and trade quotas.\nTourism.\nPre-1997.\nTourist development started in the mid-1980s when Lombok attracted attention as an 'unspoiled' alternative to Bali. Initially, low budget bungalows proliferated at places like the Gili islands and Kuta, Lombok on the South Coast. These tourist accommodations were largely owned by and operated by local business entrepreneurs. Areas in proximity to the airport, places like Senggigi, experienced rampant land speculation for prime beachfront land by big businesses from outside Lombok.\nIn the 1990s the national government in Jakarta began to take an active role in planning for and promoting Lombok's tourism. Private organizations like the Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) and the Lombok Tourism Development Corporation (LTDC) were formed. LTDC prepared detailed land use plans with maps and areas zoned for tourist facilities. Large hotels provide primary employment for the local population. Ancillary business, ranging from restaurants to art shops have been started by local businessmen. These businesses provide secondary employment for local residents.\n1997 to 2007.\nThe 1997 Asian financial crisis and the fall of Suharto regime in 1998 marked the beginning a decade of setbacks for tourism. Spurred by rapid devaluation of the currency and the transition to true democracy caused all of Indonesia to experience a period of domestic unrest. Many of Indonesian Provinces struggled with elements of the population desiring autonomy or independence from the Republic of Indonesia. At the same time, fanatical Islamic terrorism in Indonesia further aggravated domestic unrest across the archipelago.\nIn January 2000, radical Islamic agitators from the newly formed Jemaah Islamiyah provoked religious and ethnic violence in the Ampenan area of Mataram and the southern area of Senggigi. Many foreign expatriates and tourists were temporarily evacuated to Bali. Numerous foreign embassies issued Travel Warnings advising of the potential danger of traveling to Indonesia.\nSubsequently, the 2002 Bali bombings, the 2005 Bali bombings and the Progress of the SARS outbreak in Asia all dramatically impacted tourism activities in Lombok. Tourism was slow to return to Lombok, provoked in part by a worldwide reluctance to travel because of global tensions. Only since 2007\u20132008, when most developed countries lifted their Travel Warnings has tourism recovered to pre-2000 levels.\nPresent.\nThe years leading up to 2010 saw a rapid revival and promotion of tourism recovery in the tourism industry. The number of visitors far surpassed pre-2000 levels.\nThe Indonesian government has actively promoted both Lombok and neighboring Sumbawa as Indonesia's number two tourist destination after Bali. In 2009, then President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, the Ministry of Cultural and Tourism and the regional Governor made public statements supporting the development of Lombok as a tourism destination and setting a goal of 1 million visitors annually by the year 2012 for the combined destination of Lombok and Sumbawa. This has seen infrastructure improvements to the island including road upgrades and the construction of a much delayed new International airport in the islands south. Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC) has been empowered to develop Mandalika Resort Area at southern part of the island, extending from Kuta along of sandy beach.\nTourism is an important source of income on Lombok. The most developed tourism area of the island is on the west coast of the island and is centered about the township of Senggigi. The immediate surrounds of the township contain the most developed tourism facilities. The west coast coastal tourism strip is spread along a strip following the coastal road north from Mataram and the old airport at Ampenan. The principal tourism area extends to Tanjung in the northwest at the foot of Mount Rinjani and includes the Sire and Medana Peninsulas and the highly popular Gili Islands lying immediately offshore. These three small islands are most commonly accessed by boat from Bangsal near Pemenang, Teluk Nare a little to the south, or from further south at Senggigi and Mangsit beach. Many hotels and resorts offer accommodations ranging from budget to luxurious. Recently direct fast boat services have been running from Bali making a direct connection to the Gili islands. Although rapidly changing in character, the Gili islands still provide both a lay-back backpacker's retreat and a high-class resort destination.\nOther tourist destinations include Mount Rinjani, Gili Bidara, Gili Lawang, Narmada Park and Mayura Park and Kuta (distinctly different from Kuta, Bali). Sekotong, in southwest Lombok, is popular for its numerous and diverse scuba diving locations.\nThe Kuta area is also famous for its largely deserted, white sand beaches. The Smalltown is rapidly developing since the opening of the International airport in Praya. Increasing amounts of surfers from around the globe come here seeking out perfect surf and the slow and rustic feel of Lombok. South Lombok surfing is considered some of the best in the world. Large polar lows push up through the Indian Ocean directing long range, high period swell from as far south as Heard Island from late March through to September or later. This coincided with the dry season and South-East trade winds that blow like clockwork. Lombok is famous for its diversity of breaks, which includes world-renowned \"Desert Point\" at Banko Banko in the southwest of the island.\nThe northern west coast near Tanjung has many new upmarket hotel and villa developments centered about the Sire and Medana peninsular nearby to the Gili islands and a new boating marina at Medana Bay. These new developments complement the already existing five-star resorts and a large golf course already established there.\nPromoting Halal tourism.\nIn 2019, Lombok received a score of 70, the highest among the assessed top 10 halal tourist destinations in Indonesia in study conducted by the Tourism Ministry. The Indonesian Government was hoping to attract some of the anticipated 230 million Muslim travellers across the world in 2026, with potential spending of up to US$.\nAccording to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, halal (or Islamic) tourism components are halal hotels (no alcohol, gambling, etc.; Quran, prayer mats and arrows indicating the direction of Mecca in every room), halal transport (cleanliness; non-alcoholic drinks; publications coherent with Islam), halal food premises, halal (Islamic-themed) tour packages and halal finance (the financial resources of the hotel, restaurant, travel agency and the airlines have to fit with Islamic principles).\nTransport.\nLombok International Airport (\"Bandara Internasional Lombok\") () is south west of the small regional city of Praya in South central Lombok. It commenced operations on 1 October 2011. It replaced Selaparang airport near Ampenan. It is the only operational international airport within the province of West Nusa Tenggara (\"Nusa Tenggara Barat\").\nSelaparang Airport in Ampenan was closed for operations on the evening of 30 September 2011. It previously provided facilities for domestic services to Java, Bali, and Sumbawa and international services to Singapore to Kuala Lumpur via Surabaya and Jakarta. It was the island's original airport and is situated on Jalan Adi Sucipto on the north western outskirts of Mataram. The terminals and basic airport infrastructure remain intact but it is closed to all civil airline traffic.\nLembar Harbor seaport in the southwest has shipping facilities and a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services. In 2013, the gross tonnage is 4.3\u00a0million Gross Tonnages or increase by 72 percent from 2012 data means in Lombok and West Nusa Tenggara the economy progress significantly.\nLabuhan Lombok ferry port on the east coast provides a ferry for road vehicles and passenger services to Poto Tano on Sumbawa.\nTransport between Bali and Lombok.\nFlights from Ngurah Rai International Airport () to Lombok \"Zainuddin Abdul Madjid\" International Airport () take about 40 minutes. Lombok International Airport is located in southwest Lombok, 1.5 hours drive to Senggigi main tourist areas in the west Lombok, 2 hours drive to the jetty of Teluk Nara before you cross to Gili Islands and about 30 minutes drive to Kuta south Lombok.\nPublic ferries depart from Padang Bai (Southeast Bali) and Lembar (Southwest Lombok) every hour, taking a minimum of 4\u20135 hours to make the crossing in either direction.\nFast boat services are available from various departure points on Bali and principally serve the Gili Islands, with some significant onward traffic to the Lombok mainland. Arrival points on Lombok are dependent upon the operator, at either Teluk Nare/Teluk Kodek, Bangsal harbour or the township of Senggigi, all on the northwest coast. Operating standards vary widely.\nFestivals.\nA traditional event called the Nyale Festival, or Bau Nyale (meaning \"to catch the sea worms), is held between February and March. The event focuses on catching the spawning parts of \"Palola viridis\", which are known as \"nyale\" or \"wawo\". In local legend, nyale are believed to be the reincarnation of the beautiful Princess Mandalika, who had jumped into the sea to drown herself off Seger beach, after her father had set up a contest for potential suitors to fight one another to win her hand in marriage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "18362", "revid": "47468357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18362", "title": "Lego", "text": "Plastic construction toy\nLego (, ; ; stylised as LEGO) is a brand of plastic construction toys manufactured by the Lego Group, a privately held company based in Billund, Denmark. Lego consists of variously coloured interlocking plastic bricks made of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) that accompany an array of gears, figurines called minifigures, and various other parts. Its pieces can be assembled and connected in many ways to construct objects, including vehicles, buildings, and working robots. Assembled Lego models can be taken apart, and their pieces can be reused to create new constructions.\nThe Lego Group began manufacturing the interlocking toy bricks in 1949. Moulding is done in Denmark, Hungary, Mexico, and China. Brick decorations and packaging are done at plants in the former three countries and in the Czech Republic. Annual production of the bricks averages approximately 36\u00a0billion, or about 1140 elements per second. One of Europe's biggest companies, Lego is the largest toy manufacturer in the world by sales. As of July\u00a02015[ [update]], 600\u00a0billion Lego parts had been produced.\nLego maintains a large fan community based around building competitions and custom creations, and a range of films, games, and ten Legoland amusement parks have been developed under the brand.\nHistory.\nThe Lego Group began in the workshop of Ole Kirk Christiansen (1891\u20131958), a carpenter from Billund, Denmark, who began making wooden toys in 1932. In 1934, his company came to be called \"Lego\", derived from the Danish phrase , which means \"play well\". In 1947, Lego expanded to begin producing plastic toys. In 1949 the business began producing, among other new products, an early version of the now familiar interlocking bricks, calling them \"Automatic Binding Bricks\". These bricks were based on the Kiddicraft Self-Locking Bricks, invented by Hilary Page in 1939 and patented in the United Kingdom in 1940 before being displayed at the 1947 Earl's Court Toy Fair. Lego had received a sample of the Kiddicraft bricks from the supplier of an injection-molding machine that it purchased. The bricks, originally manufactured from cellulose acetate, were a development of the traditional stackable wooden blocks of the time.\nThe Lego Group's motto, \"only the best is good enough\" (, literally \"the best isn't excessively good\") was created in 1936. Christiansen created the motto, still used today, to encourage his employees never to skimp on quality, a value he believed in strongly. By 1951, plastic toys accounted for half of the company's output, even though the Danish trade magazine \"Leget\u00f8js-Tidende\" (\"Toy Times\"), visiting the Lego factory in Billund in the early 1950s, wrote that plastic would never be able to replace traditional wooden toys. Although a common sentiment, Lego toys seem to have become a significant exception to the dislike of plastic in children's toys, due in part to the high standards set by Ole Kirk.\nBy 1954, Christiansen's son, Godtfred, had become the junior managing director of the Lego Group. It was his conversation with an overseas buyer that led to the idea of a toy system. Godtfred saw the immense potential in Lego bricks to become a system for creative play, but the bricks still had some problems from a technical standpoint: Their locking ability was still limited, and they were not yet versatile. In 1958, the modern brick design was developed; ABS subsequently replaced cellulose acetate as the manufacturing material five years later. A patent application for the modern Lego brick design was filed in Denmark on 28 January 1958 and in various other countries in the subsequent few years.\nThe Lego Group's Duplo product line was introduced in 1969 and became a range of blocks whose lengths measure twice the width, height, and depth of standard Lego blocks and are aimed towards younger children. In 1978, Lego produced the first minifigures, which have since become a staple in most sets.\nIn 1997, more than five million Lego pieces were swept into the sea when a wave hit a cargo ship off the coast of Cornwall, England. Pieces have washed up over the ensuing decades, attracting attention from news outlets and social media.\nIn May 2011, Space Shuttle Endeavour mission STS-134 brought 13 Lego kits to the International Space Station, where astronauts built models to see how they would react in microgravity, as a part of the Lego Bricks in Space program. In May 2013, the largest model ever created, made of over 5 million bricks, was displayed in New York City: a one-to-one scale model of a \"Star Wars\" X-wing fighter. Other record breakers include a tower and a railway.\nIn February 2015, marketing consulting company Brand Finance ranked Lego as the \"world's most powerful brand\", overtaking Ferrari.\nWhile Lego has generally been considered a children's toy, there have also been adult fans of the toys. In 2020, Lego introduced sets aged at 18+, generally some of their more expensive and difficult-to-assemble sets based on real world or fictional objects, such as the Concorde or Rivendell. The timing of these sets favorably aligned with the COVID-19 pandemic, with many adults purchasing these sets to work on during various lockdown periods. Popularity within adults was further pushed by the release of \"The Lego Movie\" and the reality series \"Lego Masters\". By 2024, nearly 15% of the sets released in the U.S. were aimed at adult builders.\nIn May 2025 Lego announced that it was planning to move its London headquarters from Farringdon to 76 South Bank, in 2027.\nDesign.\nLego pieces of all varieties constitute a universal system. Despite variations in the design and the purposes of individual pieces over the years, each remains compatible in some way with existing pieces. Lego bricks from 1958 still interlock with those made presently, and Lego sets for young children are compatible with those made for teenagers. Six bricks of 2\u202f\u00d7\u202f4 studs can be combined in 915,103,765 ways.\nEach piece must be manufactured to an exacting degree of precision. When two pieces are engaged, they must fit firmly, yet be easily disassembled. The machines that manufacture Lego bricks have tolerances as small as 10 micrometres.\nPrimary concept and development work for the toy takes place at the Billund headquarters, where the company employs approximately 120 designers. The company also has smaller design offices in the UK, Spain, Germany, and Japan which are tasked with developing products aimed specifically at their respective national markets. The average development period for a new product is around twelve months, split into three stages. The first is to identify market trends and developments, including contact by the designers directly with the market; some are stationed in toy shops close to holidays, while others interview children. The second stage is the design and development of the product based on the results of the first stage. As of September\u00a02008[ [update]] the design teams use 3D modelling software to generate CAD drawings from initial design sketches. The designs are then prototyped using an in-house stereolithography machine. These prototypes are presented to the entire project team for comment and testing by parents and children during the \"validation\" process. Designs may then be altered in accordance with the results from the focus groups. Virtual models of completed Lego products are built concurrently with the writing of the user instructions. Completed CAD models are also used in the wider organisation for marketing and packaging.\nLego Digital Designer was an official piece of Lego software for Mac OS X and Windows which allowed users to create their own digital Lego designs. The program once allowed customers to order custom designs with a service to ship physical models from Digital Designer to consumers; the service ended in 2012. Lego's website now recommends BrickLink Studio.\nManufacturing.\nSince 1963, Lego pieces have been manufactured from ABS plastic. As of September\u00a02008[ [update]], Lego engineers use the NX CAD/CAM/CAE PLM software suite to model the elements. The software allows the parts to be optimised by way of mould flow and stress analysis. Prototype moulds are sometimes built before the design is committed to mass production. The ABS plastic is heated to until it reaches a dough-like consistency. It is then injected into the moulds using forces of between 25 and 150 tonnes and takes approximately 15 seconds to cool. The moulds are permitted a tolerance of up to twenty micrometres to ensure the bricks remain connected. Human inspectors check the output of the moulds to eliminate significant variations in colour or thickness. According to the Lego Group, about eighteen bricks out of every million fail to meet the standard required.\nLego factories recycle all but about 1 percent of their plastic waste from the manufacturing process. If the plastic cannot be re-used in Lego bricks, it is processed and sold on to industries that can make use of it. Lego, in 2018, set a self-imposed 2030 deadline to find a more eco-friendly alternative to the ABS plastic.\nManufacturing of Lego bricks occurs at several locations around the world. Moulding is done in Billund, Denmark; Ny\u00edregyh\u00e1za, Hungary; Monterrey, Mexico; and most recently in Jiaxing, China. Brick decorations and packaging are done at plants in the former three countries and in Kladno in the Czech Republic. The Lego Group estimates that in five decades it has produced 400\u00a0billion Lego blocks. Annual production of the bricks averages approximately 36\u00a0billion, or about 1140 elements per second. According to an article in \"BusinessWeek\" in 2006, Lego could also be considered the world's number-one tyre manufacturer; the factory produces about 306 million small rubber tyres a year. The claim was reiterated in 2012. In April 2023, Lego broke ground on its first manufacturing facility in the United States. The new carbon-neutral factory will be located near Richmond, Virginia. It will amount to over $1 billion in investment once completed in 2025. The 340-acre site will have rooftop and ground solar panels and an on-site 35-40 MW solar plant, generating the equivalent of the energy of powering 10,000 American homes. In April 2025, Lego opened its sixth factory worldwide, located in Vietnam, with Lego saying the location is its most environmentally sustainable factory to date.\nIn December 2012, the BBC's \"More or Less\" radio program asked the Open University's engineering department to determine \"how many Lego bricks, stacked one on top of the other, it would take for the weight to destroy the bottom brick?\" Using a hydraulic testing machine, members of the department determined the average maximum force a 2\u00d72 Lego brick can stand is 4,240 newtons. Since an average 2\u00d72 Lego brick has a mass of , according to their calculations it would take a stack of 375,000 bricks to cause the bottom brick to collapse, which represents a stack in height.\nPrivate tests have shown several thousand assembly-disassembly cycles before the bricks begin to wear out, although Lego tests show fewer cycles.\nIn 2018, Lego announced that it will be using bio-derived polyethylene to make its botanical elements (parts such as leaves, bushes and trees). \"The New York Times\" reported the company's footprint that year was \"about a million tons of carbon dioxide each year\" and that it was investing about 1 billion kroner and hiring 100 people to work on changes. The paper reported that Lego's researchers \"have already experimented with around 200 alternatives.\" In 2020, Lego announced that it would cease packaging its products in single-use plastic bags and would instead be using recyclable paper bags. In 2021, the company said it would aim to produce its bricks without using crude oil, by using recycled polyethylene terephthalate bottles, but in 2023 it reversed this decision, having found that this did not reduce its carbon dioxide emissions.\nSet themes.\nSince the 1950s, the Lego Group has released thousands of sets with a variety of themes, including space, pirates, trains, (European) castle, dinosaurs, undersea exploration, and wild west, as well as wholly original themes like Bionicle and Hero Factory. Some of the classic themes that continue to the present day include Lego City (a line of sets depicting city life introduced in 1973) and Lego Technic (a line aimed at emulating complex machinery, introduced in 1977).\nOver the years, the company has licensed themes from numerous cartoon and film franchises and some from video games. These include \"Batman\", \"Indiana Jones\", \"Pirates of the Caribbean\", \"Harry Potter\", \"Star Wars\", \"Marvel\", \"Minecraft\" and \"Wicked\". Although some of these themes, such as Star Wars and Indiana Jones, had highly successful sales, the Lego Group expressed in 2015 a desire to rely more upon their own characters and classic themes and less upon such licensed themes. Some sets include references to other themes, such as a Bionicle mask in one of the Harry Potter sets. Discontinued sets may become collectable and command value on the secondary market.\nFor the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, Lego released a special Team GB Minifigures series exclusively in the United Kingdom to mark the opening of the games. For the 2016 Summer Olympics and 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio de Janeiro, Lego released a kit with the Olympic and Paralympic mascots Vinicius and Tom.\nOne of the largest commercially produced Lego sets was a minifigure-scaled edition of the \"Star Wars\" \"Millennium Falcon\". Designed by Jens Kronvold Fredericksen, the Ultimate Collector's Millennium Falcon (set10179) was released in 2007 and contained 5,195 pieces. It was later surpassed by a 5,922-piece Taj Mahal (set10189). A redesigned Millennium Falcon (set75192) retook the top spot in 2017 with 7,541 pieces. Since then, the Millennium Falcon has been superseded by the Lego Art World Map (set31203) at 11,695 pieces, the Lego Titanic (set10294) at 9,090 pieces, and the Lego Architect Colosseum (set10276) at 9,036 pieces.\nIn 2022, Lego introduced its Eiffel Tower (set10307), which consists of 10,001 parts and reaches a height of , making it the tallest set and tower, but second in number of parts after the World Map.\nRobotics themes.\nThe company also initiated a robotics line of toys called Mindstorms in 1999, and continued to expand and update this range until it was eventually discontinued in 2022. The roots of the product originated with a programmable brick developed at the MIT Media Lab, and the name was taken from a paper by Seymour Papert, a computer scientist and educator who developed the educational theory of constructionism, and whose research was at times funded by the Lego Group.\nThe programmable Lego brick which was at the heart of these robotics sets underwent several updates and redesigns, with the last being called the 'EV3' brick, being sold under the name of Lego Mindstorms EV3. The set included various sensors such as touch, light, sound and ultrasonic waves, with several others being sold separately, including an RFID reader.\nThe programmable brick could be programmed using official software available for Windows and Mac computers. In the earliest iteration of the product, the program would be uploaded to the programmable brick via an infrared transmitter, while in later versions this was achieved via Bluetooth or a USB cable. Unofficial programming languages that can be used with Lego Mindstorms programmable bricks have also been developed.\nThere have been several robotics competitions which used the Lego robotics sets. The earliest was Botball, a national U.S. middle- and high-school competition stemming from the MIT 6.270 Lego robotics tournament. Other Lego robotics competitions include FIRST LEGO League Discover for children ages 4\u20136, FIRST LEGO League Explore for students ages 6\u20139 and FIRST Lego League Challenge for students ages 9\u201316 (age 9\u201314 in the United States, Canada, and Mexico). These programs have offered real-world engineering challenges to participants using LEGO-based robots to complete tasks. In its 2019\u20132020 season, there were 38,609 FIRST LEGO League Challenge teams and 21,703 FIRST LEGO League Explore teams around the world. The international RoboCup Junior football competition involved extensive use of Lego Mindstorms equipment which was often pushed to its extreme limits.\nThe capabilities of the Mindstorms range have also been harnessed for use in the Iko Creative Prosthetic System, a prosthetic limbs system designed for children. Designs for these Lego prosthetics allow everything from mechanical diggers to laser-firing spaceships to be screwed on to the end of a child's limb. Iko was the work of the Chicago-based Colombian designer Carlos Arturo Torres, and is a modular system that allows children to customise their own prosthetics with the ease of clicking together plastic bricks. Designed with Lego's Future Lab, the Danish toy company's experimental research department, and Cirec, a Colombian foundation for physical rehabilitation, the modular prosthetic incorporated myoelectric sensors that register the activity of the muscle in the stump and send a signal to control movement in the attachment. A processing unit in the body of the prosthetic contained an engine compatible with Lego Mindstorms, which allowed the wearer to build an extensive range of customised, programmable limbs.\nIn popular culture.\nLego's popularity is demonstrated by its wide representation and usage in many cultural works, including books, films, and art. It has even been used in the classroom as a teaching tool. In the US, Lego Education North America is a joint venture between Pitsco, Inc. and the educational division of the Lego Group.\nIn 1998, Lego bricks were one of the original inductees into the National Toy Hall of Fame at The Strong in Rochester, New York.\n\"Lego\" is commonly used as a mass noun (\"some Lego\") or, in American English, as a countable noun with plural \"Legos\", to refer to the bricks themselves, (e.g. genericization) but as is common for trademarks, Lego group insists on the name being used as an adjective when referring to a product (as in \"LEGO bricks\").\nLego bricks have a reputation for causing pain when stepped on, often being humorously exaggerated as more extreme than that caused by even the worst injuries. In this way, they are viewed as a sort of modern-day caltrop.\nClones.\nThe last significant patent for Lego bricks expired in 1978. Since then, competitors have produced blocks of similar dimensions and design that can be connected with Lego bricks. In 2002, Lego sued the CoCo Toy Company in Beijing for copyright infringement over its \"Coko bricks\" product. CoCo was ordered to cease manufacture of the products, publish a formal apology and pay damages. Lego sued the English company Best-Lock Construction Toys in German courts in 2004 and 2009; the Federal Patent Court of Germany denied Lego trademark protection for the shape of its bricks for the latter case. In 2005, the Lego Company sued Canadian company Ritvik Holdings Inc., which makes Mega Bloks, for trademark violation. However, the Supreme Court of Canada upheld Ritvik Holdings Inc.'s rights to sell its product. In 2010, the European Court of Justice ruled that the eight-peg design of the original Lego brick \"merely performs a technical function [and] cannot be registered as a trademark.\"\nIn 2020 and 2021, Lego sent cease and desist letters to small toy retailers and popular YouTubers in Germany. In 2021, a shipment of bricks delivered by clone producer Qman was blocked from passing through German customs due to concerns over the potential infringement of Lego's intellectual property. The recipient toy retailer initiated an appeal for donations to import containers of Lego clones from China to Germany and donate them to children's homes, which received more than within a couple of weeks.\nRelated services.\nOfficial website.\nFirst launched in 1996, the Lego website has developed over the years, and provides many extra services beyond an online store and a product catalogue. There are also moderated message boards that were founded in 2001. The site also includes instruction booklets for all Lego sets dating back to 2002.\nThe Lego website features a social media app named Lego Life, which is designed for children under 13 years of age. The app is available as a free download and only features Lego-related content. It was designed to be a social network for children to be inspired, create and share their Lego builds, photos and videos with a like-minded community, whilst also providing Lego content in the form of product advertising, images, videos, campaigns and competitions. The app incorporates a variety of child safety features to provide a safe digital environment for children, including the protection of personal information and the heavy moderation of all uploaded user-generated content and communication.\n\"My Lego Network\" was a social networking site that involved items, blueprints, ranks, badges which were earned for completing certain tasks, trading and trophies called masterpieces which allowed users to progress to go to the next rank. The website had a built-in inbox which allowed users to send pre-written messages to one another. The Lego Network included automated non-player characters within called \"Networkers\", who were able to do things which normal users could not do, sending custom messages, and selling masterpieces and blueprints. The site also had modules which were set up on the user's page that gave the user items, or that displayed picture compositions. My Lego network closed in 2015.\nBefore My Lego Network, there were Lego Club Pages, which essentially held the same purpose, although the design lacked complex interaction.\nTheme parks.\nMerlin Entertainments operates ten Legoland amusement parks, the original in Billund, Denmark, the second in Windsor, England, the third in G\u00fcnzburg, Germany, the fourth in Carlsbad, California, the fifth in Winter Haven, Florida, the sixth in Iskandar Puteri, Malaysia, the seventh in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, the eighth in Nagoya, Japan, the ninth in Goshen, New York, and a tenth in 2022 in Shanghai, China. On 13 July 2005, the control of 70% of the Legoland parks was sold for $460\u00a0million to the Blackstone Group of New York while the remaining 30% is still held by Lego Group. There are also eight Legoland Discovery Centres, two in Germany, four in the United States, one in Japan and one in the United Kingdom. Two Legoland Discovery Centres opened in 2013: one at the Westchester Ridge Hill shopping complex in Yonkers, New York, and one at the Vaughan Mills in Vaughan, Ontario, Canada. Another opened at American Dream Meadowlands in East Rutherford, New Jersey, in 2021.\nRetail stores.\nThe first Lego store to open anywhere in the world was in Sydney, Australia, in 1984. Located in the Birkenhead Point Outlet Centre it was not only the first dedicated Lego retail outlet, but it also had displays including many iconic Australian items such as the Holden FJ, Sydney Harbour Bridge, and the Sydney Opera House as well as buildings from Amsterdam, dinosaurs and an English Village. Known as The LEGO Centre, Birkenhead Point, the store closed in the early 1990s.\nAs of March 2024[ [update]], Lego operates 1031 retail shops, called Lego Stores, globally. The world's largest Lego store is located in Leicester Square, London. The U.S. stores include the Downtown Disney shopping complexes at Disneyland and Walt Disney World Resorts as well as in Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota. The opening of each new store is celebrated with a weekend-long event in which a Master Model Builder creates, with the help of volunteers\u2014a larger-than-life Lego statue, which is then displayed at the new store for several weeks.\nBusiness consultancy.\nSince around 2000, the Lego Group has been promoting \"Lego Serious Play\", a form of business consultancy fostering creative thinking, in which team members build metaphors of their organizational identities and experiences using Lego bricks. Participants work through imaginary scenarios using visual three-dimensional Lego constructions, imaginatively exploring possibilities in a serious form of play.\nRelated products.\nVideo games.\nLego branched out into the video game market in 1997 by founding Lego Media International Limited, and \"Lego Island\" was released that year by Mindscape. After this Lego released titles such as \"Lego Creator\" and \"Lego Racers\".\nAfter Lego closed down their publishing subsidiary, they moved on to a partnership with Traveller's Tales, and went on to make games based on licensed properties, like ', ', \"\", and \"Lego Marvel Super Heroes\". In 2014 Lego and TT Games released a video game based on \"The Lego Movie\".\nBoard games.\nLego Games launched in 2009, was a series of Lego-themed board games designed by Cephas Howard and Reiner Knizia in which the players usually build the playing board out of Lego bricks and then play with Lego-style players. Examples of the games include \"Minotaurus\", in which players roll dice to move characters within a brick-build labyrinth, \"Creationary\", in which players must build something which appears on a card, or \"Ramses Pyramid\", in which players collect gems and climb up a customizable pyramid. Like many board games, the games use dice. In Lego Games, the dice are Lego, with Lego squares with symbols on Lego studs on the dice, surrounded by rubber. The games vary from simple to complex; some are similar to \"traditional\" board games, while others are completely different.\nFilms and television.\nThe first official Lego film was the straight-to-DVD release of ' in 2003 developed by Creative Capers Entertainment and distributed by Miramax Home Entertainment. Several other straight-to-DVD computer-animated Bionicle sequels and Hero Factory movies were produced in the following years. ' was released on DVD in February 2010, a computer-animated film made by Tinseltown Toons. A computer-generated animated series titled ' began in January 2011 for the Lego Ninjago brand. Another television series titled \"Legends of Chima\" began in 2013 for the Legends of Chima brand. In December 2015, a television series titled \"Nexo Knights\" made its debut for the Lego Nexo Knights brand. An animated series titled \"Lego Elves\" was released in 2015 and another titled \"Lego Elves: Secrets of Elvendale\" was released in 2017 for the Lego Elves brand. In 2016, ' was released for the Bionicle franchise and \"Lego Friends: The Power of Friendship\" for the Lego Friends brand. In June 2019, an animated series titled \"Lego City Adventures\" was released for the Lego City brand. In 2021, an animated series titled \"Lego Monkie Kid\" was released to support the Lego brand of the same name.\n\"The Lego Movie\", a feature film based on Lego toys, was released by Warner Bros. in February 2014. It featured Chris Pratt in the lead role, with substantial supporting characters voiced by Elizabeth Banks, Will Arnett, Morgan Freeman, Liam Neeson, Alison Brie, Will Ferrell and Nick Offerman. A contest was held for contestants to submit designs for vehicles to be used in the film. After the release of \"The Lego Movie\", independent Canadian toy retailers reported issues with shortages of Lego products and cited cancellations of Lego pre-orders without warning as a motive to stock compatible, rival products.\nA spin-off of \"The Lego Movie\", entitled \"The Lego Batman Movie\", directed by Chris McKay was released in the US in February 2017. A sequel to \"The Lego Batman Movie\" was planned and later cancelled.\nIn June 2013, it was reported that Warner Bros. was developing a feature film adaptation of Lego Ninjago. Brothers Dan Hageman and Kevin Hageman were attached to write the adaptation, while Dan Lin and Roy Lee, along with Phil Lord and Chris Miller, were announced as producers. The film, \"The Lego Ninjago Movie\", was released in September 2017.\nIn February 2019, \"\" was released, which was a direct sequel to the original film and starred Chris Pratt in the lead role.\nOn 27 January 2024, it was announced that a new film, titled \"Piece by Piece\", would be released on 11 October 2024. It is a biographical film focusing on the life of singer Pharrell Williams.\nAs of \u00a02025[ [update]], Universal and the Lego Group are developing an animated Lego film tentatively called \"Inner Child\" from a concept by James Morosini.\nBooks and magazines.\nLego has an ongoing deal with British multinational publisher Dorling Kindersley (DK), who have produced a series of illustrated hardback books looking at different aspects of the construction toy. The first was \"The Ultimate Lego Book\", published in 1999. In 2009, the same publisher produced \"The LEGO Book\", which was sold within a slipcase along with \"Standing Small: A celebration of 30 years of the LEGO minifigure\", a smaller book focused on the minifigure. In 2012, a revised edition was published. Also in 2009, DK also published books on Lego Star Wars and a range of Lego-based sticker books.\nAlthough no longer being published in the United States by Scholastic, books covering events in the Bionicle storyline are written by Greg Farshtey. They are still being published in Europe by AMEET. Bionicle comics, also written by Farshtey, are compiled into graphic novels and were released by Papercutz. This series ended in 2009, after nine years.\nThere is also the Lego Club and Brickmaster magazine, the latter discontinued in 2011. The \"Lego Life Magazine\" was released in 2017 and serves as a replacement for the \"Lego Club Magazine\".\nClothing.\nKabooki, a Danish company founded in 1993, produces children's clothes branded as \"Lego Wear\" under licence from the Lego Group. In 2020, Lego announced collaborations with Adidas and Levi's. In 2021, Lego announced collaborations with Justhype and Adidas to produce apparel inspired by the Lego Ninjago theme. In May 2021, Lego announced collaborations with Adidas to produce products inspired by the Lego Vidiyo theme.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18364", "revid": "33857122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18364", "title": "Hlai people", "text": "Krai-Dai-speaking ethnic group on Hainan Island\nThe Hlai, also known as Li or Lizu, are a Kra\u2013Dai-speaking ethnic group, one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the People's Republic of China. The vast majority live off the southern coast of China on Hainan Island, where they are the largest minority ethnic group. Divided into the five branches of the Qi (Gei), Ha, Run (Zwn), Sai (Tai, Jiamao) and Meifu (Moifau), the Hlai have their own distinctive culture and customs.\nNames.\n (), which was pronounced in Middle Chinese is the Chinese transcription of their native name, which is . They are sometimes also known as the \"Sai\" or \"Say\". During China's Sui Dynasty, their ancestors were known by various names, including Liliao (), a general term encompassing several non-Chinese ethnic groups in Southern China. The name Li first is recorded during the Later Tang period (923\u2013937 CE).\nHistory.\nLiang and Zhang (1996:18\u201321) believe that the original homeland of the Hlai languages was the Leizhou Peninsula, and estimate that the Hlai had migrated across the Hainan Strait to Hainan island about 4,000 years before present. According to Schafer, the Li people were originally spread out across the continental coastline, covering Northern Vietnam and the area west of Guangzhou, including Hainan. Their names were converted into the Chinese clan name Li. The earliest mention of the term Li as an ethnonym was in the Han dynasty, referring to people of the highlands of Central Vietnam at Jiuzhen (). After the Han dynasty these people were primarily located in Guangxi and western Guangdong. \nThe 3rd century \"Nanzhou Yiwuzhi\" mentioned bandits called \"L\u01d0\" (\u4fda) who lived south of Guangzhou in the five commanderies: Cangwu, Yulin, Hepu, Ningpu and Gaoliang. They lived in villages with no walls and took refuge in the mountains and narrow passes. They did not have commanders or lords. The Liu Song dynasty (420\u2013479) set up a post called \"Protector the Western Rivers\" specifically to attack the Li and Lao people. After 471, the holder of that post encroached on the territory of the Li and Lao people. An army under the command of Li Sidao, the governor of Jinkang (close to modern Wuzhou), attacked the Li under the Protector's orders. During the 6th century, the Li people were united under the rule of Lady Xian, a hereditary leader who convinced tribal leaders to obey her. In the early 6th century, the Liang dynasty (502\u2013557) waged war on the Li people, calling it the \"pacification of the Li \"dong\"\". In 503, governor Xun Fei of the Yulin Commandery (east central Guangxi) was killed in battle while fighting the Li. Between 523 and 545, there was open warfare with the Li and a Li commander named Chen Wenche was defeated. In the Tang dynasty, the Li people of northern Vietnam were assigned a separate administrative status among the populace of the Annan protectorate, only paying half the taxes of ordinary subjects. By the 11th century, records no longer mention the Li on the mainland.\nState administration of Hainan's lowlands was indirect until the Song dynasty and state control of the inland mountains was indirect until the 1950s.\u00a0By the 11th century, Chinese records state that Hlai people were living close to Chinese settlements and paid taxes to the central state. However by the end of the Ming dynasty in the mid-17th century, virtually all areas of Hainan capable of intense cultivation had been settled by Han Chinese, while the Hlai filled the niche of supplying mountain products. By 1700, the Qing dynasty had re-established administration over Hainan. Migrant merchants started entering Hainan and threatened the economic niche of the Hlai, who broke out in violent protest against these \"guest merchants\" in 1766.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"shu\" Li live in the foothills of the Five-Fingers mountains, and although their nature differs from that of Han people, still they plow and plant and pay taxes and perform corv\u00e9e service. They have been marinated in Han culture for a very long time. Therefore there are many Li people in every area who have shaved their heads and want to become regular citizens \"[qimin]\". But it has not been made a clear order, and there are many \"shu\" Li who have not shaved their heads. There is really no uniformity. We should order the Li leaders to clearly order all shu Li to shave their heads ... by requiring them universally and gradually to comply, we will make shaven heads the prevailing custom, and they will not be able to pretend to be \"sheng\" Li and cause trouble. It will gradually and imperceptibly rid them of their violent tendencies and habits.\u2014\u200a\nIn 1751, He Xiang wrote an essay titled \"Arguments against Settling the Li and Establishing Counties.\" In it he explained that Hainan was dangerous not because the Hlai people were fierce, but because of malaria and poisonous animals. He mocked previous campaigns against the Hlai for conquering hamlets of no value or significance while several thousand troops died of malaria. The highlands inhabited by the Hlai were also not economically valuable, and therefore had not yet been transformed. While many Chinese generals had made a name for themselves by \"settling Guangdong\", they all left the Hlai alone.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While its indigenous inhabitants, known in Chinese as the Li people, have frequently clashed with Han Chinese on the island, Hainan has never produced a noteworthy political or military movement that sought independence from China. There has never been a question as to Hainan's allegiance and belonging. This sets Hainan apart from other troublesome border regions of China, including Tibet, Xinjiang, Manchuria, Mongolia, and Taiwan.\u2014\u200a\nDuring the Japanese occupation of Hainan (1939\u20131945), the Hlai suffered extremely heavily due to their communist resistance activities especially in western Hainan. Hlai villages were frequently targeted for extermination and rape by Kuomintang and Japanese soldiers. In four towns alone, the Japanese slaughtered more than 10,000 Hlai people. The Hlai were persecuted by the Nationalists partly due to their support of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Nationalist forces massacred over 7,000 Hlai in a village. Nationalist officers had 9,000 Hlai and 3,000 Miao executed after tricking them to the war fronts during a fake conscription campaign. As the Nationalists retreated with over 1.5 million civilians that they evacuated to the hills with, they massacred and stole food from the ethnic Hlai as well as other tribal peoples. The Nationalists executed 2,180 Miao women and children of Baisha and Baoting uprising origin.\nBecause the Hlai sided with the CCP during the Chinese Civil War against the Nationalists, the Hlai are looked upon favorably by the government of the People's Republic of China.\nLanguage.\nThe Hlai speak the Hlai languages, a member of the Kra\u2013Dai language family, but most can understand or speak Hainanese and Standard Chinese. The Jiamao language spoken natively by the Sai (also known as Tai or Jiamao) subgroup has been noted for its dissimilarity to the dialects or languages spoken by the other subgroups of the Hlai.\nA Qing dynasty report on the Hlai dated 1756 claimed that they did not have a writing system.\nCulture.\nWomen were able to become political leaders in Hlai society. In 1171, a Hlai woman by the name of Wang Erniang was bestowed the title of \"Lady of Suitability\" by the Song court and given the post of commander-general over 36 ethnic groups in the south. She was the headwoman of the Hlai people and had a husband but nobody knew his name. She was very wealthy and adept at keeping order over her people. The Song dynasty communicated with non-Chinese southerners by relaying their orders through her. In 1181, her daughter inherited her position, and in 1216, another daughter inherited the position.\nAmong the Hlai, the women have a custom of tattooing their arms and backs after a certain age is reached.\nThe Hlai play a traditional wind instrument called \"k\u01d2uxi\u0101o\" ().\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The land of the \"sheng\" Li is not governed by officials \"[bushu guan]\", but they all have leaders. Among them are some who receive pawned goods, and they use a piece of bamboo as a receipt. The Li have no writing, and the bamboo they use is split into three parts, and upon it is carved the price and amount of \u201chill\u201d land. The two parties and a mediator each carry off one part as proof of the transaction. There is not one who dares to cheat. Lately, however, dishonest, sneaky people frequently make counterfeits, which starts fights. . . . The Li people do not store grain. After the harvest they tie up the grain and save it and hang it over their stoves using the stove\u2019s smoke to cure it, and eat it after a certain number of days. . . . They see this as very convenient. Among the Li there are no markets, and there have never been sellers of grain there. Poor people who lack food borrow from those who have rice. They do not calculate interest. Whether they pay back or not is also not a weighty matter. Lately there are many dishonest, greedy people who lend in the spring and expect repayment in the fall. They get profits from very high interest; their hearts do not follow the ways of the ancients!\u2014\u200a\nReligion.\nThe Hlai were primarily animists. According to Hlai legends, their clans each originated from the marriage of a woman and an animal. The most prominent animal is the snake. Leigong, the God of Thunder, laid a snake on Li Mountain. From the egg hatched a woman named Limu (literally \"mother of the Li\") who lived off of wild fruits and nested in the trees. Eventually she married and their descendants became the Hlai people. Another version says that the woman arrived on a ship and married a dog, giving birth to the Hlai. The Hlai also worshiped other animals such as the ox, which was represented in each house by a stone that they called the \"soul of the ox.\" The \"Oxen's Festival\" was celebrated on the eighth day of the third lunar month every year. On that day the oxen were forbidden to be killed or worked. They stayed at home and were fed liquor believed to protect the ox and guarantee plentiful harvest. The \"najiaxila\" bird of legend was worshiped as a protector god for taking care of an ancestor woman of the Hlai. Dragons and cats were worshiped as well since they are considered to be ancestors.\nGenetics.\nThe Hlai are believed to be descendants of the Rau people, who settled on the island thousands of years ago. They also form a 'clean clade' with Taiwanese aborigines such as Ami and Atayal. DNA analysis carried out amongst the modern Hlai population indicate a close relationship with populations in the southern Chinese province of Guangxi. Most of them have Y-DNA O1a and O1b.\nA 2019 study states that the Hlai show genetic affinities with Tai-Kadai-speaking groups (i.e. Zhuang and Dong) and Hmong-Mien-speaking groups (i.e.Miao groups). In contrast, Han Chinese from Hainan Island exhibit affinities with Tujia, Bai, She, Yunnan Yi and Sinitic-speaking populations. A 2022 study shows that Hlai are enriched with ~85% Baiyue ancestry due to their geographic isolation. They cluster with Austronesians that harbor more divergent ancestry, such as the Ami, Atayal, and Kankanaey. Compared to other Kra-Dai groups, they did not heavily mix with groups like Guangxi populations and Han Chinese. However, there is evidence of admixture between Hlai and Han Chinese about 2000 years ago, with some Hlai having about 56.56% Han ancestry as a result. In addition, there is evidence that the Kinh Vietnamese diverged earlier from the Hlai than the Dai diverged from Hlai. Other studies alternatively suggest that the Longli Bouyei and Qiandongnan Dong, whom Kinh Vietnamese cluster with, are a good representative of the 'ancestral Tai-Kadai' population.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18365", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18365", "title": "Luminance", "text": "Photometric measure\nLuminance is a photometric measure of the luminous intensity per unit area of light travelling in a given direction. It describes the amount of light that passes through, is emitted from, or is reflected from a particular area, and falls within a given solid angle.\nThe procedure for conversion from spectral radiance to luminance is standardized by the CIE and ISO.\nBrightness is the term for the \"subjective\" impression of the \"objective\" luminance measurement standard (see for the importance of this contrast).\nThe SI unit for luminance is candela per square metre (cd/m2). A non-SI term for the same unit is the nit. The unit in the Centimetre\u2013gram\u2013second system of units (CGS) (which predated the SI system) is the stilb, which is equal to one candela per square centimetre or 10\u00a0kcd/m2.\nDescription.\nLuminance is often used to characterize emission or reflection from flat, diffuse surfaces. Luminance levels indicate how much luminous power could be detected by the human eye looking at a particular surface from a particular angle of view. Luminance is thus an indicator of how bright the surface will appear. In this case, the solid angle of interest is the solid angle subtended by the eye's pupil.\nLuminance is used in the video industry to characterize the brightness of displays. A typical computer display emits between . The sun has a luminance of about at noon.\nLuminance is invariant in geometric optics. This means that for an ideal optical system, the luminance at the output is the same as the input luminance.\nFor real, passive optical systems, the output luminance is at most equal to the input. As an example, if one uses a lens to form an image that is smaller than the source object, the luminous power is concentrated into a smaller area, meaning that the illuminance is higher at the image. The light at the image plane, however, fills a larger solid angle so the luminance comes out to be the same assuming there is no loss at the lens. The image can never be \"brighter\" than the source.\nHealth effects.\nRetinal damage can occur when the eye is exposed to high luminance. Damage can occur because of local heating of the retina. Photochemical effects can also cause damage, especially at short wavelengths.\nThe IEC 60825 series gives guidance on safety relating to exposure of the eye to lasers, which are high luminance sources. The IEC 62471 series gives guidance for evaluating the photobiological safety of lamps and lamp systems including luminaires. Specifically it specifies the exposure limits, reference measurement technique and classification scheme for the evaluation and control of photobiological hazards from all electrically powered incoherent broadband sources of optical radiation, including LEDs but excluding lasers, in the wavelength range from through . This standard was prepared as Standard CIE S 009:2002 by the International Commission on Illumination.\nLuminance meter.\nA luminance meter is a device used in photometry that can measure the luminance in a particular direction and with a particular solid angle. The simplest devices measure the luminance in a single direction while imaging luminance meters measure luminance in a way similar to the way a digital camera records color images.\nFormulation.\nThe luminance of a specified point of a light source, in a specified direction, is defined by the mixed partial derivative\nformula_1\nwhere\nIf light travels through a lossless medium, the luminance does not change along a given light ray. As the ray crosses an arbitrary surface S, the luminance is given by\nformula_2\nwhere\nMore generally, the luminance along a light ray can be defined as\nformula_3\nwhere\nRelation to illuminance.\nThe luminance of a reflecting surface is related to the illuminance it receives:\nformula_4\nwhere the integral covers all the directions of emission \u03a9\u03a3,\nIn the case of a perfectly diffuse reflector (also called a Lambertian reflector), the luminance is isotropic, per Lambert's cosine law. Then the relationship is simply\nformula_5\nUnits.\nA variety of units have been used for luminance, besides the candela per square metre. Luminance is essentially the same as surface brightness, the term used in astronomy. This is measured with a logarithmic scale, magnitudes per square arcsecond (MPSAS).\nSee also.\nTable of SI light-related units.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18366", "revid": "24247980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18366", "title": "Lycos", "text": "Search engine and web portal\nLycos, Inc. (stylized as LYCOS), a subsidiary of Brightcom Group, offers a search engine, web portal, chat service, domain name registration service, and email client. The company also owns Tripod and Angelfire. It was established in 1994 as a university spin-off from Carnegie Mellon University.\nThe name \"Lycos\" is short for \"Lycosidae\", which is the Latin name of wolf spiders.\nHistory.\nLycos began in May 1994 as a research project by Michael Loren Mauldin of Carnegie Mellon University. Lycos was funded with approximately US$2 million in venture capital funding from CMGI.\nBob Davis became the CEO and first employee of the new company in 1995. He concentrated on building the company into an advertising-supported web portal, led by Bill Townsend.\nIn April 1996, the company completed the fastest initial public offering from inception to offering in NASDAQ history, ending its first day of trading with a market value of $300 million. It also became the first search engine to become a public company, before rivals Yahoo! and Excite.\nIn May 1997, the company formed Lycos Europe, a joint venture with Bertelsmann.\nLycos began offering e-mail services in October 1997.\nThat year, it became one of the first profitable Internet businesses.\nIn February 1998, Lycos acquired Tripod.com for $58 million.\nIn March 1998, Lycos paid $4 million for a 9% stake in GlobeComm, which powered its free email service.\nIn August 1998, Lycos acquired WhoWhere for $133 million in stock.\nIn October 1998, the company acquired the digital assets of \"Wired\" for $83 million in stock after the print version of the magazine was sold to Advance Magazine Publishers. The deal also included Hotbot and WebMonkey, which was shut in 2004 but relaunched in 2008.\nIn a brief surge in April 1999, the website was visited by 52% of all internet users, which was more than the reach of Yahoo.\nIn 1999, the company abandoned its internal search technology and outsourced search technology to AlltheWeb.\nIn April 1999, Lycos launched an internet radio service.\nIn September 1999, the company acquired Quote.com for $78 million in stock.\nIn November 1999, Lycos acquired Gamesville for $207 million in stock.\nIn December 1999, the company formed Lycos Asia, a $50 million joint venture with Singtel.\nIn June 2000, Lycos acquired Matchmaker.com for $44 million in cash. it was sold in February 2006.\nIn July 2000, Lycos began using Microsoft Windows 2000 software and Intel processors to power its platform.\nIn October 2000, near the peak of the dot-com bubble, Lycos was acquired by Terra Networks, a division of , for $12.5 billion and was renamed Terra Lycos.\nIn January 2001, the company acquired RagingBull.com.\nIn October 2002, the company acquired GetRelevant.\nIn October 2004, Terra sold Lycos to Daum Communications Corporation, now Kakao, for $95.4 million in cash, less than 2% of Terra's initial multibillion-dollar investment.\nIn July 2006, the company sold the digital assets of Wired to Cond\u00e9 Nast Publications which remerged it with the print version of the magazine.\nIn February 2006, Lycos sold Quote.com and RagingBull.com to FT Interactive Data Corporation for $30 million.\nIn March 2006, Lycos introduced phone call services, including video chat, real-time video on demand, and an MP3 player.\nIn November 2006, Lycos introduced Lycos Cinema.\nIn February 2007, Lycos Mix was launched, allowing users to pull video clips from YouTube, Google Video, Yahoo! Video and MySpace Video and allowed users to create playlists where other users could add video comments and chat in real-time.\nLycos was sold for $36 million in August 2010 to Ybrant Digital, an Internet marketing company based in Hyderabad, India. Ybrant Digital paid $20 million at signing and there was a legal dispute over magnitude of the second installment between Ybrant and Daum. In 2018, a New York court ruled in favor of Daum and appointed Daum (by then merged with Kakao) as receiver of Ybrant's 56% ownership interest in Lycos.\nIn May 2012, Rob Balazy was named CEO.\nIn June 2015, Lycos announced the Band and Ring wearable devices.\nIn October 2016, Lycos sold the HotBot.com domain name for $155,000.\nThe parent company of Lycos, YBrant Digital, was renamed Brightcom Group in May 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18367", "revid": "31696229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18367", "title": "Luton Town F.C.", "text": "Association football club in Luton, England\nFootball club\nLuton Town Football Club is a professional football club from Luton, Bedfordshire, England. The club currently competes in EFL League One, the third tier of the English football league system. Nicknamed \"The Hatters\", Luton have played their home games at Kenilworth Road since 1905.\nLuton Town joined the Football League before the 1897\u201398 season but left soon after in 1900 due to financial issues. The club didn't rejoin the League until 1920. Luton competed in the First Division for the first time during the 1955\u201356 season and contested a major final for the first time against Nottingham Forest in the 1959 FA Cup final. The club was then relegated from the First Division at the end of the 1959\u201360 season, and further relegated twice more in five years, playing in the Fourth Division from the 1965\u201366 season, before returning to the First Division for the 1974\u201375 season for a single season.\nAt the end of the 1981\u201382 season, the club won the Second Division and gained promotion to the First Division. Several years later, Luton defeated Arsenal 3\u20132 in the 1988 Football League Cup final and remained in the First Division until relegation at the end of the 1991\u201392 season.\nBetween 2007 and 2009, financial difficulties caused the club to fall from the second tier of English football to the fifth in successive seasons. The last of these relegations, in the 2008\u201309 season, followed a 30-point deduction for financial irregularities. Luton spent five seasons in non-League football before winning the Conference Premier in the 2013\u201314 season, securing promotion back into the Football League. Luton were promoted from League Two and League One in successive seasons in 2017\u201318 and 2018\u201319 before being promoted to the Premier League at the conclusion of the 2023 Championship playoffs. After spending a season in the Premier League, Luton saw two back-to-back relegations, seeing them play in the current 2025\u201326 League One season.\nHistory.\nFormation and election to the Southern League (1885\u20131890).\nLuton Town Football Club was founded on 11 April 1885. Prior to its formation, there were many other football clubs in the town, the most prominent of which were Luton Wanderers and Luton Excelsior. A Wanderers player, George Deacon, came up with the idea of a 'Town' club which would include all the best players in Luton. Wanderers secretary Herbert Spratley seized upon Deacon's idea and arranged a secret meeting on 13 January 1885 at St Matthew's School in High Town, near the railway station. The Wanderers committee resolved to rename the club Luton Town\u2014which was not well received by the wider community. The local newspapers referred to the club as 'Luton Town (late Wanderers)'. When George Deacon and John Charles Lomax then arranged a public meeting with the purpose of forming a 'Luton Town Football Club', Spratley protested, saying there was already a Luton Town club; and the atmosphere was tense when the meeting convened in the town hall on 11 April 1885. The meeting, attended by most football lovers in the town, heard about Spratley's secret January meeting and voted down his objections. The motion to form a 'Luton Town Football Club', put forward by GH Small and seconded by EH Lomax, was carried. A club committee was elected by ballot and the team colours were agreed to be pink and dark blue shirts and caps.\nInitially based at Excelsior's ground, Dallow Lane, Luton Town began making payments to certain individual players in 1890. The following year, Luton became the first club in southern England to be fully professional. The club was a founder member of the Southern Football League in the 1894\u201395 season and finished as runners-up in its first two seasons. It then left to help form the United League and came second in that league's inaugural season before joining the Football League (then based mostly in northern and central England)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[A] for the 1897\u201398 season, concurrently moving to a new ground, Dunstable Road. The club continued to enter a team to the United League for two more seasons, winning the title in the1897\u201398 season. Poor attendance, high wages, in addition to the high travel and accommodation costs that resulted from Luton's distance from the northern heartlands of the Football League crippled the club financially; it became too expensive to compete in that league. A return to the Southern League was therefore arranged for the 1900\u201301 season.\nEarly 20th century (1900\u20131950).\nLuton moved into their current ground, Kenilworth Road, in 1905 after having spent eight years at Dunstable Road. Captain and left winger Bob Hawkes became Luton's first international player when he was picked to play for England against Ireland on 16 February 1907. A poor 1911\u201312 season saw Luton relegated to the Southern League's Second Division; the club won promotion back two years later. After the First World War broke out, Luton took part in The London Combination during the 1915\u201316 season, and afterwards filled each season with friendly matches. A key player of the period was Ernie Simms, a forward. Simms was invalided back to England after being wounded on the Italian front, but recovered enough to regain his place in the Luton team and scored 40 goals during the 1916\u201317 season.\nThe Luton side first played in the white and black colours which it retained for much of its history during the 1920\u201321 season, when the club rejoined the Football League; the players had previously worn an assortment of colour combinations, most permanently sky blue shirts with white shorts and navy socks. Such was the quality of Luton's team at this time that despite playing in the third tier, a fixture between Ireland and England at Windsor Park on 22 October 1921 saw three Luton players on the pitch\u2014Louis Bookman and Allan Mathieson for Ireland, and the club's top goalscorer, Simms, for England. However, after Luton finished fourth in the division, the squad was broken up as Simms, Bookman and Mathieson joined South Shields, Port Vale and Exeter City respectively. Luton stayed in the Third Division South until 1936\u201337, when the team finished top and won promotion to the Second Division. During the promotion season, striker Joe Payne scored 55 goals in 39 games; during the previous season he had scored 10 in one match against Bristol Rovers, which remains a Football League record today. Towards the end on the 1936-37 season Eddie Parris became the first Black player to represent Luton when he made his debut on 13 March 1937 in a home game against Northampton Town.\nSuccess under Duncan and relegation (1950\u20131965).\nDuring the early 1950s, one of Luton's greatest sides emerged under manager, Dally Duncan. The team included Gordon Turner, who went on to become Luton's all-time top goalscorer, Bob Morton, who holds the record for the most club appearances and Syd Owen, an England international. During this period, Luton sides also featured two England international goalkeepers, Ron Baynham and Bernard Streten, as well as Irish internationals Seamus Dunne, Tom Aherne and George Cummins. This team reached the First Division for the first time at the end of the 1955\u201356 season, having finished in second place behind Birmingham City on goal difference. A few years of success followed, including an FA Cup Final appearance against Nottingham Forest in the 1958\u201359 season where Owen was voted FWA Footballer of the Year. However, the club was relegated the following season and, by the 1964\u201365 season, was playing in the Fourth Division.\nBack to the first tier and late century success (1965\u20131992).\nIn yo-yo club fashion, Luton were to return. A team including Bruce Rioch, John Moore and Graham French won the Fourth Division championship in the 1967\u201368 season under the leadership of former player Allan Brown; two years later Malcolm Macdonald's goals helped them to another promotion, while comedian Eric Morecambe became a director of the club. Luton Town won promotion back to the First Division at the end of the 1973\u201374 season, but were relegated the following season by a solitary point. Former Luton player David Pleat was made manager in 1978, and by the 1982\u201383 season the team was back in the top flight. The team which Pleat assembled at Kenilworth Road was notable at the time for the number of Black players it included; during an era when many English squads were almost entirely white, Luton often fielded a mostly black team. Talented players such as Ricky Hill, Brian Stein and Emeka Nwajiobi made key contributions to the club's success during this period, causing it to accrue \"a richer history of black stars than any in the country\", in the words of journalist Gavin Willacy.\nOn the last day of the 1982\u201383 season, the club's first back in the top tier, it narrowly escaped relegation: playing Manchester City at Maine Road, Luton needed to win to stay up, while City could escape with a draw. A late winner by Yugoslavian substitute Raddy Anti\u0107 saved the team and prompted Pleat to dance across the pitch performing a \"jig of joy\", an image that has become iconic. The club achieved its highest ever league position, seventh, under John Moore in the 1986\u201387 season, and, managed by Ray Harford, won the Football League Cup a year later with a 3\u20132 win over Arsenal. With ten minutes left on the clock and Arsenal 2\u20131 ahead, a penalty save from stand-in goalkeeper Andy Dibble sparked a late Luton rally: Danny Wilson equalised, before Brian Stein scored the winner with the last kick of the match. The club reached the League Cup Final once more in the 1988\u201389 season, but lost 3\u20131 to Nottingham Forest.\nResurgence and fall to non-League (1992\u20132009).\nThe club was relegated from the top division at the end of the 1991\u201392 season, and sank to the third tier four years later. Luton stayed in the third-tier Second Division until relegation at the end of the 2000\u201301 season. Under the management of Joe Kinnear, who had arrived halfway through the previous season, the team won promotion from the fourth tier at the first attempt. \"Controversial\" owner John Gurney unsettled the club in 2003, terminating Kinnear's contract on his arrival in May; Gurney replaced Kinnear with Mike Newell before leaving Luton as the club entered administration. Newell's team finished as champions of the rebranded third-tier Football League One in 2004\u201305.\nWhile Newell's place was taken first by Kevin Blackwell and later former player Mick Harford, the team was then relegated twice in a row, starting in 2006\u201307, and spent the latter part of the 2007\u201308 season in administration, thus incurring a ten-point deduction from that season's total. The club then had a total of 30 points docked from its 2008\u201309 record by the Football Association and the Football League for financial irregularities dating back several years. These deductions proved to be too large an obstacle to overcome, but Luton came from behind in the final of the Football League Trophy to win the competition for the first time.\nNon-league to Premier League (2009\u20132024).\nRelegation meant that the 2009\u201310 season saw Luton playing in the Conference Premier, a competition in which the club had never before participated. The club unsuccessfully contested the promotion play-offs three times in four seasons during their time as a non-League club, employing five different managers. In the 2012\u201313 FA Cup fourth round, Luton won their away tie against Premier League club Norwich City 1\u20130 and, in doing so, became the first non-League team to beat a side from England's top division since 1989.\nIn the 2013\u201314 season, under the management of John Still, Luton won the Conference Premier title with three games to spare, and thereby secured a return to the Football League for the 2014\u201315 season. After reaching the League Two play-offs during the 2016\u201317 season, when they were beaten 6\u20135 on aggregate by Blackpool in the semi-final, Luton were promoted back to League One the following season as runners-up. Luton achieved a second successive promotion at the end of the 2018\u201319 season, after they won the League One title, marking the club's return to the Championship after a 12-year absence. Luton reached the Championship play-offs in 2021\u201322, where they were beaten 2\u20131 on aggregate by Huddersfield Town in the semi-final. \nAt the end of the 2022\u201323 season, Luton Town secured a consecutive place in the Championship play-offs having finished in 3rd place. Luton Town beat Sunderland 3\u20132 on aggregate in the play-off semi-finals to reach the play-off final against Coventry City. They went on to beat Coventry City 6\u20135 on penalties after a tense 1\u20131 draw to secure promotion to the Premier League for the first time. After collecting one point in their first five matches of the season, Luton won their first Premier League game on 30 September 2023, beating Everton 2\u20131 away at Goodison Park. After a stable first half of the season, the club's form significantly regressed after January, winning one in seventeen matches before being relegated in May 2024.\nBack-to-back relegation to League One (2024\u2013present).\nOn 3 May 2025, a second successive relegation put Luton back in League One after losing 5\u20133 on the final day to West Bromwich Albion. Despite compiling 49 points and equaling Hull City's total, their inferior goal difference resulted in them finishing 22nd.\nLuton parted ways with head coach Matt Bloomfield on 6 October 2025. Bloomfield was sacked by Luton after a bad run of games, leaving the club in 11th place in the league. Former Hatters player, Alex Lawless, was named interim manager the following day. Jack Wilshere had been a favourite to replace Bloomfield, and was appointed manager on 13th October.\nClub identity.\n \n Luton first wore white and black between 1920 and 1973.\nThe club's nickname, \"the Hatters\", reflects Luton's historical connection with the hat making trade, which has been prominent there since the 17th century. Supporters of the club are also called Hatters.\nThe club is associated with two very different colour schemes\u2014white and black (first permanently adopted in 1920), and orange, navy and white (first used in 1973, and worn by the team as of the 2015\u201316 season). Luton mainly wore a combination of light blue and white before 1920, when white shirts and black shorts were first adopted. These colours were retained for over half a century, with the colour of the socks varying between white and black, until Luton changed to orange, navy and white at the start of the 1973\u201374 season. Luton began playing in white shirts, shorts and socks in 1979, with the orange and navy motif reduced to trim; navy shorts were adopted in 1984. This palette was retained until the 1999\u20132000 season, when the team played in orange shirts and blue shorts. From 2000 to 2008, Luton returned to white shirts and black shorts; orange was included as trim until 2007. The white, navy and orange palette favoured in the 1980s was brought back in 2008, following the results of a club poll, but a year later the colours were changed yet again, this time to a predominantly orange strip with white shorts. Navy shorts were readopted in 2011. Luton wore orange shirts, navy shorts and white socks during the 2015\u201316 season.\nLuton Town have traditionally used the town's crest as its own in a manner similar to many other teams. The club's first badge was a white eight-pointed star, which was emblazoned across the team's shirts (then a deep cochineal red) in 1892. Four years later a crest comprising the club's initials intertwined was briefly adopted. The shirts were thereafter plain until 1933, when Luton first adopted a badge depicting a straw boater, which appeared on Luton shirts. The letters \"LTFC\" were added in 1935, and this basic design remained until 1947. The club then played without a badge until 1970, when the club began to wear the town crest regularly, having first done so in the 1959 FA Cup Final.\nIn 1973, concurrently with the club's switch to the orange kit, a new badge was introduced featuring the new colours. The new emblem depicted a stylised orange football, bearing the letters \"Lt\", surrounded by the club's name in navy blue text. In 1987, the club switched back to a derivative of the town emblem, with the shield portion of the heraldic crest becoming the team's badge; the only similarity with the previous design was the inclusion of the club name around the shield in navy blue. The \"rainbow\" badge, introduced in 1994, featured the town crest below an orange and blue bow which curved around to meet two footballs, positioned on either side of the shield, with the club name underneath. This badge was used until 2005, when a replacement very similar to the 1987 version was adopted, featuring black text rather than blue and a straw boater in place of the outstretched arm depicted in the older design. The club's founding year, 1885, was added in 2008. The badge was altered once more during the 2009\u201310 pre-season, with the red of the town crest being replaced with orange to better reflect the club colours.\nThe club released the song \"Hatters, Hatters\", a collaboration between the Luton team and the Bedfordshire-based musical comedy group the Barron Knights, in 1974. Eight years later another song featuring vocals by the Luton players, \"We're Luton Town\", was released to celebrate the club's promotion to the First Division.\nShirt sponsors.\nThe first sponsor to appear on a Luton Town shirt was Tricentrol, a local motor company based in Dunstable, who sponsored the club from March 1980 to 1982; the deal was worth \u00a350,000.\nA list of subsequent Luton Town shirt sponsors are as follow:\nStadium.\nLuton Town's first ground was at Dallow Lane, the former ground of Excelsior. The ground was next to the Dunstable to Luton railway line, and players regularly claimed to have trouble seeing the ball because of smoke from the trains. A damaging financial loss during 1896\u201397 forced Luton to sell the stadium to stay afloat and, as a result, the club moved across the tracks to a stadium between the railway and Dunstable Road. The Dunstable Road ground was opened by Herbrand Russell, 11th Duke of Bedford, who also donated \u00a350 towards the \u00a3800 building costs. When the site was sold for housing in 1905, the club was forced to move again at short notice, to its present Kenilworth Road site, in time for the start of the 1905\u201306 season.\nThe stadium has an all-seater capacity of 11,600 and is situated in the Bury Park area of Luton. It was named after the road that runs along one end of it, although the official address of the club is 1 Maple Road. Opposite the eponymous Kenilworth Stand is the Oak Road End, which has evolved from a stand first used exclusively by Luton supporters, then later by away supporters, and now used by both except in times of high ticket demand from away clubs. The Main Stand is flanked by the David Preece Stand, and opposite them stands a row of executive boxes. These boxes replaced the Bobbers Stand in 1986, as the club sought to maximise income.\nThe original Main Stand burnt down in 1921, and was replaced by the current stand before the 1922\u201323 season. The ground underwent extensive redevelopment during the 1930s, and the capacity by the start of the Second World War was 30,000. Floodlights were installed before the 1953\u201354 season, but it was 20 years before any further modernisation was carried out. In 1973 the Bobbers Stand became all-seated, and in 1985 the grass pitch was replaced with an artificial playing surface; it quickly became unpopular and was derided as \"the plastic pitch\".\nA serious incident involving hooliganism before, during and after a match against Millwall in 1985 led to the club's then chairman, Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) David Evans, introducing a scheme effective from the start of 1986\u201387 supposedly banning all visiting supporters from the ground, and requiring home fans to carry membership cards when attending matches. Conversion to an all-seater ground also began in 1986. Away fans returned for 1990\u201391, and grass a year later. The David Preece Stand was erected in 1991, and the conversion of the Kenilworth Stand to an all-seater was completed in 2005.\nNew stadium.\nThe club first expressed an interest in building a new stadium away from Kenilworth Road in 1955, the year it won promotion to the First Division for the first time. Even then the ground was small compared to those of most First and Second Division clubs, and its location made significant redevelopment difficult. The team has since made several attempts to relocate. Leaving Luton for the nearby new town of Milton Keynes was unsuccessfully proposed several times, most notably in the 1980s. The club sold Kenilworth Road to Luton Council in 1989, and has since leased it. A planning application for a new 20,000-seater indoor stadium, the \"Kohlerdome\" proposed by chairman David Kohler in 1995, was turned down by the Secretary of State in 1998, and Kohler left soon after.\nIn 2007, the club's then-owners proposed a controversial plan to relocate to a site near Junction 12 of the M1 motorway, near Harlington and Toddington. A planning application was made on the club's behalf by former chairman Cliff Bassett, but the application was withdrawn almost immediately following the club's takeover in 2008. In 2009, the club began an independent feasibility study to determine a viable location to move to. The club did not rule out redeveloping Kenilworth Road and, in October 2012, entered talks to buy the stadium back from Luton Borough Council. By 2015, these plans had been dropped in favour of a move to a new location, with managing director Gary Sweet confirming that the club was in a position to \"buy land, secure the best possible professional advice\u00a0... and to see the [planning] application process through to the receipt of consent.\"\nIn April 2016, the club announced its intention to build and move into a 17,500-capacity stadium on the Power Court site in central Luton. Outline planning permission for this ground, with potential to expand to 23,000 seats, was granted by Luton Borough Council on 16 January 2019. In March 2021, the club announced that it intended to make a number of changes to the initial scheme to reflect changes caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, but that the capacity of the new stadium was still to be 23,000 and had a target opening date of 2024. This plan was revised in 2023, to delivering the first phase, a 19,500-seat stadium, by 2026, followed by the second, a further 4,000 safe standing seats, at a later date. In September 2024, the club submitted revised plans to the Luton Borough Council for a 25,000 stadium with a planned opening date of 2027. The council approved the plans in January 2025. In April 2025, Turkish contractor Limak International was appointed to build the new stadium, with construction starting in summer 2025 and the stadium now set to hold its first competitive game at the start of the 2028\u201329 season.\nSupporters and rivalries.\nDuring the 2014\u201315 season, Luton Town had an average home league attendance of 8,702\u2014the second highest in League Two behind only Portsmouth.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[B] In the 2013\u201314 season, when the club were in the Conference Premier, the club had significantly higher support than the other clubs in its league, with an average home attendance of 7,387; more than twice compared to the second highest of 3,568.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[C] Average attendances at Kenilworth Road fell with the installation of seats and the club's reduction in stature, dropping from 13,452 in 1982\u201383 to their 2014\u201315 level\u2014a slump of 35% over 32 years. A supporters' trust, Trust in Luton, owns shares in the club and elects a representative to the club's board. The club's official supporters' group, Luton Town Supporters' Club, merged with Trust in Luton in 2014. The club is associated with another supporters' group, the breakaway Loyal Luton Supporters Club. Trust in Luton has, since March 2014, held the legal right to veto any changes to the club's identity, including name, nickname, colours, club crest and mascot.\nLuton Town supporters maintain a bitter rivalry with Hertfordshire-based Watford. Watford were the higher ranked team at the end of every season from 1997 until 2022. However, overall Luton still hold the superior record in the fixture between the two clubs; out of 120 competitive matches there have been 55 Luton victories and 38 for Watford, with 29 draws. The 2003 Football Fans Census showed that there was also animosity between Luton Town fans and those of west London club Queens Park Rangers. The fans also maintain a friendly relationship with Dutch side Go Ahead Eagles.\nThe club produces an official match programme for home matches, entitled \"Our Town\". A character known as Happy Harry, a smiling man wearing a straw boater, serves as the team's mascot and appears on the Kenilworth Road pitch before matches. In December 2014, after the seafront statue of Eric Morecambe in his birthplace Morecambe was restored, Luton and Morecambe F.C. jointly announced that the winners of future Luton\u2013Morecambe fixtures would be awarded the \"Eric Morecambe Trophy\".\nRecords and statistics.\nThe record for the most appearances for Luton is held by Bob Morton, who turned out for Luton 562 times in all competitions. Morton also holds the record for the most Football League appearances for the club, with 495. Fred Hawkes holds the record for the most league appearances for Luton, having played in 509 league matches. Six players, Gordon Turner, Andy Rennie, Brian Stein, Ernie Simms, Herbert Moody and Steve Howard, have scored more than 100 goals for Luton.\nThe first player to be capped while playing for Luton was left winger Robert Hawkes, who took to the field for England against Ireland at Goodison Park on 16 February 1907. The most capped player is Mal Donaghy, who earned 58 Northern Ireland caps while at the club. The first player to score in an international match was Joe Payne, who scored twice in his only game for England against Finland on 20 May 1937. Payne also holds the Football League record for the most goals in a game\u2014he hit 10 past Bristol Rovers on 13 April 1936.\nThe club's largest wins have been a 15\u20130 victory over Great Yarmouth Town on 21 November 1914 in the FA Cup and a 12\u20130 win over Bristol Rovers in the Third Division South on 13 April 1936. Luton's heaviest loss was a 9\u20130 defeat against Small Heath in the Second Division on 12 November 1898.\nLuton's highest home attendances are 30,069 against Blackpool in the FA Cup on 4 March 1959 and 27,911 against Wolverhampton Wanderers in the First Division on 5 November 1955.\nThe highest transfer fee received for a Luton Town player is the fee Leicester City paid for Luton-born full-back James Justin on 28 June 2019. The most expensive player Luton Town have ever bought was wing-back Ryan Giles, for a reported fee of \u00a35 million from Wolverhampton Wanderers on 27 July 2023.\nThe youngest player to make a first-team appearance for Luton Town is Connor Tomlinson at 15 years and 199 days old in the EFL Trophy, replacing Zane Banton as a 92nd-minute substitute in a 2\u20131 win over Gillingham on 30 August 2016, after the club were given permission for him to play from his headteacher.\n \"As of 1 September 2025\"\nPlayers.\nCurrent squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYouth team.\nThe club operates a Development Squad, made up of contracted senior players, youth team scholars and trialists, which plays in the Southern Division of The Central League. The club also fields an under-18 team in the Football League Youth Alliance South East Conference. Luton's youth set-up consists of ten Soccer Centres across Bedfordshire and North Hertfordshire, two Centres of Excellence (one in Luton, one in Dunstable), and an academy in Baldock that caters for players in the under-9 to under-16 age groups.\nDevelopment squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder 18s squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"As of 24 October 2021\"\n\"As of 19 May 2024. Only managers in charge for a minimum of 50 competitive matches are counted.\"\n\"Key: M = matches; W = matches won; D = matches drawn; L = matches lost\"\n\"Luton Town's major honours are detailed below. For a list of all club honours, see List of Luton Town F.C. records and statistics : Honours and achievements\".\nHonours.\nLeague\nCup\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The only other club from the south of England in the Football League at the time was Woolwich Arsenal.\nB.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Calculated by adding together all the home league attendances for the 2014\u201315 season to calculate the total attendance (200,157) and then dividing by the number of home league matches (23) to reach an average of 8,702. Attendances taken from BBC report for match that day and Soccerbase statistics.\nC.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Calculated by adding together all the home league attendances for the 2013\u201314 season to calculate the total attendance (169,906) and then dividing by the number of home league matches (23) to reach an average of 7,387. Attendances taken from BBC report for match that day and Soccerbase statistics.\nD.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Before the start of the 2004\u201305 season, Football League re-branding saw the First Division become the Football League Championship. The Second and Third Divisions became Leagues One and Two, respectively.\nE.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ On its formation for the 1992\u201393 season, the FA Premier League became the top tier of English football; the First, Second and Third Divisions then became the second, third and fourth tiers, respectively.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18368", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18368", "title": "Lev Sergeivitch Termen", "text": ""}
{"id": "18369", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18369", "title": "Lunar calendar", "text": "Calendar based only on the Moon\nA lunar calendar is a calendar based on the monthly cycles of the Moon's phases (synodic months, lunations), in contrast to solar calendars, whose annual cycles are based on the solar year, and lunisolar calendars, whose lunar months are brought into alignment with the solar year through some process of intercalation\u00a0\u2013 such as by insertion of a leap month. The most widely observed lunar calendar is the Islamic calendar. The details of when months begin vary from calendar to calendar, with some using new, full, or crescent moons and others employing detailed calculations.\nSince each lunation is approximately &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;29+1\u20442\u00a0days, it is common for the months of a lunar calendar to alternate between 29 and 30\u00a0days. Since the period of 12 such lunations, a lunar year, is 354\u00a0days, 8\u00a0hours, 48\u00a0minutes, 34\u00a0seconds (354.36707\u00a0days), lunar calendars are 11 to 12 days shorter than the solar year. In lunar calendars, which do not make use of lunisolar calendars' intercalation, the lunar months cycle through all the seasons of a solar year over the course of a 33\u201334 lunar-year cycle (see, e.g., list of Islamic years).\nHistory.\nScholars have argued that ancient hunters conducted regular astronomical observations of the Moon back in the Upper Palaeolithic. Samuel L. Macey dates the earliest uses of the Moon as a time-measuring device back to 28,000\u201330,000 years ago.\nStart of the lunar month.\nLunar and lunisolar calendars differ as to which day is the first day of the month. Some are based on the first sighting of the lunar crescent, such as the Hijri calendar observed by most of Islam. Alternatively, in some lunisolar calendars, such as the Hebrew calendar and Chinese calendar, the first day of a month is the day when an astronomical new moon occurs in a particular time zone. In others, such as some Hindu calendars, each month begins on the day after the full moon.\nLength of the lunar month.\nThe length of each lunar cycle varies slightly from the average value. In addition, observations are subject to uncertainty and weather conditions. Thus, to minimise uncertainty, there have been attempts to create fixed arithmetical rules to determine the start of each calendar month. The best known of these is the Tabular Islamic calendar: in brief, it has a 30-year cycle with 11 leap years of 355 days and 19 years of 354 days. In the long term, it is accurate to one day in about 2,500 solar years or 2,570 lunar years. It also deviates from observation by up to about one or two days in the short term. The algorithm was introduced by Muslim astronomers in the 8th century to predict the approximate date of the first crescent moon, which is used to determine the first day of each month in the Islamic lunar calendar.\nLunisolar calendars.\nMost calendars referred to as \"lunar\" calendars are lunisolar calendars. Their months are based on observations of the lunar cycle, with periodic intercalation being used to restore them into general agreement with the solar year. The solar \"civic calendar\" that was used in ancient Egypt showed traces of its origin in the earlier lunar calendar, which continued to be used alongside it for religious and agricultural purposes. Present-day lunisolar calendars include the Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Hindu, Hebrew and Thai calendars.\nThe most common form of intercalation is to add an additional month every second or third year. Some lunisolar calendars are also calibrated by annual natural events which are affected by lunar cycles as well as the solar cycle. An example of this is the lunisolar calendar of the Banks Islands, which includes three months in which the edible palolo worms mass on the beaches. These events occur at the last quarter of the lunar month, as the reproductive cycle of the palolos is synchronized with the moon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18370", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18370", "title": "Lycanthropy", "text": ""}
{"id": "18372", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18372", "title": "Mount Lykaion", "text": "Mountain in Greece\nMount Lykaion (, \"L\u00fdkaion \u00d3ros\"; ) is a mountain in Arcadia, Greece. Lykaion has two peaks: \"Stefani\" to the north and St. Ilias (, \"Agios \u012al\u00edas\") to the south where the altar of Zeus is located.\nThe northern peak is higher, 1,421 m, than the southern, 1,382\u00a0m (). Mount Lykaion was sacred to Zeus Lykaios, who was said to have been born and brought up on it, and was the home of Pelasgus and his son Lycaon, who were said to have founded the ritual of Zeus practiced on its summit. This seems to have involved a human sacrifice and a feast in which the man who received the portion of a human victim was changed to a wolf, as Lycaon had been after sacrificing a child. The altar of Zeus consists of a great mound of ashes with a retaining wall. It was said that no shadows fell within the precincts and that any who entered it died within the year. The sanctuary of Zeus played host to athletic games held every four years, the Lykaia.\nArchaeological excavations were first carried out in 1897 by K. Kontopoulos for the Greek Archaeological Service, followed by K. Kourouniotes between 1902 and 1909.\nThe Mt. Lykaion Excavation and Survey Project, a joint effort of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Arizona began work at the site in 2004, with the aim of continuing the topographical survey begun in 1996 and carrying out a full topographical and architectural analysis not only of the altar and \"temenos\", but of the nearby valley where the Lykaian Games were held. The detailed digital records and drawings of every architectural stone block. To date, a complete map of the area has been made, including not only the Ash Altar and \"temenos\", but also two fountains, including the Hagno fountain mentioned by Pausanias, the hippodrome, the stadium, a building that was probably a bathhouse, the \"xenon\" (hotel), a stoa, several rows of seats, and a group of statue bases.\nMany of these buildings seem to have been planned in relation to each other: the baths at the northern end of the hippodrome are on the same alignment as it is, and the stoa, the \"xenon\", the lower fountain, and the rows of seats all appear to have been built in an intentionally similar alignment. Just to the north of the stoa four rows of seats were excavated, with the remains of a group of stelae and statue bases nearby. These would have bordered the hippodrome's southern edge, and correspond to an earlier excavated row of seats on the south-eastern edge of the racetrack. The majority of the spectators of events in the hippodrome, however, would have sat on the surrounding hills.\nIn the literary record.\nMt. Lykaion, its religious significance, and its quadrennial athletic games appear with some frequency in the ancient literary sources. The 2nd-century Greek geographer Pausanias provides the greatest amount of information in the eighth book of his \"Description of Greece\", where he discusses Lykaion's mythological, historical, and physical characteristics in detail. More isolated references occur, however, in sources ranging from Plato to Virgil.\nLegendary period.\nPausanias states that the Arcadians claimed Cretea atop Mt. Lykaion as the birthplace of Zeus, although tradition had handed down at least two other locations for Zeus\u2019 birth.\nLycaon, son of Pelasgus, the mythical founder of the Greek race, is said to have instituted the worship of Zeus at Mt. Lykaion, giving the god the epithet Lykaios and establishing games in his honor. The \"Bibliotheca\", a Roman-era mythological compendium, adds the story that Lycaon attempted to test Zeus\u2019 omniscience by tricking him into eating a sacrifice mixed with human flesh. In punishment, Zeus slew Lycaon and his fifty sons. Other sources, including the Roman poet Ovid, claim instead that Lycaon's punishment was transformation into a wolf, an early example of lycanthropy.\nHistorical events.\nAccording to Pausanias and the Greek historian Polybius, an inscribed pillar (\"stele\") was erected near the altar of Zeus on Mt. Lykaion during the Second Messenian War, a revolt against the Spartans. The inscription supposedly commemorated the execution of Aristocrates of Arcadia, who had betrayed the Messenian hero Aristomenes at the battle of the Great Trench.\nThucydides, a Greek historian of the Peloponnesian War, writes that the Spartan king Pleistoanax lived on Mt. Lykaion while in exile from the mid-440s BC until 427, where he built a house straddling the sacred region (\"temenos\") of Zeus to avoid further persecution.\nIn his \"Stratagems\", the 2nd-century Macedonian rhetorician Polyaenus describes a battle between the Spartans and Demetrius of Macedon in 294 BC. Mt. Lykaion extended between the camps of the two sides, causing some consternation among the Macedonians due to their unfamiliarity with the terrain. Nevertheless, Demetrius\u2019 forces won the battle with relative ease.\nPolybius and Plutarch, a Greek author writing under the Roman empire, cite a battle at Mt. Lykaion in 227 BC between the Achaean League under Aratus and the Spartans under Cleomenes III. Although the details are vague, both authors make it clear that the Achaeans were defeated and that Aratus was believed (mistakenly) to have been killed.\nReligious worship.\nPan.\nMt. Lykaion was an important site of religious worship in ancient Greece. Pausanias describes a sanctuary of Pan surrounded by a grove of trees. At the sanctuary were bases of statues, which by Pausanias\u2019 time had been deprived of the statues themselves, as well as a hippodrome, where the athletic games had once been held. References to Lykaian Pan are especially abundant in Latin poetry, as for instance in Virgil's epic, the \"Aeneid\": \u201c\"Lupercal / Parrhasio dictum Panos de more Lycaei\",\u201d \u201c...the Lupercal, named after the Parrhasian worship of Lykaian Pan,\u201d and in Horace's Odes: \u201c\"Velox amoenum saepe Lucretilem / mutat Lycaeo Faunus\",\u201d \u201cOften swift Faunus [Pan] exchanges Lykaion for pleasant Lucretilis.\u201d\nZeus Lykaios.\nPausanias records the presence of a mound of earth on the highest point of the mountain, an altar to Zeus Lykaios. He describes two pillars near the altar which had once been topped by golden eagles. Although Pausanias alludes to secret sacrifices which took place on this altar, he explains that he was reluctant to inquire into these rites due to their extreme antiquity. Pausanias also discusses the \"temenos\" of Zeus, a sacred precinct which humans were forbidden to enter. He notes the common belief that any person entering the \"temenos\" would die within a year, along with the legend that all creatures, human and animal alike, cast no shadow while inside the sacred area.\nGames.\nThe athletic competitions at Lykaion, held every four years, receive occasional mention in the literary record. Authors are in disagreement as to when exactly the games were first instituted: Aristotle is said to have ranked the Lykaion games fourth in order of institution after the Eleusinia, the Panathenaia, and the Argive games, while Pausanias argues for the Lykaian competition's priority to the Panathenaia. Pliny the Elder, an imperial Roman polymath, states that the games at Lykaion were the first to introduce gymnastic competition. The ancient Greek lyric poet Pindar records the victories of several athletes in his \"Victory Odes\", and two inscribed \"stelae\" recently excavated from the Lykaian hippodrome provide information about the events, participants, and winners at the games.\nModern study.\nAfter 1832, when Greece had gained independence from the Ottoman Empire, European travelers and scholars began to systematically tour Sparta and the Peloponnese. Ernst Curtius, Charles Beul\u00e9, and Guillaume Blouet published scholarly studies of the area, and discussions of the region appeared in German and British travelogues as well. Many of these writers used Pausanias as their guide to the geography and sights of the region, but were also concerned to correlate modern Greek place-names with ancient evidence.\nBeul\u00e9 described the hippodrome and surrounding area, including large stones that he assumed formed had formed the seats of the judges and magistrates, and the remains of a building he called a temple to Pan, but which probably corresponds to the stoa of the modern excavations. The German writer Ross described the bathhouse and its ancient but still-visible cisterns, which site he noted the locals called the Skaphidia.\nMt. Lykaion was initially excavated by the Greek Archaeological Service, first in 1897 by archaeologist K. Kontopoulos and again in 1902 by K. Kourouniotes. Kontopoulos dug several trial trenches near the hippodrome and the altar. Kourouniotes's excavations of the altar and surrounding area (the \"temenos\") were particularly informative; he learned that the altar consisted of a raised mound of blackened earth as described by Pausanias. Excavation of the earth of the altar yielded burnt stones, small animal (cow and pig) bones, tiny pottery fragments, iron knives, clay figures, coins from Aegina, a clay figure of a bird, and two small bronze tripods. Further trenches dug in the \"temenos\" produced several bronze figures, some iron objects, and roof tiles. In 1909 Kourouniotes excavated an area at the east of the mountain and beneath the summit, the site of the hippodrome, stadium, and bathhouse.\nSince Kourouniotes's excavation, anthropologists and scholars of Arcadian religion have studied the site in terms of its development as a sanctuary, but there was no further systematic or scientific investigation until 1996, when Dr. David Gilman Romano of the University of Pennsylvania conducted a topographical and architectural survey of the site. Romano continued his work with the Mt. Lykaion Excavation and Survey Project under the auspices of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Arizona. A preliminary planning phase of cleaning and surveying took place in 2004 and 2005, and was followed by a five-year excavation program beginning in June 2006. A two-year period during which the findings will be studied is scheduled to begin in the summer of 2011. As of 2023, the research was sponsored by the University of Arizona and the Greek Archaeological Service under the auspices of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens and the Ministry of Culture and Sports. \nHippodrome.\nThe hippodrome at Mount Lykaion, located in a valley below and to the north of the altar, is the only extant hippodrome from Greek antiquity, and is therefore crucial to our understanding of Greek athletic festivals. The hippodrome was constructed on roughly a north-south orientation with a retaining wall of about 140 meters along the eastern side curving around the northern end. Modern excavations have discovered portions tapering column drums that may belonged to the turning posts at either end of the race-course, from whose location it appears that the hippodrome could have had a length of 320 meters and a width of 140. A bath building is being excavated about 35 meters to the northeast of the hippodrome; a large portion of it appears to have been dedicated to a cistern, and large stone basins from the middle of the structure have been uncovered.\nThe Lykaian hippodrome is further unique in apparently having encompassed the stadium racecourse. The early 20th century excavator of Lykaion, Kouriouniotis discovered stone blocks in the middle of the hippodrome that would have formed the starting line of the stadium. The topological survey of 1996 confirmed 6 starting line blocks, four of which were grouped together and were thus possibly found near their original orientation and position. From this, archaeologist David Romano speculated that a stadium racecourse of 170\u2013180 meters would have been enclosed within the hippodrome. The apparently double-use of the space is particularly interesting because inscriptional evidence concerning the Lykaian Games of the 4th century BCE indicates that horse and foot-races were held during the same festivals, and possibly on the same day.\nTwo inscriptions were uncovered in the excavations of Kouriouniotis that give the names of winning athletes in the various contests of the Lykaian Games that were held every four years between 320 and 304 BCE. These contests included footraces for men and for boys, various chariot races with teams of adult and juvenile horses, boxing, wrestling, and a pentathlon.\nAsh altar.\nA circular altar of blackened earth about 1.5 meters in height and 30 meters in diameter seems to date from before the migration of Indo-European peoples into the area. The excavations of Kourouniotes in 1903 of the altar and its nearby \"temenos\" determined definite cult activity at the Lykaion altar from the late 7th century b.c.e, including animals bones, miniature tripods, knives, and statuettes of Zeus holding an eagle and a lightning bolt. These objects were primarily found in the \"temenos\". The earth-altar may correspond to a Linear B mention of an \"open-fire altar\"; Linear B (14th\u201313th centuries BCE) inscriptions also give the first mentions of offerings to Zeus and of the sacred precinct (temenos) near the altar, such as has been excavated at Lykaion.\nAn excavation in 2007 revealed pottery fragments and signs of activity in the ash altar believed to have been used as early as 3000 BCE. Nearby Olympia (only 22 miles away) has a similar ash altar, and both settlements held ancient athletic games. The extremely early date of activity at Lykaion could suggest that these customs originated there. Stratigraphic analysis from the most recent excavations showed prehistoric human activity at the altar site, which seems to have been in continuous use from the Late Neolithic period through to the Hellenistic era. A number of drinking vessels and bones of sheep and goats from the Late Helladic period indicates that the altar was the site of Mycenean drinking and feasting rituals, probably in honor of Zeus. An especially interesting discovery was a seal ring from the Late Minoan period (1500\u20131400 BCE), which could indicate some interaction between Mt. Lykaion and Crete, both of which are given as the birthplace of Zeus by ancient sources.\nIn 2016, excavations of the ash altar revealed a 3000-year-old skeleton of an adolescent boy thought to be a human sacrifice. The researchers explained it is not a cemetery, and the skeleton was lined with stones, showing that it was not a typical human burial. Plato and other ancient writers linked Mount Lykaion specifically to human sacrifices to Zeus\u2014the legends say a sacrificed boy would be cooked with sacrificed animal meat and those who consumed the human portion would become a wolf for 9 years.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18374", "revid": "40707762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18374", "title": "Lake Eyre", "text": "Endorheic lake in South Australia\nLake Eyre ( ), officially known as Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre, is an endorheic lake in the east-central part of the Far North region of South Australia, some 700\u00a0km (435\u00a0mi) north of Adelaide. It is the largest ephemeral endorheic lake on the Australian continent, covering over 9,000\u00a0km2 (3,500\u00a0sq\u00a0mi). The shallow lake is the depocentre of the vast endorheic Lake Eyre basin, and contains the lowest natural point in Australia, at approximately 15\u00a0m (49\u00a0ft) below sea level. The lake is most often empty, filling mostly when flooding occurs upstream in Channel Country, but almost always partially. On the rare occasions that it fills completely (only three times between 1860 and 2025), it is the largest lake in Australia, covering an area of up to . When the lake is full, it has the same salinity as seawater, but becomes hypersaline as the lake dries up and the water evaporates. To the north of the lake is the Simpson Desert.\nThe lake was named in honour of Edward John Eyre, the first European to see it in 1840. It was officially renamed in December 2012 to include its Aboriginal Arabana name, Kati Thanda, in accordance with a policy of dual naming. The native title over most of the lake and surrounding region is held by the Arabana people, with the eastern portion allocated to the Dieri people. \nThe lake is one of the most important sites for waterbirds in Australia, and was the location of several attempts at creating a land speed record in the 1960s. \nHistory.\nPre-colonial and colonial history.\nThe lake lies mostly within the traditional lands of the Arabana people, for whom it holds deep spiritual significance in their Dreaming stories. The Dieri people have long ties to the eastern portion of the lake. \nIn the 1860s, explorer Peter Egerton-Warburton wrote that the lake was dry, and \"terrible in its death-like stillness and the vast expanse of its unbroken sterility\". British geologist John Walter Gregory wrote in his 1906 book on central Australia that while the lake was sometimes described as \"a fertile land of lakes\", others called it a \"desert of the worst type\". He recognised its importance in the natural science of the continent: \"For Lake Eyre, with its coasts and estuaries, was once the living heart of Australia\".\nLand speed record attempts.\nKati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre has been a site for various land speed record attempts on its salt flats, similar to those found in the Bonneville Salt Flats, especially those by Donald Campbell with the Bluebird-Proteus CN7, in 1963 and 1964.\nOn 17 July 1964 in the CN7 on the Lake Eyre salt flats, Campbell set a land speed record of for a four-wheeled vehicle (Class A). Campbell was disappointed with the record speed, as the vehicle had been designed for .\nNaming and ownership.\nThe lake was named by early colonists in South Australia in honour of Edward John Eyre, the first European to see it in 1840. It was officially renamed in December 2012 to include its Aboriginal name, Kati Thanda, in accordance with a policy of dual naming.\nNative title over the lake and much of the surrounding region is held by the Arabana people since a Federal Court ruling in 2012. Native title is held by the Dieri people over the eastern portion of the lake. \nGeography.\nKati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre is in the deserts of central Australia, in northern South Australia. It is located around north of Adelaide, and from the nearest point of the South Australian coastline. Marree is located at the northern end of The Outback Highway at the junction of the Oodnadatta and Birdsville Tracks. William Creek, the closest town to the lake, is away along the unsealed Oodnadatta Track, and still over from the edge of the lake. Halligan Bay is one of only a few public lookouts. The lake covers over .\nThe Lake Eyre Basin is a large endorheic (internally draining) system surrounding the lakebed, the lowest part of which is filled with the characteristic salt pan caused by the seasonal expansion and subsequent evaporation of the trapped waters. Even in the dry season, there is usually some water remaining in Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre, normally collecting in over 200 smaller sub-lakes within its margins. The lake was formed by aeolian processes after tectonic upwarping occurred to the south subsequent to the end of the Pleistocene epoch. Stretching across around 15 per cent of the Australian landmass, including parts of South Australia, the Northern Territory, Queensland, and a small part of New South Wales, the Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre Basin is one of the largest endorheic systems in the world.\nDuring the rainy season, rivers from the north-east part of the Lake Eyre Basin\u2014in outback (south-west and central) Queensland\u2014flow towards the lake through the Channel Country. The amount of water from the monsoon determines whether water will reach the lake and, if it does, how deep the lake will get. The average rainfall in the area of the lake is per year.\nWithin the lake is the lowest natural point in Australia, at approximately below sea level. The altitude usually attributed to Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre refers to the deepest parts of the lake floor, in Belt Bay and the Madigan Gulf. The shoreline lies at . The lake is the area of maximum deposition of sediment in the Lake Eyre Basin.\nLake Eyre is divided into two sections which are joined by the Goyder Channel. These are known as Lake Eyre North, which is in length and wide, and Lake Eyre South, which measures . The salt crusts are thickest\u2014up to \u2014in the southern Belt Bay, Jackboot Bay, and Madigan Gulf sub-basins of Lake Eyre North.\nSalinity and flooding.\nThe salinity in the lake increases as the salt crust dissolves over a period of six months of a major flood, resulting in a massive fish kill. When over deep, the lake is no saltier than the sea, but salinity increases as the water evaporates, with saturation occurring at about a depth. The lake takes on a pink hue when saturated, due to the presence of beta-carotene pigment caused by the alga \"Dunaliella salina\".\nFlooding proposals.\nSince 1883, proposals have been made to flood Lake Eyre with seawater brought to the basin via a canal or pipeline (such as the Bradfield Scheme). The purpose was, in part, to increase evaporation and thereby increase rainfall in the region downwind of an enlarged Lake Eyre. The added rainfall has been modelled as small. Due to the basin's low elevation below sea level and the region's high annual evaporation rate (between ), such schemes have generally been considered impractical, as it is likely that accumulation of salt deposits would rapidly block the engineered channel. At a rate of evaporation per day, a viaduct flowing a would supply enough water to create a sea. If brine water were not sent back to the ocean, it would precipitate of salt every year.\nNatural floods.\nTypically a flood occurs every three years, a flood every decade, and a fill or near fill a few times a century. The water in the lake soon evaporates, with a minor or medium flood drying by the end of the following summer. Most of the water entering the lakes arrives via Warburton River. In strong La Ni\u00f1a years, the lake can fill. Since 1885, this has occurred in 1886\u20131887, 1889\u20131890, 1916\u20131917, 1950, 1955, 1974\u20131977, and 1999\u20132001, with the highest flood of in 1974. According to the National Parks and Wildlife Service South Australia, the lake has only been completely filled to capacity three times between 1860 and June 2025.\n1974.\nIn 1974, the largest recorded historical lake filling in nearly 200 years occurred. By July and August of that year, the colour was reported to be as blue as the ocean, and thousands of pelicans and seagulls arrived to feast on the fish brought into the lake by the floods. \n1989.\nIn 1989 the lake reached a depth of .\n2007.\nTorrential rain in January 2007 took about six weeks to reach the lake but only placed a small amount of water into it. \n2009 to 2011.\nThe 2009 Lake Eyre flood peaked at deep in late May, which is a quarter of its maximum recorded depth of . of water crossed the Queensland\u2013South Australian border with most of it coming from massive floods in the Georgina River. However, owing to the very low rainfall in the lower reaches of these rivers (contrasting with heavy rainfall in the upper catchments), the greater proportion soaked into the desert or evaporated en route to the lake, leaving less than in the lake, which covered an area of , or 12% of the total. As the flood did not start filling the lake's deepest point (Belt Bay) until late March, little bird life appeared, preferring instead to nest in the upper reaches of the Lake Eyre Basin, north of Birdsville, where large lakes appeared in January as a result of monsoonal rain.\nThe high rainfall in summer 2010 sent flood water into the Diamantina, Georgina, and Cooper Creek catchments of the Lake Eyre basin, with the Cooper Creek reaching the lake for the first time since 1990. The higher rainfall prompted many different birds to migrate back to the area for breeding.\nHeavy local rain in early March 2011 in the Stuart Creek and Warriner catchments filled Lake Eyre South, with Lake Eyre North about 75 per cent covered with water firstly from the Neales and Macumba Rivers, and later from the Warburton River.\n2015 to 2016.\nIn late 2015, water began flowing into Lake Eyre following heavy rain in the north-east of the state.\n2019.\nIn late March 2019, floodwaters began arriving as a result of torrential rains in northern Queensland in January. In the past, the water had taken anywhere from three to 10 months to reach the lake, but this time it arrived in two. The first flooding would be closely followed by another surge, following rains produced by Cyclone Trevor. Traditional owners and graziers agree that it is essential that the river run its course and should not be harvested during floods, as any interference in the natural systems could damage the ecosystem.\n2025.\nIn April 2025 it was predicted that floodwaters from Queensland in late March, combined with local rainfall pre-filling parts of the lake, would result in the lake reaching its deepest levels in 15 years some time around late May to June. Upstream river levels have been higher than in previous flood events, with Birdsville reaching on Wednesday 9\u00a0April (higher than the 8.15 m in 2019), and Windorah recording flood levels approaching 1974's heights, that being Australia's wettest year on record. On 30 May 2025, the floodwaters were said to be the highest seen in Channel Country, and making their way into Kati Thanda. However, South Australia has had severe drought since 2024, and locals think that the lake is unlikely to reach the peak reached in 1974.\nFlora and fauna.\nPhytoplankton in the lake includes \"Nodularia spumigena\" and a number of species of \"Dunaliella\".\nWhen recently flooded, the lake is almost fresh, and native freshwater fish, including bony bream (\"Nematolosa erebi\"), the Lake Eyre Basin sub-species of golden perch (\"Macquaria ambigua\") and various small hardyhead species (\"Craterocephalus\" spp.) can survive in it. Macroinvertebrates and other crustaceans, form in the river systems and are brought down with the floodwaters.\nBirds.\nThe lake is one of the most important sites for waterbirds in Australia. Birds such as pelicans and banded stilts are drawn to a filled lake from southern coastal regions of Australia, and from as far afield as Papua New Guinea. During the 1989\u20131990 flood, it was estimated that 200,000 pelicans, 80% of Australia's total population, came to feed and roost at Lake Eyre. Scientists are presently unable to determine how such birds appear able to detect the filling of the lake, even when hundreds or thousands of kilometres away from the basin.\nProtected area status.\nStatutory.\nThe extent of the lake is covered by two protected areas declared by the Government of South Australia: the Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre National Park and the Elliot Price Conservation Park.\nNon-statutory.\nWetlands.\nLake Eyre is on the list of wetlands of national importance known as A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia.\nImportant bird area.\nLake Eyre has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area (IBA) known as the Lake Eyre Important Bird Area, because, when flooded, it supports major breeding events of the banded stilt and Australian pelican, as well as over 1% of the world populations of red-necked avocets, sharp-tailed sandpipers, red-necked stints, silver gulls and Caspian terns.\nYacht club.\nThe Lake Eyre Yacht Club, headquartered in Marree, comprises a dedicated group of sailors who sail on the lake's floods, including in 1997, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2009. A number of trailer sailers sailed on Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre in 1975, 1976, and 1984, when the flood depth reached . In July 2010 The Yacht Club held its first regatta since 1976 and its first on Lake Killamperpunna, a freshwater lake on Cooper Creek. The Cooper had reached Kati Thanda\u2013Lake Eyre for the first time since 1990. It is estimated that these waters reach Lake Eyre roughly 8 years in 100.\nWhen the lake is full, a notable phenomenon is that around midday the surface can often become very flat. The surface then reflects the sky in a way that leaves both the horizon and water surface virtually impossible to see. The commodore of the Lake Eyre Yacht Club stated that sailing during this time has the appearance of sailing in the sky.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Lake featured in the 1953 radio play \"The Happy Hippopotamus\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18375", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18375", "title": "Locksmithing", "text": "Science and art of making and defeating locks\nLocksmithing is the work of creating and bypassing locks. Locksmithing is a traditional trade and in many countries requires completion of an apprenticeship. The level of formal education legally required varies by country, ranging from no formal education to a training certificate awarded by an employer, or a full diploma from an engineering college, along with time spent as an apprentice.\nTerminology.\nA lock is a mechanism that secures buildings, rooms, cabinets, objects, or other storage facilities. A \"smith\" is a metalworker who shapes metal pieces, often using a forge or mould, into useful objects or to be part of a more complex structure. Thus locksmithing, as its name implies, is the assembly and designing of locks and their respective keys by hand. Most locksmiths use both automatic and manual cutting tools to mold keys, with many of these tools being powered by batteries or mains electricity.\nWork.\nLocks have been constructed for over 2,500 years, initially out of wood and later out of metal. Historically, locksmiths would make the entire lock, working for hours hand cutting screws and doing much file-work. Lock designs became significantly more complicated in the 18th century, and locksmiths often specialized in repairing or designing locks.\nAlthough replacing lost keys for automobiles and homes, as well as rekeying locks for security purposes, remains an important part of locksmithing, a 1976 U.S. Government publication noted that modern locksmiths are primarily involved in installing high-quality lock-sets and managing keying and key control systems.\nLocksmith specialisations.\nMost locksmiths also provide electronic lock services, such as programming smart keys for transponder-equipped vehicles and implementing access control systems to protect individuals and assets for large institutions. Many also specialise in other areas such as:\nRegulation by country.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, prospective locksmiths are required to take a Technical and Further Education (TAFE) course in locksmithing, completion of which leads to issuance of a Level 3 Australian Qualifications Framework certificate, and complete an apprenticeship. They must also pass a criminal records check certifying that they are not currently wanted by the police. Apprenticeships can last one to four years. Course requirements are variable: there is a minimal requirements version that requires fewer total training units, and a fuller version that teaches more advanced skills, but takes more time to complete. Apprenticeship and course availability vary by state or territory.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, licensing for locksmiths was introduced in 2016, with locksmiths having to obtain a Private Security Authority license.\nThe Irish Locksmith Organisation has 50 members with ongoing training to ensure all members are up-to-date with knowledge and skills.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, there is no current government regulation for locksmithing, so effectively anyone can trade and operate as a locksmith with no skill or knowledge of the industry.\nUnited States.\nFifteen states in the United States require licensure for locksmiths. Nassau County and New York City in New York State, and Hillsborough County and Miami-Dade County in Florida have their own licensing laws. State and local laws are described in the table below. \n15 states require locksmith licensing: Alabama, California, Connecticut, Illinois, Louisiana, Maryland, Nebraska, New Jersey, Nevada, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.\nEmployment.\nLocksmiths may be commercial (working out of a storefront), mobile (working out of a vehicle), institutional (employed by an institution) or investigatory (forensic locksmiths) or may specialize in one aspect of the skill, such as an automotive lock specialist, a master key system specialist or a safe technician. Many locksmiths also work as security consultants, but not all security consultants possess locksmithing skills. Locksmiths are frequently certified in specific skill areas or to a level of skill within the trade. This is separate from certificates of completion of training courses. In determining skill levels, certifications from manufacturers or locksmith associations are usually more valid criteria than certificates of completion. Some locksmiths decide to call themselves \"Master Locksmiths\" whether they are fully trained or not, and some training certificates appear quite authoritative.\nThe majority of locksmiths also work on any existing door hardware, not just locking mechanisms. This includes door closers, door hinges, electric strikes, frame repairs and other door hardware.\nFull disclosure.\nThe issue of full disclosure was first raised in the context of locksmithing, in a 19th-century controversy regarding whether weaknesses in lock systems should be kept secret in the locksmithing community, or revealed to the public.\nAccording to A. C. Hobbs:\nA commercial, and in some respects a social doubt has been started within the last year or two, whether or not it is right to discuss so openly the security or insecurity of locks. Many well-meaning persons suppose that the discussion respecting the means for baffling the supposed safety of locks offers a premium for dishonesty, by showing others how to be dishonest. This is a fallacy. Rogues are very keen in their profession, and know already much more than we can teach them respecting their several kinds of roguery.\nRogues knew a good deal about lock-picking long before locksmiths discussed it among themselves, as they have lately done. If a lock, let it have been made in whatever country, or by whatever maker, is not so inviolable as it has hitherto been deemed to be, surely it is to the interest of honest persons to know this fact, because the dishonest are tolerably certain to apply the knowledge practically; and the spread of the knowledge is necessary to give fair play to those who might suffer by ignorance.\nIt cannot be too earnestly urged that an acquaintance with real facts will, in the end, be better for all parties. Some time ago, when the reading public was alarmed at being told how London milk is adulterated, timid persons deprecated the exposure, on the plea that it would give instructions in the art of adulterating milk; a vain fear, milkmen knew all about it before, whether they practised it or not; and the exposure only taught purchasers the necessity of a little scrutiny and caution, leaving them to obey this necessity or not, as they pleased.\n -- From A. C. Hobbs (Charles Tomlinson, ed.), \"Locks and Safes: The Construction of Locks.\" Published by Virtue &amp; Co., London, 1853 (revised 1868).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18376", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18376", "title": "Loran-C", "text": "Radio navigation system\nLoran-C is a hyperbolic radio navigation system that allows a receiver to determine its position by listening to low frequency radio signals that are transmitted by fixed land-based radio beacons. Loran-C combined two different techniques to provide a signal that was both long-range and highly accurate, features that had been incompatible. Its disadvantage was the expense of the equipment needed to interpret the signals, which meant that Loran-C was used primarily by militaries after it was introduced in 1957.\nBy the 1970s, the cost, weight and size of electronics needed to implement Loran-C had been dramatically reduced because of the introduction of solid-state electronics and, from the mid-1970s, early microcontrollers to process the signal. Low-cost and easy-to-use Loran-C units became common from the late 1970s, especially in the early 1980s, and the earlier LORAN system was discontinued in favor of installing more Loran-C stations around the world. Loran-C became one of the most common and widely-used navigation systems for large areas of North America, Europe, Japan and the entire Atlantic and Pacific areas. The Soviet Union operated a nearly identical system, CHAYKA.\nThe introduction of civilian satellite navigation in the 1990s led to a rapid drop-off in Loran-C use. Discussions about the future of Loran-C began in the 1990s; several turn-off dates were announced and then cancelled. In 2010, the US and Canadian systems were shut down, along with Loran-C/CHAYKA stations that were shared with Russia. Several other chains remained active; some were upgraded for continued use. At the end of 2015, navigation chains in most of Europe were turned off.\nIn December 2015 there was also renewed discussion of funding an eLoran system, and NIST offered to fund development of a microchip-sized eLoran receiver for distribution of timing signals. The National Timing Resilience and Security Act of 2017, proposed resurrecting Loran as a backup for the United States in case of a GPS outage caused by space weather or attack.\nHistory.\nLoran-A.\nThe original LORAN was proposed in 1940 by Alfred Lee Loomis at a meeting of the U.S. Army's Microwave Committee. The Army Air Corps were interested in the concept for aircraft navigation, and after some discussion they returned a requirement for a system offering accuracy of about at a range of , and a maximum range as great as for high-flying aircraft. The Microwave Committee, by this time organized into what would become the MIT Radiation Laboratory, took up development as Project 3. During the initial meetings, a member of the UK liaison team, Taffy Bowen, mentioned that he was aware the British were also working on a similar concept, but had no information on its performance.\nThe development team, led by Loomis, made rapid progress on the transmitter design and tested several systems during 1940 before settling on a 3\u00a0MHz design. Extensive signal-strength measurements were made by mounting a conventional radio receiver in a station wagon and driving around the eastern states. However, the custom receiver design and its associated cathode-ray tube displays proved to be a bigger problem. In spite of several efforts to design around the problem, instability in the display prevented accurate measurements as the output shifted back and forth on the face of the oscilloscope.\nBy this time the team had become much more familiar with the British Gee system, and were aware of their related work on \"strobes\", a time base generator that produced well-positioned \"pips\" on the display that could be used for accurate measurement. This meant that inaccuracy of the positioning on the display had no effect: any inaccuracy in the position of the signal was also in the strobe, so the two remained aligned. The Project 3 team met with the Gee team in 1941, and immediately adopted this solution. This meeting also revealed that Project 3 and Gee called for almost identical systems, with similar performance, range and accuracy, but Gee had already completed basic development and was entering into initial production, making Project 3 superfluous.\nIn response, the Project 3 team told the Army Air Force to adopt Gee, and instead, at the behest of the British team, realigned their efforts to provide long-range navigation on the oceans where Gee was not useful. This led to United States Navy interest, and a series of experiments quickly demonstrated that systems using the basic Gee concept, but operating at a lower frequency around 2\u00a0MHz would offer reasonable accuracy on the order of a few miles over distances on the order of , at least at night when signals of this frequency range were able to skip off the ionosphere. Rapid development followed, and a system covering the western Atlantic was operational in 1943. Additional stations followed, first covering the European side of the Atlantic, and then a large expansion in the Pacific. By the end of the war, there were 72 operational LORAN stations and as many as 75,000 receivers.\nIn 1958 the operation of the LORAN system was handed over to the United States Coast Guard, which renamed the system \"Loran-A\", the lower-case name being introduced at that time.\nLF LORAN.\nThere are two ways to implement the timing measurements needed for a hyperbolic navigation system, pulse timing systems like Gee and LORAN, and phase-timing systems like the Decca Navigator System.\nThe former requires sharp pulses of signal, and their accuracy is generally limited to how rapidly the pulses can be turned on and off, which is a function of the carrier frequency. There is an ambiguity in the signal; the same measurements can be valid at two locations relative to the broadcasters, but in normal operation, they are hundreds of kilometres apart, so one possibility can be eliminated.\nThe second system uses constant signals (\"continuous wave\") and takes measurements by comparing the phase of two signals. This system is easy to use even at very low frequencies. However, its signal is ambiguous over the distance of a wavelength, meaning there are hundreds of locations that will return the same signal. Decca referred to these ambiguous locations as \"cells\". This demands some other navigation method to be used in conjunction to pick which cell the receiver is within, and then using the phase measurements to place the receiver accurately within the cell.\nNumerous efforts were made to provide some sort of secondary low-accuracy system that could be used with a phase-comparison system like Decca in order to resolve the ambiguity. Among the many methods was a directional broadcast system known as POPI, and a variety of systems combining pulse-timing for low-accuracy navigation and then using phase-comparison for fine adjustment. Decca themselves had set aside one frequency, \"9f\", for testing this combined-signal concept, but did not have the chance to do so until much later. Similar concepts were also used in the experimental Navarho system in the United States.\nIt was known from the start of the LORAN project that the same CRT displays that showed the LORAN pulses could, when suitably magnified, also show the individual waves of the intermediate frequency. This meant that pulse-matching could be used to get a rough fix, and then the operator could gain additional timing accuracy by lining up the individual waves within the pulse, like Decca. This could either be used to greatly increase the accuracy of LORAN, or alternately, offer similar accuracy using much lower carrier frequencies, and thus greatly extend the effective range. This would require the transmitter stations to be synchronized both in time and phase, but much of this problem had already been solved by Decca engineers.\nThe long-range option was of considerable interest to the Coast Guard, who set up an experimental system known as LF LORAN in 1945. This operated at much lower frequencies than the original LORAN, at 180\u00a0kHz, and required very long balloon-borne antennas. Testing was carried out throughout the year, including several long-distance flights as far as Brazil. The experimental system was then sent to Canada where it was used during Operation Muskox in the Arctic. Accuracy was found to be at , a significant advance over LORAN. With the ending of Muskox, it was decided to keep the system running under what became known as \"Operation Musk Calf\", run by a group consisting of the United States Air Force, Royal Canadian Air Force, Royal Canadian Navy and the UK Royal Corps of Signals. The system ran until September 1947.\nThis led to another major test series, this time by the newly-formed United States Air Force, known as Operation Beetle. Beetle was located in the far north, on the Canada-Alaska border, and used new guy-stayed steel towers, replacing the earlier system's balloon-lofted cable antennas. The system became operational in 1948 and ran for two years until February 1950. Unfortunately, the stations proved poorly sited, as the radio transmission over the permafrost was much shorter than expected and synchronization of the signals between the stations using ground waves proved impossible. The tests also showed that the system was extremely difficult to use in practice; it was easy for the operator to select the wrong sections of the waveforms on their display, leading to significant real-world inaccuracy.\nCYCLAN and Whyn.\nIn 1946 the Rome Air Development Center sent out contracts for longer-ranged and more-accurate navigation systems that would be used for long-range bombing navigation. As the United States Army Air Forces were moving towards smaller crews, only three in the Boeing B-47 Stratojet for instance, a high degree of automation was desired. Two contracts were accepted; Sperry Gyroscope proposed the CYCLAN system (CYCLe matching LorAN) which was broadly similar to LF LORAN but with additional automation, and Sylvania proposed Whyn using continuous wave navigation like Decca, but with additional coding using frequency modulation. In spite of great efforts, Whyn could never be made to work, and was abandoned.\nCYCLAN operated by sending the same LF LORAN-like signals on two frequencies, LF LORAN's 180\u00a0kHz and again on 200\u00a0kHz. The associated equipment would look for a rising amplitude that indicated the start of the signal pulse, and then use sampling gates to extract the carrier phase. Using two receivers solved the problem of mis-aligning the pulses, because the phases would only align properly between the two copies of the signal when the same pulses were being compared. None of this was trivial; using the era's tube-based electronics, the experimental CYCLAN system filled much of a semi-trailer.\nCYCLAN proved highly successful, so much so that it became increasingly clear that the problems that led the engineers to use two frequencies were simply not as bad as expected. It appeared that a system using a single frequency would work just as well, given the right electronics. This was especially good news, as the 200\u00a0kHz frequency was interfering with existing broadcasts, and had to be moved to 160\u00a0kHz during testing.\nThrough this period the issue of radio spectrum use was becoming a major concern, and had led to international efforts to decide on a frequency band suitable for long-range navigation. This process eventually settled on the band from 90 to 100\u00a0kHz. CYCLAN appeared to suggest that accuracy at even lower frequencies was not a problem, and the only real concern was the expense of the equipment involved.\nCytac.\nThe success of the CYCLAN system led to a further contract with Sperry in 1952 for a new system with the twin goals of working in the 100\u00a0kHz range while being equally accurate, less complex and less expensive. These goals would normally be contradictory, but the CYCLAN system gave all involved the confidence that these could be met. The resulting system was known as Cytac.\nTo solve the complexity problem, a new circuit was developed to properly time the sampling of the signal. This consisted of a circuit to extract the envelope of the pulse, another to extract the derivative of the envelope, and finally another that subtracted the derivative from the envelope. The result of this final operation would become negative during a very specific and stable part of the rising edge of the pulse, and this zero-crossing was used to trigger a very short-time sampling gate. This system replaced the complex system of clocks used in CYCLAN. By simply measuring the time between the zero-crossings of the master and secondary, pulse-timing was extracted.\nThe output of the envelope sampler was also sent to a phase-shifter that adjusted the output of a local clock that locked to the master carrier using a phase-locked loop. This retained the phase of the master signal long enough for the secondary signal to arrive. Gating on the secondary signal was then compared to this master signal in a phase detector, and a varying voltage was produced depending on the difference in phase. This voltage represented the fine-positioning measurement.\nThe system was generally successful during testing through 1953, but there were concerns raised about the signal power at long range and the possibility of jamming. This led to further modifications of the basic signal. The first was to broadcast a series of pulses instead of just one, broadcasting more energy during a given time and improving the ability of the receivers to tune in a useful signal. They also added a fixed 45\u00b0 phase shift to every pulse, so simple continuous-wave jamming signals could be identified and rejected.\nThe Cytac system underwent an enormous series of tests across the United States and offshore. Given the potential accuracy of the system, even minor changes to the groundwave synchronization were found to cause errors that could be eliminated\u00a0\u2014 issues such as the number of rivers the signal crossed caused predictable delays that could be measured and then factored into navigation solutions. This led to a series of \"correction contours\" that could be added to the received signal to adjust for these concerns, and these were printed on the Cytac charts. Using prominent features on dams as target points, a series of tests demonstrated that the uncorrected signals provided accuracy on the order of 100 yards, while adding the correction contour adjustments reduced this to the order of ten yards.\nLoran-B and -C.\nIt was at this moment that the United States Air Force, having taken over these efforts while moving from the United States Army Air Forces, dropped their interest in the project. Although the reasons are not well recorded, it appears the idea of a fully automated bombing system using radio aids was no longer considered possible. The AAF had been involved in missions covering about 1000\u00a0km (the distance from London to Berlin) and the Cytac system would work well at these ranges, but as the mission changed to trans-polar missions of 5,000\u00a0km or more, even Cytac did not offer the range and accuracy needed. They turned their attention to the use of inertial platforms and Doppler radar systems, cancelling work on Cytac as well as a competing system known as Navarho.\nAround this period the United States Navy began work on a similar system using combined pulse and phase comparison, but based on the existing LORAN frequency of 200\u00a0kHz. By this time the United States Navy had handed operational control of the LORAN system to the Coast Guard, and it was assumed the same arrangement would be true for any new system as well. Thus, the United States Coast Guard was given the choice of naming the systems, and decided to rename the existing system Loran-A, and the new system Loran-B.\nWith Cytac fully developed and its test system on the east coast of the United States mothballed, the United States Navy also decided to re-commission Cytac for tests in the long-range role. An extensive series of tests across the Atlantic were carried out by the USCGC \"Androscoggin\" starting in April 1956. Meanwhile, Loran-B proved to have serious problems keeping their transmitters in phase, and that work was abandoned. Minor changes were made to the Cytac systems to further simplify it, including a reduction in the pulse-chain spacing from 1200 to 1000\u00a0\u03bcs, the pulse rate changed to 20\u00a0pps to match the existing Loran-A system, and the phase-shifting between pulses to an alternating 0, 180-degree shift instead of 45 degrees at every pulse within the chain.\nThe result was Loran-C. Testing of the new system was intensive, and over-water flights around Bermuda demonstrated that 50% of fixes lay within a circle of radius, a dramatic improvement over the original Loran-A, meeting the accuracy of the Gee system, but at much greater range. The first chain was set up using the original experimental Cytac system, and a second one in the Mediterranean in 1957. Further chains covering the North Atlantic and large areas of the Pacific followed. At the time global charts were printed with shaded sections representing the area where a accurate fix could be obtained under most operational conditions. Loran-C operated in the 90 to 110\u00a0kHz frequency range.\nImproving systems.\nLoran-C had originally been designed to be highly automated, allowing the system to be operated more rapidly than the original LORAN's multi-minute measurement. It was also operated in \"chains\" of linked stations, allowing a fix to be made by simultaneously comparing two secondaries to a single master. The downside of this approach was that the required electronic equipment, built using 1950s-era tube technology, was very large. Looking for companies with knowledge of seaborne, multi-channel phase-comparison electronics led, ironically, to Decca, who built the AN/SPN-31, the first widely used Loran-C receiver. The AN/SPN-31 weighed over and had 52 controls.\nAirborne units followed, and an adapted AN/SPN-31 was tested in an Avro Vulcan in 1963. By the mid-1960s, units with some transistorization were becoming more common, and a chain was set up in Vietnam to support the United States' war efforts there. A number of commercial airline operators experimented with the system as well, using it for navigation on the great circle route between North America and Europe. However, inertial platforms ultimately became more common in this role.\nIn 1969, Decca sued the United States Navy for patent infringement, producing ample documentation of their work on the basic concept as early as 1944, along with the \"missing\" 9f frequency at 98\u00a0kHz that had been set aside for experiments using this system. Decca won the initial suit, but the judgement was overturned on appeal when the Navy claimed \"wartime expediency\".\nLoran-D and -F.\nWhen Loran-C became widespread, the United States Air Force once again became interested in using it as a guidance system. They proposed a new system layered on top of Loran-C to provide even higher accuracy, using the Loran-C fix as the coarse guidance signal in much the same way that Loran-C extracted coarse location from pulse timing to remove the ambiguity in the fine measurement. To provide an extra-fine guidance signal, Loran-D interleaved another train of eight pulses immediately after the signals from one of the existing Loran-C stations, folding the two signals together. This technique became known as \"Supernumary Interpulse Modulation\" (SIM). These were broadcast from low-power portable transmitters, offering relatively short-range service of high accuracy.\nLoran-D was used only experimentally during war-games in the 1960s from a transmitter set in the UK. The system was also used in a limited fashion during the Vietnam War, combined with the Pave Spot laser designator system, a combination known as Pave Nail. Using mobile transmitters, the AN/ARN-92 LORAN navigation receiver could achieve accuracy on the order of , which the Spot laser improved to about . The SIM concept later became a system for sending additional data.\nAt about the same time, Motorola proposed a new system using pseudo-random pulse-chains. This mechanism ensures that no two chains within a given period (on the order of many seconds) will have the same pattern, making it easy to determine if the signal is a groundwave from a recent transmission or a multi-hop signal from a previous one. The system, Multi-User Tactical Navigation Systems (MUTNS) was used briefly but it was found that Loran-D met the same requirements but had the added advantage of being a standard Loran-C signal as well. Although MUTNS was unrelated to the Loran systems, it was sometimes referred to as Loran-F.\nDecline.\nIn spite of its many advantages, the high cost of implementing a Loran-C receiver made it uneconomical for many users. Additionally, as military users upgraded from Loran-A to Loran-C, large numbers of surplus Loran-A receivers were dumped on the market. This made Loran-A popular in spite of being less accurate and fairly difficult to operate. By the early 1970s the introduction of integrated circuits combining a complete radio receiver began to greatly reduce the complexity of Loran-A measurements, and fully automated units the size of a stereo receiver became common. For those users requiring higher accuracy, Decca had considerable success with their Decca Navigator system, and produced units that combined both receivers, using Loran to eliminate the ambiguities in Decca.\nThe same rapid development of microelectronics that made Loran-A so easy to operate worked equally well on the Loran-C signals, and the obvious desire to have a long-range system that could also provide enough accuracy for lake and harbour navigation led to the \"opening\" of the Loran-C system to public use in 1974. Civilian receivers quickly followed, and dual-system A/C receivers were also common for a time. The switch from A to C was extremely rapid, due largely to rapidly falling prices which led to many users' first receiver being Loran-C. By the late 1970s the Coast Guard decided to turn off Loran-A, in favour of adding additional Loran-C stations to cover gaps is its coverage. The original Loran-A network was shut down in 1979 and 1980, with a few units used in the Pacific for some time. Given the widespread availability of Loran-A charts, many Loran-C receivers included a system for converting coordinates between A and C units.\nOne of the reasons for Loran-C's opening to the public was the move from Loran to new forms of navigation, including inertial navigation systems, Transit and OMEGA, meant that the security of Loran was no longer as stringent as it was as a primary form of navigation. As these newer systems gave way to GPS through the 1980s and 90s, this process repeated itself, but this time the military was able to separate GPS's signals in such a way that it could provide both secure military and insecure civilian signals at the same time. GPS was more difficult to receive and decode, but by the 1990s the required electronics were already as small and inexpensive as Loran-C, leading to rapid adoption that has become largely universal.\nLoran-C in the 21st century.\nAlthough Loran-C was largely redundant by 2000, it has not universally disappeared as of 2014[ [update]] due to a number of concerns. One is that the GPS system can be jammed through a variety of means. Although the same is true of Loran-C, the transmitters are close-at-hand and can be adjusted if necessary. More importantly, there are effects that might cause the GPS system to become unusable over wide areas, notably space weather events and potential EMP events. Loran, located entirely under the atmosphere, offers more resilience to these issues. There has been considerable debate about the relative merits of keeping the Loran-C system operational as a result of such considerations.\nIn November 2009, the United States Coast Guard announced that Loran-C was not needed by the U.S. for maritime navigation. This decision left the fate of LORAN and eLoran in the United States to the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. Per a subsequent announcement, the US Coast Guard, in accordance with the DHS Appropriations Act, terminated the transmission of all U.S. Loran-C signals on 8 February 2010. On 1 August 2010 the U.S. transmission of the Russian American signal was terminated, and on 3 August 2010 all Canadian signals were shut down by the USCG and the CCG.\nThe European Union had decided that the potential security advantages of Loran are worthy not only of keeping the system operational, but upgrading it and adding new stations. This is part of the wider Eurofix system which combines GPS, Galileo and nine Loran stations into a single integrated system.\nIn 2014, Norway and France both announced that all of their remaining transmitters, which make up a significant part of the Eurofix system, would be shut down on 31 December 2015. The two remaining transmitters in Europe (Anthorn, UK and Sylt, Germany) would no longer be able to sustain a positioning and navigation Loran service, with the result that the UK announced its trial eLoran service would be discontinued from the same date.\nDescription.\nHyperbolic navigation.\nIn conventional navigation by triangulation, measuring one's location, or \"taking a fix\", is accomplished by taking two measurements against well known locations. In optical systems this is typically accomplished by measuring the bearings to two landmarks, and then drawing lines on a nautical chart at those bearings, producing an intersection that reveals the ship's location. Radio methods can also use the same concept with the aid of a radio direction finder, but due to the nature of radio propagation, such instruments are subject to significant errors, especially at night. More accurate radio navigation can be made using pulse timing or phase comparison techniques, which rely on the time-of-flight of the signals. In comparison to angle measurements, these remain fairly steady over time, and most of the effects that change these values are fixed objects like rivers and lakes that can be accounted for on charts.\nTiming systems can reveal the absolute distance to an object, as is the case in radar. The problem in the navigational case is that the receiver has to know when the original signal was sent. In theory, one could synchronize an accurate clock to the signal before leaving port, and then use that to compare the timing of the signal during the voyage. However, in the 1940s no suitable system was available that could hold an accurate signal over the time span of an operational mission.\nInstead, radio navigation systems adopted the \"multilateration\" concept which is based on the difference in times (or phase) instead of the absolute time. The basic idea is that it is relatively easy to synchronize two ground stations, using a signal shared over a phone line for instance, so one can be sure that the signals received were sent at exactly the same time. They will not be received at exactly the same time, however, as the receiver will receive the signal from the closer station first. Timing the difference between two signals can be easily accomplished, first by physically measuring them on a cathode-ray tube, or simple electronics in the case of phase comparison.\nThe difference in signal timing does not reveal the location by itself. Instead, it determines a series of locations where that timing is possible. For instance, if the two stations are 300\u00a0km apart and the receiver measures no difference in the two signals, that implies that the receiver is somewhere along a line equidistant between the two. If the signal from one is received exactly 100\u00a0\u03bcs after, then the receiver is closer to one station than the other. Plotting all the locations where one station is 30\u00a0km closer than the other produces a curved line. Taking a fix is accomplished by making two such measurements with different pairs of stations, and then looking up both curves on a navigational chart. The curves are known as \"lines of position\" or LOP.\nIn practice, radio navigation systems normally use a \"chain\" of three or four stations, all synchronized to a \"master\" signal that is broadcast from one of the stations. The others, the \"secondaries\", are positioned so their LOPs cross at acute angles, which increases the accuracy of the fix. So for instance, a given chain might have four stations with the master in the center, allowing a receiver to pick the signals from two secondaries that are currently as close to right angles as possible given their current location. Modern systems, which know the locations of all the broadcasters, can automate which stations to pick.\nLORAN method.\nIn the case of LORAN, one station remains constant in each application of the principle, the \"primary\", being paired up separately with two other \"secondary\" stations. Given two secondary stations, the time difference (TD) between the primary and first secondary identifies one curve, and the time difference between the primary and second secondary identifies another curve, the intersections of which will determine a geographic point in relation to the position of the three stations. These curves are referred to as \"TD lines\".\nIn practice, LORAN is implemented in integrated regional arrays, or \"chains\", consisting of one \"primary\" station and at least two (but often more) \"secondary\" stations, with a uniform \"group repetition interval\" (GRI) defined in microseconds. The amount of time before transmitting the next set of pulses is defined by the distance between the start of transmission of primary to the next start of transmission of primary signal.\nThe secondary stations receive this pulse signal from the primary, then wait a preset number of milliseconds, known as the \"secondary coding delay\", to transmit a response signal. In a given chain, each secondary's coding delay is different, allowing for separate identification of each secondary's signal. (In practice, however, modern LORAN receivers do not rely on this for secondary identification.)\nLORAN chains (GRIs).\nEvery LORAN chain in the world uses a unique Group Repetition Interval, the number of which, when multiplied by ten, gives how many microseconds pass between pulses from a given station in the chain. In practice, the delays in many, but not all, chains are multiples of 100 microseconds. LORAN chains are often referred to by this designation, \"e.g.\", GRI 9960, the designation for the LORAN chain serving the Northeastern United States.\nDue to the nature of hyperbolic curves, a particular combination of a primary and two secondary stations can possibly result in a \"grid\" where the grid lines intersect at shallow angles. For ideal positional accuracy, it is desirable to operate on a navigational grid where the grid lines are closer to right angles (orthogonal) to each other. As the receiver travels through a chain, a certain selection of secondaries whose TD lines initially formed a near-orthogonal grid can become a grid that is significantly skewed. As a result, the selection of one or both secondaries should be changed so that the TD lines of the new combination are closer to right angles. In practice, nearly all chains provide at least three, and as many as five, secondaries.\nLORAN charts.\nWhere available, common marine nautical charts include visible representations of TD lines at regular intervals over water areas. The TD lines representing a given primary-secondary pairing are printed with distinct colors, and note the specific time difference indicated by each line. On a nautical chart, the denotation for each Line of Position from a receiver, relative to axis and color, can be found at the bottom of the chart. The color on official charts for stations and the timed-lines of position follow no specific conformance for the purpose of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO). However, local chart producers may color these in a specific conformance to their standard. Always consult the chart notes, administrations Chart1 reference, and information given on the chart for the most accurate information regarding surveys, datum, and reliability.\nThere are three major factors when considering signal delay and propagation in relation to LORAN-C:\nThe chart notes should indicate whether ASF corrections have been made (Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS) charts, for example, include them). Otherwise, the appropriate correction factors must be obtained before use.\nDue to interference and propagation issues suffered from land features and artificial structures such as tall buildings, the accuracy of the LORAN signal can be degraded considerably in inland areas (see Limitations). As a result, nautical charts will not show TD lines in those areas, to prevent reliance on LORAN-C for navigation.\nTraditional LORAN receivers display the time difference between each pairing of the primary and one of the two selected secondary stations, which is then used to find the appropriate TD line on the chart. Modern LORAN receivers display latitude and longitude coordinates instead of time differences, and, with the advent of time difference comparison and electronics, provide improved accuracy and better position fixing, allowing the observer to plot their position on a nautical chart more easily. When using such coordinates, the datum used by the receiver (usually WGS84) must match that of the chart, or manual conversion calculations must be performed before the coordinates can be used.\nTiming and synchronization.\nEach LORAN station is equipped with a suite of specialized equipment to generate the precisely timed signals used to modulate / drive the transmitting equipment. Up to three commercial cesium atomic clocks are used to generate 5\u00a0MHz and pulse per second (or 1\u00a0Hz) signals that are used by timing equipment to generate the various GRI-dependent drive signals for the transmitting equipment.\nWhile each U.S.-operated LORAN station is supposed to be synchronized to within 100\u00a0ns of Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), the actual accuracy achieved as of 1994 was within 500\u00a0ns.\nTransmitters and antennas.\nLORAN-C transmitters operate at peak powers of 100\u20134,000\u00a0kilowatts, comparable to longwave broadcasting stations. Most use 190\u2013220\u00a0metre tall mast radiators, insulated from ground. The masts are inductively lengthened and fed by a loading coil (see: electrical length). A well known-example of a station using such an antenna is Rantum. Free-standing tower radiators in this height range are also used. Carolina Beach uses a free-standing antenna tower. Some LORAN-C transmitters with output powers of 1,000\u00a0kW and higher used extremely tall 412-metre mast radiators (see below). Other high power LORAN-C stations, like George, used four T-antennas mounted on four guyed masts arranged in a square.\nAll LORAN-C antennas are designed to radiate an omnidirectional pattern. Unlike longwave broadcasting stations, LORAN-C stations cannot use backup antennas because the exact position of the antenna is a part of the navigation calculation. The slightly different physical location of a backup antenna would produce Lines of Position different from those of the primary antenna.\nLimitations.\nLORAN suffers from electronic effects of weather and the ionospheric effects of sunrise and sunset. The most accurate signal is the groundwave that follows the Earth's surface, ideally over seawater. At night the indirect skywave, bent back to the surface by the ionosphere, is a problem as multiple signals may arrive via different paths (multipath interference). The ionosphere's reaction to sunrise and sunset accounts for the particular disturbance during those periods. Geomagnetic storms have serious effects, as with any radio based system.\nLORAN uses ground-based transmitters that only cover certain regions. Coverage is quite good in North America, Europe, and the Pacific Rim.\nThe absolute accuracy of LORAN-C varies from . Repeatable accuracy is much greater, typically from .\nLORAN Data Channel (LDC).\nLORAN Data Channel (LDC) is a project underway between the FAA and United States Coast Guard to send low bit rate data using the LORAN system. Messages to be sent include station identification, absolute time, and position correction messages. In 2001, data similar to Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) GPS correction messages were sent as part of a test of the Alaskan LORAN chain. As of November 2005, test messages using LDC were being broadcast from several U.S. LORAN stations.\nIn recent years, LORAN-C has been used in Europe to send differential GPS and other messages, employing a similar method of transmission known as EUROFIX.\nA system called SPS (Saudi Positioning System), similar to EUROFIX, is in use in Saudi Arabia. GPS differential corrections and GPS integrity information are added to the LORAN signal. A combined GPS/LORAN receiver is used, and if a GPS fix is not available it automatically switches over to LORAN.\nFuture.\nAs LORAN systems are maintained and operated by governments, their continued existence is subject to public policy. With the evolution of other electronic navigation systems, such as satellite navigation systems, funding for existing systems is not always assured.\nCritics, who have called for the elimination of the system, state that the LORAN system has too few users, lacks cost-effectiveness, and that Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signals are superior to LORAN. Supporters of continued and improved LORAN operation note that LORAN uses a strong signal, which is difficult to jam, and that LORAN is an independent, dissimilar, and complementary system to other forms of electronic navigation, which helps ensure availability of navigation signals.\nOn 26 February 2009, the U.S. Office of Management and Budget released the first blueprint for the Fiscal Year 2010 budget. This document identified the LORAN-C system as \"outdated\" and supported its termination at an estimated savings of $36 million in 2010 and $190 million over five years.\nOn 21 April 2009 the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs released inputs to the FY 2010 Concurrent Budget Resolution with backing for the continued support for the LORAN system, acknowledging the investment already made in infrastructure upgrades and recognizing the studies performed and multi-departmental conclusion that eLoran is the best backup to GPS.\nSenator Jay Rockefeller, Chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, wrote that the committee recognized the priority in \"Maintaining LORAN-C while transitioning to eLORAN\" as means of enhancing the national security, marine safety and environmental protection missions of the Coast Guard.\nSenator Collins, the ranking member on the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs wrote that the President's budget overview proposal to terminate the LORAN-C system is inconsistent with the recent investments, recognized studies and the mission of the U.S. Coast Guard. The committee also recognizes the $160 million investment already made toward upgrading the LORAN-C system to support the full deployment of eLoran.\nFurther, the Committees also recognize the many studies which evaluated GPS backup systems and concluded both the need to back up GPS and identified eLoran as the best and most viable backup. \"This proposal is inconsistent with the recently released (January 2009) Federal Radionavigation Plan (FRP), which was jointly prepared by DHS and the Departments of Defense (DOD) and Transportation (DOT). The FRP proposed the eLoran program to serve as a Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) backup to GPS (Global Positioning System).\"\nOn 7 May 2009, President Barack Obama proposed cutting funding (approx. $35 million/year) for LORAN, citing its redundancy alongside GPS. In regard to the pending Congressional bill, H.R. 2892, it was subsequently announced that \"[t]he Administration supports the Committee's aim to achieve an orderly termination through a phased decommissioning beginning in January 2010, and the requirement that certifications be provided to document that the LORAN-C termination will not impair maritime safety or the development of possible GPS backup capabilities or needs.\"\nAlso on 7 May 2009, the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO), the investigative arm of Congress, released a report citing the very real potential for the GPS system to degrade or fail in light of program delays which have resulted in scheduled GPS satellite launches slipping by up to three years.\nOn 12 May 2009 the March 2007 Independent Assessment Team (IAT) report on LORAN was released to the public. In its report the ITA stated that it \"unanimously recommends that the U.S. government complete the eLoran upgrade and commit to eLoran as the national backup to GPS for 20 years.\" The release of the report followed an extensive Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) battle waged by industry representatives against the federal government. Originally completed 20 March 2007 and presented to the co-sponsoring Department of Transportation and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Executive Committees, the report carefully considered existing navigation systems, including GPS. The unanimous recommendation for keeping the LORAN system and upgrading to eLoran was based on the team's conclusion that LORAN is operational, deployed and sufficiently accurate to supplement GPS. The team also concluded that the cost to decommission the LORAN system would exceed the cost of deploying eLoran, thus negating any stated savings as offered by the Obama administration and revealing the vulnerability of the U.S. to GPS disruption.\nIn November 2009, the U.S. Coast Guard announced that the LORAN-C stations under its control would be closed down for budgetary reasons after 4 January 2010 provided the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security certified that LORAN is not needed as a backup for GPS.\nOn 7 January 2010, Homeland Security published a notice of the permanent discontinuation of LORAN-C operation. Effective 2000 UTC 8 February 2010, the United States Coast Guard terminated all operation and broadcast of LORAN-C signals in the United States. The United States Coast Guard transmission of the Russian American CHAYKA signal was terminated on 1 August 2010. The transmission of Canadian LORAN-C signals was terminated on 3 August 2010.\nUnited Kingdom eLoran implementation.\nOn 31 May 2007, the UK Department for Transport (DfT), via the general lighthouse authorities, awarded a 15-year contract to provide a state-of-the-art Enhanced LORAN service to improve the safety of mariners in the UK and Western Europe. The service contract was to operate in two phases, with development work and further focus for European agreement on eLoran service provision from 2007 through 2010, and full operation of the eLoran service from 2010 through 2022. The first eLoran transmitter was situated at Anthorn Radio Station Cumbria, UK, and was operated by Babcock International (previously Babcock Communications).\nThe UK government granted approval for seven differential eLoran ship-positioning technology stations to be built along the south and east coasts of the UK to help counter the threat of jamming of global positioning systems. They were set to reach initial operational capability by summer 2014. The general lighthouse authorities of the UK and Ireland announced 31 October 2014 the initial operational capability of UK maritime eLoran. Seven differential reference stations provided additional position, navigation, and timing (PNT) information via low-frequency pulses to ships fitted with eLoran receivers. The service was to help ensure they could navigate safely in the event of GPS failure in one of the busiest shipping regions in the world, with expected annual traffic of 200,000 vessels by 2020.\nDespite these plans, in light of the decision by France and Norway to cease Loran transmissions on 31 December 2015, the UK announced at the start of that month that its eLoran service would be discontinued on the same day. However to allow for further research and PNT development, the eLoran timing signal is still active from the government facility in Anthorn.\nList of LORAN-C transmitters.\nA list of LORAN-C transmitters. Stations with an antenna tower taller than 300 metres (984 feet) are shown in bold.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18377", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18377", "title": "Lunatic", "text": "Antiquated adjective epithet of one given to lunacy\nLunatic is a term referring to a person who is seen as mentally ill, dangerous, foolish, or crazy\u2014conditions once attributed to \"lunacy\". The word derives from \"lunaticus\" meaning \"of the moon\" or \"moonstruck\".\nHistory.\nThe term \"lunatic\" derives from the Latin word \"lunaticus\", which originally referred mainly to epilepsy and madness, as diseases thought to be caused by the moon. The King James Version of the Bible records \"lunatick\" in the Gospel of Matthew, which has been interpreted as a reference to epilepsy. By the fourth and fifth centuries, astrologers were commonly using the term to refer to neurological and psychiatric diseases. Pliny the Elder argued that the full moon induced individuals to lunacy and epilepsy by effects on the brain analogous to the nocturnal dew. Until at least 1700, it was also a common belief that the moon influenced fevers, rheumatism, episodes of epilepsy and other diseases.\nUse of the term \"lunatic\" in legislation.\nIn the jurisdiction of England and Wales, the Madhouses Act 1774 originated what later became Metropolitan Commissioners in Lunacy, under the Madhouses Act 1828. The Lunacy Acts 1890\u20131922 referred to \"lunatics\", but the Mental Treatment Act 1930 changed the legal term to \"person of unsound mind\", an expression which was replaced under the Mental Health Act 1959 by \"mental illness\". \"Person of unsound mind\" was the term used in 1950 in the English version of the European Convention on Human Rights as one of the types of person who could be deprived of liberty by a judicial process. The 1930 Act also replaced the term \"asylum\" with \"mental hospital\". Criminal lunatics became Broadmoor patients in 1948 under the National Health Service Act 1946.\nOn December 5, 2012, the US House of Representatives passed legislation approved earlier by the US Senate removing the word \"lunatic\" from all federal laws in the United States. President Barack Obama signed the 21st Century Language Act of 2012 into law on December 28, 2012.\n\"Of unsound mind\" or \"non compos mentis\" are alternatives to \"lunatic\", the most conspicuous term used for insanity in the law in the late 19th century.\nLunar distance.\nThe term \"lunatic\" was sometimes used to describe those who sought to discover a reliable method of determining longitude (before John Harrison developed the marine chronometer method of determining longitude, the main theory was the Method of Lunar Distances, advanced by Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne). The artist William Hogarth portrayed a \"longitude lunatic\" in the eight scene of his 1733 work \"A Rake's Progress\". Twenty years later, though, Hogarth described John Harrison's H-1 chronometer as \"one of the most exquisite movements ever made.\"\nLater, members of the Lunar Society of Birmingham called themselves \"lunaticks\". In an age with little street lighting, the society met on or near the night of the full moon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18378", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18378", "title": "Loony", "text": ""}
{"id": "18379", "revid": "1263273098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18379", "title": "Linear timecode", "text": "Timecode encoded as an audio signal\nLinear (or Longitudinal) Timecode (LTC) is an encoding of SMPTE timecode data in an audio signal, as defined in SMPTE 12M specification. The audio signal is commonly recorded on a VTR track or other storage media. The bits are encoded using the biphase mark code (also known as \"FM\"): a 0 bit has a single transition at the start of the bit period. A 1 bit has two transitions, at the beginning and middle of the period. This encoding is self-clocking. Each frame is terminated by a 'sync word' which has a special predefined sync relationship with any video or film content.\nA special bit in the linear timecode frame, the \"biphase mark correction\" bit, ensures that there are an even number of AC transitions in each timecode frame.\nThe sound of linear timecode is a jarring and distinctive noise and has been used as a sound-effects shorthand to imply \"telemetry\" or \"computers\".\nGeneration and Distribution.\nIn broadcast video situations, the LTC generator should be tied into house black burst, as should all devices using timecode, to ensure correct color framing and correct synchronization of all digital clocks. When synchronizing multiple clock-dependent digital devices together with video, such as digital audio recorders, the devices must be connected to a common word clock signal that is derived from the house black burst signal. This can be accomplished by using a generator that generates both black burst and video-resolved word clock, or by synchronizing the master digital device to video, and synchronizing all subsequent devices to the word clock output of the master digital device (and to LTC).\nMade up of 80 bits per frame, where there may be 24, 25 or 30 frames per second, LTC timecode varies from 960\u00a0Hz (binary zeros at 24 frames/s) to 2400\u00a0Hz (binary ones at 30 frames/s), and thus is comfortably in the audio frequency range. LTC can exist as either a balanced or unbalanced signal, and can be treated as an audio signal in regards to distribution. Like audio, LTC can be distributed by standard audio wiring, connectors, distribution amplifiers, and patchbays, and can be ground-isolated with audio transformers. It can also be distributed via 75 ohm video cable and video distribution amplifiers, although the voltage attenuation caused by using a 75 ohm system may cause the signal to drop to a level that can not be read by some equipment.\nCare has to be taken with analog audio to avoid audible 'breakthrough' (aka \"crosstalk\") from the LTC track to the audio tracks.\nLTC care:\nLongitudinal SMPTE timecode should be played back at a middle-level when recorded on an audio track, as both low and high levels will introduce distortion.\nLongitudinal timecode data format.\nThe basic format is an 80-bit code that gives the time of day to the second, and the frame number within the second. Values are stored in binary-coded decimal, least significant bit first.\nThere are thirty-two bits of user data, usually used for a reel number and date.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18381", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18381", "title": "John Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh", "text": "British physicist (1842\u20131919)\nJohn William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh ( ; 12 November 1842 \u2013 30 June 1919), was a British physicist and hereditary peer who received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1904 for his discovery of argon.\nRayleigh provided the first theoretical treatment of the elastic scattering of light by particles much smaller than the light's wavelength, a phenomenon now known as Rayleigh scattering, which notably explains why the sky is blue. He studied and described transverse surface waves in solids, now known as Rayleigh waves. He contributed extensively to fluid dynamics, with concepts such as the Rayleigh number (a dimensionless number associated with natural convection), Rayleigh flow, the Rayleigh\u2013Taylor instability, and Rayleigh's criterion for the stability of Taylor\u2013Couette flow.\nRayleigh also formulated the circulation theory of aerodynamic lift. In optics, he proposed a well-known criterion for angular resolution. His derivation of the Rayleigh\u2013Jeans law for classical black-body radiation later played an important role in the birth of quantum mechanics (see ultraviolet catastrophe). His textbook, \"The Theory of Sound\" (1877), is still used today by acousticians and engineers. He introduced the Rayleigh test for circular non-uniformity, which the Rayleigh plot visualises.\nRayleigh served as President of the Royal Society from 1905 to 1908, and as Chancellor of the University of Cambridge from 1908 until his death in 1919.\nBiography.\nJohn William Strutt was born on 12 November 1842 at Langford Grove, Maypole Road in Maldon, England, the son of John James Strutt, 2nd Baron Rayleigh, and Clara Elizabeth La Touche. In his early years, he suffered from frailty and poor health.\nStrutt attended Eton College and Harrow School (each for only a short period), before entering Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1861, where he studied mathematics. In 1865, he received his B.A. (Senior Wrangler and Smith's Prizeman), and was elected a Fellow of Trinity College the following year. He obtained an M.A. in 1868.\nIn 1871, Stutt resigned from his fellowship to marry Evelyn Balfour, the daughter of James Maitland Balfour, with whom he had three sons. In 1873, on the death of his father, he inherited the Barony of Rayleigh.\nIn 1879, Rayleigh was appointed Cavendish Professor of Physics at the University of Cambridge. In 1883, he first described dynamic soaring by seabirds in \"Nature\". The following year, he resigned as Cavendish Professor to continue his experimental work at Terling Place.\nFrom 1887 to 1905, Rayleigh was Professor of Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution. During this period, he carefully and precisely measured atomic mass of oxygen and hydrogen, and by 1892 he moved on to nitrogen. By isolating nitrogen in different ways he discovered a small but significant difference, which indicated a heavier inert gas present in the air besides nitrogen. William Ramsay joined this research topic, and in August 1894 they discovered argon. In 1904, Rayleigh and Ramsay were awarded the Nobel Prizes in Physics and Chemistry, respectively; both for research related to the discovery of argon.\nAround 1900, Rayleigh developed the \"duplex\" (combination of two) theory of human sound localisation using two binaural cues, interaural phase difference (IPD) and interaural level difference (ILD) (based on analysis of a spherical head with no external pinnae). The theory posits that we use two primary cues for sound lateralisation, using the difference in the phases of sinusoidal components of the sound and the difference in amplitude (level) between the two ears.\nRayleigh received the degree of \"Doctor mathematicae (honoris causa)\" from the Royal Frederick University on 6 September 1902, when they celebrated the centennial of the birth of mathematician Niels Abel.\nFrom 1905 to 1908, Rayleigh served as President of the Royal Society. From time to time, he participated in the House of Lords; however, he spoke up only if politics attempted to become involved in science.\nDuring the First World War, Rayleigh was President of the Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which was located at the National Physical Laboratory and chaired by Richard Glazebrook.\nIn 1919, Rayleigh served as President of the Society for Psychical Research. As an advocate that simplicity and theory be part of the scientific method, he argued for the principle of similitude.\nRayleigh died on 30 June 1919 in Witham at the age of 76, and was buried in the graveyard of All Saints' Church in Terling. His son Robert, a physicist, succeeded him as Baron Rayleigh.\nReligious views.\nRayleigh was an Anglican. Though he did not write about the relationship between science and religion, he retained a personal interest in spiritual matters. When his scientific papers were to be published in a collection by the Cambridge University Press, Strutt wanted to include a quotation from the Bible, but he was discouraged from doing so, as he later reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I was bringing out my \"Scientific Papers\" I proposed a motto from the Psalms, \"The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.\" The Secretary to the Press suggested with many apologies that the reader might suppose that I was the Lord.\nStill, he had his wish and the quotation was printed in the five-volume collection of scientific papers. In a letter to a family member, he wrote about his rejection of materialism and spoke of Jesus Christ as a moral teacher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have never thought the materialist view possible, and I look to a power beyond what we see, and to a life in which we may at least hope to take part. What is more, I think that Christ and indeed other spiritually gifted men see further and truer than I do, and I wish to follow them as far as I can.\u2014\u200a\nRayleigh held an interest in parapsychology and was an early member of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR). He was not convinced of spiritualism but remained open to the possibility of supernatural phenomena. Rayleigh was the president of the SPR in 1919. He gave a presidential address in the year of his death but did not come to any definite conclusions.\nCommemorations.\nA lunar crater, as well as a Martian crater, are named in his honour. The asteroid 22740 Rayleigh was named after him on 1 June 2007. The rayl, a unit of specific acoustic impedance, is also named for him. \nSir William Ramsay, his co-worker in the investigation to discover argon, described Rayleigh as \"the greatest man alive\" while speaking to Lady Ramsay during his last illness.\nH. M. Hyndman said of Rayleigh that \"no man ever showed less consciousness of great genius\".\nIn honour of Lord Rayleigh, the Institute of Acoustics sponsors the Rayleigh Medal (established in 1970) and the Institute of Physics sponsors the John William Strutt, Lord Rayleigh Medal and Prize (established in 2008).\nMany of the papers that he wrote on lubrication are now recognized as early classical contributions to the field of tribology. For these contributions, he was named as one of the 23 \"Men of Tribology\" by Duncan Dowson.\nThere is a memorial to him by Derwent Wood in St Andrew's Chapel at Westminster Abbey.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;*Acoustic levitation\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n A biography written by his son, Robert Strutt, 4th Baron Rayleigh"}
{"id": "18382", "revid": "49463746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18382", "title": "Lunisolar calendar", "text": "Calendar with lunar month, solar year\nA lunisolar calendar is a calendar in many cultures, that combines monthly lunar cycles with the solar year. As with all calendars which divide the year into months, there is an additional requirement that the year have a whole number of months (Moon cycles). The majority of years have twelve months but every second or third year is an embolismic year, which adds a thirteenth intercalary, embolismic, or leap month.\nIn contrast to purely lunar calendars such as the Islamic calendar, lunisolar calendars have additional intercalation rules that reset them periodically into a rough agreement with the solar year and thus with the seasons.\nExamples.\nThe Chinese, Buddhist, Burmese, Assyrian,\nHebrew, Jain, traditional Nepali, Hindu, Japanese, Korean, Mongolian, Tibetan, and Vietnamese calendars (in the East Asian Chinese cultural sphere), plus the ancient Hellenic, Coligny, and Babylonian calendars are all lunisolar. Also, some of the ancient pre-Islamic calendars in south Arabia followed a lunisolar system. The Chinese, Coligny and\nHebrew lunisolar calendars track more or less the tropical year whereas the Buddhist and Hindu lunisolar calendars track the sidereal year. Therefore, the first three give an idea of the seasons whereas the last two give an idea of the position among the constellations of the full moon.\nChinese lunisolar calendar.\nThe Chinese calendar (\u83ef\u590f\u66c6\u6cd5) or Chinese lunisolar calendar is also called Agricultural Calendar [\u8fb2\u66c6; \u519c\u5386; N\u00f3ngl\u00ec; 'farming calendar'], or Yin Calendar [\u9670\u66c6; \u9634\u5386; Y\u012bnl\u00ec; 'yin calendar']), as movements of the sun (representing Yang) and moon (representing Yin) are the references for the Chinese lunisolar calendar calculations. The Chinese lunisolar calendar is the origin of some variant calendars adopted by other neighboring countries, such as Vietnam and Korea. \nTogether with astronomical, horological, and phenological observations, definitions, measurements, and predictions of years, months, and days were refined. Astronomical phenomena and calculations emphasized especially the efforts to mathematically correlate the solar and lunar cycles from the perspective of the earth, which however are known to require some degree of numeric approximation or compromise. \nThe earliest record of the Chinese lunisolar calendar was in the Zhou dynasty (1050\u00a0BC \u2013 771\u00a0BC, around 3000 years ago. Throughout history, the Chinese lunisolar calendar had many variations and evolved with different dynasties with increasing accuracy, including the \"six ancient calendars\" in the Warring States period, the Qin calendar in the Qin dynasty, the Han calendar or the Taichu calendar in the Han dynasty and Tang dynasty, the Shoushi calendar in the Yuan dynasty, and the Daming calendar in the Ming dynasty, etc. Starting in 1912, the western solar calendar is used together with the lunisolar calendar in China.\nThe most celebrated Chinese holidays, such as the Chinese New Year (\u83ef\u590f\u65b0\u5e74), Lantern Festival (\u5143\u5bb5\u7bc0), Mid-Autumn Festival (\u4e2d\u79cb\u7bc0), and Dragon Boat Festival (\u7aef\u5348\u7bc0) are all based upon the Chinese lunisolar calendar. In addition, the popular Chinese zodiac is a classification scheme based on the Chinese calendar that assigns an animal and its reputed attributes to each year in a repeating twelve-year cycle. The traditional calendar used the sexagenary cycle-based \"ganzhi\" system's mathematically repeating cycles of Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches.\nMovable feasts in the Christian calendars, related to the lunar cycle.\nThe Gregorian calendar (the world's most commonly used) is a solar one but the Western Christian churches use a lunar-based algorithm to determine the date of Easter and consequent movable feasts. Briefly, the date is determined with respect to the ecclesiastical full moon that follows the ecclesiastical equinox in March. (These events are almost, but not quite, the same as the actual astronomical observations.) The Eastern Christian churches have a similar algorithm that is based on the Julian calendar.\nReconciling lunar and solar cycles.\nDetermining leap months.\nA tropical year is approximately 365.2422 days long and a synodic month is approximately 29.5306 days long, so a tropical year is approximately 365.2422 / 29.5306 \u2248 12.36826 months long. Because 0.36826 is between &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, a typical year of 12 months needs to be supplemented with one intercalary or leap month every 2 to 3 years. More precisely, 0.36826 is quite close to &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u204419 (about 0.3684211): several lunisolar calendars have 7 leap months in every cycle of 19 years (called a 'Metonic cycle'). The Babylonians applied the 19-year cycle in the late sixth century BCE.\nIntercalation of leap months is frequently controlled by the \"epact\", which is the difference between the lunar and solar years (approximately 11 days). The classic Metonic cycle can be reproduced by assigning an initial epact value of 1 to the last year of the cycle and incrementing by 11 each year. Between the last year of one cycle and the first year of the next the increment is 12\u00a0\u2013 the \u00a0\u2013 which causes the epacts to repeat every 19 years. When the epact reaches 30 or higher, an intercalary month is added and 30 is subtracted. The Metonic cycle states that 7 of 19 years will contain an additional intercalary month and those years are numbered: 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17 and 19. Both the Hebrew calendar and the Julian calendar use this sequence.\nThe Buddhist and Hebrew calendars restrict the leap month to a single month of the year; the number of common months between leap months is, therefore, usually 36, but occasionally only 24 months. Because the Chinese and Hindu lunisolar calendars allow the leap month to occur after or before (respectively) any month but use the true apparent motion of the Sun, their leap months do not usually occur within a couple of months of perihelion, when the apparent speed of the Sun along the ecliptic is fastest (now about 3 January). This increases the usual number of common months between leap months to roughly 34 months when a doublet of common years occurs, while reducing the number to about 29 months when only a common singleton occurs.\nWith uncounted time.\nAn alternative way of dealing with the fact that a solar year does not contain an integer number of lunar months is by including uncounted time in a period of the year that is not assigned to a named month. Some Coast Salish peoples used a calendar of this kind. For instance, the Chehalis began their count of lunar months from the arrival of spawning chinook salmon (in Gregorian calendar October), and counted 10 months, leaving an uncounted period until the next chinook salmon run.\nList of lunisolar calendars.\nThe following is a list of lunisolar calendars sorted by family.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18383", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18383", "title": "Leonids", "text": "Meteor shower associated with the comet Tempel\u2013Tuttle\nThe Leonids ( ) are a prolific annual meteor shower associated with the comet Tempel\u2013Tuttle, and are also known for their spectacular meteor storms that occur about every 33 years. The Leonids get their name from the location of their radiant in the constellation Leo: the meteors appear to radiate from that point in the sky. The name is derived from Greek and Latin with the prefix \"Leo-\" referring to the constellation and the suffix \"-ids\" signifying that the meteor shower is the offspring of, descendant of, the constellation Leo.\nEarth moves through meteoroid streams left from passages of a comet. The streams consist of solid particles, known as meteoroids, normally ejected by the comet as its frozen gases evaporate under the heat of the Sun once within Jupiter's orbit. Due to the retrograde orbit of 55P/Tempel-Tuttle, the Leonids are fast moving streams which encounter the path of Earth and impact at . It is the fastest annual meteor shower. Larger Leonids which are about across have a mass of and are known for generating bright (apparent magnitude \u22121.5) meteors. An annual Leonid shower may deposit of particles across the entire planet.\nThe meteoroids left by the comet are organized in trails in orbits similar to\u2013though different from\u2013that of the comet. They are differentially disturbed by the planets, in particular Jupiter, and to a lesser extent by radiation pressure from the Sun\u00a0\u2013 the Poynting\u2013Robertson effect and the Yarkovsky effect. These trails of meteoroids cause meteor showers when Earth encounters them. Old trails are spatially not dense and compose the meteor shower with a few meteors per minute. In the case of the Leonids, that tends to peak around 18 November, but some are spread through several days on either side and the specific peak changes every year. Conversely, young trails are spatially very dense and the cause of meteor outbursts when the Earth enters one.\nThe Leonids also produce meteor storms (very large outbursts) about every 33 years, during which activity exceeds 1,000 meteors per hour, with some events exceeding 100,000 meteors per hour, in contrast to the sporadic background (5 to 8 meteors per hour) and the shower background (several meteors per hour).\nHistory.\n1800s.\nThe Leonids are famous because their meteor showers, or storms, can be among the most spectacular. Because of the storm of 1833 and the developments in scientific thought of the time (see for example the identification of Halley's Comet), the Leonids have had a major effect on the scientific study of meteors, which had previously been thought to be atmospheric phenomena. Although it has been suggested the Leonid meteor shower and storms have been noted in ancient times, it was the meteor storm of November 12\u201313, 1833 that broke into people's modern-day awareness. One estimate of the peak rate is over one hundred thousand meteors an hour, while another, done as the storm abated, estimated in excess of 240,000 meteors during the nine hours of the storm, over the entire region of North America east of the Rocky Mountains.\nThe event was marked by several nations of Native Americans: the Cheyenne established a peace treaty and the Lakota calendar was reset. Many Native American birthdays were calculated by reference to the 1833 Leonid event. Abolitionists including Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass as well as slave-owners took note and others. The \"New York Evening Post\" carried a series of articles on the event including reports from Canada to Jamaica, it made news in several states beyond New York and, though it appeared in North America, was talked about in Europe. The journalism of the event tended to rise above the partisan debates of the time and reviewed facts as they could be sought out. Abraham Lincoln commented on it years later. Near Independence, Missouri, in Clay County, a refugee Mormon community watched the meteor shower on the banks of the Missouri River after having been driven from their homes by local settlers. Joseph Smith, the founder and first leader of Mormonism, afterwards noted in his journal for November 1833 his belief that this event was \"a litteral [\"sic\"] fulfillment of the word of God\" and a harbinger of the imminent second coming of Christ. Though it was noted in the midwest and eastern areas, it was also noted in Far West, Missouri.\nDenison Olmsted explained the event most accurately. After spending the last weeks of 1833 collecting information, he presented his findings in January 1834 to the \"American Journal of Science and Arts\", published in January\u2013April 1834, and January 1836. He noted the shower was of short duration and was not seen in Europe, and that the meteors radiated from a point in the constellation of Leo and he speculated the meteors had originated from a cloud of particles in space. Accounts of the 1866 repeat of the Leonids counted hundreds per minute/a few thousand per hour in Europe. The Leonids were again seen in 1867, when moonlight reduced the rates to 1,000 meteors per hour. Another strong appearance of the Leonids in 1868 reached an intensity of 1,000 meteors per hour in dark skies. It was in 1866\u201367 that information on Comet Tempel-Tuttle was gathered, pointing it out as the source of the meteor shower and meteor storms. When the storms failed to return in 1899, it was generally thought that the dust had moved on and the storms were a thing of the past.\n1900s.\nIn 1966, a spectacular meteor storm was seen over the Americas. Historical notes were gathered thus noting the Leonids back to 900\u00a0AD. Radar studies showed the 1966 storm included a relatively high percentage of smaller particles while 1965's lower activity had a much higher proportion of larger particles. In 1981 Donald K. Yeomans of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory reviewed the history of meteor showers for the Leonids and the history of the dynamic orbit of Comet Tempel-Tuttle. A graph from it was adapted and re-published in \"Sky and Telescope\". It showed relative positions of the Earth and Tempel-Tuttle and marks where Earth encountered dense dust. This showed that the meteoroids are mostly behind and outside the path of the comet, but paths of the Earth through the cloud of particles resulting in powerful storms were very near paths of nearly no activity. But overall the 1998 Leonids were in a favorable position so interest was rising.\nLeading up to the 1998 return, an airborne observing campaign was organized to mobilize modern observing techniques by Peter Jenniskens at NASA Ames Research Center. In 1999, there were also efforts to observe impacts of meteoroids on the Moon, as an example of transient lunar phenomenon. A particular reason to observe the Moon is that our vantage from a location on Earth sees only meteors coming into the atmosphere relatively close to us, while impacts on the Moon would be visible from across the Moon in a single view. The sodium tail of the Moon tripled just after the 1998 Leonid shower which was composed of larger meteoroids (which in the case of the Earth was witnessed as fireballs). However, in 1999 the sodium tail of the Moon did not change from the Leonid impacts.\nResearch by Kondrat'eva, Reznikov and colleagues at Kazan University had shown how meteor storms could be accurately predicted, but for some years the worldwide meteor community remained largely unaware of these results. The work of David J. Asher, Armagh Observatory and Robert H. McNaught, Siding Spring Observatory and independently by Esko Lyytinen in 1999, following on from the Kazan research, is considered by most meteor experts as the breakthrough in modern analysis of meteor storms. Whereas previously it was hazardous to guess if there would be a storm or little activity, the predictions of Asher and McNaught timed bursts in activity down to ten minutes by narrowing down the clouds of particles to individual streams from each passage of the comet, and their trajectories amended by subsequent passage near planets. However, whether a specific meteoroid trail will be primarily composed of small or large particles, and thus the relative brightness of the meteors, was not understood. But McNaught did extend the work to examine the placement of the Moon with trails and saw a large chance of a storm impacting in 1999 from a trail while there were less direct impacts from trails in 2000 and 2001 (successive contact with trails through 2006 showed no hits).\n2000s.\nViewing campaigns resulted in spectacular footage from the 1999, 2001, and 2002 storms which produced up to 3,000 Leonid meteors per hour. Predictions for the Moon's Leonid impacts also noted that in 2000 the side of the Moon facing the stream was away from the Earth, but that impacts should be in number enough to raise a cloud of particles kicked off the Moon which could cause a detectable increase in the sodium tail of the Moon. Research using the explanation of meteor trails/streams have explained the storms of the past. The 1833 storm was not due to the recent passage of the comet, but from a direct impact with the previous 1800 dust trail. The meteoroids from the 1733 passage of Comet Tempel-Tuttle resulted in the 1866 storm and the 1966 storm was from the 1899 passage of the comet. The double spikes in Leonid activity in 2001 and in 2002 were due to the passage of the comet's dust ejected in 1767 and 1866. This ground breaking work was soon applied to other meteor showers \u2013 for example the 2004 June Bootids. Peter Jenniskens has published predictions for the next 50 years. However, a close encounter with Jupiter is expected to perturb the comet's path, and many streams, making storms of historic magnitude unlikely for many decades. Recent work tries to take into account the roles of differences in parent bodies and the specifics of their orbits, ejection velocities off the solid mass of the core of a comet, radiation pressure from the Sun, the Poynting\u2013Robertson effect, and the Yarkovsky effect on the particles of different sizes and rates of rotation to explain differences between meteor showers in terms of being predominantly fireballs or small meteors.\nPredictions until the end of the 21st century have been published by Mikhail Maslov.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18384", "revid": "2292051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18384", "title": "Labarum", "text": "Roman military standard displaying XP for Christ\nThe labarum ( or \u03bb\u03ac\u03b2\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd) was a \"vexillum\" (military standard) that displayed the \"Chi-Rho\" symbol \u2627, a christogram formed from the first two Greek letters of the word \"Christ\" (, or \u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2) \u2013 \"Chi\" (\u03c7) and \"Rho\" (\u03c1). It was first used by the Roman emperor Constantine the Great.\nAncient sources draw an unambiguous distinction between the two terms \"labarum\" and \"Chi-Rho\", even though later usage sometimes regards the two as synonyms. The name labarum was applied both to the original standard used by Constantine the Great and to the many standards produced in imitation of it in the Late Antique world, and subsequently.\nEtymology.\nBeyond its derivation from Latin \"labarum\", the etymology of the word is unclear. The Oxford English Dictionary offers no further derivation from within Latin. Some derive it from Latin \"labare\" 'to totter, to waver' (in the sense of the \"waving\" of a flag in the breeze) or \"laureum [vexillum]\" (\"laurel standard\"). An origin as a loan into Latin from a Celtic language or Basque has also been postulated. There is a traditional Basque symbol called the lauburu; though the name is only attested from the 19th century onwards the motif occurs in engravings dating as early as the 2nd century AD.\nHarry Thurston Peck, in his \"Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities\", wrote: \"The etymology of the term itself has given rise to many conflicting opinions. Some derive the name from labor; others from \u03b5\u1f50\u03bb\u03ac\u03b2\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1, 'reverence'; others from \u03bb\u03b1\u03bc\u03b2\u03ac\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd, 'to take'; and others, again, from \u03bb\u03ac\u03c6\u03c5\u03c1\u03b1, 'spoils'. One writer makes Labarum to be like S.P.Q.R., only a notatio, or combination of initials to represent an equal number of terms; and thus, L.A.B.A.R.V.M. will stand for \"Legionum aquila Byzantium antiqua Roma urbe mutavit\".\"\nVision of Constantine.\nOn the evening of October 27, 312 AD, with his army preparing for the Battle of the Milvian Bridge, the emperor Constantine I claimed to have had a vision which led him to believe he was fighting under the protection of the Christian God.\nLactantius states that in the night before the battle Constantine was commanded in a dream to \"delineate the heavenly sign on the shields of his soldiers\". Obeying this command, \"he marked on their shields the letter X, with a perpendicular line drawn through it and turned round thus at the top, being the cipher of Christ\". Having had their shields marked in this fashion, Constantine's troops readied themselves for battle.\nFrom Eusebius, two accounts of a battle survive. The first, shorter one in the \"Ecclesiastical History\" leaves no doubt that God helped Constantine but does not mention any vision. In his later \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius gives a detailed account of a vision and stresses that he had heard the story from the emperor himself. According to this version, Constantine with his army was marching somewhere (Eusebius does not specify the actual location of the event, but it clearly is not in the camp at Rome) when he looked up to the sun and saw a cross of light above it, and with it the Greek words \"\u1f18\u03bd \u03a4\u03bf\u03cd\u03c4\u1ff3 \u039d\u03af\u03ba\u03b1\". The traditionally employed Latin translation of the Greek is \"in hoc signo vinces\"\u2014 literally \"In this sign, you will conquer.\" However, a direct translation from the original Greek text of Eusebius into English gives the phrase \"By this, conquer!\"\nAt first he was unsure of the meaning of the apparition, but the following night he had a dream in which Christ explained to him that he should use the sign against his enemies. Eusebius then continues to describe the labarum, the military standard used by Constantine in his later wars against Licinius, showing the Chi Rho sign.\nThose two accounts have been merged in popular notion into Constantine seeing the Chi-Rho sign on the evening before the battle. Both authors agree that the sign was not readily understandable as denoting Christ, which corresponds with the fact that there is no certain evidence of the use of the letters chi and rho as a Christian sign before Constantine. Its first appearance is on a Constantinian silver coin from c. 317, which proves that Constantine did use the sign at that time. He made extensive use of the Chi-Rho and the labarum later in the conflict with Licinius.\nThe vision has been interpreted in a solar context (e.g., as a sun dog phenomenon), which would have been reshaped to fit with the Christian beliefs of the later Constantine.\nAn alternate explanation of the intersecting celestial symbol has been advanced by George Latura, which claims that Plato's visible god in \"Timaeus\" is in fact the intersection of the Milky Way and the zodiacal light, a rare apparition important to pagan beliefs that Christian bishops reinvented as a Christian symbol.\nEusebius' description of the labarum.\n\"A Description of the Standard of the Cross, which the Romans now call the Labarum.\"\n\"Now it was made in the following manner. A long spear, overlaid with gold, formed the figure of the cross by means of a transverse bar laid over it. On the top of the whole was fixed a wreath of gold and precious stones; and within this, the symbol of the Saviour\u2019s name, two letters indicating the name of Christ by means of its initial characters, the letter P being intersected by X in its centre: and these letters the emperor was in the habit of wearing on his helmet at a later period. From the cross-bar of the spear was suspended a cloth, a royal piece, covered with a profuse embroidery of most brilliant precious stones; and which, being also richly interlaced with gold, presented an indescribable degree of beauty to the beholder. This banner was of a square form, and the upright staff, whose lower section was of great length, of the pious emperor and his children on its upper part, beneath the trophy of the cross, and immediately above the embroidered banner.\"\n\"The emperor constantly made use of this sign of salvation as a safeguard against every adverse and hostile power, and commanded that others similar to it should be carried at the head of all his armies.\"\nIconographic career under Constantine.\nThe labarum does not appear on any of several standards depicted on the Arch of Constantine, which was erected just three years after the battle. If Eusebius' oath-confirmed account of Constantine's vision and the role it played in his victory and conversion can be trusted, then a grand opportunity for the kind of political propaganda that the Arch was built to present was missed. Many historians have argued that in the early years after the battle, the Emperor had not yet decided to give clear public support to Christianity, whether from a lack of personal faith or because of fear of religious friction. The arch's inscription does say that the Emperor had saved the \"res publica\" (\"by greatness of mind and by instinct [or impulse] of divinity\"). Continuing the iconography of his predecessors, Constantine's coinage at the time was inscribed with solar symbolism, interpreted as representing \"Sol Invictus\" (the Unconquered Sun), Helios, Apollo, or Mithras, but in 325 and thereafter the coinage ceases to be explicitly pagan, and Sol Invictus disappears. And although Eusebius' \"Historia Ecclesiae\" further reports that Constantine had a statue of himself \"holding the sign of the Savior [the cross] in his right hand\" erected after his victorious entry into Rome, there are no other reports to confirm such a monument.\nHistorians still dispute whether Constantine was the first Christian Emperor to support a peaceful transition to Christianity during his rule, or an undecided pagan believer until middle age, and also how strongly influenced he was in his political-religious decisions by his Christian mother St. Helena.\nAs for the labarum itself, there is little evidence for its use before 317. In the course of Constantine's second war against Licinius in 324, the latter developed a superstitious dread of Constantine's standard. During the attack of Constantine's troops at the Battle of Adrianople the guard of the labarum standard were directed to move it to any part of the field where his soldiers seemed to be faltering. The appearance of this talismanic object appeared to embolden Constantine's troops and dismay those of Licinius. At the final battle of the war, the Battle of Chrysopolis, Licinius, though prominently displaying the images of Rome's pagan pantheon on his own battle line, forbade his troops from actively attacking the labarum, or even looking at it directly.\nConstantine felt that both Licinius and Arius were agents of Satan, and associated them with the serpent described in the Book of Revelation (). Constantine represented Licinius as a snake on his coins.\nEusebius stated that in addition to the singular labarum of Constantine, other similar standards (labara) were issued to the Roman army. This is confirmed by the two labara depicted being held by a soldier on a coin of Vetranio (illustrated) dating from 350.\nLater usage.\nA later Byzantine manuscript indicates that a jewelled labarum standard believed to have been that of Constantine was preserved for centuries, as an object of great veneration, in the imperial treasury at Constantinople. The labarum, with minor variations in its form, was widely used by the Christian Roman emperors who followed Constantine.\nA miniature version of the labarum became part of the imperial regalia of Byzantine rulers, who were often depicted carrying it in their right hands.\nThe term \"labarum\" can be generally applied to any ecclesiastical banner, such as those carried in religious processions.\n\"The Holy Lavaro\" were a set of early national Greek flags, blessed by the Greek Orthodox Church. Under these banners the Greeks united throughout the Greek Revolution (1821), a war of liberation waged against the Ottoman Empire.\nLabarum also gives its name (Labaro) to a suburb of Rome adjacent to Prima Porta, one of the sites where the 'Vision of Constantine' is placed by tradition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18385", "revid": "36761066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18385", "title": "Lactantius", "text": "Roman Christian author (c. 250 \u2013 c. 325)\nLucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius (c.\u2009250\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009325) was an early Christian author who became an advisor to Roman emperor Constantine I, guiding his Christian religious policy in its initial stages of emergence, and a tutor to his son Crispus. His most important work is the \"Institutiones Divinae\" (\"The Divine Institutes\"), an apologetic treatise intended to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity to pagan critics.\nHe is best known for his apologetic works, widely read during the Renaissance by humanists, who called Lactantius the \"Christian Cicero\". Also often attributed to Lactantius is the poem \"The Phoenix\", which is based on the myth of the phoenix from Egypt and Arabia. Though the poem is not clearly Christian in its motifs, modern scholars have found some literary evidence in the text to suggest the author had a Christian interpretation of the eastern myth as a symbol of resurrection.\nBiography.\nLactantius was of Punic or Berber origin, born into a family that had not converted to Christianity. He was a pupil of Arnobius who taught at Sicca Veneria, an important city in Numidia (corresponding to today's city of El Kef in Tunisia). In his early life, he taught rhetoric in his native town, which may have been Cirta in Numidia, where an inscription mentions a certain \"L. Caecilius Firmianus\".\nLactantius had a successful public career at first. At the request of the Roman emperor Diocletian, he became an official professor of rhetoric in Nicomedia; the voyage from Africa is described in his poem \"Hodoeporicum\" (now lost). There, he associated in the imperial circle with the administrator and polemicist Sossianus Hierocles and the Neoplatonic philosopher Porphyry; he first met Constantine, and Galerius, whom he cast as villain in the persecutions. Having converted to Christianity, he resigned his post before Diocletian's purging of Christians from his immediate staff and before the publication of Diocletian's first \"Edict against the Christians\" (February 24, 303).\nAs a Latin \"rhetor\" in a Greek city, he subsequently lived in poverty according to Saint Jerome and eked out a living by writing until Constantine I became his patron. The persecution forced him to leave Nicomedia, perhaps re-locating to North Africa. The emperor Constantine appointed the elderly Lactantius Latin tutor to his son Crispus in 309\u2013310 who was probably 10\u201315 years old at the time. Lactantius followed Crispus to Trier in 317, when Crispus was made Caesar (subordinate co-emperor) and sent to the city. Crispus was put to death by order of his father Constantine I in 326. The time and circumstances of Lactantius's death are unknown.\nWorks.\nLike many of the early Christian authors, Lactantius depended on classical models. Saint Jerome praised his writing style while faulting his ability as a Christian apologist, saying: \"Lactantius has a flow of eloquence worthy of Tully: would that he had been as ready to teach our doctrines as to pull down those of others!\" Similarly, the early humanists called him the \"Christian Cicero\" (\"Cicero Christianus\"). A translator of the \"Divine Institutes\" wrote: \"Lactantius has always held a very high place among the Christian Fathers, not only on account of the subject-matter of his writings, but also on account of the varied erudition, the sweetness of expression, and the grace and elegance of style, by which they are characterized.\"\nProphetic exegesis.\nLike many writers in the first few centuries of the early church, Lactantius took a premillennialist view, holding that the second coming of Christ will precede a millennium or a thousand-year reign of Christ on earth. According to Charles E. Hill, \"With Lactantius in the early fourth century we see a determined attempt to revive a more 'genuine' form of chiliasm.\" Lactantius quoted the Sibyls extensively (although the Sibylline Oracles are now considered to be pseudepigrapha). Book VII of \"The Divine Institutes\" indicates a familiarity with Jewish, Christian, Egyptian and Iranian apocalyptic material.\nAttempts to determine the time of the End were viewed as in contradiction to Acts 1:7: \"It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has established by his own authority,\" and Mark 13:32: \"But of that day or hour, no one knows, neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.\"\nApologetics.\nHe wrote apologetic works explaining Christianity in terms that would be palatable to educated people who still practiced the traditional religions of the Empire. He defended Christian beliefs against the criticisms of Hellenistic philosophers. His \"Divinae Institutiones\" (\"Divine Institutes\") were an early example of a systematic presentation of Christian thought.\nLater heritage.\nFor unclear reasons, he became considered somewhat heretical after his death. The Gelasian Decree of the 6th century condemns his work as apocryphal and not to be read. Renaissance humanists took a renewed interest in him, more for his elaborately rhetorical Latin style than for his theology. His works were copied in manuscript several times in the 15th century and were first printed in 1465 by the Germans Arnold Pannartz and Konrad Sweynheim at the Abbey of Subiaco. This edition was the first book printed in Italy to have a date of printing, as well as the first use of a Greek alphabet font anywhere, which was apparently produced in the course of printing, as the early pages leave Greek text blank. It was probably the fourth book ever printed in Italy. A copy of this edition was sold at auction in 2000 for more than $1 million.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18386", "revid": "50948702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18386", "title": "Laconia", "text": "Historic and administrative region of Greece\nLaconia or Lakonia (, , ) is a historical and administrative region of Greece located on the southeastern part of the Peloponnese peninsula. Its administrative capital is Sparta. The word \"laconic\"\u2014to speak in a blunt, concise way\u2014is probably derived from the name of this region, a reference to the ancient Spartans who were renowned for their verbal austerity and blunt, often pithy remarks.\nGeography.\nLaconia is bordered by Messenia to the west and Arcadia to the north and is surrounded by the Myrtoan Sea to the east and by the Laconian Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. It encompasses Cape Malea and Cape Tainaron and a large part of the Mani Peninsula. The Mani Peninsula is in the west region of Laconia. The islands of Kythira and Antikythera lie to the south, but they administratively belong to the Attica regional unit of islands. The island Elafonisos, situated between the Laconian mainland and Kythira, is part of Laconia.\nThe Evrotas is the longest river in the prefecture. The Evrotas Valley is predominantly an agricultural region that contains many citrus groves, olive groves, and pasture lands. It is the location of the largest orange production in the Peloponnese and probably in all of Greece. \"Lakonia\", a brand of orange juice, is based in Amykles.\nThe main mountain ranges are the Taygetus in the west and the Parnon in the northeast. Taygetus, known as Pentadaktylos (\"five-fingers\") throughout the Middle Ages, is west of Sparta and the Evrotas Valley. It is the highest mountain in Laconia and the Peloponnese and is mostly covered with pine trees. Two roads join the Messenia and Laconia prefectures: one is a tortuous mountain pass through Taygetus and the other bypasses the mountain via the Mani district to the south.\nThe stalactite cave, Dirou, a major tourist attraction, is located south of Areopolis in the southwest of Laconia.\nClimate.\nThe city of Sparta enjoys a sunny and warm Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"). January highs are around while July and August highs are around in the city proper. Sparta records the highest summer average maximum temperatures in Greece. In July 2012 the city registered an average maximum temperature of , making it Greece's second highest monthly average maximum temperature to date after the recorded in Stylida in July 2023. The highest temperature ever recorded in Sparta is in August 2021. On average, Sparta records 5 days per year with temperatures of over .\nHistory.\nAncient.\nEvidence of Neolithic settlement in southern Laconia has been found during excavations of the Alepotrypa cave site. Significant archaeological recovery exists at the Vaphio-tomb site in Laconia. Found there is advanced Bronze Age art as well as evidence of cultural associations with the contemporaneous Minoan culture on Crete. At the end of the Mycenean period, the population of Laconia sharply declined. In classical Greece, Laconia was Spartan territory but from the 4th century BC onward Sparta lost control of various ports, towns and areas. From the mid-2nd century BC until 395 AD, Laconia was a part of the Roman Empire.\nMedieval.\nIn the medieval period, Laconia formed part of the Byzantine Empire. In the 7th century, Slavic tribes settled in the Peloponnese. Two of them, the Melingoi and the Ezeritai, who settled in parts of Laconia, survived the subsequent Byzantine reconquest and re-Hellenization of the Peloponnese, and are attested until the late Middle Ages.\nFollowing the Fourth Crusade, Laconia was gradually conquered by the Frankish Principality of Achaea. In the 1260s, the Byzantines recovered Mystras and other fortresses in the region and managed to evict the Franks from Laconia, which became the nucleus of a new Byzantine province. By the mid-14th century, this evolved into the Despotate of the Morea, held by the last Greek ruling dynasty, the Palaiologoi. The capital of the Despotate, Mystras, was a major site of the Palaiologan Renaissance, the last flowering of Byzantine culture. With the fall of the Despotate to the Ottomans in 1460, Laconia was conquered as well.\nModern.\nWith the exception of a 30-year interval of Venetian rule, Laconia remained under Ottoman control until the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence of 1821. Following independence, Sparta was selected as the capital of the modern prefecture, and its economy and agriculture expanded. With the incorporation of the British-ruled Ionian Islands into Greece in 1864, Elafonissos became part of the prefecture. After World War II and the Greek Civil War, its population began to somewhat decline, as people moved from the villages toward the larger cities of Greece and abroad.\nIn 1992, a devastating fire ruined the finest olive crops in the northern part of the prefecture, and affected the area of Sellasia along with Oinountas and its surrounding areas. Firefighters, helicopters and planes battled for days to put out the horrific fire.\nIn early 2006, flooding ruined olive and citrus crops as well as properties and villages along the Eurotas river. In the summer 2006, a fire devastated a part of the Mani Peninsula, ruining forests, crops, and numerous villages.\nMunicipalities.\nThe regional unit, Laconia, is subdivided into five municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox):\nPrefecture.\nAs a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, regional unit Laconia was created out of the former prefecture Laconia (). The prefecture had the same territory as the present regional unit. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below.\nProvinces.\n\"Note:\" Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe main cities and towns of Laconia are (ranked by 2021 census population):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18387", "revid": "42425010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18387", "title": "Lanista", "text": "Genus of cricket-like animals\nLanista is a genus of African bush-crickets (Orthoptera: Tettigoniidae) in the subfamily Conocephalinae.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18388", "revid": "1318871616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18388", "title": "Laoco\u00f6n", "text": "Trojan priest in Greek and Roman mythology\nLaoco\u00f6n (; , , gen.: ) is a figure in Greek and Roman mythology and the Epic Cycle. \nLaoco\u00f6n is a Trojan priest. He and his two young sons were attacked by giant serpents sent by the gods when Laoco\u00f6n argued against bringing the Trojan horse into the city. The story of Laoco\u00f6n has been the subject of numerous artists, both in ancient and in more contemporary times.\nFamily.\nLaoco\u00f6n was variously called as the son of Acoetes, Antenor or Poseidon; or the son of Priam and Hecuba. He had two sons.\nDeath.\nThe most detailed description of Laoco\u00f6n's grisly fate was provided by Quintus Smyrnaeus in \"Posthomerica\", a later, literary version of events following the \"Iliad\". According to Quintus, Laoco\u00f6n begged the Trojans to set fire to the Trojan horse to ensure it was not a trick.\nAthena, angry with him and the Trojans, shook the ground around Laoco\u00f6n's feet and painfully blinded him. The Trojans, watching this unfold, assumed Laoco\u00f6n was punished for the Trojans' mutilating and doubting Sinon, the undercover Greek soldier sent to convince the Trojans to let him and the horse inside their city walls. Thus, the Trojans wheeled the great wooden horse in. Laoco\u00f6n did not give up trying to convince the Trojans to burn the horse.\nAccording to one source, it was Athena who punished Laoco\u00f6n even further, by sending two giant sea serpents to strangle and kill him and his two sons. Another version of the story says that it was Poseidon who sent the sea serpents to kill them. And according to Apollodorus, it was Apollo who sent the two sea serpents, because Laoco\u00f6n had insulted Apollo by having sex with his wife in front of his cult statue.\nVirgil used the story in the \"Aeneid\". According to Virgil, Laoco\u00f6n advised the Trojans not to receive the horse from the Greeks. They were taken in by the deceitful testimony of Sinon and disregarded Laoco\u00f6n's advice. The enraged Laoco\u00f6n threw his spear at the Horse in response.\nMinerva then sent sea serpents to strangle Laoco\u00f6n and his two sons, Antiphantes and Thymbraeus, for his actions.\n \"Laoco\u00f6n, ostensibly sacrificing a bull to Neptune on behalf of the city (lines\u00a0201\u202fff.), becomes himself the tragic victim, as the simile (lines\u00a0223\u2013224) makes clear. In some sense, his death must be symbolic of the city as a whole\u00a0...\" \u2014 S.V. Tracy (1987)(p453)\nAccording to the Hellenistic poet Euphorion of Chalcis, Laoco\u00f6n was \"actually\" punished for procreating upon holy ground sacred to Poseidon; it was only unlucky timing that caused the Trojans to misinterpret his death as punishment for striking the horse with a spear, which they bring into the city with disastrous consequences.\nThe episode furnished the subject of Sophocles' lost tragedy, \"Laoco\u00f6n\".\nIn \"Aeneid\", Virgil describes the circumstances of Laoco\u00f6n's death:\nClassical descriptions.\nThe story of Laoco\u00f6n is not mentioned by Homer, but it had been the subject of a tragedy, now lost, by Sophocles and was mentioned by other Greek writers, though the events around the attack by the serpents vary considerably. The most famous account of these is now in Virgil's \"Aeneid\" where Laoco\u00f6n was a priest of Neptune (Poseidon), who was killed with both his sons after attempting to expose the ruse of the Trojan Horse by striking it with a spear.\nVirgil gives Laoco\u00f6n the famous line\n \"Equ\u014d n\u0113 cr\u0113dite, Teucr\u012b / Quidquid id est, time\u014d Dana\u014ds et d\u014dna ferent\u0113s\"\n [Do not trust the Horse, Trojans / Whatever it is, I fear the Greeks even bearing gifts.]\nThis quote is the source of the saying: \"Beware of Greeks bearing gifts.\"\nIn Sophocles, however, he was a priest of Apollo who should have been celibate, but had married. The serpents killed only the two sons, leaving Laoco\u00f6n himself alive to suffer. In other versions, he was killed for having committed an impiety by making love with his wife in the presence of a cult image in a sanctuary, or simply making a sacrifice in the temple with his wife present. In this second group of versions, the snakes were sent by Poseidon and in the first by Poseidon and Athena, or Apollo, and the deaths were interpreted by the Trojans as proof that the horse was a sacred object. The two versions have rather different morals: Laoco\u00f6n was either punished for doing wrong, or for being right.\nLater depictions.\nThe death of Laoco\u00f6n was famously depicted in a much-admired marble \"Laoco\u00f6n and His Sons\", attributed by Pliny the Elder to the Rhodian sculptors Agesander, Athenodoros, and Polydorus, which stands in the Vatican Museums, Rome. Copies have been executed by various artists, notably Baccio Bandinelli. These show the complete sculpture (with conjectural reconstructions of the missing pieces) and are located in Rhodes, at the Palace of the Grand Master of the Knights of Rhodes, Rome, the Uffizi Gallery in Florence and in front of the Archaeological Museum, Odesa, Ukraine, amongst others. Alexander Calder also designed a stabile which he called Laoco\u00f6n in 1947; it's in the collection of The Broad museum in Los Angeles.\nThe marble Laoco\u00f6n provided the central image for Lessing's \"Laoco\u00f6n\", 1766, an aesthetic polemic directed against Winckelmann and the comte de Caylus. Daniel Albright reengages the role of the figure of Laoco\u00f6n in aesthetic thought in his book \"Untwisting the Serpent: Modernism in Literature, Music, and Other Arts\".\nIn Hector Berlioz's 1863 opera \"Les Troyens\", the death of Laoco\u00f6n is a pivotal moment of the first act after Aeneas' entrance, sung by eight singers and a double choir (\"ottetto et double ch\u0153ur\"). It begins with the verse \"Ch\u00e2timent effroyable\" (\"frightful punishment\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nClassical sources.\nCompiled by Tracy,(p452, note\u00a03) which includes a fragmentary line possibly by Nicander:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18389", "revid": "50620178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18389", "title": "Limburg an der Lahn", "text": "Limburg an der Lahn (, lit.\u2009'Limburg on the Lahn'; officially abbreviated \"Limburg a. d. Lahn\") is the district seat of Limburg-Weilburg in Hesse, Germany.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nLimburg lies in western Hessen between the Taunus and the Westerwald on the river Lahn.\nThe town lies roughly centrally in a basin within the Rhenish Slate Mountains which is surrounded by the low ranges of the Taunus and Westerwald and called the Limburg Basin (\"Limburger Becken\"). Owing to the favourable soil and climate, the Limburg Basin stands as one of Hesse's richest agricultural regions and moreover, with its convenient Lahn crossing, it has been of great importance to transport since the Middle Ages. Within the basin, the Lahn's otherwise rather narrow lower valley broadens out noticeably, making Limburg's mean elevation only 117\u00a0m above sea level.\nNeighbouring communities.\nLimburg forms, together with the town of Diez, a middle centre (in terms of Central place theory) but partially functions as an upper centre to western Middle Hesse.\nLimburg's residential neighbourhoods reach beyond the town limits; the neighbouring centres of Elz and Diez run seamlessly together.\nSurrounding towns and communities are the community of Elz and the town of Hadamar in the north, the community of Beselich in the northeast, the town of Runkel in the east, the communities of Villmar and Brechen in the southeast, the community of H\u00fcnfelden in the south (all in Limburg-Weilburg), the community of Holzheim in the southwest, and the town of Diez and the communities of Aull and G\u00fcckingen in the west (all in the Rhein-Lahn-Kreis in Rhineland-Palatinate).\nThe nearest major cities are Wetzlar and Gie\u00dfen to the north east, Wiesbaden and Frankfurt to the south and Koblenz to the west.\nConstituent communities.\nThe town consists of eight formerly autonomous \"Ortsbezirke\" or boroughs, listed here by population (as of 2020):\nEach \"Ortsbezirk\" is represented by a council. Blumenrod is also often called a constituent community, although this is actually only a big residential neighbourhood in the main town's south end. Its landmark is the \"Dom\u00e4ne Blumenrod\", a former manor house that has been restored and remodelled by the Limburg Free Evangelical community.\nLimburg's biggest outlying centre is Lindenholzhausen (3,315 residents as of June 2020); the second biggest is Linter.\nEtymology.\nThe derivation of the name \"Limburg\" is not quite clear and may well derive from a local castle (\"Burg\" means \"castle\" in German). In 910 the town was first mentioned as \"Lintpurc\". Two of the popular theories are:\nHistory.\nAbout 800 A.D., the first castle buildings arose on the Limburg crags. This was probably designed for the protection of a ford over the river Lahn. In the decades that followed, the town developed under the castle's protection. Limburg is first mentioned in documents in 910 under the name of \"Lintpurc\" when Louis the Child granted Konrad Kurzbold an estate in the community on which he was to build a church. Konrad Kurzbold laid the foundation stone for Saint George's Monastery Church, where he was also buried. The community soon increased in importance with the monastery's founding and profited from the lively goods trade on the \"Via Publica\".\nIn 1150, a wooden bridge was built across the Lahn. The long-distance road from Cologne to Frankfurt am Main subsequently ran through Limburg. In the early 13th century, Limburg Castle was built in its current form. Shortly afterwards, the town passed into the ownership of the Lords of Ysenburg. In 1214, the community was granted town rights. Remains of the fortification wall from the years 1130, 1230 and 1340 with a maximum length of roughly one thousand metres indicate to this day the blossoming town's quick development in the Middle Ages. There is proof of a mint in Limburg in 1180.\nOne line of the Lords of Ysenburg resided from 1258 to 1406 at Limburg Castle and took their name from their seat, Limburg. From this line came the House of Limburg-Stirum and also Imagina of Isenburg-Limburg, the wife of the German King Adolf.\nThe ruling class among the mediaeval townsfolk were rich merchant families whose houses stood right near the castle tower and were surrounded by the first town wall once it was built. The area of today's Rossmarkt (\"Horse Market\"), in which many simple craftsmen lived, was only brought within the fortifications once the second town wall was built. The inhabitants there, however, unlike the merchant \u00e9lite, were accorded no entitlement to a voice in town affairs and were not allowed to send representatives to the town council. Nevertheless, they had to bear the main financial burden of running the town. Only in 1458 were they allowed to send two representatives to town council.\nSaint George's Cathedral (\"Sankt-Georgs-Dom\") built on the old monastery church's site, and also called \"Georgsdom\", was consecrated in 1235. On 14 May 1289, a devastating fire wiped out great parts of the inner town, although these were subsequently rebuilt. One of the houses built at that time was the R\u00f6mer 2-4-6, which is today one of Germany's oldest half-timbered houses. In 1337, Limburg's Jews were expelled from the town. Only in 1341 were they once again able to settle in the town, by royal decree. In 1344 a half share of the town was pledged to the Electorate of Trier, and in 1420, the town passed wholly into the ownership of Trier. This event, along with another town fire in 1342, the Black Death in 1349, 1356 and 1365, but above all the rise of the Territorial Princes, led to a gradual decline. In 1315 and 1346, the old stone Lahn Bridge was built (presumably in two sections).\nAgainst the background of the German Peasants' War, unrest also arose among the townsfolk in 1525. After the Elector of Trier had demanded that the townsmen turn a Lutheran preacher out of the town, a board made up of townsmen who were ineligible for council functions handed the council a 30-point comprehensive list of demands on 24 May. It dealt mainly with financial participation and equality in taxation, trade and building issues with the merchant class. In the days that followed, these demands were reduced in negotiations between the council and the board to 16 points, which were likely also taken up with the Elector afterwards. On 5 August, however, Archbishop Richard ordered the council to overturn all concessions to the townsmen. Furthermore, a ban on assembly was decreed, and the ineligible townsmen were stripped of their right to send two representatives to council.\nIn 1806, Limburg came into the possession of the newly founded Duchy of Nassau. In 1818 the town wall was torn down. In 1827 the town was raised to a Catholic episcopal seat. In 1866 the Duchy and with it Limburg passed to Prussia in the wake of the Austro-Prussian War. As of 1862, Limburg became a railway hub and from 1886 a district seat. In 1892, the Pallottines settled in town, but only the men; the women came in 1895.\nDuring World War I there was a major prisoner of war camp at Limburg an der Lahn. Many Irish members of the British Army were interned there until the end of the war and at one stage they were visited by the Irish republican leader Roger Casement in an attempt to win recruits for the forthcoming Irish rebellion.\nFrom 1919 to 1923, Limburg was the \"capital\" of a short-lived state called Free State Bottleneck (or \"Freistaat Flaschenhals\" in German) because during the Allied occupation of the Rhineland it was effectively cut off from the Weimar Republic in an area the shape of a bottle's neck and subsequently separated from its administration.\nIn August 1939, shortly before the German invasion of Poland and start of World War II, the German Army established the Dulag G prisoner-of-war camp for Polish POWs in the town. The camp was dissolved in January 1941.\nPolitics.\nTown council.\nThe municipal election held on 6 March 2016 yielded the following results:\nMayor.\nThe town's mayor is currently Marius Hahn (SPD).\nSponsorship.\nIn 1956, a sponsorship was undertaken for Sudeten Germans driven out of the town of Uni\u010dov, Czech Republic.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nTransport.\nLimburg is a traditional transportation hub. Already in the Middle Ages, the \"Via Publica\" crossed the navigable Lahn here. Today the A\u00a03 (Emmerich\u2013Oberhausen\u2013Cologne\u2013Frankfurt\u2013Nuremberg\u2013Passau) and \"Bundesstra\u00dfe\" 8, which both follow the \"Via Publica's\" alignment as closely as possible, run through the town. \"Bundesstra\u00dfe\" 49 links Limburg to Koblenz towards the west and Wetzlar and Gie\u00dfen towards the east. The section between Limburg and Wetzlar is currently being widened to four lanes. This section as far as Obertiefenbach is also known as \"Die lange Meil\" (\"The Long Mile\"). \"Bundesstra\u00dfe\" 54 links Limburg on the one hand with Siegen to the north and on the other by way of Diez with Wiesbaden, which may likewise be reached over \"Bundesstra\u00dfe\" 417 (\"H\u00fchnerstra\u00dfe\").\nAs early as 1248, a wooden bridge spanned the Lahn, but was replaced after the flooding in 1306 by a stone bridge, the \"Alte Lahnbr\u00fccke\". Other road bridges are the \"Lahntalbr\u00fccke Limburg\" (1964) on the A\u00a03, the \"Lahnbr\u00fccke\" near Staffel and the \"Neue Lahnbr\u00fccke\" from 1968, over which run the \"Bundesstra\u00dfen\" before they cross under the inner town through the \"Schiedetunnel\", a bypass tunnel.\nOnce the \"Lahntalbahn\" had been built, Limburg was joined to the railway network in 1862. Limburg railway station developed into a transport hub. Eschhofen station is also in Limburg. Other railway lines are the \"Unterwesterwaldbahn\", the \"Oberwesterwaldbahn\" and the Main-Lahn Railway. At Niedernhausen station on the \"Main-Lahn Railway\", transfer to the \"L\u00e4ndchesbahn\" to Wiesbaden is possible. With the exception of the upper section of the \"Lahntalbahn\" and express lines to Koblenz and Frankfurt, which are still served by Deutsche Bahn, all railway lines are run by Vectus Verkehrsgesellschaft mbH, based in Limburg.\nOnce the InterCityExpress Cologne-Frankfurt high-speed rail line had been built, Limburg acquired an ICE station. It is the only railway station in Germany at which exclusively ICE trains stop. The high-speed rail line crosses the Lahn over the \"Lahntalbr\u00fccke\" and then dives into the \"Limburger Tunnel\".\nThe nearest airport is Frankfurt Airport, 63\u00a0km away on the A\u00a03. Travel time there on the ICE is roughly 20 minutes. Cologne Bonn Airport is 110\u00a0km away and can be reached on the ICE in 44 minutes.\nThe Lahn between Lahnstein and Wetzlar is a \"Bundeswasserstra\u00dfe\" (\"Federal waterway\"). Since the \"Lahntalbahn's\" expansion, however, the waterway's importance has been declining. It is used mainly by tourists with small motorboats, canoes and rowboats. Limburg is the landing site of the tourboat \"Wappen von Limburg\".\nPublic institutions.\nEducation.\nLimburg has four schools which lead to, among other qualifications, the Abitur:\nProfessional training schools:\nHauptschulen and Realschulen:\nLibraries:\nSt. Vincenz Hospital.\nThe hospital perched on the Schafsberg overlooking the town has at its disposal 433 beds and 15 specialist departments.\nSport and leisure.\nIn Limburg there are various sport clubs; some are even represented in \"Bundesligen\", and even at the world level.\nYouth meeting place in Limburg.\nThe Evangelical Church offers with its \"Jugendfreizeitst\u00e4tte Limburg\" (JFS for short, meaning \"Youth Leisure Place\") a meeting place for youth with many events. With table football, Internet caf\u00e9 and many events, this institution is not only church-based, with two staff and a \"Zivildienstleistender\" supporting the visitors not only with their problems.\nLimburg Mothers' Centre.\nThe \"M\u00fctterzentrum Limburg\" is a family meeting place for those with or without children on Hospitalstra\u00dfe. The club is supported by the town of Limburg and the \"Bundesland\" of Hesse and offers among other things a parents' service that looks after children, a broad array of course offerings for children and adults, a miniature kindergarten and a caf\u00e9.\nCulture and sightseeing.\nPerformers.\nThe cabaret troupe \"Thing\", founded more than 25 years ago, moved after a short time from its initial home in the outlying centre of Staffel to the Josef-Kohlmaier-Halle, a civic event hall, where its stage can now be found in the hall's club rooms. The troupe is run by an independent acting club. On the programme are chanson, cabaret, literature and jazz as well as folk, Rock and performances by singer-songwriters. It makes a point of furthering young artists. Each month, three or four events are staged.\nThe dedication of \"Thing\" was recognized on 6 December 2003 when the \"Kulturpreis Mittelhessen\" (\"Middle Hesse Culture Prize\") was awarded to it.\nLimburg Cathedral has a famous boys' choir, the Limburger Domsingknaben, which trains at Musical Boarding School in Hadamar, and an excellent girls' choir, the M\u00e4dchenkantorei Limburg, both singing at the Limburg Cathedral and internationally.\nMuseums.\nIn Limburg there are several museums. The most important are:\nBuildings.\nOnly a few towns, like Limburg, have been able to keep a full set of nearly unscathed mediaeval buildings. The formerly walled town core between St. George's Cathedral, Grabenstra\u00dfe (a street marking the old town moat) and the 600-year-old Lahn Bridge thus stands today as a whole under monumental protection.\nThe \"Altstadt\" (\"Old Town\") has a fine cathedral and is full of narrow streets with timber-frame houses, dating mainly from the 17th and 18th centuries; hence the name the German Timber-Frame Road.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nLimburg an der Lahn is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "18390", "revid": "35184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18390", "title": "Lavrentiy Beria", "text": "Soviet secret police chief (1899\u20131953)\nLavrentiy Pavlovich Beria (29 March\u00a0[O.S. 17 March]\u00a01899\u00a0\u2013 23 December 1953) was a Soviet politician and one of the longest-serving and most influential of Joseph Stalin's secret police chiefs, serving as head of the NKVD from 1938 to 1946, during the country's involvement in the Second World War.\nAn ethnic Georgian, Beria enlisted in the Cheka in 1920, and quickly rose through its ranks. He transferred to Communist Party work in the Caucasus in the 1930s, and in 1938 was appointed head of the NKVD by Stalin. His ascent marked the end of the Stalinist Great Purge carried out by Nikolai Yezhov, whom Beria purged. After the Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939, Beria organized the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers and intelligentsia, and after the occupation of the Baltic states and parts of Romania in 1940, he oversaw the deportations of hundreds of thousands of Poles, Balts, and Romanians to remote areas or Gulag camps. In 1940, Beria began a new purge of the Red Army. After Operation Barbarossa, the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, he was appointed to the State Defense Committee, overseeing security.\nBeria expanded the system of forced labour, mobilizing millions of Gulag prisoners into wartime production. He also was in charge of NKVD units responsible for barrier and partisan intelligence and sabotage operations on the Eastern Front. In 1943\u201344, Beria oversaw the mass deportations of millions of ethnic minorities from the Caucasus, actions which have been described by many scholars as ethnic cleansing or genocide. Beria was also responsible for supervising secret Gulag detention facilities for scientists and engineers, known as . From 1945, he oversaw the Soviet atomic bomb project, to which Stalin gave priority; the project's first nuclear device was completed in 1949. After the war, Beria was made a Marshal of the Soviet Union in 1945, and promoted to a full member of the Politburo in 1946.\nAfter Stalin's death in March 1953, Beria became head of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and a First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. He also formed a troika alongside Georgy Malenkov and Vyacheslav Molotov which briefly led the country in Stalin's place. However, by June 1953, Beria was removed from power in a coup organized with the support of his colleagues in the Soviet leadership and Marshal Georgy Zhukov. He was arrested, tried for treason and other offenses, and ultimately executed on 23 December 1953.\nEarly life and rise to power.\nLavrentiy Pavlovich Beria was born in Merkheuli, near Sukhumi, in the Sukhum Okrug of the Kutais Governorate (now Gulripshi District, Abkhazia, Georgia, then part of the Russian Empire). He grew up in a Georgian Orthodox family; his mother, Marta Jaqeli (1868\u20131955), was deeply religious and church-going. Marta was from the Guria region, descended from a noble Georgian family, and was a widow before marrying Beria's father, Pavle Beria (1872\u20131922), a landowner in Sukhumi Okrug, from the Mingrelian ethnic group.\nBeria attended a technical school in Sukhumi, and later claimed to have joined the Bolsheviks in March 1917 while a student in the Baku Polytechnicum (subsequently known as the Azerbaijan State Oil Academy). Beria had earlier worked for the anti-Bolshevik Mussavatists in Baku. After the Red Army captured the city on 28 April 1920, he was saved from execution because there was not enough time to arrange his shooting and replacement; it may also have been that Sergei Kirov intervened. While in prison, Beria formed a connection with Nina Gegechkori (1905\u20131991), his cellmate's niece, and they eloped on a train.\nIn 1919, at the age of 20, Beria started his career in state security when the security service of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic hired him while he was still a student at the Polytechnicum. In 1920, he was enlisted in the Cheka, the original Bolshevik secret police, by Mir Jafar Baghirov. At that time, a Bolshevik revolt took place in the Menshevik-controlled Democratic Republic of Georgia, and the Red Army subsequently invaded. The Cheka became heavily involved in the conflict, which resulted in the defeat of the Mensheviks and the formation of the Georgian SSR. Between 1922 and 1924, Beria was deputy chairman of the Georgian OGPU (as Cheka had been renamed).\nHe then led the repression of a Georgian nationalist uprising in 1924, after which up to 10,000 people were executed. Between 1924 and 1927, he was head of the secret political department of the Transcaucasian SFSR OGPU. In December 1926, he was appointed Chairman of the Georgian OGPU, and deputy chairman for the Transcaucasian OGPU.\nRelations with Stalin.\nBeria and Joseph Stalin first met in summer 1931, when Stalin took a six-week rest in Tsqaltubo, and Beria took personal charge of his security. Stalin was unimpressed by most of the local party leaders, chosen by the former Georgian party boss, Sergo Ordzhonikidze, but writing to Lazar Kaganovich in August 1932, Stalin commented that \"Beria makes a good impression. He is a good organizer, an efficient, capable functionary.\" But according to Stalin's daughter Svetlana:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was a magnificent specimen of the artful courtier, the embodiment of Oriental perfidy, flattery and hypocrisy who had succeed[ed] in confounding even my father, a man whom it was ordinarily difficult to deceive. A good deal that this monster did is now a blot on my father's name.\nIn October 1931, when Stalin proposed to appoint Beria Second Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party Central Committee and Second Secretary of the Transcaucasian party, the First Secretary Lavrenty Kartvelishvili exclaimed: \"I refuse to work with that charlatan!\" Ordzhonikidze also objected to the promotion. Kartvelishvili was replaced by Mamia Orakhelashvili, who wrote to Stalin and Ordzhonikidze in August 1932 asking to be allowed to resign because he could not work with Beria as his deputy. On 9 October 1932, Beria was appointed party leader for the whole Transcaucasian region. He also retained his post as First Secretary of the Georgian CP. In 1933, he promoted his old ally, Baghirov, to the head of the Azerbaijani communist party. He became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in February 1934.\nDuring this time, he began to attack fellow members of the Georgian Communist Party, particularly Gaioz Devdariani, who served as Minister of Education of the Georgian SSR. Beria ordered the executions of Devdariani's brothers George and Shalva. In 1935, Beria cemented his place in Stalin's entourage with a lengthy oration titled, \"On the History of the Bolshevik Organisations in Transcaucasia\" (later published as a book), which emphasised Stalin's role. It quoted from what purported to be police reports from early in the century, which identified Stalin, under his real name Jugashvili, as the leader of the Social Democrats (Marxists) in Georgia and Azerbaijan, though as the historian Bertram Wolfe noted: \"These new finds tell a different story and even speak another language from all police documents and Bolshevik reminiscences published [...] while Lenin was alive. The language sounds uncommonly like Beria's own.\"\nThe Great Purge.\nIn the first couple of years of mass arrests of members of the Communist Party and Soviet government that began after the assassination of Leningrad party boss Sergei Kirov (1 December 1934), Beria was one of the few regional party leaders considered ruthless enough to purge the region under his control, without outside interference. On 9 July 1936, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Armenian Communist Party, Aghasi Khanjian was found dead from a bullet wound. It was officially announced that he had committed suicide, and he was retrospectively denounced as an enemy of the people, but in 1961, the then head of the KGB, Alexander Shelepin reported that he had been murdered by Beria.\nOn 26 December 1936, Beria summoned the head of the communist party of Abkhazia, Nestor Lakoba, to the Party headquarters in Tbilisi. Beria had Lakoba over for dinner the next day, where he was served fried trout, a favorite of Lakoba's and a glass of poisoned wine. They attended the opera after the dinner, watching the play \"Mzetchabuki\" (; \"Sun-boy\" in Georgian). During the performance Lakoba showed the first signs of his poisoning and returned to his hotel room, where he died early the next morning. Officially, Lakoba was said to have died of a heart attack, though a previous medical examination in Moscow had shown he had arteriosclerosis (thickening of the arteries), cardiosclerosis (thickening of the heart), and erysipelas (skin inflammation) in the left auricle that had led to his hearing loss. His body was returned to Sukhumi, though notably all the internal organs (which could have helped identify the cause of death) were removed. Lakoba was accused of \"nationalist deviationism\", of having helped Trotsky, and of trying to kill both Stalin and Beria. With Lakoba dead, Beria effectively took control of Abkhazia and implemented a policy of \"Georgification\".\nIn the months that followed Lakoba's death, members of his family were implicated on charges against the state. His two brothers were arrested on 9 April 1937, and his mother Sariya was arrested on 23 August of that year. A trial of thirteen members of Lakoba's family was conducted between 30 October and 3 November 1937 in Sukhumi, with charges including counter-revolutionary activities, subversion and sabotage, espionage, terrorism, and insurgent organization in Abkhazia. Nine of the defendants, including Lakoba's two brothers, were shot on the night of 4 November. Rauf, Lakoba's 15-year-old son, tried to speak to Beria, who visited Sukhumi to view the start of the trial. He was promptly arrested as well. Sariya was taken to Tbilisi and tortured in order to extract a statement implicating Lakoba, but refused, even after Rauf was tortured in front of her. Sariya would die in prison in Tbilisi on 16 May 1939. Rauf was sent to a labour camp, and was eventually shot in a Sukhumi prison on 28 July 1941.\nIn December 1936, Nikolai Yezhov, the newly appointed commissar of the NKVD, the ministry which oversaw the state security and police forces, reported that more than 300 people had been arrested in Georgia in the previous few weeks. In June 1937, Beria said in a speech, \"Let our enemies know that anyone who attempts to raise a hand against the will of our people, against the will of the party of Lenin and Stalin, will be mercilessly crushed and destroyed.\"\nOn 20 July, he wrote to Stalin to report that he had had 200 people shot, was about to submit a list of another 350 who were also to be shot, and that Shalva Eliava, Lavrenty Kartvelishvili, Maria Orakhelashvili (wife of Mamia Orakhelashvili), and numerous others had all confessed to counter-revolutionary activities but Mamia Orakhelashvili himself was holding out, though he repeatedly fainted under interrogation and had to be revived with camphor. The evidence against all of them was found, after Beria's execution, to have consisted of false confessions extracted under torture. Reputedly, Orakhelashvili's ear drums were perforated and his eyes gouged out.\nHead of the NKVD.\nIn August 1938, Stalin brought Beria to Moscow as deputy head of the NKVD. Under Yezhov, the NKVD carried out the Great Purge: the imprisonment or execution of a huge number, possibly over a million, of citizens throughout the Soviet Union as alleged \"enemies of the people\". By 1938 the oppression had become so extensive that it was damaging the infrastructure, economy, and the armed forces of the Soviet state, prompting Stalin to wind the purge down. In September, Beria was appointed head of the Main Administration of State Security (GUGB) of the NKVD, and in November he succeeded Nikolai Yezhov as NKVD head. Yezhov was executed in 1940.\nBeria's appointment marked an easing of the repression begun under Yezhov. Over 100,000 people were released from the labour camps. The government officially admitted that there had been some injustice and \"excesses\" during the purges, which were blamed entirely on Yezhov. The liberalization was only relative; arrests, torture, and executions continued. On 16 January 1940, Beria sent Stalin a list of 457 \"enemies of the people\" of whom 346 were marked to be shot. They included Yezhov and his brother and nephews; Mikhail Frinovsky and his wife and teenage son, Yefim Yevdokimov and his wife and teenage son, dozens more former NKVD officers, and the renowned writer Isaac Babel and the journalist Mikhail Koltsov.\nSome of the NKVD officers Beria promoted, such as Boris Rodos, Lev Shvartzman, and Bogdan Kobulov were brutal torturers who were executed in the 1950s. The theatre director Vsevolod Meyerhold described being beaten on the spine and soles of his feet until \"the pain was so intense that it felt as if boiling water was being poured on these sensitive areas.\" His interrogation record was signed by Shvartzman. Robert Eikhe, a former high ranking party official, was sadistically beaten and had an eye gouged out by Rodos, in Beria's office, while Beria watched. He not only permitted and encouraged the beating of prisoners, but in some cases carried it out. One prisoner who survived to give evidence in the 1950s testified that he was brought to Beria's office and accused of plotting to blow up the Moscow metro, which he denied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Beria hit me in the face. After that, I was given 30 minutes to think in the next room, next to his office, from where the screams and groans of the beaten could be heard. An hour later, called to the office, I was met with the words of Kobulov: \"What shall we start beating?\"\nIn March 1939, Beria was appointed as a candidate member of the Communist Party's Politburo. Although he did not rise to full membership until 1946, he was by then one of the senior leaders of the Soviet state. In 1941, he was made a Commissar General of State Security, the highest quasi-military rank within the Soviet police system. In 1940, the pace of the purges accelerated again. During this period, Beria supervised deportations of people identified as \"political enemies\" from Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia after Soviet occupation of those countries.\nOn 5 March 1940, after the Gestapo\u2013NKVD Third Conference was held in Zakopane, Beria sent a note (No. 794/B) to Stalin in which he stated that the Polish prisoners of war kept at camps and prisons in western Belarus and Ukraine were enemies of the Soviet Union, and recommended their execution. Most of them were military officers, but there were also intelligentsia, doctors, priests, and others in a total of 22,000 people. With Stalin's approval, Beria's NKVD executed them in what became known as the Katyn massacre.\nFrom October 1940 to February 1942, the NKVD under Beria carried out a new purge of the Red Army and related industries. In February 1941, Beria became deputy chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, and in June, following Operation Barbarossa Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, he became a member of the State Defense Committee (GKO). During the Second World War, he took on major domestic responsibilities and mobilised the millions of people imprisoned in NKVD Gulag camps into wartime production. He took control of the manufacture of armaments, and (with Georgy Malenkov) aircraft and aircraft engines. This was the beginning of Beria's alliance with Malenkov, which later became of central importance.\nIn 1944, as the Soviet Union had repelled the German invasion, Beria was placed in charge of the various ethnic minorities accused of anti-sovietism and/or collaboration with the invaders, including the Balkars, Karachays, Chechens, Ingush, Crimean Tatars, Kalmyks, Pontic Greeks, and Volga Germans. All these groups were deported to Soviet Central Asia.\nIn December 1944, the NKVD supervised the Soviet atomic bomb project (\"Task No. 1\"), which built and tested a bomb by 29 August 1949. The project was extremely labour-intensive. At least 330,000 people, including 10,000 technicians, were involved. The Gulag system provided tens of thousands of people for work in uranium mines and for the construction and operation of uranium processing plants. They also constructed test facilities, such as those at Semipalatinsk and in the Novaya Zemlya archipelago.\nIn July 1945, as Soviet police ranks were converted to a military uniform system, Beria's rank was officially converted to that of Marshal of the Soviet Union. Although he had never held a traditional military command, he made a significant contribution to the victory of the Soviet Union in the war through his organisation of wartime production and his use of partisans. Abroad, Beria had met with Kim Il Sung, the future leader of North Korea, several times when the Soviet troops had declared war on Japan and occupied the northern half of Korea from August 1945. Beria recommended that Stalin install a communist leader in the occupied territories.\nPost-war politics.\nWith Stalin nearing 70, a concealed struggle for succession amongst his entourage dominated Soviet politics. At the end of the war, Andrei Zhdanov, who had served as the Communist Party leader in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) during the war, seemed the most likely candidate. After 1946, Beria formed an alliance with Malenkov to counter Zhdanov's rise. In January 1946, Beria resigned as chief of the NKVD while retaining general control over national security matters as Deputy Prime Minister and Curator of the Organs of State Security under Stalin. However, the new NKVD chief, Sergei Kruglov, was not a supporter of Beria. Also by the summer of 1946 Beria's man, Vsevolod Merkulov, was replaced as head of the Ministry for State Security (MGB) by Viktor Abakumov.\nAbakumov had headed SMERSH from 1943 to 1946; his relationship with Beria involved close collaboration (since Abakumov owed his rise to Beria's support and esteem) but also rivalry. Stalin had begun to encourage Abakumov to form his own network inside the MGB to counter Beria's dominance of the power ministries. Kruglov and Abakumov moved expeditiously to replace Beria's men in the security apparatus with new people. Very soon, Deputy Minister Stepan Mamulov of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) was the only close Beria ally left outside foreign intelligence on which Beria kept a grip.\nIn the following months, Abakumov started carrying out important operations without consulting Beria, often working with Zhdanov, and on Stalin's direct orders. One of the first such moves involved the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee affair, which commenced in October 1946 and eventually led to the murder of Solomon Mikhoels and the arrest of many other members. After Zhdanov died in August 1948, Beria and Malenkov consolidated their power by means of a purge of Zhdanov's associates in the so-called \"Leningrad Affair\". Those executed included Zhdanov's deputy, Alexey Kuznetsov; the economic chief, Nikolai Voznesensky; the Party head in Leningrad, Pyotr Popkov; and the Prime Minister of the Russian SFSR, Mikhail Rodionov.\nHowever, Beria was unable to purge Mikhail Suslov, whom he hated. Beria felt increasingly uncomfortable with Suslov's growing relationship with Stalin. Russian historian Roy Medvedev speculates in his book, \"Neizvestnyi Stalin\", that Stalin had made Suslov his \"secret heir\". Evidently, Beria felt so threatened by Suslov that after his arrest in 1953, documents were found in his safe labelling Suslov the No. 1 person he wanted to \"eliminate\".\nDuring the postwar years, Beria supervised the establishment of communist regimes in Eastern Europe and chose their Soviet-backed leaders. Starting in 1948, Abakumov initiated several investigations against these leaders, which culminated with the arrest in November 1952 of Rudolf Sl\u00e1nsk\u00fd, Bed\u0159ich Geminder, and others in Czechoslovakia. These men were frequently accused of Zionism, \"rootless cosmopolitanism\", and providing weapons to Israel. Such charges deeply disturbed Beria, as he had directly ordered the sale of large amounts of Czech arms to Israel. Altogether, fourteen Czechoslovak communist leaders, eleven of them Jewish, were tried, convicted, and executed as part of Soviet policy to woo Arab nationalists, which culminated in the major Czech\u2013Egyptian arms deal of 1955.\nThe Doctors' Plot began in 1951, when a number of the country's prominent Jewish physicians were accused of poisoning top Soviet leaders and arrested. Concurrently, the Soviet press began an anti-Semitic propaganda campaign, euphemistically termed the \"struggle against rootless cosmopolitanism\". Initially, 37 men were arrested, but the number quickly grew into hundreds. Scores of Soviet Jews were dismissed from their jobs, arrested, sent to the Gulag, or executed. The \"plot\" was presumably invented by Stalin. A few days after Stalin's death on 5 March 1953, Beria freed all surviving arrested doctors, announced that the entire matter was fabricated, and arrested the MGB functionaries directly involved.\nStalin's death.\nStalin's aide, Vasili Lozgachev, reported that Beria and Malenkov were the first members of the Politburo to see Stalin's condition when he was found unconscious. They arrived at Stalin's dacha at Kuntsevo at 03:00 on 2 March 1953, after being called by Nikita Khrushchev and Nikolai Bulganin. The latter two did not want to risk Stalin's wrath by entering his private rooms. Lozgachev tried to explain to Beria that the unconscious Stalin (still in his soiled clothing) was \"sick and needed medical attention\". Beria angrily dismissed his claims as panic-mongering and quickly left, ordering him, \"Don't bother us, don't cause a panic and don't disturb Comrade Stalin!\" Alexsei Rybin, Stalin's bodyguard, recalled, \"No one wanted to telephone Beria, since most of the personal bodyguards hated Beria\".\nCalling a doctor was deferred for a full twelve hours after Stalin was rendered paralysed, incontinent, and unable to speak. This decision is noted as \"extraordinary\" by the historian Simon Sebag Montefiore, but also consistent with the standard Stalinist policy of deferring all decision-making (no matter how crucial or obvious) without official orders from a higher authority. Beria's decision to avoid immediately calling a doctor was tacitly supported (or at least not opposed) by the rest of the Politburo, which was rudderless without Stalin's micromanagement and paralysed by a legitimate fear that he would suddenly recover and take reprisals on anyone who had dared to act without his orders. Stalin's suspicion of doctors in the wake of the Doctors' Plot was well known at the time of his sickness; his private physician was being tortured in the basement of the Lubyanka for suggesting the leader required more bed rest. Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that immediately after Stalin's stroke, Beria had gone about \"spewing hatred against [Stalin] and mocking him\". When Stalin showed signs of consciousness, Beria dropped to his knees and kissed his hand. When Stalin fell unconscious again, Beria immediately stood and spat.\nAfter Stalin's death on 5 March 1953, Beria's ambitions sprang into full force. In the uneasy silence following the cessation of Stalin's last agonies, he was the first to dart forward to kiss his lifeless form (a move likened by Montefiore to \"wrenching a dead King's ring off his finger\"). While the rest of Stalin's inner circle (even Molotov, saved from certain liquidation) stood sobbing unashamedly over the body, Beria reportedly appeared \"radiant\", \"regenerated\", and \"glistening with ill-concealed relish\". When Beria left the room, he broke the sombre atmosphere by shouting loudly for his driver, his voice echoing with what Stalin's daughter Svetlana Alliluyeva called \"the ring of triumph unconcealed\". Alliluyeva noticed how the Politburo seemed openly frightened of Beria and unnerved by his bold display of ambition. \"He's off to take power\", Mikoyan recalled muttering to Khrushchev. That prompted a \"frantic\" dash for their own limousines to intercept him at the Kremlin.\nStalin's death prevented a final purge of the Old Bolsheviks, Mikoyan and Molotov, for which Stalin had been laying the groundwork in the year prior to his death. Shortly after Stalin's death, Beria announced triumphantly to the Politburo that he had \"done [Stalin] in\" and \"saved [us] all\", according to Molotov's memoirs. The assertion that Stalin was poisoned by Beria's associates has been shared by Edvard Radzinsky and other authors. From 1939 to 1953, the Soviet Poison Laboratory was under the supervision of Beria . According to Radzinsky, Stalin was poisoned by a senior bodyguard. Beria's son, Sergo Beria, later recounted that after Stalin's death, his mother Nina told her husband that, \"Your position now is even more precarious than when Stalin was alive\". Some authors have claimed that Stalin \"may have been poisoned\" using the anticoagulant warfarin, although others have argued that \"the description we have of Stalin's illness does not match the appearance or timeline of patients that experience severe warfarin or warfarin-related overdoses\". Towards the end of his life, Stalin was \"obsessive about the possibility of being poisoned\" and that given his paranoia, \"it is difficult to imagine a scenario where Beria or another conspirator could have slipped an anticoagulant into his drink\".\nFirst Deputy Premier and triumvirate.\nAfter Stalin's death, Beria was appointed First Deputy Premier and reappointed head of the MVD, which he merged with the MGB. His close ally Malenkov was the new Premier and initially the most powerful man in the post-Stalin leadership. Beria was second-most powerful, and given Malenkov's weakness, was poised to become the power behind the throne and ultimately leader. Khrushchev became Party Secretary and Kliment Voroshilov became Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (the nominal head of state).\nBeria undertook some measures of liberalisation immediately after Stalin's death. He reorganised the MVD and drastically reduced its economic power and penal responsibilities. A number of costly construction projects, such as the Salekhard\u2013Igarka Railway, were scrapped, and the remaining industrial enterprises became affiliated under other economic ministries. The Gulag system was transferred to the Ministry of Justice, and a mass release of over a million prisoners was announced, although only prisoners convicted for \"non-political\" crimes were released. That amnesty led to a substantial increase in crime and would later be used against Beria by his rivals.\nTo consolidate power, Beria also took steps to recognise the rights of non-Russian nationalities. As a Georgian, he questioned the traditional policy of Russification and encouraged local officials to assert their own identities. He first turned to Georgia, where Stalin's fabricated Mingrelian affair was called off and the republic's key posts were filled by pro-Beria Georgians. Beria's policies of granting more autonomy to the Ukrainian SSR alarmed Khrushchev, for whom Ukraine was a power base. Khrushchev then tried to draw Malenkov to his side, warning that \"Beria is sharpening his knives\".\nKhrushchev opposed the alliance between Beria and Malenkov, but he was initially unable to challenge them. Khrushchev's opportunity came in June 1953 when the East German uprising of 1953 against the East German communist regime broke out in East Berlin. Based on Beria's statements, other leaders suspected that in the wake of the uprising he would consider trading the reunification of Germany and the end of the Cold War for support from the United States, as had been received in the Second World War.\nThe cost of the war still weighed heavily on the Soviet economy. Beria craved the vast financial resources that another (more sustained) relationship with the U.S. could provide. According to some later sources, he ostensibly even considered giving the Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian SSRs \"serious prospects of national autonomy\", possibly similar to the Soviet satellite states in Europe. Beria said of East Germany, \"It is not even a real state but one kept in being only by Soviet troops\". The East German uprising convinced Molotov, Malenkov and Bulganin that Beria's policies were dangerous and destabilizing to Soviet power.\nOn 21 June 1953, Khrushchev was contacted by MVD Chief Timofei Strokach, a wartime colleague of his, who warned him that Beria was preparing for a coup in Moscow and had threatened him, saying \"we shall expel you from the MVD, arrest you, and allow you to rot in the camps\". He claimed that Beria intended to send special MVD divisions to Moscow to help him seize power, and that several MVD agents had boasted that the MVD would become independent of Party bodies and \"a regional MVD chief would no longer be answerable to the Party secretary\". Within days, Khrushchev persuaded the other leaders to support a \"coup d'etat\" against Beria.\nArrest, trial and execution.\nBeria, as first deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers and an influential Politburo member, saw himself as Stalin's successor, while wider Politburo members had contrasting thoughts on the leadership. On 26 June 1953, Beria was arrested and held in an undisclosed location near Moscow. Accounts of his downfall vary considerably. The historical consensus is that Khrushchev prepared an elaborate ambush, convening a meeting of the Presidium on 26 June, where he suddenly launched a scathing attack on Beria, accusing him of being a traitor and spy in the pay of British intelligence agencies. Beria was taken completely by surprise. He asked, \"What's going on, Nikita Sergeyevich? Why are you picking fleas in my trousers?\" When Beria finally realised what was happening and plaintively appealed to Malenkov to speak for him, Malenkov silently hung his head and pressed a button on his desk. This was an arranged signal to Marshal Georgy Zhukov and a group of armed officers in a nearby room, who burst in and arrested Beria.\nAs Beria's men were guarding the Kremlin, he was held there in a special cell until nightfall and then smuggled out in the trunk of a car. He was taken first to the Moscow guardhouse and then to the bunker of the headquarters of the Moscow Military District. Defence Minister Bulganin ordered the Kantemirovskaya Tank Division and Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division to move into Moscow to prevent security forces loyal to Beria from rescuing him. Many of Beria's subordinates, proteges, and associates were also arrested and later executed, among them Merkulov, Bogdan Kobulov, Sergo Goglidze, Vladimir Dekanozov, Pavlo Meshyk, and Lev Vlodzimirsky.\nFollowing Beria's arrest, the Politburo issued a decree formally removing him from his posts as a \"traitor and capitalist agent\" and accused him and his co-defendants of attempting to place the MVD above the party in a bid to seize power and liquidate the Soviet regime. A \"Pravda\" editorial on 10 July repeated these charges and made other accusations, claiming that Beria had caused food shortages by undermining the Soviet collective farm system, and claimed his policies of liberalization (in which a number of Russian officials in Latvia were dismissed from their posts) were meant to incite ethnic hatred and undermine the friendship of the Soviet people.\nVyacheslav Malyshev succeeded Beria as head of the Soviet nuclear weapons project. After a review of project documentation during the summer of 1953 it was found that Beria had started thermonuclear weapons development without approval from the Central Committee, which was \"shocked\" by the revelation. Beria had even scratched out the signature block for Malenkov's signature and signed it himself. \"Evidently Beria had been confident enough of his ascent to power to assume that he would command sole authority by the time the thermonuclear design was ready to be tested\".\nBeria and his men were tried by a \"special session\" () of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union on 23 December 1953 with no defence counsel and no right of appeal. Marshal Ivan Konev was the chairman of the court. Beria was found guilty of:\nBeria and all the other defendants were sentenced to death on the day of the trial. The other six defendants \u2013 Dekanozov, Merkulov, Vlodzimirsky, Meshik, Goglidze, and Kobulov \u2013 were shot immediately after the trial ended. Beria was executed separately; he allegedly pleaded on his knees before collapsing to the floor wailing. He was shot through the forehead by General Pavel Batitsky. His final moments bore great similarity to those of his predecessor, Nikolai Yezhov, who begged for his life before his execution in 1940. Beria's body was cremated and the remains buried in Communal Grave No. 3 at Donskoye Cemetery in Moscow. Beria's personal archive (said to have included \"compromising\" material on his former colleagues) was destroyed on Khrushchev's orders.\nSexual predation.\nAt Beria's trial in 1953, it became known that he had committed numerous rapes during the years he was NKVD chief. Montefiore concludes that the information \"reveals a sexual predator who used his power to indulge himself in obsessive depravity\". Despite evidence, charges of sexual abuse were disputed by his wife Nina and their son Sergo.\nAccording to the testimony of Colonel Rafael Semyonovich Sarkisov and Colonel Sardion Nikolaevich Nadaraia\u00a0\u2013 two of Beria's bodyguards\u00a0\u2013 on warm nights during the war, Beria was often driven around Moscow in his limousine. He would point out young women that he wanted to be taken to his dacha, where wine and a feast awaited them. After dining, Beria would take the women into his soundproofed office and rape them. An American report from 1952 quoted a former Muscovite as having \"learned from one of Beria's mistresses that it was Beria's habit to order various women to become intimate with him and that he threatened them with prison if they refused\".\nHis bodyguards reported that their duties included handing each victim a flower bouquet as she left the house. Accepting it implied that the sex had been consensual; refusal would mean arrest. Sarkisov reported that after one woman rejected Beria's advances and ran out of his office, Sarkisov mistakenly handed her the flowers anyway. The enraged Beria declared, \"Now, it is not a bouquet, it is a wreath! May it rot on your grave!\" The NKVD arrested the woman the next day.\nAccording to the historian Amy Knight, rumors about Beria's behavior had been circulating around Moscow, with post-war US embassy employee Edward Ellis Smith claiming that \"Beria's escapades were common knowledge among embassy personnel because his house was on the same street as a residence for Americans, and those who lived there saw girls brought to Beria's house late at night in a limousine\".\nWomen also submitted to Beria's sexual advances in exchange for the promise of freedom for imprisoned relatives. In one case, Beria picked up Tatiana Okunevskaya, a well-known Soviet actress, under the pretence of bringing her to perform for the Politburo. Instead he took her to his dacha, where he offered to free her father and grandmother from prison if she submitted. He then raped her, telling her, \"Scream or not, it doesn't matter\". In fact, Beria knew that Okunevskaya's relatives had been executed months earlier. Okunevskaya was arrested shortly afterwards and sentenced to solitary confinement in the gulag, which she survived.\nStalin and other high-ranking officials came to distrust Beria. In one instance, when Stalin learned that his teenage daughter, Svetlana, was alone with Beria at his house, he telephoned her and told her to leave immediately. When Beria complimented Alexander Poskrebyshev's daughter on her beauty, Poskrebyshev quickly pulled her aside and instructed her, \"Don't ever accept a lift from Beria\". After taking an interest in Kliment Voroshilov's daughter-in-law during a party at their summer dacha, Beria shadowed their car closely all the way back to the Kremlin, terrifying his wife.\nBefore and during the war, Beria directed Sarkisov to keep a list of the names and phone numbers of the women that Beria had sex with. Eventually, he ordered Sarkisov to destroy the list as a security risk, but Sarkisov retained a secret copy. When Beria's fall from power began, Sarkisov passed the list to Viktor Abakumov, the former wartime head of SMERSH and now chief of the MGB\u00a0\u2013 the successor to the NKVD. Abakumov was already building a case against Beria. Stalin, who was also seeking to undermine Beria, was thrilled by the detailed records kept by Sarkisov, demanding, \"Send me everything this asshole writes down!\" In 2003, the Russian government acknowledged Sarkisov's handwritten list of Beria's victims, which reportedly contains hundreds of names. The victims' names were also released to the public in 2003.\nEvidence suggests that Beria also murdered some of the women. In 1993, construction workers installing streetlights unearthed human remains near Beria's former Moscow villa (now the Tunisian embassy), which included skulls, pelvises and leg bones. More were found at the site in 1998, when the skeletal remains of five young women were discovered during work carried out on the water pipes in the villa's garden. In 2011, building workers digging a ditch in Moscow city centre unearthed a common grave near the same residence containing a pile of human bones, including two children's skulls covered with lime or chlorine. The lack of articles of clothing and the condition of the remains indicate that these bodies were buried naked.\nAccording to Martin Sixsmith, in a BBC documentary, \"Beria spent his nights having teenagers abducted from the streets and brought here for him to rape. Those who resisted were strangled and buried in his wife's rose garden\". Vladimir Zharov, head of the Department of Forensic Medicine at Moscow State University and then the head of the criminal forensics bureau, said a torture chamber existed in the basement of Beria's villa and that there was probably an underground passage to burial sites.\nHonours and awards.\nBeria was stripped of all titles and awards on 23 December 1953.\nIn popular culture.\nTheatre.\nBeria is the central character in \"Good Night, Uncle Joe\" by Canadian playwright David Elendune. The play is a fictionalised account of the events leading up to Stalin's death.\nFilm.\nIn My Best Friend, General Vasili, Son of Joseph Stalin Beria is portrayed by actor Yan Yanakiev.\nGeorgian film director Tengiz Abuladze based the character of dictator Varlam Aravidze on Beria in his 1984 film \"Repentance\". Although banned in the Soviet Union for its semi-allegorical critique of Stalinism, it premiered at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival, winning the FIPRESCI Prize, Grand Prize of the Jury, and the Prize of the Ecumenical Jury.\nBeria was played by British actor Bob Hoskins in the 1991 film \"Inner Circle\", and by David Suchet in \"Red Monarch\".\nSimon Russell Beale played Beria in the 2017 satirical film \"The Death of Stalin\".\nTelevision.\nIn the 1958 CBS production of \"The Plot to Kill Stalin\" for \"Playhouse 90\", Beria was portrayed by E. G. Marshall. In the 1992 HBO movie \"Stalin\", Roshan Seth was cast as Beria.\nIn the 1999 film adaptation \"Animal Farm\" based on George Orwell's novel, Napoleon's bodyguard Pincher represents Beria.\nBeria appears in the third episode (\"Superbomb\") of the four-part 2007 BBC docudrama series \"Nuclear Secrets\", played by Boris Isarov. In the 2008 BBC documentary series \"\", Beria was portrayed by Polish actor Krzysztof Dracz.\nIn the 1969 \"Doctor Who\" story \"The War Games\", actor Philip Madoc based the coldly evil War Lord on Beria, even wearing his pince-nez glasses.\nLiterature.\nAlan Williams wrote a spy novel titled \"The Beria Papers\", the plot of which revolves around Beria's alleged secret diaries recording his political and sexual depravities.\nAt the opening of Kingsley Amis's \"The Alteration\", Beria appears as \"Monsignor Laurentius\", paired with the similarly black-clad cleric \"Monsignor Henricus\" (Heinrich Himmler) of the Inquisition.\nBeria is a significant character in the alternate history/alien invasion novel series \"Worldwar\" by Harry Turtledove, as well as the \"Axis of Time\" series by John Birmingham.\nIn the 1981 novel \"Noble House\" by James Clavell, set in 1963 Hong Kong, the main character Ian Dunross receives a set of secret documents regarding a Soviet spy-ring in Hong Kong code-named \"Sevrin\" signed by an LB (Lavrentiy Beria).\nThe arrest and execution of Beria is recreated in the Robert Moss novel \"Moscow Rules\" as part of the rise of main character Alexander Preobrazensky's father-in-law Marshall Zotov, a character who stands in for Zhukov.\nBeria is a significant character in the opening chapters of the 1998 novel \"Archangel\" by British novelist Robert Harris.\nBeria is a minor character in the 2009 novel \"The Hundred-Year-Old Man Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared\" by Jonas Jonasson.\nAs \"der Kleine Gro\u00dfe Mann\" (\"the Little Big Man\"), Beria appears as the abuser of one of the leading characters, Christine, in the 2014 novel \"Das achte Leben (F\u00fcr Brilka)\" (translated as \"The Eighth Life (For Brilka)\") by Nino Haratischwili.\nIn the 2015\u20132017 serialised science fiction novel \"Unsong\" by writer Scott Alexander, Beria is mentioned as being in the nicest part of hell, reserved for the worst sinners, along with Hitler and LaLaurie.\nA character based on Beria, named \"Loria\" with his predatorial tendencies, appears in \"The Saga of Tanya the Evil\" light novel. Loria is also depicted in the series' .\nBeria is a significant character in Malcolm Knox's 2024 novel \"The First Friend\", about his fictional childhood friend Vasil Murtov who now works as his driver, and the consequences that follow from a proposed visit by Stalin to Georgia.\nBeria is a significant character in Polostan by Neal Stephenson.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
