{"id": "14268", "revid": "34434225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14268", "title": "Hapworth 16, 1924", "text": "Novella by Jerome David Salinger\n\"Hapworth 16, 1924\" is an uncollected work of short fiction by J. D. Salinger that appeared in the June 19, 1965, issue of \"The New Yorker\".\nThe story is the last original work Salinger published during his lifetime, and filled almost the entire magazine. It is the \"youngest\" of his Glass family stories, in the sense that the narrated events happen chronologically before those in the rest of the series.\nPlot.\n46-year-old Buddy Glass reproduces the contents of a letter written by his older brother Seymour, who died by suicide 17 years earlier in 1948. Seymour wrote the letter to their parents while he and Buddy (two years his junior) were attending Camp Simon Hapworth, Maine, in 1924. The literary voice conveyed in the letter is that of a highly articulate and strikingly precocious boy of seven. The letter, written from his bunk in his cabin (Seymour has injured his leg) is a wide-ranging commentary on the camp personnel, the camp attendees, and his relationships with his family, humanity and God. Seymour and Buddy largely prefer to occupy themselves writing poems and short stories rather than participate in group activities. They therefore meet with some hostility.\nSeymour devotes a large part of the letter to enumerating his reading list and requests for further reading material from his parents. He offers critical appraisals of a number of major literary figures. The letter closes with a lengthy discourse on the significance of God.\nPublishing history.\nThe circumstances and considerations that led chief fiction editor William Shawn at \"The New Yorker\" to devote virtually the entire June 19, 1965, edition to \"Hapworth 16, 1924\" are obscure. Biographer Kenneth Slawenki writes, \"the files of \"The New Yorker\" are unusually silent on the details of the novella's reception by the editorial staff and its eventual reception by William Shawn.\" The correspondence between Salinger and Shawn chronicling the decision may have been deliberately suppressed. Slawenski speculates that the appearance of Salinger's piece in the journal was \"a \"fait accompli\" rather than a topic of debate\".\nAfter the story's appearance in \"The New Yorker\", Salinger\u2014who had already withdrawn to his New Hampshire home\u2014stopped publishing altogether. Since the story never appeared in book form, readers had to seek out that issue or find it on microfilm. Finally, with the release of \"The Complete New Yorker\" on DVD in 2005, the story was once again widely available.\nIn 1996, Orchises Press, a small Virginia publishing house, started a process of publishing \"Hapworth\" in book form. Orchises Press owner Roger Lathbury has described the effort in \"The Washington Post\" and, three months after Salinger's death, in \"New York\" magazine\".\" According to Lathbury, Salinger was deeply concerned with the proposed book's appearance, even visiting Washington to examine the cloth for the binding. Salinger also sent Lathbury numerous \"infectious and delightful and loving\" letters.\nFollowing publishing norms, Lathbury applied for Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data, unaware of how publicly available the information would be. A writer in Seattle, researching an article on Jeff Bezos, came across the \"Hapworth\" publication date, and told his sister, a journalist for the \"Washington Business Journal\", who wrote an article about the upcoming book. This led to substantial coverage in the press. Shortly before the books were to be shipped, Salinger changed his mind, and Orchises withdrew the book. New publication dates were repeatedly announced, but it never appeared. Lathbury said, \"I never reached back out. I thought about writing some letters, but it wouldn't have done any good.\"\nReception and assessment.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Crucial to any to any approach to the Glass family stories is a recognition of Salinger's refusal to recast standard literary forms, a tendency that becomes most manifest in the diffuse and digressive \"\" and the shapeless and interminable \"Hapworth.\"\u2014Literary critic John Wenke in \"J. D. Salinger: A Study of the Short Fiction\" (1991).\nBoth contemporary and later literary critics harshly panned \"Hapworth 16, 1924\"; writing in \"The New York Times\", Michiko Kakutani called it \"a sour, implausible and, sad to say, completely charmless story ... filled with digressions, narcissistic asides and ridiculous shaggy-dog circumlocutions.\"\nCalling it \"virtually unreadable\" and \"an enigma\", critic John Wenke compares \"Hapworth\" to viewing a neighbor's unedited family home movies. He writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Possibly the least structured and most tedious piece of fiction ever produced by an important writer, \"Hapworth\" seems \"designed\" to bore, to tax patience, as if Salinger was trying to torment his readers.\nWenke adds that the story is a striking departure from the \"urbane, pithy and wry\" short fiction \"The New Yorker\"'s editors and readership favored.\nBiographer Kenneth Slawenski considers the piece \"professionally, a disaster\" and ponders what may have motivated Salinger to submit the work for publication:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Questions regarding \"Hapworth\" have plagued Salinger fans ever since. Did he intentionally write the story as his final publication? Why is \"Hapworth\" so unreadable? The story fostered a suspicion that...Salinger attempted to release himself from the affections of average readers by feeding them a work that was completely indigestible.\nBiographer Ian Hamilton concurs that Salinger appears to abandon his loyal readership and retreat into the exclusive realm of his characters. He writes, \"The Glass family has, in this last story, become Salinger's subject and his readership, his creatures and his companions. His life is finally made one with art.\"\nSalinger is said to have considered the story a \"high point of his writing\" and made tentative steps to have it reprinted, though those came to nothing.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14269", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14269", "title": "Hypnotic", "text": "Drug whose use induces sleep\nA hypnotic (from Greek \"Hypnos\", sleep), also known as a somnifacient or soporific, and commonly known as sleeping pills, are a class of psychoactive drugs whose primary function is to induce sleep and to treat insomnia (sleeplessness). Some hypnotics are also used to treat narcolepsy and hypersomnia by improving sleep at night and thereby reducing daytime sleepiness. Certain hypnotics can be used to treat non-restorative sleep and associated symptoms in conditions like fibromyalgia as well.\nThis group of drugs is related to sedatives\". \"Whereas the term sedative describes drugs that serve to calm or relieve anxiety, the term hypnotic generally describes drugs whose main purpose is to initiate, sustain, or lengthen sleep. Because these two functions frequently overlap, and because drugs in this class generally produce dose-dependent effects (ranging from anxiolysis to loss of consciousness), they are often referred to collectively as sedative\u2013hypnotic drugs.\nHypnotic drugs are regularly prescribed for insomnia and other sleep disorders, with over 95% of insomnia patients being prescribed hypnotics in some countries. Many hypnotic drugs are habit-forming and\u2014due to many factors known to disturb the human sleep pattern\u2014a physician may instead recommend changes in the environment before and during sleep, better sleep hygiene, the avoidance of caffeine and alcohol or other stimulating substances, or behavioral interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), before prescribing medication for sleep. When prescribed, hypnotic medication should be used for the shortest period of time necessary.\nAmong individuals with sleep disorders, 13.7% are taking or prescribed nonbenzodiazepines (Z-drugs), while 10.8% are taking benzodiazepines, as of 2010, in the USA. Early classes of drugs, such as barbiturates, have fallen out of use in most practices but are still prescribed for some patients. In children, prescribing hypnotics is not currently acceptable\u2014unless used to treat night terrors or sleepwalking. Elderly people are more sensitive to potential side effects of daytime fatigue and cognitive impairment, and a meta-analysis found that the risks generally outweigh any marginal benefits of hypnotics in the elderly. A review of the literature regarding benzodiazepine hypnotics and Z-drugs concluded that these drugs have adverse effects, such as dependence and accidents, and that optimal treatment uses the lowest effective dose for the shortest therapeutic time, with gradual discontinuation to improve health without worsening of sleep.\nFalling outside the above-mentioned categories, the neurohormone melatonin and its analogues (e.g., ramelteon) serve a hypnotic function.\nTypes.\nGABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators.\nBenzodiazepines.\nBenzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia. Their use beyond 2 to 4 weeks is not recommended due to the risk of dependence. It is preferred that benzodiazepines be taken intermittently and at the lowest effective dose. They improve sleep-related problems by shortening the time spent in bed before falling asleep, prolonging sleep time, and reducing wakefulness. Like alcohol, benzodiazepines are commonly used to treat insomnia in the short-term (both prescribed and self-medicated), but worsen sleep in the long-term. While benzodiazepines can put people to sleep (i.e., inhibit NREM stage 1 and 2 sleep), while asleep, the drugs disrupt sleep architecture by decreasing sleep time, delaying time to REM sleep, and decreasing deep slow-wave sleep (the most restorative part of sleep for both energy and mood).\nOther drawbacks of hypnotics, including benzodiazepines, are possible tolerance to their effects, rebound insomnia, and reduced slow-wave sleep and a withdrawal period typified by rebound insomnia and a prolonged period of anxiety and agitation. The list of benzodiazepines approved for the treatment of insomnia is similar among most countries, but which benzodiazepines are officially designated as first-line hypnotics prescribed for the treatment of insomnia can vary distinctly between countries. Longer-acting benzodiazepines, such as nitrazepam and diazepam, have residual effects that may persist into the next day and are, in general, not recommended.\nIt is not clear whether the newer nonbenzodiazepine (Z-drug) hypnotics are better than the short-acting benzodiazepines. The efficacy of these two groups of medications is similar. According to the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, indirect comparison indicates that side effects from benzodiazepines may be about twice as frequent as from nonbenzodiazepines. Some experts suggest using nonbenzodiazepines preferentially as a first-line long-term treatment of insomnia. However, the UK National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) did not find any convincing evidence in favor of Z-drugs. A NICE review pointed out that short-acting Z-drugs were inappropriately compared in clinical trials with long-acting benzodiazepines. There have been no trials comparing short-acting Z-drugs with appropriate doses of short-acting benzodiazepines. Based on this, NICE recommended choosing the hypnotic based on cost and the patient's preference.\nOlder adults should not use benzodiazepines to treat insomnia unless other treatments have failed to be effective. When benzodiazepines are used, patients, their caretakers, and their physician should discuss the increased risk of harms, including evidence which shows twice the incidence of traffic collisions among driving patients, as well as falls and hip fracture for all older patients.\nTheir mechanism of action is primarily at GABAA receptors.\nNonbenzodiazepines.\nNonbenzodiazepines (Z-drugs) are a class of psychoactive drugs that are \"benzodiazepine-like\" in nature. Nonbenzodiazepine pharmacodynamics are almost entirely the same as benzodiazepine drugs, and therefore entail similar benefits, side effects, and risks. Nonbenzodiazepines, however, have dissimilar or different chemical structures, and are unrelated to benzodiazepines on a molecular level.\nExamples include zopiclone (Imovane), eszopiclone (Lunesta), zaleplon (Sonata), and zolpidem (Ambien). Since the generic names of all drugs of this type start with \"Z\", they are often referred to as \"Z-drugs\".\nResearch on nonbenzodiazepines is new and conflicting. A review by a team of researchers suggests the use of these drugs for people who have trouble falling asleep (but not staying asleep), as next-day impairments were minimal. The team noted that the safety of these drugs had been established, but called for more research into their long-term effectiveness in treating insomnia. Other evidence suggests that tolerance to nonbenzodiazepines may be slower to develop than with benzodiazepines. A different team was more skeptical, finding little benefit over benzodiazepines.\nBarbiturates.\nBarbiturates are drugs that act as central nervous system depressants, and can therefore produce a broad spectrum of effects, from mild sedation to total anesthesia. They are also effective as anxiolytics, hypnotics, and anticonvulsant effects; however, these effects are somewhat weak, preventing barbiturates from being used in surgery in the absence of other analgesics. They have dependence liability, both physical and psychological. Barbiturates have now largely been replaced by benzodiazepines in routine medical practice\u00a0\u2013 such as in the treatment of anxiety and insomnia\u00a0\u2013 mainly because benzodiazepines are significantly less dangerous in overdose. However, barbiturates are still used in general anesthesia, for epilepsy, and for assisted suicide. The principal mechanism of action of barbiturates is believed to be positive allosteric modulation of GABAA receptors. Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid. Examples include amobarbital, pentobarbital, phenobarbital, secobarbital, and sodium thiopental.\nQuinazolinones.\nQuinazolinones are also a class of drugs that function as hypnotics/sedatives that contain a 4-quinazolinone core. Examples of quinazolinones include cloroqualone, diproqualone, etaqualone (Aolan, Athinazone, Ethinazone), mebroqualone, afloqualone (Arofuto), mecloqualone (Nubarene, Casfen), and methaqualone (Quaalude). This class of drugs has been largely discontinued and is no longer used clinically.\nNeurosteroids.\nOral progesterone (Prometrium) metabolizes into neurosteroids including allopregnanolone and pregnanolone which act as potent GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators. As a result, oral progesterone can dose-dependently produce side effects including dizziness, drowsiness, sedation, somnolence, fatigue, anxiety reduction, euphoria, and cognitive impairment. For this reason, oral progesterone is often taken at night before bed. Oral progesterone taken before bed has been found to improve multiple sleep outcomes in clinical studies. Zuranolone is a synthetic analogue of allopregnanolone that likewise acts as a GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulator but is orally active. It is under development for the treatment of insomnia and is in phase 3 clinical trials for this indication as of September 2025.\nOthers.\nOther GABAA receptor positive allosteric modulators with hypnotic effects include alcohol (ethanol), chloral hydrate, urethane (ethyl carbamate), isoflurane, allopregnanolone (brexanolone), and propofol, among others.\nGABAA receptor agonists.\nThe GABAA receptor agonist gaboxadol (THIP; LU-2-030), a synthetic derivative of the neurotransmitter \u03b3-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and an analogue of the alkaloid muscimol, underwent formal clinical development for the treatment of insomnia and reached phase 3 clinical trials for this indication in the 1990s and 2000s. It was found to effectively improve sleep onset and duration in people with insomnia. In addition, and unlike other hypnotics like benzodiazepines, gaboxadol improved slow wave sleep, preserved sleep architecture, and did not suppress REM sleep. Moreover, in contrast to benzodiazepines, tolerance did not appear to develop to gaboxadol's hypnotic effects.\nThe development of gaboxadol was discontinued in 2007. This was due to high rates of psychiatric and hallucinogenic effects in drug users at supratherapeutic doses, failure of a 3-month efficacy trial, and other cited reasons. Moreover, there was tension concerning hypnotics in the pharmaceutical industry at the time owing to bizarre reports of zolpidem (Ambien)-induced delirium that emerged in the media in 2006, which may have made the developer of gaboxadol more concerned about potential liability issues. According to journalist Hamilton Morris, the discontinuation of gaboxadol's late-stage development may have deprived people with insomnia access to an effective, safe, and non-addictive treatment. There has been some further study of gaboxadol as a hypnotic by David Nutt and colleagues following the discontinuation of its development.\nMuscimol, the compound from which gaboxadol was derived, is a naturally occurring constituent of \"Amanita\" mushrooms such as \"Amanita muscaria\" (fly agaric) and is a potent GABAA receptor agonist similarly. However, muscimol is less selective, more toxic, and far less-researched than gaboxadol. Muscimol is reported to induce sleep in humans in addition to its well-known hallucinogenic effects that occur at sufficiently high doses. The drug shows similar effects on sleep in rodents as gaboxadol. By the mid-2020s, microdosing of muscimol and \"Amanita\" mushrooms for claimed therapeutic benefits, the most prominently cited of which is improved sleep, has become increasingly prominent.\nGABAB receptor agonists.\nThe GABAB receptor agonist sodium oxybate (SXB; Xyrem), also known as \u03b3-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), has hypnotic and sleep-improving effects. It robustly increases slow wave sleep (deep sleep), decreases sleep fragmentation, and improves rapid eye movement (REM) sleep consolidation, all whilst preserving physiological sleep architecture. The drug is approved and clinically used in the treatment of narcolepsy and excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). Narcolepsy is associated with poor sleep, and sodium oxybate improves sleep quality and stability in the condition, in turn reducing symptoms like daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. The robust enhancement of slow wave sleep by sodium oxybate is unusual and potentially advantageous relative to other hypnotics. In addition, unlike the case of many other hypnotics, tolerance does not appear to develop to the hypnotic effects of sodium oxybate.\nSodium oxybate also completed formal clinical development for fibromyalgia. This condition has very high rates of non-restorative sleep (unrefreshing sleep) that may be directly involved in its symptoms. Sodium oxybate improved sleep in fibromyalgia and showed moderate effectiveness in treating multiple symptoms across the condition including pain and fatigue. However, despite its effectiveness, sodium oxybate was ultimately not approved for treatment of fibromyalgia owing mostly to concerns about possible misuse. Sodium oxybate has also been investigated and been of interest to improve sleep and associated symptoms in other conditions with sleep disruption, such as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and long COVID, which also have high rates of non-restorative sleep. In addition, sodium oxybate was limitedly studied to improve insomnia in people with depression or bipolar disorder. However, it was reported to paradoxically disrupt sleep and induce narcolepsy-like changes in these individuals. Moreover, concerns about misuse have limited use of sodium oxybate for other medical conditions. GHB has also garnered a reputation as a date-rape drug, although the actual prevalence of this appears to be much lower than popular perception.\nThe GABAB receptor agonist baclofen has also been more limitedly investigated for improvement of sleep and has been found to be effective in enhancing sleep similarly to sodium oxybate. However, in people with narcolepsy, baclofen and sodium oxybate both improved sleep but only sodium oxybate reduced daytime sleepiness. In any case, research in this area is limited, and there remains significant interest in baclofen in the potential treatment of sleeping problems. Unlike sodium oxybate, baclofen is not a controlled substance and has much less or no misuse potential. Baclofen and sodium oxybate have been found to activate the GABAB receptor differently, which is thought to underlie the differences in their effects. Another difference between baclofen and sodium oxybate is that baclofen has a much longer elimination half-life and duration of action in comparison (half-life 3\u20134hours versus 0.5\u20131.0hours, respectively).\nGABA reuptake inhibitors.\nThe GABA transporter 1 (GAT-1) and GABA reuptake inhibitor tiagabine (Gabitril) is approved and clinically used as an anticonvulsant. It has also been used off-label in the treatment of anxiety disorders and other conditions. The drug increases \u03b3-aminobutyric acid (GABA) levels in the brain and has been found to improve sleep, including by increasing slow wave sleep (deep sleep). In addition, tiagabine has been reported to make sleep feel more restorative and to improve several cognitive outcomes. The drug has an elimination half-life of 5 to 8hours.\nMelatonin receptor agonists.\nMelatonin, the hormone produced in the pineal gland in the brain and secreted in dim light and darkness, among its other functions, promotes sleep in diurnal mammals. It activates the melatonin MT1 and MT2 receptors to produce beneficial effects on sleep, therefore being used exogenously for mild insomnia. A small improvement in sleep onset and total sleep time by using melatonin has been shown in recent systematic reviews. Synthetic analogues of melatonin, or melatonin receptor agonists, have also been made. Among these, ramelteon and tasimelteon are used for sleep disorders. Agomelatine is an antidepressant of this class, with some studies also reporting an effect on sleep.\nHistamine H1 receptor antagonists.\nAntihistamines, also known as histamine H1 receptor antagonists, are a class of drugs that inhibit action at histamine H1 receptors. They are clinically used to alleviate allergic reactions including allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, and urticaria, which are mediated by histamine. First-generation antihistamines, such as doxylamine (Unisom) and diphenhydramine (Benadryl), often cause sedation as a side effect, which can be utilized to treat insomnia. Some antihistamines, such as doxylamine, are available for purchase over-the-counter (OTC) in some countries and can be used for the occasional relief of insomnia. Many sedating antihistamines also have anticholinergic activity that can produce side effects like cognitive impairment. Low-dose doxepin (Silenor) is approved by the FDA for the treatment of insomnia. Non-selective hypnotics that possess histamine H1 receptor antagonism include the antidepressants amitriptyline, high-dose doxepin, trazodone, and trimipramine; the antipsychotics olanzapine and quetiapine; and the antihistamines hydroxyzine, promethazine, and cyproheptadine, among others. Second-generation antihistamines such as cetirizine and loratadine produce much less if any sedation due to a greatly reduced capacity to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier.\nOrexin receptor antagonists.\nOrexin receptor antagonists are drugs that block the orexin OX1 and/or OX2 receptors, hence reducing the wakefulness-promoting effects of the orexin system and inducing sleep. Non-selective orexin receptor antagonists including suvorexant, lemborexant, and daridorexant and selective orexin OX2 receptor antagonists like seltorexant have been shown in clinical studies to improve sleep onset, sleep duration, and sleep quality.\nSerotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists.\nSerotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists such as ritanserin, ketanserin, eplivanserin, volinanserin, nelotanserin, and pimavanserin have been studied and developed to improve sleep. They do not improve sleep onset, but have been found to increase slow wave sleep (deep sleep) and reduce nighttime awakenings. Conversely, improvement in subjective sleep ratings have been more mixed. Ultimately no selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists have been approved for treatment of insomnia. The only selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist to be approved for any indication is pimavanserin for treatment of Parkinson's disease psychosis. Besides selective serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonists however, many non-selective agents used as hypnotics show serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonism, for instance antidepressants like trazodone, mirtazapine, and amitriptyline, antipsychotics like quetiapine and olanzapine, and antihistamines like hydroxyzine and cyproheptadine.\nGabapentinoids.\nGabapentinoids, also known as \u03b12\u03b4 subunit-containing voltage-gated calcium channel ligands, include drugs like gabapentin, pregabalin, and gabapentin enacarbil. They have been found to increase slow wave sleep (deep sleep) in people with insomnia and healthy individuals. However, they do not appear to improve sleep onset. The gabapentinoid atagabalin (PD-0200390) was under formal development for treatment of insomnia, but development was discontinued following unsatisfactory clinical trial results. PD-0299685 is another gabapentinoid that was under development for the treatment of insomnia, specifically that related to menopausal symptoms, but its development was discontinued similarly.\nCannabinoids.\nCannabinoids, or cannabinoid receptor agonists, such as the \u03b49-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) found in cannabis, have been found to be effective in improving sleep in healthy people and in people with insomnia. They have been found to improve sleep onset, sleep duration, and sleep quality. Cannabidiol (CBD), which acts differently than other cannabinoids like THC, is not effective in improving sleep on the other hand. Zenivol is a cannabis extract which is approved for the treatment of insomnia in Germany.\n\u03b11- and \u03b2-adrenergic receptor antagonists.\nThe \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonist prazosin is used off-label to treat insomnia, nightmares, and poor sleep quality in people with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It is clinically effective for this purpose. However, the drug is also an antihypertensive agent and can lower blood pressure, thereby producing side effects like dizziness and orthostatic hypotension. Certain non-selective hypnotics such as trazodone and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) like amitriptyline and trimipramine are also \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonists. The combination of prazosin and the centrally-penetrant beta blocker (\u03b2-adrenergic receptor antagonist) timolol has been found to be synergistic in producing sedative and hypnotic effects in animals. Conversely, timolol alone produced no such effects. Centrally active beta blockers like propranolol and metoprolol on their own are not effective or clinically used as hypnotics and have actually been associated with insomnia as a side effect. Certain beta blockers like labetalol and carvedilol also block the \u03b11-adrenergic receptor to varying extents and have been associated with somnolence as a side effect. However, these two beta blockers have also been associated with insomnia similarly to selective beta blockers.\n\u03b12-Adrenergic receptor agonists.\n\u03b12-Adrenergic receptor agonists like clonidine can improve sleep and may be useful in the treatment of insomnia. An example of this is in the treatment of insomnia in children and adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), for instance due stimulant therapy. Similarly to clonidine, the \u03b12-adrenergic receptor agonist dexmedetomidine has sedative and hypnotic effects and is used to produce sedation in hospital settings. The sleep induced by dexmedetomidine is said to closely resemble natural sleep. The selective \u03b12A-adrenergic receptor agonist tasipimidine (ODM-105) is under development for the treatment of insomnia and is in phase 2 clinical trials for this indication as of October 2024. \u03b12-Adrenergic receptor agonists can produce hypotension and bradycardia as side effects, which has limited their use. Activation of the \u03b12A-adrenergic receptor is thought to be responsible for most of the physiological effects of the \u03b12-adrenergic receptors, including hypotension. On the other hand, the preferential \u03b12A-adrenergic receptor agonist guanfacine appears to show less sedation and hypotension than clonidine.\nSerotonin precursors.\nThe serotonin precursors tryptophan and 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP; oxitriptan) are available as over-the-counter supplements. They are often used to produce sleepiness and treat insomnia. However, little to no clinical data exist to support their use or effectiveness.\nMultiple mechanisms.\nAntidepressants.\nSome antidepressants have hypnotic and/or sedative effects. These include the serotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitor (SARI) trazodone, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) such as amitriptyline, doxepin, and trimipramine, and tetracyclic antidepressants (TeCAs) like mirtazapine and mianserin. These agents produce their hypnotic and sedative effects via multiple mechanisms of action that may include histamine H1 receptor antagonism, serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonism, and \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonism. Some hypnotic antidepressants, such as trazodone and mirtazapine, have been shown to enhance slow wave sleep, which may be due to serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonism.\nAntipsychotics.\nCertain typical antipsychotics (first-generation) like chlorpromazine and atypical antipsychotics (second-generation) including clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone, and zotepine may have sedative and/or hypnotic effects and have been used in the treatment of insomnia. However, the most commonly used agents for insomnia are quetiapine and olanzapine. They are thought to produce these effects via multiple mechanisms of action, including histamine H1 receptor antagonism, serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonism, \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonism, and/or dopamine D2 receptor antagonism. While some of these drugs are frequently prescribed for insomnia, such use is not recommended unless the insomnia is due to an underlying mental health condition treatable by antipsychotics as the risks frequently outweigh the benefits. Some of the more serious adverse effects have been observed to occur at the low doses used for this off-label prescribing, such as dyslipidemia and neutropenia, and a recent network meta-analysis of 154 double-blind, randomized controlled trials of drug therapies vs. placebo for insomnia in adults found that quetiapine had not demonstrated any short-term benefits in sleep quality.\nHerbal supplements.\nSome herbal supplements, including valerian, kava, chamomile, lavender, passion flower, and hops among others, are purported to have hypnotic effects and are used to treat sleeping problems, but little to no clinical data are available to support their use.\nOther drugs.\nVarious other types of drugs have also been found to produce hypnotic-type effects in scientific research. Examples include histamine H3 receptor agonists like \u03b1-methylhistamine, BP 2.94, GT-2203 (VUF-5296), and SCH-50971, adenosine A1 and A2A receptor agonists like adenosine and YZG-331, and dopamine D1 receptor receptor antagonists like NNC 01-0687 (ADX-10061, CEE-03-310, NNC-687).\nComparative effectiveness.\nA major systematic review and network meta-analysis of medications for the treatment of insomnia was published in 2022. It found a widely varying range of effect sizes (standardized mean difference or SMD) in terms of clinical effectiveness for insomnia. The assessed medications and their effect sizes included benzodiazepines (e.g., temazepam, triazolam, many others) (SMDs 0.58 to 0.83), Z-drugs (eszopiclone, zaleplon, zolpidem, zopiclone) (SMDs 0.03 to 0.63), sedative antidepressants and antihistamines (doxepin, doxylamine, trazodone, trimipramine) (SMDs 0.30 to 0.55), the antipsychotic quetiapine (SMD 0.07), orexin receptor antagonists (daridorexant, lemborexant, seltorexant, suvorexant) (SMDs 0.23 to 0.44), and melatonin receptor agonists (melatonin, ramelteon) (SMDs 0.00 to 0.13). The certainty of evidence varied and ranged from high to very low depending on the medication. Certain medications often used as hypnotics, including the antihistamines diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, and promethazine and the antidepressants amitriptyline and mirtazapine among others, were not included in analyses due to insufficient data.\nRisks.\nThe use of sedative medications in older people generally should be avoided. These medications are associated with poorer health outcomes, including cognitive decline, fall, and bone fractures. Sedatives and hypnotics should also be avoided in people with dementia, according to the clinical guidelines known as the Medication Appropriateness Tool for Comorbid Health Conditions in Dementia (MATCH-D). The use of these medications can further impede cognitive function for people with dementia, who are also more sensitive to side effects of medications. Some hypnotics, such as low-dose doxepin, melatonin receptor agonists, and orexin receptor antagonists, may be safer and more appropriate in older adults however.\nHistory.\nHypnotica was a class of somniferous drugs and substances tested in medicine of the 1890s and later. These include urethan, acetal, methylal, sulfonal, paraldehyde, amylenhydrate, hypnon, chloralurethan, ohloralamid, or chloralimid.\nResearch about using medications to treat insomnia evolved throughout the last half of the 20th century. Treatment for insomnia in psychiatry dates back to 1869, when chloral hydrate was first used as a soporific. Barbiturates emerged as the first class of drugs in the early 1900s, after which chemical substitution allowed derivative compounds. Although they were the best drug family at the time (with less toxicity and fewer side effects), they were dangerous in overdose and tended to cause physical and psychological dependence.\nDuring the 1970s, quinazolinones and benzodiazepines were introduced as safer alternatives to replace barbiturates; by the late 1970s, benzodiazepines emerged as the safer drug.\nBenzodiazepines are not without their drawbacks; substance dependence is possible, and deaths from overdoses sometimes occur, especially in combination with alcohol or other depressants. Questions have been raised as to whether they disturb sleep architecture.\nNonbenzodiazepines or Z-drugs like zolpidem were introduced in the 1990s and 2000s. Although it is clear that they are less toxic than barbiturates, their predecessors, comparative efficacy over benzodiazepines has not been established. Such efficacy is hard to determine without longitudinal studies. However, some psychiatrists recommend these drugs, citing research suggesting they are equally potent with less potential for abuse.\nOrexin receptor antagonists like suvorexant were introduced in the 2010s and 2020s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14273", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14273", "title": "HMS Dunraven", "text": "HMS \"Dunraven\" was a Q-ship of the Royal Navy during World War I.\nOn 8 August 1917, 130 miles southwest of Ushant in the Bay of Biscay, disguised as the collier \"Boverton\" and commanded by Gordon Campbell, VC, \"Dunraven\" spotted , commanded by Reinhold Saltzwedel. Saltzwedel believed the disguised ship was a merchant vessel. The U-boat submerged and closed with \"Dunraven\" before surfacing astern at 11:43 am and opening fire at long range. \"Dunraven\" made smoke and sent off a panic party (a small number of men who \"abandon ship\" during an attack to continue the impersonation of a merchant).\nShells began hitting \"Dunraven\", detonating her depth charges and setting her stern afire. Her crew remained hidden letting the fires burn. Then a 4-inch (102\u00a0mm) gun and crew were blown away revealing \"Dunraven\"'s identity as a warship, and \"UC-71\" submerged. A second \"panic party\" abandoned ship. \"Dunraven\" was hit by a torpedo. A third \"panic party\" went over the side, leaving only two guns manned. \"UC-71\" surfaced, shelled \"Dunraven\" and again submerged. Campbell replied with two torpedoes that missed, and around 3 pm, the undamaged U-boat left that area. Only one of \"Dunraven\"'s crew was killed, but the Q-Ship was sinking.\nThe British destroyer picked up \"Dunraven\"'s survivors and took her in tow for Plymouth, but \"Dunraven\" sank at 1:30 am early on 10 August 1917 to the north of Ushant.\nIn recognition, two Victoria Crosses were awarded, one to the ship's First Lieutenant, Lt. Charles George Bonner RNR, and the other, by ballot, to a gunlayer, Petty Officer Ernest Herbert Pitcher.\nCaptain Campbell later wrote:\n\"It had been a fair and honest fight, and I lost it. Referring to my crew, words cannot express what I am feeling. No one let me down. No one could have done better.\"\nCaptain Campbell had been previously awarded the Victoria Cross, in February 1917, for the sinking of .\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14275", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14275", "title": "Hacker ethic", "text": "Common moral values of hacker culture\nThe hacker ethic is a philosophy and set of moral values within hacker culture. Practitioners believe that sharing information and data with others is an ethical imperative. The hacker ethic is related to the concept of freedom of information, as well as the political theories of anti-authoritarianism, anarchism, and libertarianism.\nWhile some tenets of the hacker ethic were described in other texts like \"Computer Lib/Dream Machines\" (1974) by Ted Nelson, the term \"hacker ethic\" is generally attributed to journalist Steven Levy, who appears to have been the first to document both the philosophy and the founders of the philosophy in his 1984 book titled \".\"\nHistory.\nThe term hacker originated at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the 1950s\u20131960s. The term \"hacker\" has long been used there to describe college pranks that MIT students would regularly devise, and was used more generally to describe a project undertaken or a product built to fulfill some constructive goal, but also out of pleasure for mere involvement.\nMIT housed an early IBM 704 computer inside the Electronic Accounting Machinery (EAM) room in 1959. This room became the staging grounds for early hackers, as MIT students from the Tech Model Railroad Club sneaked inside the EAM room after hours to attempt programming the 30-ton, computer.\nThe hacker ethic was described as a \"new way of life, with a philosophy, an ethic and a dream\". However, the elements of the hacker ethic were not openly debated and discussed; rather they were implicitly accepted and silently agreed upon.\nThe free software movement was born in the early 1980s from followers of the hacker ethic. Its founder, Richard Stallman, is referred to by Steven Levy as \"the last true hacker\".\nRichard Stallman describes:\n\"The hacker ethic refers to the feelings of right and wrong, to the ethical ideas this community of people had\u2014that knowledge should be shared with other people who can benefit from it, and that important resources should be utilized rather than wasted.\"\nHe further states more precisely that hacking and ethics are two separate issues:\n\"Just because someone enjoys hacking does not mean he has an ethical commitment to treating other people properly. Some hackers care about ethics\u2014I do, for instance\u2014but that is not part of being a hacker, it is a separate trait. [...] Hacking is not primarily about an ethical issue. [...] hacking tends to lead a significant number of hackers to think about ethical questions in a certain way. I would not want to completely deny all connection between hacking and views on ethics.\"\nThe notion of moral indifference between hackers characterized the persistent actions of computer culture in the 1970s and early 1980s. According to Kirkpatrick, author of \"The Hacker Ethic\", the \"computer plays the role of God, whose requirements took priority over the human ones of sentiment when it came to assessing one's duty to others.\"\nAccording to Kirkpatrick's \"The Hacker Ethic:\"\n\"Exceptional single-mindedness and determination to keep plugging away at a problem until the optimal solution had been found are well-documented traits of the early hackers. Willingness to work right through the night on a single programming problem are widely cited as features of the early 'hacker' computer culture.\" \nThe hacker culture is placed in the context of 1960s youth culture when American youth culture challenged the concept of capitalism and big, centralized structures. The hacker culture was a subculture within 1960s counterculture. The hackers' main concern was challenging the idea of technological expertise and authority. The 1960s hippy period attempted to \"overturn the machine.\" Although hackers appreciated technology, they wanted regular citizens, and not big corporations, to have power over technology \"as a weapon that might actually undermine the authority of the expert and the hold of the monolithic system.\"\nThe hacker ethics.\nAs Levy summarized in the preface of \"Hackers\", the general tenets or principles of hacker ethic include:\nIn addition to those principles, Levy also described more specific hacker ethics and beliefs in chapter 2, \"The Hacker Ethic\": The ethics he described in chapter 2 are:\nSharing.\nFrom the early days of modern computing through to the 1970s, it was far more common for computer users to have the freedoms that are provided by an ethic of open sharing and collaboration. Software, including source code, was commonly shared by individuals who used computers. Most companies had a business model based on hardware sales, and provided or bundled the associated software free of charge. According to Levy's account, sharing was the norm and expected within the non-corporate hacker culture. The principle of sharing stemmed from the open atmosphere and informal access to resources at MIT. During the early days of computers and programming, the hackers at MIT would develop a program and share it with other computer users.\nIf the hack was deemed particularly good, then the program might be posted on a board somewhere near one of the computers. Other programs that could be built upon it and improved it were saved to tapes and added to a drawer of programs, readily accessible to all the other hackers. At any time, a fellow hacker might reach into the drawer, pick out the program, and begin adding to it or \"bumming\" it to make it better. Bumming referred to the process of making the code more concise so that more can be done in fewer instructions, saving precious memory for further enhancements.\nIn the second generation of hackers, sharing was about sharing with the general public in addition to sharing with other hackers. A particular organization of hackers that was concerned with sharing computers with the general public was a group called Community Memory. This group of hackers and idealists put computers in public places for anyone to use. The first community computer was placed outside of Leopold's Records in Berkeley, California.\nAnother sharing of resources occurred when Bob Albrecht provided considerable resources for a non-profit organization called the People's Computer Company (PCC). PCC opened a computer center where anyone could use the computers there for fifty cents per hour.\nThis second generation practice of sharing contributed to the battles of free and open software. In fact, when Bill Gates' version of BASIC for the Altair was shared among the hacker community, Gates claimed to have lost a considerable sum of money because few users paid for the software. As a result, Gates wrote an Open Letter to Hobbyists. This letter was published by several computer magazines and newsletters, most notably that of the Homebrew Computer Club where much of the sharing occurred.\nAccording to Brent K. Jesiek in \"Democratizing Software: Open Source, the Hacker Ethic, and Beyond,\" technology is being associated with social views and goals. Jesiek refers to Gisle Hannemyr's views on open source vs. commercialized software. Hannemyr concludes that when a hacker constructs software, the software is flexible, tailorable, modular in nature and is open-ended. A hacker's software contrasts mainstream hardware which favors control, a sense of being whole, and be immutable (Hannemyr, 1999).\nFurthermore, he concludes that 'the difference between the hacker\u2019s approach and those of the industrial programmer is one of outlook: between an agoric, integrated and holistic attitude towards the creation of artifacts and a proprietary, fragmented and reductionist one' (Hannemyr, 1999). As Hannemyr\u2019s analysis reveals, the characteristics of a given piece of software frequently reflect the attitude and outlook of the programmers and organizations from which it emerges.\"\nCopyright and patents.\nAs copyright and patent laws limit the ability to share software, opposition to software patents is widespread in the hacker and free software community.\nHands-On Imperative.\nMany of the principles and tenets of hacker ethic contribute to a common goal: the Hands-On Imperative. As Levy described in Chapter 2, \"Hackers believe that essential lessons can be learned about the systems\u2014about the world\u2014from taking things apart, seeing how they work, and using this knowledge to create new and more interesting things.\"\nEmploying the Hands-On Imperative requires free access, open information, and the sharing of knowledge. To a true hacker, if the Hands-On Imperative is restricted, then the ends justify the means to make it unrestricted \"so that improvements can be made\". When these principles are not present, hackers tend to work around them. For example, when the computers at MIT were protected either by physical locks or login programs, the hackers there systematically worked around them in order to have access to the machines. Hackers assumed a \"willful blindness\" in the pursuit of perfection.\nThis behavior was not malicious in nature: the MIT hackers did not seek to harm the systems or their users. This deeply contrasts with the modern, media-encouraged image of hackers who crack secure systems in order to steal information or complete an act of cyber-vandalism.\nCommunity and collaboration.\nThroughout writings about hackers and their work processes, a common value of community and collaboration is present. For example, in Levy's \"Hackers\", each generation of hackers had geographically based communities where collaboration and sharing occurred. For the hackers at MIT, it was the labs where the computers were running. For the hardware hackers (second generation) and the game hackers (third generation) the geographic area was centered in Silicon Valley where the Homebrew Computer Club and the People's Computer Company helped hackers network, collaborate, and share their work.\nThe concept of community and collaboration is still relevant today, although hackers are no longer limited to collaboration in geographic regions. Now collaboration takes place via the Internet. Eric S. Raymond identifies and explains this conceptual shift in \"The Cathedral and the Bazaar\":\nBefore cheap Internet, there were some geographically compact communities where the culture encouraged Weinberg's egoless programming, and a developer could easily attract a lot of skilled kibitzers and co-developers. Bell Labs, the MIT AI and LCS labs, UC Berkeley: these became the home of innovations that are legendary and still potent.\nRaymond also notes that the success of Linux coincided with the wide availability of the World Wide Web. The value of community is still in high practice and use today.\nLevy's \"true hackers\".\nLevy identifies several \"true hackers\" who significantly influenced the hacker ethic. Some well-known \"true hackers\" include:\nLevy also identified the \"hardware hackers\" (the \"second generation\", mostly centered in Silicon Valley) and the \"game hackers\" (or the \"third generation\"). All three generations of hackers, according to Levy, embodied the principles of the hacker ethic. Some of Levy's \"second-generation\" hackers include:\nLevy's \"third generation\" practitioners of hacker ethic include:\nOther descriptions.\nIn 2001, Finnish philosopher Pekka Himanen promoted the hacker ethic in opposition to the Protestant work ethic. In Himanen's opinion, the hacker ethic is more closely related to the virtue ethics found in the writings of Plato and of Aristotle. Himanen explained these ideas in a book, \"The Hacker Ethic and the Spirit of the Information Age\", with a prologue contributed by Linus Torvalds and an epilogue by Manuel Castells.\nIn this manifesto, the authors wrote about a hacker ethic centering on passion, hard work, creativity and joy in creating software. Both Himanen and Torvalds were inspired by the Sampo in Finnish mythology. The Sampo, described in the Kalevala saga, was a magical artifact constructed by Ilmarinen, the blacksmith god, that brought good fortune to its holder; nobody knows exactly what it was supposed to be. The Sampo has been interpreted in many ways: a world pillar or world tree, a compass or astrolabe, a chest containing a treasure, a Byzantine coin die, a decorated Vendel period shield, a Christian relic, etc. Kalevala saga compiler L\u00f6nnrot interpreted it to be a \"quern\" or mill of some sort that made flour, salt, and wealth.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14276", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14276", "title": "Hotel", "text": "Establishment that provides lodging paid on a short-term basis\nA hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis. Facilities provided inside a hotel room may range from a modest-quality mattress in a small room to large suites with bigger, higher-quality beds, a dresser, a refrigerator, and other kitchen facilities, upholstered chairs, a television, and en-suite bathrooms. Small, lower-priced hotels may offer only the most basic guest services and facilities. Larger, higher-priced hotels may provide additional guest facilities such as a swimming pool, a business center with computers, printers, and other office equipment, childcare, conference and event facilities, tennis or basketball courts, gymnasium, restaurants, day spa, and social function services. Hotel rooms are usually numbered (or named in some smaller hotels and B&amp;Bs) to allow guests to identify their room. Some boutique, high-end hotels have custom decorated rooms. Some hotels offer meals as part of a room and board arrangement. In Japan, capsule hotels provide a tiny room suitable only for sleeping and shared bathroom facilities.\nThe precursor to the modern hotel was the inn of medieval Europe. For a period of about 200 years from the mid-17th century, coaching inns served as a place for lodging for coach travelers. Inns began to cater to wealthier clients in the mid-18th century. One of the first hotels in a modern sense was opened in Exeter in 1768. Hotels proliferated throughout Western Europe and North America in the early 19th century, and luxury hotels began to spring up in the later part of the 19th century, particularly in the United States.\nHotel operations vary in size, function, complexity, and cost. Most hotels and major hospitality companies have set industry standards to classify hotel types. An upscale full-service hotel facility offers luxury amenities, full-service accommodations, an on-site restaurant, and the highest level of personalized service, such as a concierge, room service, and clothes-ironing staff. Full-service hotels often contain upscale full-service facilities with many full-service accommodations, an on-site full-service restaurant, and a variety of on-site amenities. Boutique hotels are smaller independent, non-branded hotels that often contain upscale facilities. Small to medium-sized hotel establishments offer a limited amount of on-site amenities. Economy hotels are small to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer basic accommodations with little to no services. Extended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer-term full-service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel.\nTimeshare and destination clubs are a form of property ownership involving ownership of an individual unit of accommodation for seasonal usage. A motel is a small-sized low-rise lodging with direct access to individual rooms from the car parking area. Boutique hotels are typically hotels with a unique environment or intimate setting. A number of hotels and motels have entered the public consciousness through popular culture. Some hotels are built specifically as destinations in themselves, for example casinos and holiday resorts.\nMost hotel establishments are run by a general manager who serves as the head executive (often referred to as the \"hotel manager\"), overseeing the entire operation and ensuring all departments function cohesively, department heads who oversee various departments within a hotel (e.g., food service), middle managers, administrative staff, and line-level supervisors. Each department head manages their specific area, trains staff, handles departmental budgets, and ensures their team delivers quality service that aligns with the hotel\u2019s standards. The organizational chart and volume of job positions and hierarchy varies by hotel size, function and class, and is often determined by hotel ownership and managing companies.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hotel\" is derived from the French \"h\u00f4tel\" (coming from the same origin as \"hospital\"), which referred to a French version of a building seeing frequent visitors, and providing care, rather than a place offering accommodation. In contemporary French usage, \"h\u00f4tel\" now has the same meaning as the English term, and \"h\u00f4tel particulier\" is used for the old meaning, as well as \"h\u00f4tel\" in some place names such as H\u00f4tel-Dieu (in Paris), which has been a hospital since the Middle Ages. The French spelling, with the circumflex, was also used in English, but is now rare. The circumflex replaces the 's' found in the earlier \"hostel\" spelling, which over time took on a new, but closely related meaning. Grammatically, hotels usually take the definite article \u2013 hence \"The Astoria Hotel\" or simply \"The Astoria\".\nHistory.\nFacilities offering hospitality to travellers featured in early civilizations. In Greco-Roman culture and in ancient Persia, hospitals for recuperation and rest were built at thermal baths. Guinness World Records officially recognised Japan's Nishiyama Onsen Keiunkan, founded in 705, as the oldest hotel in the world. During the Middle Ages, various religious orders at monasteries and abbeys would offer accommodation for travellers on the road.\nThe precursor to the modern hotel was the inn of medieval Europe, possibly dating back to the rule of Ancient Rome. These would provide for the needs of travellers, including food and lodging, stabling and fodder for the traveller's horses and fresh horses for mail coaches. Famous London examples of inns include the George and the Tabard. A typical layout of an inn featured an inner court with bedrooms on the two sides, with the kitchen and parlour at the front and the stables at the back.\nFor a period of about 200 years from the mid-17th century, coaching inns served as a place for lodging for coach travellers (in other words, a roadhouse). Coaching inns stabled teams of horses for stagecoaches and mail coaches and replaced tired teams with fresh teams. Traditionally they were seven miles apart, but this depended very much on the terrain.\nSome English towns had as many as ten such inns and rivalry between them became intense, not only for the income from the stagecoach operators but for the revenue from the food and drink supplied to the wealthy passengers. By the end of the century, coaching inns were being run more professionally, with a regular timetable being followed and fixed menus for food.\nInns began to cater to richer clients in the mid-18th century, and consequently grew in grandeur and in the level of service provided. Sudhir Andrews traces \"the birth of an organised hotel industry\" to Europe's chalets and small hotels which catered primarily to aristocrats.\nOne of the first hotels in a modern sense, the Royal Clarence, opened in Exeter in 1768, although the idea only really caught on in the early-19th century. In 1812 Mivart's Hotel opened its doors in London, later changing its name to Claridge's.\nHotels proliferated throughout Western Europe and North America in the 19th century. Luxury hotels, including the 1829 Tremont House in Boston, the 1836 Astor House in New York City, the 1889 Savoy Hotel in London, and the Ritz chain of hotels in London and Paris in the late 1890s, catered to an ever more-wealthy clientele.\nTitle II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is part of a United States law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, religion, or national origin in places of public accommodation. Hotels are included as types of public accommodation in the Act.\nInternational scale.\nHotels cater to travelers from many countries and languages, since no one country dominates the travel industry.\nTypes.\nHotel operations vary in size, function, and cost. Most hotels and major hospitality companies that operate hotels have set widely accepted industry standards to classify hotel types. General categories include the following:\nInternational luxury.\nInternational luxury hotels offer high-quality amenities, full-service accommodations, on-site full-service restaurants, and the highest level of personalized and professional service in major or capital cities. International luxury hotels are classified with at least a Five Diamond rating or Five Star hotel rating depending on the country and local classification standards. Example brands include: Grand Hyatt, Conrad, InterContinental, Sofitel, Mandarin Oriental, Four Seasons, The Peninsula, Rosewood, JW Marriott and The Ritz-Carlton.\nLifestyle luxury resorts.\nLifestyle luxury resorts are branded hotels that appeal to a guest with lifestyle or personal image in specific locations. They are typically full-service and classified as luxury. A key characteristic of lifestyle resorts is focus on providing a unique guest experience as opposed to simply providing lodging. Lifestyle luxury resorts are classified with a Five Star hotel rating depending on the country and local classification standards. Example brands include: Waldorf Astoria, St. Regis, Wynn Resorts, MGM, Shangri-La, Oberoi, Belmond, Jumeirah, Aman, Taj Hotels, Hoshino, Raffles, Capella, Fairmont, Banyan Tree, Regent and Park Hyatt.\nUpscale full-service.\nUpscale full-service hotels often provide a wide array of guest services and on-site facilities. Commonly found amenities may include: on-site food and beverage (room service and restaurants), meeting and conference services and facilities, fitness center, and business center. Upscale full-service hotels range in quality from upscale to luxury. This classification is based upon the quality of facilities and amenities offered by the hotel. Examples include: W Hotels, Sheraton, Langham, Kempinski, Pullman,\nKimpton Hotels, Hilton, Swiss\u00f4tel, Lotte, Renaissance, Marriott and Hyatt Regency brands.\nBoutique.\nBoutique hotels are smaller independent non-branded hotels that often contain mid-scale to upscale facilities of varying size in unique or intimate settings with full-service accommodations. These hotels are generally 100 rooms or fewer.\nFocused or select service.\nSmall to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer a limited number of on-site amenities that only cater and market to a specific demographic of travelers, such as the single business traveler. Most focused or select service hotels may still offer full-service accommodations but may lack leisure amenities such as an on-site restaurant or a swimming pool. Examples include Hyatt Place, Holiday Inn, Courtyard by Marriott and Hilton Garden Inn.\nEconomy and limited service.\nSmall to medium-sized hotel establishments that offer a very limited number of on-site amenities and often only offer basic accommodations with little to no services, catering to the budget-minded traveler seeking a \"no frills\" accommodation. Limited service hotels often lack an on-site restaurant but in return may offer a limited complimentary food and beverage amenity such as on-site continental breakfast service. Examples include Ibis Budget, Hampton by Hilton, Aloft, Holiday Inn Express, Fairfield by Mariott, and Four Points by Sheraton.\nExtended stay.\nExtended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer-term full-service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel. Extended stay hotels may offer non-traditional pricing methods such as a weekly rate that caters towards travelers in need of short-term accommodations for an extended period of time. Similar to limited and select service hotels, on-site amenities are normally limited and most extended stay hotels lack an on-site restaurant. Examples include Staybridge Suites, Candlewood Suites, Homewood Suites by Hilton, Home2 Suites by Hilton, Residence Inn by Marriott, Element, and Extended Stay America.\nTimeshare and destination clubs.\nTimeshare and destination clubs are a form of property ownership also referred to as a vacation ownership involving the purchase and ownership of an individual unit of accommodation for seasonal usage during a specified period of time. Timeshare resorts often offer amenities similar that of a full-service hotel with on-site restaurants, swimming pools, recreation grounds, and other leisure-oriented amenities. Destination clubs on the other hand may offer more exclusive private accommodations such as private houses in a neighborhood-style setting. Examples of timeshare brands include Hilton Grand Vacations, Marriott Vacation Club International, Westgate Resorts, Disney Vacation Club, and Holiday Inn Club Vacations.\nMotel.\nA motel, an abbreviation for \"motor hotel\", is a small-sized low-rise lodging establishment similar to a limited service, lower-cost hotel, but typically with direct access to individual rooms from the car park. Motels were built to serve road travellers, including travellers on road trip vacations and workers who drive for their job (travelling salespeople, truck drivers, etc.). Common during the 1950s and 1960s, motels were often located adjacent to a major highway, where they were built on inexpensive land at the edge of towns or along stretches of freeway.\nNew motel construction is rare in the 2000s as hotel chains have been building economy-priced, limited-service franchised properties at freeway exits which compete for largely the same clientele, largely saturating the market by the 1990s. Motels are still useful in less populated areas for driving travelers, but the more populated an area becomes, the more hotels move in to meet the demand for accommodation. While many motels are unbranded and independent, many of the other motels which remain in operation joined national franchise chains, often rebranding themselves as hotels, inns or lodges. Some examples of chains with motels include EconoLodge, Motel 6, Super 8, and Travelodge.\nMotels in some parts of the world are more often regarded as places for romantic assignations where rooms are often rented by the hour. This is fairly common in parts of Latin America.\nIn the United States, motels have a reputation for criminal activity such as prostitution and drug dealing.\nMicrostay.\nHotels may offer rooms for microstays, a type of booking for less than 24 hours where the customer chooses the check in time and the length of the stay. This allows the hotel increased revenue by reselling the same room several times a day. They first gained popularity in Europe but are now common in major global tourist centers.\nManagement.\nHotel management is a globally accepted professional career field and academic field of study. Degree programs such as hospitality management studies, a business degree, and/or certification programs formally prepare hotel managers for industry practice.\nMost hotel establishments consist of a general manager who serves as the head executive (often referred to as the \"hotel manager\"), department heads who oversee various departments within a hotel, middle managers, administrative staff, and line-level supervisors. The organizational chart and volume of job positions and hierarchy varies by hotel size, function, and is often determined by hotel ownership and managing companies.\nUnique and specialty hotels.\nHistoric inns and boutique hotels.\nBoutique hotels are typically hotels with a unique environment or intimate setting.\nSome hotels have gained their renown through tradition, by hosting significant events or persons, such as Schloss Cecilienhof in Potsdam, Germany, which derives its fame from the Potsdam Conference of the World War II allies Winston Churchill, Harry Truman and Joseph Stalin in 1945. The Taj Mahal Palace &amp; Tower in Mumbai is one of India's most famous and historic hotels because of its association with the Indian independence movement. Some establishments have given name to a particular meal or beverage, as is the case with the Waldorf Astoria in New York City, United States where the Waldorf Salad was first created or the Hotel Sacher in Vienna, Austria, home of the Sachertorte. Others have achieved fame by association with dishes or cocktails created on their premises, such as the Hotel de Paris where the cr\u00eape Suzette was invented or the Raffles Hotel in Singapore, where the Singapore Sling cocktail was devised.\nA number of hotels have entered the public consciousness through popular culture, such as the Ritz Hotel in London, through its association with Irving Berlin's song, \"Puttin' on the Ritz\". The Algonquin Hotel in New York City is famed as the meeting place of the literary group, the Algonquin Round Table, and Hotel Chelsea, also in New York City, has been the subject of a number of songs and the scene of the stabbing of Nancy Spungen (allegedly by her boyfriend Sid Vicious).\nResort hotels.\nSome hotels are built specifically as a destination in itself to create a captive trade as a resort, example at casinos, amusement parks and seaside resorts. Though hotels have always been built in popular destinations, the defining characteristic of a resort hotel is that it exists purely to serve another attraction, the two having the same owners.\nOn the Las Vegas Strip there is a tradition of one-upmanship with luxurious and extravagant hotels in a concentrated area. This trend now has extended to other resorts worldwide, but the concentration in Las Vegas is still the world's highest: nineteen of the world's twenty-five largest hotels by room count are on the Strip, with a total of over 67,000 rooms.\nBunker hotels.\nThe Null Stern Hotel in Teufen, Appenzellerland, Switzerland, and the Concrete Mushrooms in Albania are former nuclear bunkers transformed into hotels.\nCave hotels.\nThe Cuevas Pedro Antonio de Alarc\u00f3n (named after the author) in Guadix, Spain, as well as several hotels in Cappadocia, Turkey, are notable for being built into natural cave formations, some with rooms underground. The Desert Cave Hotel in Coober Pedy, South Australia, is built into the remains of an opal mine.\nCliff hotels.\nLocated on the coast but high above sea level, these hotels offer unobstructed panoramic views and a great sense of privacy without the feeling of total isolation. Some examples from around the globe are the Riosol Hotel in Gran Canaria, Caruso Belvedere Hotel in Amalfi Coast (Italy), Aman Resorts Amankila in Bali, Birkenhead House in Hermanus (South Africa), The Caves in Jamaica and Caesar Augustus in Capri.\nCapsule hotels.\nCapsule hotels are a type of economical hotel first introduced in Japan, where people sleep in stacks of rectangular containers. In the sleeping capsules, beside the bed, the customer can watch TV, put their valuables in the mini safes, and the customers also can use the wireless internet.\nDay room hotels.\nSome hotels fill daytime occupancy with day rooms, for example, Rodeway Inn and Suites near Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Day rooms are booked in a block of hours typically between 8 am and 5 pm, before the typical night shift. These are similar to transit hotels in that they appeal to travelers, however, unlike transit hotels, they do not eliminate the need to go through Customs.\nAn emerging trend is hotels offering day passes for guests to use the facilities for the day, without having to pay a full fee for an overnight stay, such as a ResortPass.\nGarden hotels.\nGarden hotels often originate as famous buildings with gardens before becoming luxury hotels. In Britain, the conversion into a hotel commonly results from the need to improve the finances of estates. These include Gravetye Manor, the home of garden designer William Robinson, and Cliveden, designed by Charles Barry with a rose garden by Geoffrey Jellicoe. Other prominent examples include the Abbasi Hotel in Iran, and Hostal dos Reis Cat\u00f3licos in Spain.\nIce, snow and igloo hotels.\nThe Ice Hotel in Jukkasj\u00e4rvi, Sweden, was the first ice hotel in the world; first built in 1990, it is built each winter and melts every spring. The Hotel de Glace in Duschenay, Canada, opened in 2001 and it is North America's only ice hotel. It is redesigned and rebuilt in its entirety every year. \nIce hotels can also be included within larger ice complexes; for example, the Mammut Snow Hotel in Finland is located within the walls of the Kemi snow castle; and the Lainio Snow Hotel is part of a snow village near Yll\u00e4s, Finland. There is an arctic snowhotel in Rovaniemi in Lapland, Finland, along with glass igloos. The first glass igloos were built in 1999 in Finland, they became the Kakslauttanen Arctic Resort with 65 buildings, 53 small ones for two people and 12 large ones for four people. Glass igloos, with their roof made of thermal glass, allow guests to admire auroras comfortably from their beds.\nLove hotels.\nA love hotel (also 'love motel', especially in Taiwan) is a type of short-stay hotel found around the world, operated primarily for the purpose of allowing guests privacy for sexual activities, typically for one to three hours, but with overnight as an option. Styles of premises vary from extremely low-end to extravagantly appointed. In Japan, love hotels have a history of over 400 years.\nPortable modular hotels.\nIn 2021 a New York-based company introduced new modular and movable hotel rooms which allow landowners and hospitality groups to create and easily scale hotel accommodations. The portable units can be built in three to five months and can be stacked to create multi-floor units.\nReferral hotel.\nA referral hotel is a hotel chain that offers branding to independently operated hotels; the chain itself is founded by or owned by the member hotels as a group. Many former referral chains have been converted to franchises; the largest surviving member-owned chain is Best Western.\nRailway hotels.\nThe first recorded purpose-built railway hotel was the Great Western Hotel, which opened adjacent to Reading railway station in 1844, shortly after the Great Western Railway opened its line from London. The building still exists, and although it has been used for other purposes over the years, it is now again a hotel and a member of the Malmaison hotel chain.\nFrequently, expanding railway companies built grand hotels at their termini, such as the Midland Hotel, Manchester next to the former Manchester Central Station, and in London the ones above St Pancras railway station and Charing Cross railway station. London also has the Chiltern Court Hotel above Baker Street tube station, there are also Canada's grand railway hotels. They are or were mostly, but not exclusively, used by those traveling by rail.\nStraw bale hotels.\nThe Maya Guesthouse in Nax Mont-Noble in the Swiss Alps, is the first hotel in Europe built entirely with straw bales. Due to the insulation values of the walls it needs no conventional heating or air conditioning system, although the Maya Guesthouse is built at an altitude of in the Alps.\nTransit hotels.\nTransit hotels are short stay hotels typically used at international airports where passengers can stay while waiting to change airplanes. The hotels are typically on the airside and do not require a visa for a stay or re-admission through security checkpoints.\nTreehouse hotels.\nSome hotels are built with living trees as structural elements, for example the Treehotel near Pite\u00e5, Sweden, the Costa Rica Tree House near the Jairo Mora Sandoval Gandoca-Manzanillo Mixed Wildlife Refuge, Costa Rica; the Treetops Hotel in Aberdare National Park, Kenya; the Ariau Towers near Manaus, Brazil, on the Rio Negro in the Amazon; and Bayram's Tree Houses in Olympos, Turkey.\nUnderwater hotels.\nSome hotels have accommodation underwater, such as Utter Inn in Lake M\u00e4laren, Sweden. Hydropolis, project in Dubai, would have had suites on the bottom of the Persian Gulf, and Jules' Undersea Lodge in Key Largo, Florida, requires scuba diving to access its rooms.\nOverwater hotels.\nA resort island is an island or an archipelago that contains resorts, hotels, overwater bungalows, restaurants, tourist attractions and its amenities. Maldives has the most overwater bungalows resorts.\nYurt hotels.\nYurts are circular, self-supporting structures with long rafters coalescing toward a central dome. During the day, the dome allows sunlight to illuminate the entire yurt interior, while moonlight and starlight shine through the dome at night.\nRecords.\nLargest.\nIn 2006, \"Guinness World Records\" listed the First World Hotel in Genting Highlands, Malaysia, as the world's largest hotel with a total of 6,118 rooms (and which has now expanded to 7,351 rooms). The Izmailovo Hotel in Moscow has the most beds, with 7,500, followed by The Venetian and The Palazzo complex in Las Vegas (7,117 rooms) and MGM Grand Las Vegas complex (6,852 rooms).\nOldest.\nAccording to the Guinness Book of World Records, the oldest hotel in operation is the Nisiyama Onsen Keiunkan in Yamanashi, Japan. The hotel, first opened in AD 707, has been operated by the same family for forty-six generations. The title was held until 2011 by the Hoshi Ryokan, in the Awazu Onsen area of Komatsu, Japan, which opened in the year 718, as the history of the Nisiyama Onsen Keiunkan was virtually unknown.\nHighest.\nThe Rosewood Guangzhou located on the top floors of the 108-story Guangzhou CTF Finance Centre in Tianhe District, Guangzhou, China. Soaring to 530-meters at its highest point, earns the singular status as the world's highest hotel.\nMost expensive purchase.\nIn October 2014, the Anbang Insurance Group, based in China, purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York in Manhattan for US$1.95 billion, making it the world's most expensive hotel ever sold.\nLong term residence.\nA number of public figures have notably chosen to take up semi-permanent or permanent residence in hotels.\nSee also.\nIndustry and careers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHuman habitation types.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14277", "revid": "1243320744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14277", "title": "Hebrew mythology", "text": "Hebrew mythology may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14278", "revid": "28916033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14278", "title": "Hermitian", "text": ""}
{"id": "14279", "revid": "15763484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14279", "title": "Hugh Hefner", "text": "American magazine publisher (1926\u20132017)\nHugh Marston Hefner (April 9, 1926 \u2013 September 27, 2017) was an American magazine publisher and businessman. He was the founder and editor-in-chief of \"Playboy\" magazine, a publication with revealing photographs and articles. Hefner extended the \"Playboy\" brand into a world network of Playboy Clubs. He also resided in luxury mansions where \"Playboy\" Playmates shared his wild partying life, fueling media interest.\nEarly life and education.\nHefner was born in Chicago on April 9, 1926, the first child of accountant Glenn Lucius Hefner (1896\u20131976) and his wife Grace Caroline (Swanson) Hefner (1895\u20131997) who worked as a teacher. His parents were from Nebraska. He had a younger brother named Keith (1929\u20132016). His mother was of Swedish ancestry, and his father was German and English.\nHefner was a descendant of Plymouth governor William Bradford through his father's line. He described his family as \"conservative, Midwestern, Methodist.\u201d His mother had wanted him to become a missionary.\nHefner attended Sayre Elementary School and Steinmetz High School, then served from 1944 to 1946 as a United States Army writer for a military newspaper. He graduated from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign in 1949 with a Bachelor of Arts in psychology and a double minor in creative writing and art, having earned his degree in two and a half years. In the spring of 1950, he took a semester of graduate courses in sociology at Northwestern University, but he dropped out soon after.\nCareer.\nIn January 1952, Hefner left his job as a copywriter for \"Esquire\" after he was denied a $5 raise. In 1953, he took out a mortgage loan of $600 and raised $8,000 from 45 investors (including $1,000 from his mother\u2014\"not because she believed in the venture,\" he told \"E!\" in 2006, \"but because she believed in her son\") to launch \"Playboy\", which was initially going to be called \"Stag Party\". The first issue was published in December 1953 and featured Marilyn Monroe from a 1949 nude calendar shoot she did under a pseudonym. That first issue sold more than 50,000 copies, but Monroe was not paid by Playboy or Hefner for the photos. (Hefner never met Monroe, but he bought the crypt next to hers at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in 1992 for $75,000.)\n\"Esquire\" magazine rejected Charles Beaumont's science fiction story \"The Crooked Man\" in 1955, so Hefner agreed to publish it in \"Playboy.\" The story highlighted straight men being persecuted in a world where homosexuality was the norm. The magazine received angry letters, so Hefner responded, \"If it was wrong to persecute heterosexuals in a homosexual society then the reverse was wrong, too.\" In 1961, Hefner watched Dick Gregory perform at the Herman Roberts Show Bar in Chicago, and he hired Gregory to work at the Chicago Playboy Club. Gregory attributed the launch of his career to that night.\nHefner promoted a \"bon vivant\" lifestyle in his magazine and in the television shows that he hosted, \"Playboy's Penthouse\" (1959\u20131960) and \"Playboy After Dark\" (1969\u20131970). He was also the chief creative officer of Playboy Enterprises, the publishing group which operates the magazine.\nOn June 4, 1963, Hefner was arrested for promoting obscene literature after he published an issue of \"Playboy\" featuring nude shots of Jayne Mansfield in bed with a man present. The case went to trial and resulted in a hung jury.\nIn the 1960s, Hefner created \"private key\" clubs that were racially diverse. During the civil rights movement in 1966, Hefner sent Alex Haley to interview American Nazi Party founder George Lincoln Rockwell, much to Rockwell's shock because Haley was black. Rockwell agreed to meet with Haley only after gaining assurance that he was not Jewish, although Rockwell kept a handgun on the table throughout the interview. In \"\" (1979), the interview was recreated with James Earl Jones as Haley and Marlon Brando as Rockwell. Haley had also interviewed Malcolm X in 1963 and Martin Luther King Jr. in 1966 for the newly established 1962 \"playboy interview\".\nIn 1970, Hefner stated that \"militant feminists\" are \"unalterably opposed to the romantic boy-girl society that \"Playboy\" promotes\" and ordered an article in his magazine against them.\nIn his later years, Hefner's star dimmed, but he remained a well-known personality, often appearing in cameo roles. In the 1993 \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Krusty Gets Kancelled\", Hefner voiced himself. In 1999, Hefner financed the Clara Bow documentary \"Discovering the It Girl\". \"Nobody has what Clara had,\" he said. \"She defined an era and made her mark on the nation\". Hefner guest-starred as himself in the 2000 \"Sex and the City\" episode \"Sex and Another City\". In 2005, he guest-starred on the HBO shows \"Curb Your Enthusiasm\" and \"Entourage\". He guest-starred as himself in a 2006 episode of Seth Green's \"Robot Chicken\" on the late-night programming block Adult Swim. In the 2007 \"Family Guy\" episode \"Airport '07\", he voiced himself. He has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for television and made several movie appearances as himself. In 2009, he was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor for his performance as himself in \"Miss March\". On his official Twitter account, he joked about this nomination: \"Maybe I didn't understand the character.\"\nBrigitte Berman's documentary \"\" was released on July 30, 2010. He had previously granted full access to documentary filmmaker and television producer Kevin Burns for the A&amp;E \"Biography\" special \"Hugh Hefner: American Playboy\" in 1996. Hefner and Burns later collaborated on numerous other television projects, most notably on \"The Girls Next Door\", a reality series that ran for six seasons (2005\u20132009) and 90 episodes. Hefner also made a voice-only appearance as himself in the 2011 film \"Hop\".\nIn 2012, Hefner announced that his youngest son Cooper would succeed him as the public face of \"Playboy\".\nPersonal life.\nHefner was known to friends and family simply as \"Hef\". He married Northwestern University student Mildred (\"Millie\") Williams in 1949. They had a daughter named Christie (b. 1952) and a son, David (b. 1955). Before the wedding, Mildred confessed that she had an affair while he was away in the army. He called the admission \"the most devastating moment of my life.\" A 2006 \"E! True Hollywood Story\" profile of Hefner revealed that Mildred allowed him to have sex with other women, out of guilt for her own infidelity and in the hope that it would preserve their marriage. The couple divorced in 1959.\nHefner remade himself as a \"bon vivant\" and man about town, a lifestyle that he promoted in his magazine and TV shows. He admitted to being \"'involved' with maybe eleven out of twelve months' worth of Playmates\" during some years. Donna Michelle, Marilyn Cole, Lillian M\u00fcller, Shannon Tweed, Barbi Benton, Karen Christy, Sondra Theodore, and Carrie Leigh were a few of his many lovers; Leigh filed a $35\u00a0million palimony suit against him. In 1971, he acknowledged that he experimented in bisexuality. Also in 1971, he established a second residence in Los Angeles with the acquisition of Playboy Mansion West, and moved there permanently from Chicago in 1975.\nOn March 7, 1985, Hefner had a minor stroke at age 58, whereupon he re-evaluated his lifestyle, making several changes. He toned down the wild, all-night parties, and his daughter Christie took over the operation of Playboy's commercial operations in 1988. The following year, he married Playmate of the Year Kimberley Conrad; they were 36 years apart in age. The couple had sons Marston Glenn (b. 1990) and Cooper (b. 1991). The \"E! True Hollywood Story\" profile noted that the Playboy Mansion had been transformed into a family-friendly homestead. He and Conrad separated in 1998, after which she moved into the house next door to the mansion. Hefner filed for divorce from Conrad in 2009 after an 11-year separation, citing irreconcilable differences. He stated that he only remained nominally married to her for the sake of their children, and their youngest child had just turned 18. The divorce was finalized in 2010.\nHefner became known for moving an ever-changing coterie of young women into the Playboy Mansion, including twins Mandy and Sandy Bentley. He dated as many as seven women concurrently. He also dated Brande Roderick, Izabella St. James, Tina Marie Jordan, Holly Madison, Bridget Marquardt, and Kendra Wilkinson. Madison, Wilkinson, and Marquardt appeared on \"The Girls Next Door\" depicting their lives at the Playboy Mansion. In October 2008, all three of them decided to leave the mansion.\nIn January 2009, Hefner began a relationship with Crystal Harris; she joined the Shannon Twins after his previous \"number one girlfriend\" Holly Madison had ended their seven-year relationship. On December 24, 2010, he became engaged to Harris, but she broke off their engagement on June 14, 2011, five days before their planned wedding. The July issue of \"Playboy\" reached store shelves and customers' homes within days of the wedding date; it featured Harris on the cover, and in a photo spread as well. The headline on the cover read \"Introducing America's Princess, Mrs. Crystal Hefner\". Hefner and Harris subsequently reconciled and married on December 31, 2012.\nHefner was very distantly related to the 41st and 43rd presidents of the United States, George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush, respectively. Hefner's brother Keith died at age 87 on April 8, 2016, one day before Hefner's 90th birthday.\nPlayboy Mansion.\nIn January 2016, the Playboy Mansion was put on the market for $200\u00a0million, on condition that Hugh Hefner would continue to work and live in the mansion. Later that year it was sold to Daren Metropoulos, a principal at private equity firm Metropoulos &amp; Company, for $100\u00a0million. Metropoulos planned to reconnect the Playboy Mansion property with a neighboring estate that he purchased in 2009, combining the two for a 7.3-acre (3-hectare) compound as his own private residence.\nIn May 2017, Eugena Washington was the last Playmate of the Year to be announced by Hugh Hefner at the Playboy Mansion.\nPolitics and philanthropy.\nIn 1964, Hefner established the Hugh M. Hefner Foundation to \"facilitate individual rights in our democratic society\". The foundation funded Marty Goddard's prototype of the rape kit as part of its efforts to support women's empowerment. Additionally, the Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Award was created by Christie Hefner \"to honor individuals who have made significant contributions in the vital effort to protect and enhance First Amendment rights for Americans.\"\nHefner debated \"The Playboy Philosophy\" with William F. Buckley Jr., on \"Firing Line\" in Episode 26, recorded on September 12, 1966.\nHefner donated and raised money for the Democratic Party. In 2011, he referred to himself as an independent due to dissatisfaction with both the Democratic and Republican parties. Nonetheless, in 2012, he supported Barack Obama's reelection campaign.\nIn 1978, Hefner helped organize fund-raising efforts that led to the restoration of the Hollywood Sign. He hosted a gala fundraiser at the Playboy Mansion and contributed $27,000 (or 1/9 of the total restoration costs) by purchasing the letter Y in a ceremonial auction.\nHefner stated in a 2000 interview with \"Playboy\", \"It's perfectly clear to me that religion is a myth. It's something we have invented to explain the inexplicable.\" Lee Strobel, a Christian author who interviewed Hefner regarding his theological positions, later described Hefner as having a \"very minimalistic, deistic view of God.\"\nHefner donated $100,000 to the University of Southern California's School of Cinematic Arts to create a course called \"Censorship in Cinema\", and $2\u00a0million to endow a chair for the study of American film. In 2007, the university's audiovisual archive at the Norris Theater received a donation from Hefner and was renamed to the Hugh M. Hefner Moving Image Archive in his honor.\nBoth through his charitable foundation and individually, Hefner also contributed to charities and other organizations outside the sphere of politics and publishing, throwing fundraiser events for Much Love Animal Rescue as well as Generation Rescue, an anti-vaccinationist campaign organization supported by Jenny McCarthy.\nOn April 26, 2010, Hefner donated the last $900,000 sought by a conservation group for a land purchase needed to stop the development of the vista of the Hollywood Sign. \"Sylvilagus palustris hefneri\", an endangered subspecies of marsh rabbit, is named after him in honor of financial support that he provided.\nOn November 18, 2010, Children of the Night founder and president Lois Lee presented Hefner with the organization's first-ever Founder's Hero of the Heart Award in appreciation for his unwavering dedication, commitment and generosity.\nThe Barbi Twins, who are among a notable cohort of celebrity Playmates, including Pamela Anderson and Hefner's third wife Crystal Harris, praised the publishing icon for providing centerfolds and extended members of the Playboy family with a platform for activism and advocacy on behalf of animal populations in need.\nHefner supported legalizing same-sex marriage, calling it \"a fight for all our rights. Without it, we will turn back the sexual revolution and return to an earlier, puritanical time.\"\nDeath.\nHefner died at the Playboy Mansion on September 27, 2017, at the age of 91. The immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest and respiratory failure, with Hefner going into sepsis brought on by an \"E. coli\" infection.\nHe is interred at Westwood Memorial Park in Los Angeles, in the crypt beside Marilyn Monroe, for which he paid $75,000 in 1992. \"Spending eternity next to Marilyn is an opportunity too sweet to pass up,\" Hefner had told the \"Los Angeles Times\" in 2009.\nCriticism.\nSuzanne Moore wrote in \"The Guardian\" that Hefner threatened to file a lawsuit against her for calling him a \"pimp\". Defending her position, Moore argued that \"he was a man who bought and sold women to other men\". She further stated that \"part of Hefner's business acumen was to make the selling of female flesh respectable and hip, to make soft porn acceptable.\" Julie Bindel argued in \"The Independent\" that Hefner \"caused immeasurable damage by turning porn\u2014and therefore the buying and selling of women's bodies\u2014into a legitimate business.\"\nRobin Abcarian wrote in the \"Los Angeles Times\", quoting Wendy Hamilton, that Hefner \"probably did more to mainstream the exploitation of women's bodies than any other figure in American history,\" adding that he \"managed to convince many women that taking off their clothes for men's pleasure was not just empowering, but a worthy goal in itself.\" She further stated that Hefner \"embodied the aesthetic notion that images of women\u2014and women themselves\u2014exist to please men.\"\nHefner's former girlfriend Holly Madison said that he \"would encourage competition\u2014and body image issues\u2014between his multiple live-in girlfriends. His legacy is full of evidence of the exploitation of women for professional gain.\" Ed Stetzer wrote in \"Christianity Today\" that Hefner would have the residence systematically cleaned whenever Christie Hefner visited in order \"to keep the realities from his own daughter\". Stetzer further lamented the consequences of Hefner's role as a \"general\" of the \"sexual revolution\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's hard to fathom that anyone would have known what this would have turned into. Parents growing up today are fighting to keep their children pure. Spouses are fighting to keep their marriages intact. And many enslaved and trapped in the adult entertainment industry have been figuratively and literally stripped not only of their clothes, but their very value as people made in the image of God. If this does not concern us, what will?\nA 12-part television documentary series, \"Secrets of Playboy\", debuted on A&amp;E January 24, 2022, in which Hefner's former male and female employees and partners made claims of systematic sexual misconduct and manipulation, recreational and manipulative drug use, peer pressure, sextortion, blackmail, rape, forced and violent anal sex, sexual assault without consent and/or while victims were in a state of drug-induced stupor or unconsciousness, spying, videotaping without consent, and illegal sex with minors by Hefner and his celebrity friends and guests at the Playboy Mansion and other locations. The PLBY group, now publicly owned, distanced itself from Hefner in a statement released shortly before the first episode was broadcast, saying, \"Today's Playboy is not Hugh Hefner's Playboy. We trust and validate these women and their stories and we strongly support those individuals who have come forward to share their experiences.\"\nIn January 2024, Hefner's widow Crystal, who previously brushed away criticism, wrote a memoir where she alleged she experienced a hostile environment while at the Playboy Mansion, even claiming that she was \"imprisoned\" while there.\nDepictions.\nThe Amazon original series \"\" was released in April 2017. It stars Matt Whelan in the title role, along with Emmett Skilton and Chelsie Preston Crayford. The ten episodes are a combination of interviews, archival footage (including moments found in Hefner's vast personal collection), and cinematic re-enactments that cover the launch of the magazine as well as the next six decades of Hefner's personal life and career. The series was filmed in Auckland.\nIn October 2017, Playboy Enterprises announced that a Hugh Hefner biopic directed by Brett Ratner with the screenplay by Jeff Nathanson was greenlit with Jared Leto rumored to play Hefner. In November 2017, it was indefinitely put on hold following sexual harassment allegations against Ratner, and Leto's representatives stated that reports of him being attached to the film at any point were false.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14280", "revid": "51018437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14280", "title": "Hafizullah Amin", "text": "Afghan communist politician (1929\u20131979)\nHafizullah Amin (Dari/;\u200e 1 August 1929\u00a0\u2013 27 December 1979) was an Afghan communist head of state, who served in that position for a little over three months, from September 1979 until his assassination. He organized the Saur Revolution of 1978 and co-founded the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), ruling Afghanistan as General Secretary of the People's Democratic Party.\nBorn in the town of Paghman in Kabul Province, Amin studied at Kabul University and started his career as a teacher before he twice went to the United States to study. During this time, Amin became attracted to Marxism and became involved in radical student movements at the University of Wisconsin. Upon his return to Afghanistan, he used his teaching position to spread socialist ideologies to students, and he later joined the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), a new far-left organization co-founded by Nur Muhammad Taraki and Babrak Karmal. He ran as a candidate in the 1965 parliamentary election but failed to secure a seat, but in 1969 became the only Khalqist elected to parliament, increasing his standing within the party.\nAmin was the main organizer of the April 1978 Saur Revolution, which overthrew the government of Mohammad Daoud Khan and formed a pro-Soviet state based on socialist ideals. Being second in chief of the Democratic Republic, Amin soon became the regime's strongman, the main architect of the state's programs including mass persecution of those deemed counter-revolutionary. A growing personal struggle with General Secretary Taraki eventually led to Amin wrestling power away then successfully deposing him and later ordering his execution; on 16 September 1979, Amin named himself Chairman of the Council of Ministers (head of government), Chairman of the Revolutionary Council (head of state), and General Secretary of the PDPA Central Committee (supreme leader).\nAmin's short-lived leadership featured controversies from beginning to end. His government failed to solve the problem of the population revolting against the regime as the situation rapidly worsened and army desertions and defections continued. He tried to change things with friendly overtures to the United States, however his reputation in Washington was tarnished by his role in the assassination of Adolph Dubs. Many Afghans, especially those from rural areas, held Amin responsible for the regime's harshest measures, such as ordering thousands of executions. Thousands of people disappeared without trace during his time in office. The Soviet Union under Leonid Brezhnev was dissatisfied with and mistrusted Amin after he conducted a series of purges against the Parcham; they intervened in Afghanistan, invoking the 1978 Twenty-Year Treaty of Friendship between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union. Soviet operatives assassinated Amin at the Tajbeg Palace on 27 December 1979 as part of Operation Storm-333, kickstarting the 10-year Soviet\u2013Afghan War.\nEarly life and career.\nHafizullah Amin was born to a Kharoti Ghilzai Pashtun family in the Qazi Khel village in Paghman on 1 August 1929. His father, a civil servant, died in 1937 when he was 8. Thanks to his brother Abdullah, a primary school teacher, Amin was able to attend both primary and secondary school, which in turn allowed him to attend Kabul University (KU). After studying mathematics there, he also graduated from the Darul Mualimeen Teachers College in Kabul, and became a teacher. Amin later became vice-principal of the Darul Mualimeen College, and then principal of the prestigious Avesina High School.\nIn 1957, Amin left Afghanistan for Columbia University in New York City, where he earned MA in education. It was at Columbia that Amin became attracted to Marxism, and in 1958 he became a member of the university's Socialist Progressive Club. When he returned to Afghanistan, Amin became a teacher at Kabul University, and later, for the second time, the principal of Avesina High School. During this period Amin became acquainted with Nur Muhammad Taraki, a communist. Around this time, Amin quit his position as principal of Avesina High School to become principal of the Darul Mualimeen College.\nIt is alleged that Amin became radicalised during his second stay in the United States in 1962, when he enrolled in a work-study group at the University of Wisconsin. Amin studied in the doctoral programme at the Columbia University Teachers College, but started to neglect his studies in favour of politics and in 1963 he became head of the Afghan students' association at the college. The association was funded by the Asia Foundation, known to be a CIA pass-through group, or front. When he returned to Afghanistan in the mid-1960s, he supposedly flew first to Moscow where he met the Afghan ambassador to the Soviet Union, his old friend Ali Ahmad Popel, a previous Afghan Minister of Education. During his short stay, Amin became even more radicalised. According to others, Nabi Misdaq for instance, Amin did not return by way of Moscow, but rather West Germany and Lebanon. \nBy the time he had returned to Afghanistan, the Communist People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) had already held its founding congress, which was in 1965. Amin ran as a candidate for the PDPA in the 1965 parliamentary election, and lost by a margin of less than fifty votes. In 1966, when the PDPA Central Committee was expanded, Amin was elected as a non-voting member, and in the spring of 1967 he gained full membership. Amin's standing in the Khalq faction of the PDPA increased when he was the only Khalqist elected to parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election.\nWhen the PDPA split along factional lines in 1967, between Khalqists led by Nur and Parchamites led by Babrak Karmal, Amin joined the Khalqists. As a member of parliament, Amin tried to win over support from the Pashtun people in the armed forces. According to a biography about Amin, he used his position as member of parliament to fight against imperialism, feudalism, and reactionary tendencies, and fought against the \"rotten\" regime, the monarchy. Amin himself said that he used his membership in parliament to pursue the class struggle against the bourgeoisie. Relations between Khalqists and Parchamites deteriorated during this period. Amin, the only Khalq member of parliament, and Babrak Karmal, the only Parcham member of parliament, did not cooperate with each other. Amin would later, during his short stint in power, mention these events with bitterness. Following the arrest of fellow PDPA members Dastagir Panjsheri and Saleh Mohammad Zeary in 1969, Amin became one of the party's leading members, and was still a pre-eminent party member by the time of their release in 1973.\nThe Daoud era.\nFrom 1973 until the PDPA unification in 1977, Amin was second only to Taraki in the Khalqist PDPA. When the PDPA ruled Afghanistan, their relationship was referred to as a disciple (Amin) following his mentor (Taraki). This official portrayal of the situation was perhaps misleading, their relationship having more to do with pragmatic calculations. Taraki needed Amin's \"tactical and strategic talents\" and, while Amin's motivations are more uncertain, it is commonly believed that he associated with Taraki to protect his own position. Amin had attracted many enemies during his career, the most notable being Karmal. According to the official version of events, Taraki protected Amin from party members or others who wanted to damage the PDPA and the country. \nWhen Mohammad Daoud Khan ousted the monarchy in 1973, and established the Republic of Afghanistan, the Khalqist PDPA offered its support for the new regime if it established a National Front which presumably included the Khalqist PDPA itself. The Parchamite PDPA had already established an alliance with Daoud at the beginning of his regime, and Karmal called for the dissolution of the Khalqist PDPA. Karmal's call for dissolution only worsened relations between the Khalqist and Parchamite PDPA. Fortunately for Taraki and Amin, Karmal's alliance actually hurt the Parchamites' standing in Afghan politics. Some communists in the armed forces, disillusioned with the government of Daoud, turned to the Khalqist PDPA because of its apparent independence. Parchamite association with the Daoud government indirectly led to the Khalqist-led PDPA coup of 1978, popularly referred to as the Saur Revolution. \nFrom 1973 until the 1978 coup, Amin was responsible for organising party work in the Afghan armed forces. According to the official version, Amin \"met patriotic liaison officers day or night, in the desert or the mountains, in the fields or the forests, enlightening them on the basis of the principles of the working class ideology.\" Amin's success in recruiting military officers lay in the fact that Daoud \"betrayed the left\" soon after taking power. When Amin began recruiting military officers for the PDPA, it was not difficult for him to find disgruntled military officers. \nIn the meantime, relations between the Parchamite and Khalqist PDPA deteriorated, In 1973 it was rumoured that Major Zia Mohammadzai, a Parchamite and head of the Republican Guard, planned to assassinate the entire Khalqist leadership. The alleged plot failed because the Khalqists found out about it. The assassination attempt proved to be a further blow to relations between the Parchamites and Khalqists. The Parchamites deny that they ever planned to assassinate the Khalqist leadership, but historian Beverley Male argues that Karmal's subsequent activities give credence to the Khalqist view of events. Because of the Parchamite assassination attempt, Amin pressed the Khalqist PDPA to seize power in 1976 by ousting Daoud. The majority of the PDPA leadership voted against such a move. The following year, in 1977, the Parchamites and Khalqists officially reconciled. The Parchamite and Khalqist PDPAs, which had separate general secretaries, politburos, central committees and other organisational structures, were officially unified in the summer of 1977. One reason for unification was that the international communist movement, represented by the Communist Party of India, Iraqi Communist Party and the Communist Party of Australia, called for party unification.\nSaur Revolution.\nOn 18 April 1978 Mir Akbar Khyber, the chief ideologue of the Parcham faction, was killed, presumably by the Daoud government. Khyber's assassination initiated a chain of events which led to the PDPA taking power eleven days later, on 27 April. The assassin was never caught, but Anahita Ratebzad, a Parchamite, believed that Amin had ordered the assassination. \nKhyber's funeral evolved into a large anti-government demonstration. Daoud, who did not understand the significance of the events, began a mass arrest of PDPA members seven days after Khyber's funeral. Amin, who organised the subsequent revolution against Daoud, was one of the last Central Committee members to be arrested by the authorities. His late arrest can be considered as proof of the regime's lack of information since Amin was the leading revolutionary party organiser. The government's lack of awareness was proven by the arrest of Taraki as it was the pre-arranged signal for the revolution to commence. When Amin found out that Taraki had been arrested, he ordered the revolution to begin at 9\u00a0am on 27 April. Amin, in contrast to Taraki, was not imprisoned, but instead put under house arrest. His son, Abdur Rahman, was still allowed freedom of movement. The revolution was successful thanks to overwhelming support from the Afghan military, including the Defence Minister, Ghulam Haidar Rasuli; the commander of the Afghan Army, Aslam Watanjar; and the Chief of Staff of the Afghan Air Force, Abdul Qadir. Daoud, his family, and high ranking loyalists were executed.\nPDPA rule.\nKhalq\u2013Parcham break.\nAfter the Saur revolution, Taraki was appointed Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers, and retained his post as PDPA general secretary. Taraki initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites. Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and a Deputy Prime Minister, and Mohammad Aslam Watanjar became a Deputy Prime Minister. The two Parchamites Abdul Qadir and Mohammad Rafi became Minister of National Defence and Minister of Public Works respectively. According to Angel Rasanayagam, the appointment of Amin, Karmal and Watanjar as Deputy Prime Ministers led to the establishment of three cabinets; the Khalqists were answerable to Amin, the Parchamites were answerable to Karmal, and the military officers (who were Parchamites) were answerable to Watanjar. \nThe first conflict between the Khalqists and Parchamites arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to the military officers who participated in the Saur Revolution. Amin, who had previously opposed the appointment of military officers to the PDPA leadership, switched sides, supporting their elevation. The PDPA Politburo voted in favour of giving membership to the military officers. The victorious Khalqists portrayed the Parchamites as opportunists who had ridden the revolutionary wave without actually participating in the revolution. To make matters worse for the Parchamites, the term Parcham was, according to Taraki, a word synonymous with factionalism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is only one leading force in the country \u2013 Hafizullah Amin. In the Politburo, everybody fears Amin.\u2014\u200a\nOn 27 June 1978, three months after the revolution, Amin managed to outmaneuver the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting. The meeting decided that the Khalqists had exclusive rights to formulate and decide policy, a policy which left the Parchamites impotent. Karmal was exiled, but was able to establish a network with the remaining Parchamites in government. A coup to overthrow Amin was planned for September. Its leading members in Afghanistan were Qadir, the defence minister, and Army Chief of Staff General Shahpur Ahmedzai. The coup was planned for 4 September, the day of the festival of Eid, because soldiers and officers would be off duty. The conspiracy failed when the Afghan ambassador to India told the Afghan leadership about the plan. A purge was initiated, and Parchamite ambassadors were recalled; few returned, for example Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah both preferred to stay in their assigned countries.\nAmin\u2013Taraki break.\nThe Afghan people revolted against the PDPA government when the government introduced several socialist reforms, including land reforms. By early 1979, 25 out of Afghanistan's 28 provinces were unsafe because of armed resistance against the government. On 29 March 1979, the Herat uprising began; the uprising turned the revolt into an open war between the Afghan government and anti-regime resistance. It was during this period that Amin became Kabul's strongman. Shortly after the Herat uprising had been crushed, the Revolutionary Council convened to ratify the new Five-Year Plan, the Afghan\u2013Soviet Friendship Treaty, and to vote on whether or not to reorganise the cabinet and to enhance the power of the executive (the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council). While the official version of events said that all issues were voted on democratically at the meeting, the Revolutionary Council held another meeting the following day to ratify the new Five-Year Plan and to discuss the reorganisation of the cabinet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs one of our slogans is 'to everyone according to his capacity and work', therefore as a result of past performances and services he has won our greater trust and assurances. I have full confidence in him and in the light of this confidence I entrust him with this job...\n\u2014 Taraki telling his colleagues why Amin should be appointed Prime Minister.\nAlexander Puzanov, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, was able to persuade Watanjar, Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy and Interior Minister Sherjan Mazdoryar to become part of a conspiracy against Amin. These three men put pressure on Taraki, who by this time believed that \"he really was the 'great leader'\", to sack Amin from office. It is unknown if Amin knew anything about the conspiracy against him, but it was after the cabinet reorganisation that he talked about his dissatisfaction. On 26 March, the PDPA Politburo and the Council of Ministers approved the extension of the powers of the executive branch, and the establishment of the Homeland Higher Defence Council (HHDC) to handle security matters. \nMany analysts of the day regarded Amin's appointment as Prime Minister as an increase in his powers at the expense of Taraki. However, the reorganisation of the cabinet and the strengthening of Taraki's position as Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, had reduced the authority of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister was, due to the strengthening of the executive, now appointed by the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council. While Amin could appoint and dismiss new ministers, he needed Taraki's consent to actually do so. Another problem for Amin was that while the Council of Ministers was responsible to the Revolutionary Council and its chairman, individual ministers were only responsible to Taraki. When Amin became Prime Minister, he was responsible for planning, finance and budgetary matters, the conduct of foreign policy, and for order and security. The order and security responsibilities had been taken over by the HHDC, which was chaired by Taraki. While Amin was HHDC Deputy chairman, the majority of HHDC members were members of the anti-Amin faction. For instance, the HHDC membership included Watanjar the Minister of National Defence, Interior Minister Mazdoryar, the President of the Political Affairs of the Armed Forces Mohammad Iqbal, the Chief of the General Staff Mohammad Yaqub, the Commander of the Afghan Air Force Nazar Mohammad, and Assadullah Sarwari, the head of ASGA, the Afghan secret police.\nThe order of precedence had been institutionalised, whereby Taraki was responsible for defence and Amin responsible for assisting Taraki in defence related matters. Amin's position was given a further blow by the democratisation of the decision-making process, which allowed its members to contribute; most of them were against Amin. Another problem for Amin was that the office of HHDC Deputy chairman had no specific functions or powers, and the appointment of a new defence minister who opposed him drastically weakened his control over the Ministry of National Defence. The reorganisation of ministers was a further blow to Amin's position; he had lost control of the defence ministry, the interior ministry and the ASGA. Amin still had allies at the top, many of them in strategically important positions, for instance, Yaqub was his brother-in-law and the Security Chief in the Ministry of Interior was Sayed Daoud Taroon, who was also later appointed to the HHDC as an ordinary member in April. Amin succeeded in appointing two more of his allies to important positions; Mohammad Sediq Alemyar as Minister of Planning and Khayal Mohammad Katawazi as Minister of Information and Culture; and Faqir Mohammad Faqir was appointed Deputy Prime Minister in April 1978.\nAmin's political position was not secure when Alexei Yepishev, the Head of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy, visited Kabul. Yepishev met personally with Taraki on 7 April, but never met with Amin. The Soviets were becoming increasingly worried about Amin's control over the Afghan military. Even so, during Yepishev's visit Amin's position was actually strengthened; Taroon was appointed Taraki's aide-de-camp.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOur homeland's enemies, the enemies of the working class movement all over the world are trying to penetrate into the PDPA leadership and above all woo the working class party leader but the people of Afghanistan and the PDPA both take great pride in the fact that the PDPA and its General-Secretary enjoys a great personality which render him impossible to woo.\n \u2014 Amin in a speech in which he warns of inter-party sectarianism.\nSoon after, at two cabinet meetings, the strengthening of the executive powers of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council was proven. Even though Amin was Prime Minister, Taraki chaired the meetings instead of him. Amin's presence at these two meetings was not mentioned at all, and it was made clear that Taraki, through his office as Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, also chaired the Council of Ministers. Another problem facing Amin was Taraki's policy of autocracy; he tried to deprive the PDPA Politburo of its powers as a party and state decision-making organ. The situation deteriorated when Amin personally warned Taraki that \"the prestige and popularity of leaders among the people has no common aspect with a personality cult.\"\nFactionalism within the PDPA made it ill-prepared to handle the intensified counter-revolutionary activities in the country. Amin tried to win support for the communist government by depicting himself as a devout Muslim. Taraki and Amin blamed different countries for helping the counter-revolutionaries; Amin attacked the United Kingdom and the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) and played down American and Chinese involvement, while Taraki blamed American imperialism and Iran and Pakistan for supporting the uprising. Amin's criticism of the United Kingdom and the BBC fed on the traditional anti-British sentiments held by rural Afghans. In contrast to Taraki, \"Amin bent over backwards to avoid making hostile reference to\", the People's Republic of China, the United States, or other foreign governments. Amin's cautious behavior was in deep contrast to the Soviet Union's official stance on the situation; it seemed that the Soviet leadership tried to force a confrontation between Afghanistan and its enemies. Amin also tried to appease the Shia communities by meeting with their leaders; despite this, a section of the Shia leadership called for the continuation of the resistance. Subsequently, a revolt broke out in a Shia populated district in Kabul; this was the first sign of unrest in Kabul since the Saur Revolution. To add to the government's problems, Taraki's ability to lead the country was questioned \u2013 he was a heavy drinker and was not in good health. Amin on the other hand was characterised in this period by portrayals of strong self-discipline. In the summer of 1979 Amin began to disassociate himself from Taraki. On 27 June, Amin became a member of the PDPA Politburo, the leading decision-making body in Afghanistan.\nRise to power.\nIn-mid July, the Soviets made their view official when \"Pravda\" wrote an article about the situation in Afghanistan; the Soviets did not wish to see Amin become leader of Afghanistan. This triggered a political crisis in Afghanistan, as Amin initiated a policy of extreme repression, which became one of the main reasons for the Soviet intervention later that year. On 28 July, a vote in the PDPA Politburo approved Amin's proposal of creating a collective leadership with collective decision-making; this was a blow to Taraki, and many of his supporters were replaced by pro-Amin PDPA members. Ivan Pavlovsky, the Commander of the Soviet Ground Forces, visited Kabul in mid-August to study the situation in Afghanistan. Amin, in a speech just a few days after Pavlovsky's arrival, said that he wanted closer relations between Afghanistan and the People's Republic of China; in the same speech he hinted that he had reservations about Soviet meddling in Afghanistan. He likened Soviet assistance to Afghanistan with Vladimir Lenin's assistance to the Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919. Taraki, a delegate to the conference held by the Non-Aligned Movement in Havana, met personally with Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, to discuss the Afghanistan situation on 9 September. Shah Wali, the Afghan Minister of Foreign Affairs, who was a supporter of Amin, did not participate in the meeting. This, according to Beverley Male, \"suggested that some plot against Amin was in preparation\".\nTaraki was instructed to stop-over in Moscow, where the Soviet leaders urged him to remove Amin from power as per the Soviet KGB's decision, because Amin posed danger. Amin's trusted aid, Taroon, informed Amin of the meeting and the KGB's plan. In Kabul, Taraki's aides, the \"Gang of Four\" (consisting of Watanjar, Mazdoryar, Gulabzoi and Sarwari), planned to assassinate Amin but failed as Amin was informed of their plot. Within hours of Taraki's return to Kabul on 11 September, Taraki convened the cabinet \"ostensibly to report on the Havana Summit\". Instead of reporting on the summit, Taraki tried to dismiss Amin as Prime Minister. Amin, aware of the murder plot, demanded the Gang of Four to be removed from their posts, but Taraki laughed it off. Taraki sought to neutralise Amin's power and influence by requesting that he serve overseas as an ambassador. Amin turned down the proposal, shouting \"You are the one who should quit! Because of drink and old age you have taken leave of your senses.\"\nOn 13 September, Taraki invited Amin to the presidential palace for lunch with him and the Gang of Four. Amin turned down the offer, stating he would prefer their resignation rather than lunching with them. Soviet ambassador Puzanov persuaded Amin to make the visit to the Presidential Palace along with Taroon, the Chief of Police, and Nawab Ali, an intelligence officer. Inside the palace on 14 September, bodyguards within the building opened fire on the visitors. Taroon was killed but Amin only sustained an injury and escaped. Amin drove to the Ministry of Defence building, put the Army on high alert and ordered Taraki's arrest. At 6:30\u00a0pm tanks from the 4th Armoured Corps entered the city and stood at government buildings. Shortly afterwards, Amin returned to the palace with a contingent of Army officers, and placed Taraki under arrest. The Gang of Four, however, had \"disappeared\" and sought refuge in the Soviet Embassy.\nAfter Taraki's arrest, the Soviets tried to rescue Taraki (or, according to other sources, kidnap Amin) via the embassy or Bagram Air Base but the strength of Amin's officers repelled their decision to make a move. Amin was told by the Soviets not to punish Taraki and strip him and his comrades of their positions, but Amin ignored them. Amin reportedly discussed the incident with Leonid Brezhnev, and indirectly asked for the permission to kill Taraki, to which Brezhnev replied that it was his choice. Amin, who now believed he had the full support of the Soviets, ordered the death of Taraki. It is believed Taraki was suffocated with pillows on 8 October 1979. The Afghan media would report that the ailing Taraki had died, omitting any mention of his murder. Taraki's murder shocked and upset Brezhnev.\nLeadership.\nDomestic policies.\nFollowing Taraki's fall from power, Amin was elected Chairman of the Presidum of the Revolutionary Council and General Secretary of the PDPA Central Committee by the PDPA Politburo. The election of Amin as PDPA General Secretary and the removal of Taraki from all party posts was unanimous. The only members of the cabinet replaced when Amin took power were the Gang of Four \u2013 Beverley Male saw this as \"a clear indication that he had their [the ministers'] support.\"\nAmin's rise to power was followed by a policy of moderation, and attempts to persuade the Afghan people that the regime was not anti-Islamic. Amin's rise to power was officially endorsed by the Jamiatul Ulama on 20 September 1979. Their endorsement led to the official announcement that Amin was a pious Muslim \u2013 Amin thus scored a point against the counter-revolutionary propaganda which claimed the communist regime was atheist. Amin's government began to invest in the reconstruction, or reparation, of mosques. He also promised the Afghan people freedom of religion. Religious groups were given copies of the Quran, and Amin began to refer to Allah in speeches. He even claimed that the Saur Revolution was \"totally based on the principles of Islam.\" The campaign proved to be unsuccessful, and many Afghans held Amin responsible for the regime's totalitarian behavior.\nAmin also tried to increase his popularity with tribal groups, a feat Taraki had been unable or unwilling to achieve. In a speech to tribal elders Amin was defensive about the Western way he dressed; an official biography was published which depicted Amin in traditional Pashtun clothes. During his short stay in power, Amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership; when Taraki was ousted, Amin promised \"from now on there will be no one-man government...\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe will not leave a backward country for future generations\n \u2014 Amin, as quoted in the \"New Kabul Times\", September 30, 1979\nAttempting to pacify the population, Amin released a list of 18,000 people who had been executed, and blamed the executions on Taraki. Nevertheless, opposition to the communist regime increased, and the government lost control of the countryside. The state of the Afghan Armed Forces deteriorated; due to desertions the number of military personnel in the Afghan army decreased from 100,000 in the immediate aftermath of the Saur Revolution, to somewhere between 50,000 and 70,000.\nAnother problem Amin faced was the KGB's penetration of the PDPA, the military and the government bureaucracy. While Amin's position in Afghanistan was becoming more perilous by the day, his enemies who were exiled in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc were agitating for his removal. Babrak Karmal, the Parchamite leader, met several leading Eastern Bloc figures during this period, and Watanjar, Gulabzoy and Sarwari wanted to exact revenge upon Amin.\nForeign policy.\nIn July 1979, Hafizullah Amin announced that the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was not bound by old treaties with Iran regarding the distribution of water from the Helmand River. Iran interpreted this as Afghanistan using Soviet backing to assert themselves in the region. When Amin became leader, he tried to reduce Afghanistan's dependence on the Soviet Union. The Soviets were concerned when they received reports that Amin had met personally with Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, one of the leading anti-communists in Afghanistan. \nHis general untrustworthiness and his unpopularity amongst Afghans made it more difficult for Amin to find new \"foreign patrons\". Amin's involvement in the death of Adolph Dubs, the American Ambassador to Afghanistan, strained his relations with the United States. He tried to improve relations by reestablishing contact, met with three different American charg\u00e9 d'affaires, and was interviewed by an American correspondent. But this did not improve Afghanistan's standing in the eyes of the United States Government. After the third meeting with Amin, J. Bruce Amstutz, the American Ambassador to Afghanistan from 1979 to 1980, believed the wisest thing to do was to maintain \"a low profile, trying to avoid issues, and waiting to see what happens.\"\nIn early December 1979, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs proposed a joint summit meeting between Amin and Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, the President of Pakistan. The Pakistani Government, accepting a modified version of the offer, agreed to send Agha Shahi, the Pakistani foreign minister, to Kabul for talks. In the meanwhile, the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), Pakistani's secret police, continued to train Mujahideen fighters who opposed Amin's regime.\nAfghan-Soviet relations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAny person and any element who harms the friendship between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union will be considered the enemy of the country, enemy of our people and enemy of our revolution. We will not allow anybody in Afghanistan to act against the friendship of Afghanistan and the Soviet Union.\n\u2014 Amin reassuring the Soviets about his intentions.\nContrary to popular belief, the Soviet leadership headed by Brezhnev, Alexei Kosygin and the Politburo, were not eager to send troops to Afghanistan. The Soviet Politburo decisions were guided by a Special Commission on Afghanistan, which consisted of the KGB chairman Yuri Andropov, Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko, Defence Minister Dmitriy Ustinov, and Boris Ponomarev, the head of the International Department of the Central Committee. The Politburo was opposed to the removal of Taraki and his subsequent murder. According to Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, \"Events developed so swiftly in Afghanistan that essentially there was little opportunity to somehow interfere in them. Right now our mission is to determine our further actions, so as to preserve our position in Afghanistan and to secure our influence there.\" Although Afghan\u2013Soviet relations deteriorated during Amin's short stint in power, he was invited on an official visit to Moscow by Alexander Puzanov, the Soviet Ambassador to Afghanistan, because of the Soviet leadership's satisfaction with his party and state-building policy\nNot everything went as planned, and Andropov talked about \"the undesirable turn of events\" taking place in Afghanistan under Amin's rule. Andropov also brought up the ongoing political shift in Afghanistan under Amin; the Soviets were afraid that Amin would move Afghanistan's foreign policy from a pro-Soviet position to a pro-United States position. By early-to-mid December 1979, the Soviet leadership had established an alliance with Karmal and Sarwari.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThose who boast of friendship with us, they can really be our friend when they respect our independence, our soil and our prideful traditions.\n\u2014 Amin stressing the importance of Afghan independence.\nAmin kept a portrait of Joseph Stalin on his desk. When Soviet officials criticized him of his brutality, Amin replied \"Comrade Stalin showed us how to build socialism in a backward country.\"\nAs it turned out, the relationship between Puzanov and Amin broke down. Amin started a smear campaign to discredit Puzanov. This in turn led to an assassination attempt against Amin, in which Puzanov participated. \nThe situation was worsened by the KGB accusing Amin of misrepresenting the Soviet position on Afghanistan in the PDPA Central Committee and the Revolutionary Council. The KGB also noted an increase in anti-Soviet agitation by the government during Amin's rule, and harassment against Soviet citizens increased under Amin. A group of senior politicians reported to the Soviet Central Committee that it was necessary to do \"everything possible\" to prevent a change in political orientation in Afghanistan. However, the Soviet leadership did not advocate intervention at this time, and instead called for increasing its influence in the Amin leadership to expose his \"true intentions\". A Soviet Politburo assessment referred to Amin as \"a power-hungry leader who is distinguished by brutality and treachery.\" Amongst the many sins they alleged were his \"insincerity and duplicity\" when dealing with the Soviet Union, creating fictitious accusations against PDPA-members who opposed him, indulging in a policy of nepotism, and his tendency to conduct a more \"balanced policy\" towards First World countries. According to the former senior Soviet diplomat, Oleg Grinevsky, the KGB was becoming increasingly convinced that Amin could not be counted on to effectively deal with the insurgency and preserve the survival of the Afghan Marxist state.\nBy the end of October, the Special Commission on Afghanistan, which consisted of Andropov, Gromyko, Ustinov and Ponomarev, wanted to end the impression that the Soviet government supported Amin's leadership and policy. The KGB's First Chief Directorate was put under orders that something had to be done about Afghanistan, and several of its personnel were assembled to deal with the task. Andropov fought hard for Soviet intervention, saying to Brezhnev that Amin's policies had destroyed the military and the government's capabilities to handle the crisis by use of mass repression. The plan, according to Andropov, was to assemble a small force to intervene and remove Amin from power and replace him with Karmal. The Soviet Union declared its plan to intervene in Afghanistan on 12 December 1979; large numbers of Soviet airborne troops landed in Kabul on 25 December, with the approval of Amin who miscalculated their intentions. Soviet leadership initiated Operation Storm-333 (the first phase of the intervention) on 27 December 1979.\nDeath.\nThe leadership of the Soviet Union had no need for Amin to remain alive. Andropov's special representative in Afghanistan, General Boris Ivanov, recommended for Amin to attend a conciliatory dinner with his political mentor, who had become an enemy of Amin, so that Amin's chef could poison Amin. However, Amin survived the poisoning after being treated by doctors at the Soviet embassy, who did not know that \"special reconnaissance officers\" were trying to kill Amin. Since Amin, who was very loyal to the USSR, had survived two attempted assassinations that had been approved by the USSR, the decision was made to eliminate him through a bloody coup at Amin's residence, the Tajbeg Palace.\nAmin trusted the Soviet Union until the very end, despite the deterioration of official relations, and was unaware that the tide in Moscow had turned against him since he ordered Taraki's death. When the Afghan intelligence service handed Amin a report that the Soviet Union would invade the country and topple him, Amin claimed that the report was a product of imperialism. His view can be explained by the fact that the Soviet Union, after several months, finally gave in to Amin's demands and sent troops into Afghanistan to secure the PDPA government. Contrary to common Western belief, Amin was informed of the Soviet decision to send troops into Afghanistan. General Tukharinov, commander of the 40th Army, met with Afghan Major General Babadzhan to talk about Soviet troop movements before the Soviet army's intervention. On 25 December, Dmitry Ustinov issued a formal order, stating that \"[t]he state frontier of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is to be crossed on the ground and in the air by forces of the 40th Army and the Air Force at 1500 hrs on 25 December\". This was the formal beginning of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.\nConcerned for his safety, on 20 December Amin moved from the Presidential Palace, located in the centre of Kabul, to the Tajbeg Palace, which had previously been the headquarters of the Central Corps of the Afghan Army. The palace was formidable, with walls strong enough to withstand artillery fire. According to Rodric Braithwaite, \"its defences had been carefully and intelligently organised\". All roads to the palace had been mined, with the exception of one, which had heavy machine guns and artillery positioned to defend it. To make matters worse for the Soviets, the Afghans had established a second line of defence which consisted of seven posts, \"each manned by four sentries armed with a machine gun, a mortar, and automatic rifles\". The external defences of the palace were handled by the Presidential Guard, which consisted of 2,500 troops and three T-54 tanks. Several Soviet commanders involved in the assassination of Amin thought the plan to attack the palace was \"crazy\". Although the military had been informed by the Soviet leadership through their commanders, Yuri Drozdov and Vasily Kolesnik, that the leader was a \"CIA agent\" who had betrayed the Saur Revolution, many Soviet soldiers hesitated; despite what their commanders had told them, it seemed implausible that Amin, the leader of the PDPA government, was an American double agent. Despite several objections, the plan to assassinate Amin went ahead.\nBefore resorting to killing Amin by brute force, the Soviets had tried to poison him as early as 13 December (but nearly killed his nephew instead) and to kill him with a sniper shot on his way to work (this proved impossible as the Afghans had improved their security measures). They even tried to poison Amin just hours before the assault on the Presidential Palace on 27 December. Amin had organised a lunch for party members to show guests his palace and to celebrate Ghulam Dastagir Panjsheri's return from Moscow. Panjsheri's return improved the mood even further; he boasted that he and Gromyko always kept in contact with each other. During the meal, Amin and several of his guests lost consciousness as they had been poisoned. Amin survived his encounter with death, because the carbonation of the Coca-Cola he was drinking diluted the toxic agent. Mikhail Talybov, a KGB agent, was given responsibility for the poisonings.\nThe assault on the palace began shortly afterward. During the attack Amin still believed the Soviet Union was on his side, and told his adjutant, \"The Soviets will help us.\" The adjutant replied that it was the Soviets who were attacking them; Amin initially replied that this was a lie. Only after he tried but failed to contact the Chief of the General Staff, he muttered, \"I guessed it. It's all true.\" There are various accounts of how Amin died, but the exact details have never been confirmed. Amin was either killed by a deliberate attack or died by a \"random burst of fire\". Amin's son was fatally wounded and died shortly after. His daughter was wounded, but survived. It was Gulabzoy who had been given orders to kill Amin and Watanjar who later confirmed his death.\nPost-death.\nThe men of Amin's family were all executed either immediately or shortly thereafter (his brother Abdullah and nephew Asadullah were executed in June 1980). The women, including his daughter, were imprisoned at Pul-e-Charkhi prison until being released by President Najibullah in early 1992. \nAfter Amin's death on 27 December 1979, Radio Kabul broadcast Babrak Karmal's pre-recorded speech to the Afghan people, saying: \"Today the torture machine of Amin has been smashed\". Karmal was installed by the Soviets as the new leader, while the Soviet Army began its intervention in Afghanistan that would last for nine years.\nOn 2 January 1980, on the PDPA's 15th anniversary, Karmal, who was now the new General Secretary, called Amin a \"conspirator, professional criminal and recognised spy of the U.S.\", as reported in the \"Kabul New Times\". Anahita Ratebzad, the education minister, described Amin as:\n ...wrathy, cruel and criminal murderer who had made terror and suppression and crushing of every opposition force part and parcel of his way of rule, and started every day with new acts of destruction, putting opponents of his bloody regime, group by group, to places of torture, jails, and slaughterhouses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14282", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14282", "title": "Hubris", "text": "Extreme pride or overconfidence, often in combination with arrogance\nHubris (; from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'pride, insolence, outrage'), or less frequently hybris (), is extreme or excessive pride or dangerous overconfidence and complacency, often in combination with (or synonymous with) arrogance.\nHubris, arrogance, and pretension are related to the need for victory (even if it does not always mean winning) instead of reconciliation, which \"friendly\" groups might promote. Hubris is usually perceived as a characteristic of an individual rather than a group, although the group the offender belongs to may suffer collateral consequences from wrongful acts. Hubris often indicates a loss of contact with reality and an overestimation of one's own competence, accomplishments, or capabilities.\nThe term \"hubris\" originated in Ancient Greek, where it had several different meanings depending on the context. In legal usage, it meant assault or sexual crimes and theft of public property, and in religious usage it meant emulation of divinity or transgression against a god.\nAncient Greek origin.\nIn ancient Greek, \"hubris\" referred to \"outrage\": actions that violated natural order, or which shamed and humiliated the victim, sometimes for the pleasure or gratification of the abuser. \nMythological usage.\nHesiod and Aeschylus used the word \"hubris\" to describe transgressions against the gods. A common way that hubris was committed was when a mortal claimed to be better than a god in a particular skill or attribute. Claims like these were rarely left unpunished, and so Arachne, a talented young weaver, was transformed into a spider when she said that her skills exceeded those of the goddess Athena. Additional examples include Icarus, Phaethon, Salmoneus, Niobe, Cassiopeia, Tantalus, and Tereus. \nThe goddess Hybris is described in the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Eleventh Edition as having \"insolent encroachment upon the rights of others\".\nThese events were not limited to myth, and certain figures in history were considered to have been punished for committing hubris through their arrogance. One such person was the king Xerxes I as portrayed in Aeschylus's play \"The Persians\", and who allegedly threw chains to bind the Hellespont sea as punishment for daring to destroy his fleet.\nWhat is common in all of these examples is the breaching of limits, as the Greeks believed that the Fates (\u039c\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9) had assigned each being with a particular area of freedom, an area that even the gods could not breach.\nLegal usage.\nIn ancient Athens, hubris was defined as the use of violence to shame the victim (this sense of hubris could also characterize rape). In legal terms, hubristic violations of the law included what might today be termed assault-and-battery, sexual crimes, or the theft of public or sacred property. In some contexts, the term had a sexual connotation. Shame was frequently reflected upon the perpetrator, as well.\nCrucial to this definition are the ancient Greek concepts of honour (\u03c4\u03b9\u03bc\u03ae, \"tim\u0113\") and shame (\u03b1\u1f30\u03b4\u03ce\u03c2, \"aid\u014ds\"). The concept of honour included not only the exaltation of the one receiving honour, but also the shaming of the one overcome by the act of hubris. This concept of honour is akin to a zero-sum game. Rush Rehm simplifies this definition of hubris to the contemporary concept of \"insolence, contempt, and excessive violence\".\nTwo well-known cases are found in the speeches of Demosthenes, a prominent statesman and orator in ancient Greece. These two examples occurred when first Midias punched Demosthenes in the face in the theatre (\"Against Midias\"), and second when (in \"Against Conon\") a defendant allegedly assaulted a man and crowed over the victim. Yet another example of hubris appears in Aeschines' \"Against Timarchus\", where the defendant, Timarchus, is accused of breaking the law of hubris by submitting himself to prostitution and anal intercourse. Aeschines brought this suit against Timarchus to bar him from the rights of political office and his case succeeded. Aristotle defined hubris as shaming the victim, not because of anything that happened to the committer or might happen to the committer, but merely for that committer's own gratification:\nto cause shame to the victim, not in order that anything may happen to you, nor because anything has happened to you, but merely for your own gratification. Hubris is not the requital of past injuries; this is revenge. As for the pleasure in hubris, its cause is this: naive men think that by ill-treating others they make their own superiority the greater.\nEarly Christianity.\nIn the Septuagint, the \"hubris is overweening pride, superciliousness or arrogance, often resulting in fatal retribution or nemesis\". The word \"hubris\" as used in the New Testament parallels the Hebrew word \"pesha\", meaning \"transgression\". It represents a pride that \"makes a man defy God\", sometimes to the degree that he considers himself an equal.\nModern usage.\nIn its modern usage, hubris denotes overconfident pride combined with arrogance. Hubris is also referred to as \"pride that blinds\" because it often causes a committer of hubris to act in foolish ways that belie common sense.\nArrogance.\nThe Oxford English Dictionary defines \"arrogance\" in terms of \"high or inflated opinion of one's own abilities, importance, etc., that gives rise to presumption or excessive self-confidence, or to a feeling or attitude of being superior to others [...].\" Adrian Davies sees arrogance as more generic and less severe than hubris.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14283", "revid": "1994553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14283", "title": "Heavy water", "text": "Form of water\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nHeavy water (deuterium oxide, 2H2O, D2O) is a form of water in which hydrogen atoms are all deuterium (2H or D, also known as \"heavy hydrogen\") rather than the common hydrogen-1 isotope (1H, also called \"protium\") that makes up most of the hydrogen in normal water. The presence of the heavier isotope gives the water different nuclear properties, and the increase in mass gives it slightly different physical and chemical properties when compared to normal water.\nDeuterium is a heavy hydrogen isotope. Heavy water contains deuterium atoms and is used in nuclear reactors. Semiheavy water (HDO) is more common than pure heavy water, while heavy-oxygen water is denser but lacks unique properties. Tritiated water is radioactive due to tritium content.\nHeavy water has different physical properties from regular water, such as being 10.6% denser and having a higher melting point. Heavy water is less dissociated at a given temperature, and it does not have the slightly blue color of regular water. It can taste slightly sweeter than regular water, though not to a significant degree. Heavy water affects biological systems by altering enzymes, hydrogen bonds, and cell division in eukaryotes. It can be lethal to multicellular organisms at concentrations over 50%. However, some prokaryotes like bacteria can survive in a heavy hydrogen environment. Heavy water can be toxic to humans, but a large amount would be needed for poisoning to occur.\nThe most cost-effective process for producing heavy water is the Girdler sulfide process. Heavy water is used in various industries and is sold in different grades of purity. Some of its applications include nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared spectroscopy, neutron moderation, neutrino detection, metabolic rate testing, neutron capture therapy, and the production of radioactive materials such as plutonium and tritium. \nComposition.\nThe deuterium nucleus consists of a neutron and a proton; the nucleus of a protium (normal hydrogen) atom consists of just a proton. The additional neutron makes a deuterium atom roughly twice as heavy as a protium atom.\nA molecule of heavy water has two deuterium atoms in place of the two protium atoms of ordinary water. The term heavy water as defined by the IUPAC Gold Book can also refer to water in which a higher than usual proportion of hydrogen atoms are deuterium. For comparison, Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water (the \"ordinary water\" used for a deuterium standard) contains about 156 deuterium atoms per million hydrogen atoms; that is, 0.0156% of the hydrogen atoms are 2H. Thus heavy water as defined by the Gold Book includes semiheavy water (hydrogen-deuterium oxide, HDO) and other mixtures of D2O, H2O, and HDO in which the proportion of deuterium is greater than usual. For instance, the heavy water used in CANDU reactors is a highly enriched water mixture that is mostly deuterium oxide D2O, but also some hydrogen-deuterium oxide and a smaller amount of ordinary water H2O. It is 99.75% enriched by hydrogen atom-fraction; that is, 99.75% of the hydrogen atoms are of the heavy type; however, heavy water in the Gold Book sense need not be so highly enriched. The weight of a heavy water molecule, however, is not very different from that of a normal water molecule, because about 89% of the mass of the molecule comes from the single oxygen atom rather than the two hydrogen atoms.\nHeavy water is not radioactive. In its pure form, it has a density about 11% greater than water but is otherwise physically and chemically similar. Nevertheless, the various differences in deuterium-containing water (especially affecting the biological properties) are larger than in any other commonly occurring isotope-substituted compound because deuterium is unique among heavy stable isotopes in being twice as heavy as the lightest isotope. This difference increases the strength of water's hydrogen\u2013oxygen bonds, and this in turn is enough to cause differences that are important to some biochemical reactions. The human body naturally contains deuterium equivalent to about five grams of heavy water, which is harmless. When a large fraction of water (&gt; 50%) in higher organisms is replaced by heavy water, the result is cell dysfunction and death.\nHeavy water was first produced in 1932, a few months after the discovery of deuterium. With the discovery of nuclear fission in late 1938, and the need for a neutron moderator that captured few neutrons, heavy water became a component of early nuclear energy research. Since then, heavy water has been an essential component in some types of reactors, both those that generate power and those designed to produce isotopes for nuclear weapons. These heavy water reactors have the advantage of being able to run on natural uranium without using graphite moderators that pose radiological and dust explosion hazards in the decommissioning phase. The graphite moderated Soviet RBMK design tried to avoid using either enriched uranium or heavy water (being cooled with ordinary water instead) which produced the positive void coefficient that was one of a series of flaws in reactor design leading to the Chernobyl disaster. Most modern reactors use enriched uranium with ordinary water as the moderator.\nOther heavy forms of water.\nSemiheavy water.\nSemiheavy water, HDO, exists whenever there is water with light hydrogen (protium, 1H) and deuterium (D or 2H) in the mix. This is because hydrogen atoms (1H and 2H) are rapidly exchanged between water molecules. Water containing 50% 1H and 50% 2H in its hydrogen, is actually about 50% HDO and 25% each of H2O and D2O, in dynamic equilibrium.\nIn normal water, about 1 molecule in 3,200 is HDO (one hydrogen in 6,400 is 2H), and heavy water molecules (D2O) only occur in a proportion of about 1 molecule in 41 million (i.e. one in 6,4002). Thus semiheavy water molecules are far more common than \"pure\" (homoisotopic) heavy water molecules.\nHeavy-oxygen water.\nWater enriched in the heavier oxygen isotopes 17O and 18O is also commercially available. It is \"heavy water\" as it is denser than normal water (H218O is approximately as dense as D2O, H217O is about halfway between H2O and D2O)\u2014but is rarely called heavy water, since it does not contain the excess deuterium that gives D2O its unusual nuclear and biological properties. It is more expensive than D2O due to the more difficult separation of 17O and 18O. H218O is also used for production of fluorine-18 in radiopharmaceuticals and radiotracers, and positron emission tomography. Small amounts of 17O and 18O are naturally present in water, and most processes enriching heavy water also enrich heavier isotopes of oxygen as a side-effect. This is undesirable if the heavy water is to be used as a neutron moderator in nuclear reactors, as 17O can undergo neutron capture, followed by emission of an alpha particle, producing radioactive 14C. However, doubly labeled water, containing both a heavy oxygen and hydrogen, is useful as a non-radioactive isotopic tracer.\nCompared to the isotopic change of hydrogen atoms, the isotopic change of oxygen has a smaller effect on the physical properties.\nTritiated water.\nTritiated water contains tritium (3H) in place of protium (1H) or deuterium (2H). Since tritium is radioactive, tritiated water is also radioactive.\nPhysical properties.\nThe physical properties of water and heavy water differ in several respects. Heavy water is less dissociated than light water at given temperature, and the true concentration of D+ ions is less than \u200aH+ ions would be for light water at the same temperature. The same is true of OD\u2212 vs. \u200aOH\u2212 ions. For heavy water Kw D2O (25.0\u00a0\u00b0C) = 1.35 \u00d7 10\u221215, and [D+\u200a] must equal [OD\u2212\u200a] for neutral water. Thus pKw D2O = p[OD\u2212] + p[D+] = 7.44 + 7.44 = 14.87 (25.0\u00a0\u00b0C), and the p[D+] of neutral heavy water at 25.0\u00a0\u00b0C is 7.44.\nThe pD of heavy water is generally measured using pH electrodes giving a pH (apparent) value, or pHa, and at various temperatures a true acidic pD can be estimated from the directly pH meter measured pHa, such that pD+ = pHa (apparent reading from pH meter) + 0.41. The electrode correction for alkaline conditions is 0.456 for heavy water. The alkaline correction is then pD+ = pHa(apparent reading from pH meter) + 0.456. These corrections are slightly different from the differences in p[D+] and p[OD-] of 0.44 from the corresponding ones in heavy water.\nHeavy water is 10.6% denser than ordinary water, and heavy water's physically different properties can be seen without equipment if a frozen sample is dropped into normal water, as it will sink. If the water is ice-cold the higher melting temperature of heavy ice can also be observed: it melts at 3.7\u00a0\u00b0C, and thus does not melt in ice-cold normal water.\nA 1935 experiment reported not the \"slightest difference\" in taste between ordinary and heavy water. However, a more recent study confirmed anecdotal observation that heavy water tastes slightly sweet to humans, with the effect mediated by the TAS1R2/TAS1R3 taste receptor. Rats given a choice between distilled normal water and heavy water were able to avoid the heavy water based on smell, and it may have a different taste. Some people report that minerals in water affect taste, e.g. potassium lending a sweet taste to hard water, but there are many factors of a perceived taste in water besides mineral contents.\nHeavy water lacks the characteristic blue color of light water; this is because the molecular vibration harmonics, which in light water cause weak absorption in the red part of the visible spectrum, are shifted into the infrared and thus heavy water does not absorb red light.\nNo physical properties are listed for \"pure\" semi-heavy water because it is unstable as a bulk liquid. In the liquid state, a few water molecules are always in an ionized state, which means the hydrogen atoms can exchange among different oxygen atoms. Semi-heavy water could, in theory, be created via a chemical method, but it would rapidly transform into a dynamic mixture of 25% light water, 25% heavy water, and 50% semi-heavy. However, if it were made in the gas phase and directly deposited into a solid, semi-heavy water in the form of ice could be stable. This is due to collisions between water vapor molecules being almost completely negligible in the gas phase at standard temperatures, and once crystallized, collisions between the molecules cease altogether due to the rigid lattice structure of solid ice.\nHeavy water exchanges with atmospheric water until it reaches the usual hydrogen-isotopic ratio.\nHistory.\nThe US scientist and Nobel laureate Harold Urey discovered the isotope deuterium in 1931 and was later able to concentrate it in water. Urey's mentor Gilbert Newton Lewis isolated the first sample of pure heavy water by electrolysis in 1933. George de Hevesy and Erich Hofer used heavy water in 1934 in one of the first biological tracer experiments, to estimate the rate of turnover of water in the human body. The history of large-quantity production and use of heavy water, in early nuclear experiments, is described below.\nEmilian Bratu and Otto Redlich studied the autodissociation of heavy water in 1934.\nIn the 1930s, it was suspected by the United States and Soviet Union that Austrian chemist Fritz Johann Hansgirg built a pilot plant for the Empire of Japan in Japanese ruled northern Korea to produce heavy water by using a new process he had invented.\nDuring the second World War, the company Fosfatbolaget in Ljungaverk, Sweden, produced 2,300 liters per year of heavy water. The heavy water was then sold both to Germany and to the Manhattan Project for the price of 1.40 SEK per gram of heavy water.\nIn October 1939, Soviet physicists Yakov Borisovich Zel'dovich and Yulii Borisovich Khariton concluded that heavy water and carbon were the only feasible moderators for a natural uranium reactor, and in August 1940, along with Georgy Flyorov, submitted a plan to the Russian Academy of Sciences calculating that 15 tons of heavy water were needed for a reactor. With the Soviet Union having no uranium mines at the time, young Academy workers were sent to Leningrad photographic shops to buy uranium nitrate, but the entire heavy water project was halted in 1941 when German forces invaded during Operation Barbarossa.\nBy 1943, Soviet scientists had discovered that all scientific literature relating to heavy water had disappeared from the West, which Flyorov in a letter warned Soviet leader Joseph Stalin about, and at which time there was only 2\u20133\u00a0kg of heavy water in the entire country. In late 1943, the Soviet purchasing commission in the U.S. obtained 1\u00a0kg of heavy water and a further 100\u00a0kg in February 1945, and upon World War II ending, the NKVD took over the project.\nIn October 1946, as part of the Russian Alsos, the NKVD deported to the Soviet Union from Germany the German scientists who had worked on heavy water production during the war, including Karl-Hermann Geib, the inventor of the Girdler sulfide process. These German scientists worked under the supervision of German physical chemist Max Volmer at the Institute of Physical Chemistry in Moscow with the plant they constructed producing large quantities of heavy water by 1948.\nEffect on biological systems.\nDifferent isotopes of chemical elements have slightly different chemical behaviors, but for most elements the differences are far too small to have a biological effect. In the case of hydrogen, larger differences in chemical properties among protium, deuterium, and tritium occur because chemical bond energy depends on the reduced mass of the nucleus\u2013electron system; this is altered in heavy-hydrogen compounds (hydrogen-deuterium oxide is the most common) more than for heavy-isotope substitution involving other chemical elements. The isotope effects are especially relevant in biological systems, which are very sensitive to even the smaller changes, due to isotopically influenced properties of water when it acts as a solvent.\nTo perform their tasks, enzymes rely on their finely tuned networks of hydrogen bonds, both in the active center with their substrates and outside the active center, to stabilize their tertiary structures. As a hydrogen bond with deuterium is slightly stronger than one involving ordinary hydrogen, in a highly deuterated environment, some normal reactions in cells are disrupted.\nParticularly hard-hit by heavy water are the delicate assemblies of mitotic spindle formations necessary for cell division in eukaryotes. Plants stop growing and seeds do not germinate when given only heavy water, because heavy water stops eukaryotic cell division. Tobacco does not germinate, but wheat does. The deuterium cell is larger and is a modification of the direction of division. The cell membrane also changes, and it reacts first to the impact of heavy water. In 1972, it was demonstrated that an increase in the percentage of deuterium in water reduces plant growth. Research conducted on the growth of prokaryote microorganisms in artificial conditions of a heavy hydrogen environment showed that in this environment, all the hydrogen atoms of water could be replaced with deuterium. Experiments showed that bacteria can live in 98% heavy water. Concentrations over 50% are lethal to multicellular organisms, but a few exceptions are known: plant species such as switchgrass (\"Panicum virgatum\") which is able to grow on 50% D2O; \"Arabidopsis thaliana\" (70% D2O); \"Vesicularia dubyana\" (85% D2O); \"Funaria hygrometrica\" (90% D2O); and the anhydrobiotic species of nematode \"Panagrolaimus superbus\" (nearly 100% D2O).\nA comprehensive study of heavy water on the fission yeast \"Schizosaccharomyces pombe\" showed that the cells displayed an altered glucose metabolism and slow growth at high concentrations of heavy water. In addition, the cells activated the heat-shock response pathway and the cell integrity pathway, and mutants in the cell integrity pathway displayed increased tolerance to heavy water. Despite its toxicity at high levels, heavy water has been observed to extend lifespan of certain yeasts by up to 85%, with the hypothesized mechanism being the reduction of reactive oxygen species turnover.\nHeavy water affects the period of circadian oscillations, consistently increasing the length of each cycle. The effect has been demonstrated in unicellular organisms, green plants, isopods, insects, birds, mice, and hamsters. The mechanism is unknown.\nLike ethanol, heavy water temporarily changes the relative density of cupula relative to the endolymph in the vestibular organ, causing positional nystagmus, illusions of bodily rotations, dizziness, and nausea. However, the direction of nystagmus is in the opposite direction of ethanol, since it is denser than water, not lighter.\nEffect on animals.\nExperiments with mice, rats, and dogs have shown that a degree of 25% deuteration prevents gametes or zygotes from developing, causing (sometimes irreversible) sterility. High concentrations of heavy water (90%) rapidly kill fish, tadpoles, flatworms, and \"Drosophila\". Mice raised from birth with 30% heavy water have 25% deuteration in body fluid and 10% in brains. They are normal except for sterility. Deuteration during pregnancy induces fetal abnormality. Higher deuteration in body fluid causes death. Mammals (for example, rats) given heavy water to drink die after a week, at a time when their body water approaches about 50% deuteration. The mode of death appears to be the same as that in cytotoxic poisoning (such as chemotherapy) or in acute radiation syndrome (though deuterium is not radioactive), and is caused by deuterium's action in generally inhibiting cell division. It is more toxic to malignant cells than normal cells, but the concentrations needed are too high for regular use. As may occur in chemotherapy, deuterium-poisoned mammals die of a failure of bone marrow (producing bleeding and infections) and of intestinal-barrier functions (producing diarrhea and loss of fluids).\nDespite the problems of plants and animals in living with too much deuterium, prokaryotic organisms such as bacteria, which do not have the mitotic problems induced by deuterium, may be grown and propagated in fully deuterated conditions, resulting in replacement of all hydrogen atoms in the bacterial proteins and DNA with the deuterium isotope. This leads to a process of bootstrapping. With prokaryotes producing fully deuterated glucose, fully deuterated \"Escherichia coli\" and \"Torula\" were raised, and they could produce even more complex fully deuterated chemicals. Molds like \"Aspergillus\" could not replicate under fully deuterated conditions.\nIn higher organisms, full replacement with heavy isotopes can be accomplished with other non-radioactive heavy isotopes (such as carbon-13, nitrogen-15, and oxygen-18), but this cannot be done for deuterium. This is a consequence of the ratio of nuclear masses between the isotopes of hydrogen, which is much greater than for any other element.\nDeuterium oxide is used to enhance boron neutron capture therapy, but this effect does not rely on the biological or chemical effects of deuterium, but instead on deuterium's ability to moderate (slow) neutrons without capturing them. 2021 experimental evidence indicates that systemic administration of deuterium oxide (30% drinking water supplementation) suppresses tumor growth in a standard mouse model of human melanoma, an effect attributed to selective induction of cellular stress signaling and gene expression in tumor cells.\nToxicity in humans.\nBecause it would take a very large amount of heavy water to replace 25% to 50% of a human being's body water (water being in turn 50\u201375% of body weight) with heavy water, accidental or intentional poisoning with heavy water is unlikely to the point of practical disregard. Poisoning would require that the victim ingest large amounts of heavy water without significant normal water intake for many days to produce any noticeable toxic effects.\nOral doses of heavy water in the range of several grams, as well as heavy oxygen 18O, are routinely used in human metabolic experiments. (See doubly labeled water testing.) Since one in about every 6,400 hydrogen atoms is deuterium, a human containing of body water would normally contain enough deuterium (about ) to make of pure heavy water, so roughly this dose is required to double the amount of deuterium in the body.\nA loss of blood pressure may partially explain the reported incidence of dizziness upon ingestion of heavy water. However, it is more likely that this symptom can be attributed to altered vestibular function. Heavy water, like ethanol, causes a temporary difference in the density of endolymph within the cupula, which confuses the vestibulo-ocular reflex and causes motion sickness symptoms.\nHeavy water radiation contamination confusion.\nAlthough many people associate heavy water primarily with its use in nuclear reactors, pure heavy water is not radioactive. Commercial-grade heavy water is slightly radioactive due to the presence of minute traces of natural tritium, but the same is true of ordinary water. Heavy water that has been used as a coolant in nuclear power plants contains substantially more tritium as a result of neutron bombardment of the deuterium in the heavy water (tritium is a health risk when ingested in large quantities).\nIn 1990, an employee at the Point Lepreau Nuclear Generating Station in Canada obtained a sample (estimated as about a \"half cup\") of heavy water from the primary heat transport loop of the nuclear reactor, and loaded it into a cafeteria drink dispenser. Eight employees drank some of the contaminated water. The incident was discovered when employees began leaving bioassay urine samples with elevated tritium levels. The quantity of heavy water involved was far below levels that could induce heavy water toxicity, but several employees received elevated radiation doses from tritium and neutron-activated chemicals in the water. This was not an incident of heavy water poisoning, but rather radiation poisoning from other isotopes in the heavy water.\nSome news services were not careful to distinguish these points, and some of the public were left with the impression that heavy water is normally radioactive and more severely toxic than it actually is. Even if pure heavy water had been used in the water dispenser indefinitely, it is not likely the incident would have been detected or caused harm, since no employee would be expected to get much more than 25% of their daily drinking water from such a source.\nProduction methods.\nThe most cost-effective process for producing heavy water is the dual temperature exchange sulfide process (known as the Girdler sulfide process) developed in parallel by Karl-Hermann Geib and Jerome S. Spevack in 1943. An alternative process, patented by Graham M. Keyser, uses lasers to selectively dissociate deuterated hydrofluorocarbons to form deuterium fluoride, which can then be separated by physical means. Although the energy consumption for this process is much less than for the Girdler sulfide process, this method is currently uneconomical due to the expense of procuring the necessary hydrofluorocarbons.\nAs noted, modern commercial heavy water is almost universally referred to, and sold as, deuterium oxide. It is most often sold in various grades of purity, from 98% enrichment to 99.75\u201399.98% deuterium enrichment (nuclear reactor grade) and occasionally even higher isotopic purity.\nProduction by country.\nArgentina.\nArgentina was the main producer of heavy water, using an ammonia/hydrogen exchange based plant supplied by Switzerland's Sulzer company. It was also a major exporter to Canada, Germany, the US and other countries. The heavy water production facility located in Arroyito was the world's largest heavy water production facility. Argentina produced of heavy water per year in 2015 using the \"monothermal ammonia-hydrogen isotopic exchange\" method. Since 2017, the Arroyito plant has not been operational.\nUnited States.\nDuring the Manhattan Project the United States constructed three heavy water production plants as part of the P-9 Project at Morgantown Ordnance Works, near Morgantown, West Virginia; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works, near Dana and Newport, Indiana; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works, near Childersburg and Sylacauga, Alabama. Heavy water was also acquired from the Cominco plant in Trail, British Columbia, Canada. The Chicago Pile-3 experimental reactor used heavy water as a moderator and went critical in 1944. The three domestic production plants were shut down in 1945 after producing around of product. The Wabash plant resumed heavy water production in 1952.\nIn 1953, the United States began using heavy water in plutonium production reactors at the Savannah River Site. The first of the five heavy water reactors came online in 1953, and the last was placed in cold shutdown in 1996. The reactors were heavy water reactors so that they could produce both plutonium and tritium for the US nuclear weapons program.\nThe U.S. developed the Girdler sulfide chemical exchange production process\u2014which was first demonstrated on a large scale at the Dana, Indiana plant in 1945 and at the Savannah River Site in 1952.\nIndia.\nIndia is the world's largest producer of heavy water through its Heavy Water Board. It exports heavy water to countries including the Republic of Korea, China, and the United States.\nNorway.\nIn 1934, Norsk Hydro built the first commercial heavy water plant at Vemork, Tinn, eventually producing per day. From 1940 and throughout World War II, the plant was under German control, and the Allies decided to destroy the plant and its heavy water to inhibit German development of nuclear weapons. In late 1942, a planned raid called Operation Freshman by British airborne troops failed, with both gliders crashing. The raiders were killed in the crash or subsequently executed by the Germans.\nOn the night of 27 February 1943 Operation Gunnerside succeeded. Norwegian commandos and local resistance managed to demolish small, but key parts of the electrolytic cells, dumping the accumulated heavy water down the factory drains.\nOn 16 November 1943, the Allied air forces dropped more than 400 bombs on the site. The Allied air raid prompted the Nazi government to move all available heavy water to Germany for safekeeping. On 20 February 1944, a Norwegian partisan sank the ferry M/F\u00a0\"Hydro\" carrying heavy water across Lake Tinn, at the cost of 14 Norwegian civilian lives, and most of the heavy water was presumably lost. A few of the barrels were only half full, hence buoyant, and may have been salvaged and transported to Germany.\nRecent investigation of production records at Norsk Hydro and analysis of an intact barrel that was salvaged in 2004 revealed that although the barrels in this shipment contained water of pH\u00a014\u2014indicative of the alkaline electrolytic refinement process\u2014they did not contain high concentrations of D2O. Despite the apparent size of the shipment, the total quantity of pure heavy water was quite small, most barrels only containing 0.5\u20131% pure heavy water. The Germans would have needed about 5 tons of heavy water to get a nuclear reactor running. The manifest clearly indicated that there was only half a ton of heavy water being transported to Germany. \"Hydro\" was carrying far too little heavy water for one reactor, let alone the 10 or more tons needed to make enough plutonium for a nuclear weapon. The German nuclear weapons program was much less advanced than the Manhattan Project, and no reactor constructed in Nazi Germany came close to reaching criticality. No amount of heavy water would have changed that.\nIsrael admitted running the Dimona reactor with Norwegian heavy water sold to it in 1959. Through re-export using Romania and Germany, India probably also used Norwegian heavy water.\nCanada.\nAs part of its contribution to the Manhattan Project, Canada built and operated a per month (design capacity) electrolytic heavy water plant at Trail, British Columbia, which started operation in 1943.\nThe Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (AECL) design of power reactor requires large quantities of heavy water to act as a neutron moderator and coolant. AECL ordered two heavy water plants, which were built and operated in Atlantic Canada at Glace Bay, Nova Scotia (by Deuterium of Canada Limited) and Point Tupper, Richmond County, Nova Scotia (by Canadian General Electric). These plants proved to have significant design, construction and production problems. The Glace Bay plant reached full production in 1984 after being taken over by AECL in 1971. The Point Tupper plant reached full production in 1974 and AECL purchased the plant in 1975. Design changes from the Point Tupper plant were carried through as AECL built the Bruce Heavy Water Plant (), which it later sold to Ontario Hydro, to ensure a reliable supply of heavy water for future power plants. The two Nova Scotia plants were shut down in 1985 when their production proved unnecessary.\nThe Bruce Heavy Water Plant (BHWP) in Ontario was the world's largest heavy water production plant with a capacity of 1600 tonnes per year at its peak (800 tonnes per year per full plant, two fully operational plants at its peak). It used the Girdler sulfide process to produce heavy water, and required 340,000 tonnes of feed water to produce one tonne of heavy water. It was part of a complex that included eight CANDU reactors, which provided heat and power for the heavy water plant. The site was located at Douglas Point/Bruce Nuclear Generating Station near Tiverton, Ontario, on Lake Huron where it had access to the waters of the Great Lakes.\nAECL issued the construction contract in 1969 for the first BHWP unit (BHWP A). Commissioning of BHWP A was done by Ontario Hydro from 1971 through 1973, with the plant entering service on 28 June 1973, and design production capacity being achieved in April 1974. Due to the success of BHWP A and the large amount of heavy water that would be required for the large numbers of upcoming planned CANDU nuclear power plant construction projects, Ontario Hydro commissioned three additional heavy water production plants for the Bruce site (BHWP B, C, and D). BHWP B was placed into service in 1979. These first two plants were significantly more efficient than planned, and the number of CANDU construction projects ended up being significantly lower than originally planned, which led to the cancellation of construction on BHWP C &amp; D. In 1984, BHWP A was shut down. By 1993 Ontario Hydro had produced enough heavy water to meet all of its anticipated domestic needs (which were lower than expected due to improved efficiency in the use and recycling of heavy water), so they shut down and demolished half of the capacity of BHWP B. The remaining capacity continued to operate in order to fulfil demand for heavy water exports until it was permanently shut down in 1997, after which the plant was gradually dismantled and the site cleared.\nHeavy water represented about 15\u201320% of the total capital cost of each CANDU reactor in the 1970s and 1980s.\nIran.\nSince 1996 a plant for production of heavy water was being constructed at Khondab near Arak. On 26 August 2006, Iranian President Ahmadinejad inaugurated the expansion of the country's heavy-water plant. Iran has indicated that the heavy-water production facility will operate in tandem with a 40 MW research reactor that had a scheduled completion date in 2009. Iran produced deuterated solvents in early 2011 for the first time. The core of the IR-40 is supposed to be re-designed based on the nuclear agreement in July 2015.\nUnder the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, Iran is permitted to store only of heavy water. Iran exports excess production, making Iran the world's third largest exporter of heavy water. In 2023, Iran sells heavy water; customers have proposed a price over 1,000 dollars per liter.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, there are two heavy water production sites that are based in Punjab. Commissioned in 1995\u201396, the Khushab Nuclear Complex is a central element of Pakistan's stockpile program for production of weapon-grade plutonium, deuterium, and tritium for advanced compact warheads (i.e. thermonuclear weapons). Another heavy water facility for producing the heavy water is located in Multan, that it sells to nuclear power plants in Karachi and Chashma.\nIn early 1980s, Pakistan succeeded in acquiring a tritium purification and storage plant and deuterium and tritium precursor materials from two East German firms. Unlike India and Iran, the heavy water produced by Pakistan is not exported nor available for purchase to any nation and is solely used for its weapons complex and energy generation at its local nuclear power plants.\nOther countries.\nRomania produced heavy water at the now-decommissioned Drobeta Girdler sulfide plant for domestic and export purposes. France operated a small plant during the 1950s and 1960s.\nApplications.\nNuclear magnetic resonance.\nDeuterium oxide is used in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy when using water as a solvent if the nuclide of interest is hydrogen. This is because the signal from light-water (1H2O) solvent molecules would overwhelm the signal from the molecule of interest dissolved in it. Deuterium has a different magnetic moment and therefore does not contribute to the 1H-NMR signal at the hydrogen-1 resonance frequency.\nFor some experiments, it may be desirable to identify the labile hydrogens on a compound, that is hydrogens that can easily exchange away as H+ ions on some positions in a molecule. With addition of D2O, sometimes referred to as a \"D2O shake\", labile hydrogens exchange between the compound of interest and the solvent, leading to replacement of those specific 1H atoms in the compound with 2H. These positions in the molecule then do not appear in the 1H-NMR spectrum.\nOrganic chemistry.\nDeuterium oxide is often used as the source of deuterium for preparing specifically labelled isotopologues of organic compounds. For example, C-H bonds adjacent to ketonic carbonyl groups can be replaced by C-D bonds, using acid or base catalysis. Trimethylsulfoxonium iodide, made from dimethyl sulfoxide and methyl iodide can be recrystallized from deuterium oxide, and then dissociated to regenerate methyl iodide and dimethyl sulfoxide, both deuterium labelled. In cases where specific double labelling by deuterium and tritium is contemplated, the researcher must be aware that deuterium oxide, depending upon age and origin, can contain some tritium.\nInfrared spectroscopy.\nDeuterium oxide is often used instead of water when collecting FTIR spectra of proteins in solution. H2O creates a strong band that overlaps with the amide I region of proteins. The band from D2O is shifted away from the amide I region.\nNeutron moderator.\nHeavy water is used in certain types of nuclear reactors, where it acts as a neutron moderator to slow down neutrons so that they are more likely to react with the fissile uranium-235 than with uranium-238, which captures neutrons without fissioning.\nThe CANDU reactor uses this design. Light water also acts as a moderator, but because light water absorbs more neutrons than heavy water, reactors using light water for a reactor moderator must use enriched uranium rather than natural uranium, otherwise criticality is impossible. A significant fraction of outdated power reactors, such as the RBMK reactors in the USSR, were constructed using normal water for cooling but graphite as a moderator. However, the danger of graphite in power reactors (graphite fires in part led to the Chernobyl disaster) has led to the discontinuation of graphite in standard reactor designs.\nThe breeding and extraction of plutonium can be a relatively rapid and cheap route to building a nuclear weapon, as chemical separation of plutonium from fuel is easier than isotopic separation of U-235 from natural uranium.\nAmong current and past nuclear weapons states, Israel, India, and North Korea first used plutonium from heavy water moderated reactors burning natural uranium, while China, South Africa and Pakistan first built weapons using highly enriched uranium.\nThe Nazi nuclear program, operating with more modest means than the contemporaraneous Manhattan Project and hampered by many leading scientists having been driven into exile (many of them ending up working for the Manhattan Project), as well as continuous infighting, wrongly dismissed graphite as a moderator due to not recognizing the effect of impurities. Given that isotope separation of uranium was deemed too big a hurdle, this left heavy water as a potential moderator. Other problems were the ideological aversion regarding what propaganda dismissed as \"Jewish physics\" and the mistrust between those who had been enthusiastic Nazis even before 1933 and those who were \"Mitl\u00e4ufer\" or trying to keep a low profile. In part due to allied sabotage and commando raids on Norsk Hydro (then the world's largest producer of heavy water) as well as the aforementioned infighting, the German nuclear program never managed to assemble enough uranium and heavy water in one place to achieve criticality despite possessing enough of both by the end of the war.\nIn the U.S., however, the first experimental atomic reactor (1942), as well as the Manhattan Project Hanford production reactors that produced the plutonium for the Trinity test and Fat Man bombs, all used pure carbon (graphite) neutron moderators combined with normal water cooling pipes. They functioned with neither enriched uranium nor heavy water. Russian and British plutonium production also used graphite-moderated reactors.\nThere is no evidence that civilian heavy water power reactors\u2014such as the CANDU or Atucha designs\u2014have been used to produce military fissile materials. In nations that do not already possess nuclear weapons, nuclear material at these facilities is under IAEA safeguards to discourage any diversion.\nDue to its potential for use in nuclear weapons programs, the possession or import/export of large industrial quantities of heavy water are subject to government control in several countries. Suppliers of heavy water and heavy water production technology typically apply IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) administered safeguards and material accounting to heavy water. (In Australia, the \"Nuclear Non-Proliferation (Safeguards) Act 1987\".) In the U.S. and Canada, non-industrial quantities of heavy water (i.e., in the gram to kg range) are routinely available without special license through chemical supply dealers and commercial companies such as the world's former major producer Ontario Hydro.\nNeutrino detector.\nThe Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) in Sudbury, Ontario uses 1,000 tonnes of heavy water on loan from Atomic Energy of Canada Limited. The neutrino detector is underground in a mine, to shield it from muons produced by cosmic rays. SNO was built to answer the question of whether or not electron-type neutrinos produced by fusion in the Sun (the only type the Sun should be producing directly, according to theory) might be able to turn into other types of neutrinos on the way to Earth. SNO detects the Cherenkov radiation in the water from high-energy electrons produced from electron-type neutrinos as they undergo charged current (CC) interactions with neutrons in deuterium, turning them into protons and electrons (however, only the electrons are fast enough to produce Cherenkov radiation for detection).\nSNO also detects neutrino electron scattering (ES) events, where the neutrino transfers energy to the electron, which then proceeds to generate Cherenkov radiation distinguishable from that produced by CC events. The first of these two reactions is produced only by electron-type neutrinos, while the second can be caused by all of the neutrino flavors. The use of deuterium is critical to the SNO function, because all three \"flavours\" (types) of neutrinos may be detected in a third type of reaction as well, neutrino-disintegration, in which a neutrino of any type (electron, muon, or tau) scatters from a deuterium nucleus (deuteron), transferring enough energy to break up the loosely bound deuteron into a free neutron and proton via a neutral current (NC) interaction.\nThis event is detected when the free neutron is absorbed by 35Cl\u2212 present from NaCl deliberately dissolved in the heavy water, causing emission of characteristic capture gamma rays. Thus, in this experiment, heavy water not only provides the transparent medium necessary to produce and visualize Cherenkov radiation, but it also provides deuterium to detect exotic mu type (\u03bc) and tau (\u03c4) neutrinos, as well as a non-absorbent moderator medium to preserve free neutrons from this reaction, until they can be absorbed by an easily detected neutron-activated isotope.\nMetabolic rate and water turnover testing in physiology and biology.\nHeavy water is employed as part of a mixture with H218O for a common and safe test of mean metabolic rate in humans and animals undergoing their normal activities.The elimination rate of deuterium alone is a measure of body water turnover. This is highly variable between individuals and depends on environmental conditions as well as subject size, sex, age and physical activity.\nTritium production.\nTritium is the active substance in self-powered lighting and controlled nuclear fusion, its other uses including autoradiography and radioactive labeling. It is also used in nuclear weapon design for boosted fission weapons and initiators. Tritium undergoes beta decay into helium-3, which is a stable, but rare, isotope of helium that is itself highly sought after. Some tritium is created in heavy water moderated reactors when deuterium captures a neutron. This reaction has a small cross-section (probability of a single neutron-capture event) and produces only small amounts of tritium, although enough to justify cleaning tritium from the moderator every few years to reduce the environmental risk of tritium escape. Given that helium-3 is a neutron poison with orders of magnitude higher capture cross section than any component of heavy or tritiated water, its accumulation in a heavy water neutron moderator or target for tritium production must be kept to a minimum.\nProducing a lot of tritium in this way would require reactors with very high neutron fluxes, or with a very high proportion of heavy water to nuclear fuel and very low neutron absorption by other reactor material. The tritium would then have to be recovered by isotope separation from a much larger quantity of deuterium, unlike production from lithium-6 (the present method), where only chemical separation is needed.\nDeuterium's absorption cross section for thermal neutrons is 0.52 millibarn (5.2 \u00d7 10\u221232 m2; 1 barn = 10\u221228 m2), while those of oxygen-16 and oxygen-17 are 0.19 and 0.24 millibarn, respectively. 17O makes up 0.038% of natural oxygen, making the overall cross section 0.28 millibarns. Therefore, in D2O with natural oxygen, 21% of neutron captures are on oxygen, rising higher as 17O builds up from neutron capture on 16O. Also, 17O may emit an alpha particle on neutron capture, producing radioactive carbon-14.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14284", "revid": "37638206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14284", "title": "Hemochromatosis", "text": ""}
{"id": "14285", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14285", "title": "History of science and technology", "text": "The history of science and technology (HST) is a field of history that examines the development of the understanding of the natural world (science) and humans' ability to manipulate it (technology) at different points in time. This academic discipline also examines the cultural, economic, and political context and impacts of scientific practices; it likewise may study the consequences of new technologies on existing scientific fields.\nAcademic study of history of science.\nHistory of science is an academic discipline with an international community of specialists. Main professional organizations for this field include the History of Science Society, the British Society for the History of Science, and the European Society for the History of Science.\nMuch of the study of the history of science has been devoted to answering questions about what science \"is\", how it \"functions\", and whether it exhibits large-scale patterns and trends.\nHistory of the academic study of history of science.\nHistories of science were originally written by practicing and retired scientists, starting primarily with William Whewell's \"History of the Inductive Sciences\" (1837), as a way to communicate the virtues of science to the public.\nAuguste Comte proposed that there should be a specific discipline to deal with the history of science.\nThe development of the distinct academic discipline of the history of science and technology did not occur until the early 20th century. Historians have suggested that this was bound to the changing role of science during the same time period.\nAfter World War I, extensive resources were put into teaching and researching the discipline, with the hopes that it would help the public better understand both Science and Technology as they came to play an exceedingly prominent role in the world.\nIn the decades since the end of World War II, history of science became an academic discipline, with graduate schools, research institutes, public and private patronage, peer-reviewed journals, and professional societies.\nFormation of academic departments.\nIn the United States, a more formal study of the history of science as an independent discipline was initiated by George Sarton's publications, \"Introduction to the History of Science\" (1927) and the journal \"Isis\" (founded in 1912). Sarton exemplified the early 20th-century view of the history of science as the history of great men and great ideas. He shared with many of his contemporaries a Whiggish belief in history as a record of the advances and delays in the march of progress.\nThe study of the history of science continued to be a small effort until the rise of Big Science after World War II. With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard University, the history of science began to become an established subdiscipline of history in the United States.\nIn the United States, the influential bureaucrat Vannevar Bush, and the president of Harvard, James Conant, both encouraged the study of the history of science as a way of improving general knowledge about how science worked, and why it was essential to maintain a large scientific workforce.\nUniversities with history of science and technology programs.\nIndia.\nHistory of science and technology is a well-developed field in India. At least three generations of scholars can be identified.\nThe first generation includes D.D.Kosambi, Dharmpal, Debiprasad Chattopadhyay and Rahman. The second generation mainly consists of Ashis Nandy, Deepak Kumar, Dhruv Raina, S. Irfan Habib, Shiv Visvanathan, Gyan Prakash, Stan Lourdswamy, V.V. Krishna, Itty Abraham, Richard Grove, Kavita Philip, Mira Nanda and Rob Anderson. There is an emergent third generation that includes scholars like Abha Sur and Jahnavi Phalkey.\nDepartments and Programmes\nThe National Institute of Science, Technology and Development Studies had a research group active in the 1990s which consolidated social history of science as a field of research in India. \nCurrently there are several institutes and university departments offering HST programmes.\nSwitzerland.\nUkraine\nUnited States.\nAcademic study of the history of science as an independent discipline was launched by George Sarton at Harvard with his book \"Introduction to the History of Science\" (1927) and the \"Isis\" journal (founded in 1912). Sarton exemplified the early 20th century view of the history of science as the history of great men and great ideas. He shared with many of his contemporaries a Whiggish belief in history as a record of the advances and delays in the march of progress. The History of Science was not a recognized subfield of American history in this period, and most of the work was carried out by interested Scientists and Physicians rather than professional Historians. With the work of I. Bernard Cohen at Harvard, the history of Science became an established subdiscipline of history after 1945.\nProminent historians of the field.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nHistoriography of science\nHistory of science as a discipline"}
{"id": "14286", "revid": "1315983061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14286", "title": "Holographic principle", "text": "Physics inside a bounded region is fully captured by physics at the boundary of the region\nThe holographic principle is a property of string theories and a supposed property of quantum gravity that states that the description of a volume of space can be thought of as encoded on a lower-dimensional boundary to the region \u2013 such as a light-like boundary like a gravitational horizon. First proposed by Gerard 't Hooft in 1993, it was given a precise string theoretic interpretation by Leonard Susskind, who combined his ideas with previous ones of 't\u00a0Hooft and Charles Thorn. Susskind said, \"The three-dimensional world of ordinary experience\u2014the universe filled with galaxies, stars, planets, houses, boulders, and people\u2014is a hologram, an image of reality coded on a distant two-dimensional surface.\" As pointed out by Raphael Bousso, Thorn observed in 1978 that string theory admits a lower-dimensional description from which gravity emerges in what would now be called a holographic way. The prime example of holography is the AdS/CFT correspondence.\nThe holographic principle was inspired by the Bekenstein bound of black hole thermodynamics, which conjectures that the maximum entropy in any region scales with the radius squared, rather than cubed as might be expected. In the case of a black hole, the insight was that the information content of all the objects that have fallen into the hole might be entirely contained in surface fluctuations of the event horizon. The holographic principle resolves the black hole information paradox within the framework of string theory. However, there exist classical solutions to the Einstein equations that allow values of the entropy larger than those allowed by an area law (radius squared), hence in principle larger than those of a black hole. These are the so-called \"Wheeler's bags of gold\". The existence of such solutions conflicts with the holographic interpretation, and their effects in a quantum theory of gravity including the holographic principle are not yet fully understood.\nHigh-level summary.\nThe physical universe is widely seen to be composed of \"matter\" and \"energy\". In his 2003 article published in Scientific American magazine, Jacob Bekenstein speculatively summarized a current trend started by John Archibald Wheeler, which suggests scientists may \"regard the physical world as made of information, with energy and matter as incidentals\". Bekenstein asks \"Could we, as William Blake memorably penned, 'see a world in a grain of sand', or is that idea no more than 'poetic license'?\", referring to the holographic principle.\nUnexpected connection.\nBekenstein's topical overview \"A Tale of Two Entropies\" describes potentially profound implications of Wheeler's trend, in part by noting a previously unexpected connection between the world of information theory and classical physics. This connection was first described shortly after the seminal 1948 papers of American applied mathematician Claude Shannon introduced today's most widely used measure of information content, now known as Shannon entropy. As an objective measure of the quantity of information, Shannon entropy has been enormously useful, as the design of all modern communications and data storage devices, from cellular phones to modems to hard disk drives and DVDs, rely on Shannon entropy.\nIn thermodynamics (the branch of physics dealing with heat), entropy is popularly described as a measure of the \"disorder\" in a physical system of matter and energy. In 1877, Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann described it more precisely in terms of the number of distinct microscopic states that the particles composing a macroscopic \"chunk\" of matter could be in, while still \"looking\" like the same macroscopic \"chunk\". As an example, for the air in a room, its thermodynamic entropy would equal the logarithm of the count of all the ways that the individual gas molecules could be distributed in the room and all the ways they could be moving.\nEnergy, matter, and information equivalence.\nShannon's efforts to find a way to quantify the information contained in, for example, a telegraph message, led him unexpectedly to a formula with the same form as Boltzmann's. In an article in the August 2003 issue of \"Scientific American\" titled \"Information in the Holographic Universe\", Bekenstein summarizes that \"Thermodynamic entropy and Shannon entropy are conceptually equivalent: the number of arrangements that are counted by Boltzmann entropy reflects the amount of Shannon information one would need to implement any particular arrangement\" of matter and energy. The only salient difference between the thermodynamic entropy of physics and Shannon's entropy of information is in the units of measure; the former is expressed in units of energy divided by temperature, the latter in essentially dimensionless \"bits\" of information.\nThe holographic principle states that the entropy of ordinary mass (not just black holes) is also proportional to surface area and not volume; that volume itself is illusory and the universe is really a hologram which is isomorphic to the information \"inscribed\" on the surface of its boundary.\nAdS/CFT correspondence.\nThe anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence, sometimes called Maldacena duality named after the Argentinian physicist Juan Maldacena (after ref.) or gauge/gravity duality, is a conjectured relationship between two kinds of physical theories. On one side are anti-de Sitter spaces (AdS) which are used in theories of quantum gravity, formulated in terms of string theory or M-theory. On the other side of the correspondence are conformal field theories (CFT) which are quantum field theories, including theories similar to the Yang\u2013Mills theories that describe elementary particles.\nThe duality represents a major advance in understanding of string theory and quantum gravity. This is because it provides a non-perturbative formulation of string theory with certain boundary conditions and because it is the most successful realization of the holographic principle.\nIt also provides a powerful toolkit for studying strongly coupled quantum field theories. Much of the usefulness of the duality results from a strong-weak duality: when the fields of the quantum field theory are strongly interacting, the ones in the gravitational theory are weakly interacting and thus more mathematically tractable. This fact has been used to study many aspects of nuclear and condensed matter physics by translating problems in those subjects into more mathematically tractable problems in string theory.\nThe AdS/CFT correspondence was first proposed by Juan Maldacena in late 1997. Important aspects of the correspondence were elaborated in articles by Steven Gubser, Igor Klebanov, and Alexander Markovich Polyakov, and by Edward Witten. By 2015, Maldacena's article had over 10,000 citations, becoming the most highly cited article in the field of high energy physics.\nBlack hole entropy.\nAn object with relatively high entropy is microscopically random, like a hot gas. A known configuration of classical fields has zero entropy: there is nothing random about electric and magnetic fields, or gravitational waves. Since black holes are exact solutions of Einstein's equations, they were thought not to have any entropy.\nBut Jacob Bekenstein noted that this leads to a violation of the second law of thermodynamics. If one throws a hot gas with entropy into a black hole, once it crosses the event horizon, the entropy would disappear. The random properties of the gas would no longer be seen once the black hole had absorbed the gas and settled down. One way of salvaging the second law is if black holes are in fact random objects with an entropy that increases by an amount greater than the entropy of the consumed gas.\nGiven a fixed volume, a black hole whose event horizon encompasses that volume should be the object with the highest amount of entropy. Otherwise, imagine something with a larger entropy, then by throwing more mass into that something, we obtain a black hole with less entropy, violating the second law.\nIn a sphere of radius \"R\", the entropy in a relativistic gas increases as the energy increases. The only known limit is gravitational; when there is too much energy, the gas collapses into a black hole. Bekenstein used this to put an upper bound on the entropy in a region of space, and the bound was proportional to the area of the region. He concluded that the black hole entropy is directly proportional to the area of the event horizon. Gravitational time dilation causes time, from the perspective of a remote observer, to stop at the event horizon. Due to the natural limit on maximum speed of motion, this prevents falling objects from crossing the event horizon no matter how close they get to it. Since any change in quantum state requires time to flow, all objects and their quantum information state stay imprinted on the event horizon. Bekenstein concluded that from the perspective of any remote observer, the black hole entropy is directly proportional to the area of the event horizon.\nStephen Hawking had shown earlier that the total horizon area of a collection of black holes always increases with time. The horizon is a boundary defined by light-like geodesics; it is those light rays that are just barely unable to escape. If neighboring geodesics start moving toward each other they eventually collide, at which point their extension is inside the black hole. So the geodesics are always moving apart, and the number of geodesics which generate the boundary, the area of the horizon, always increases. Hawking's result was called the second law of black hole thermodynamics, by analogy with the law of entropy increase.\nAt first, Hawking did not take the analogy too seriously. He argued that the black hole must have zero temperature, since black holes do not radiate and therefore cannot be in thermal equilibrium with any black body of positive temperature. Then he discovered that black holes do radiate. When heat is added to a thermal system, the change in entropy is the increase in mass\u2013energy divided by temperature:\nformula_1\nIf black holes have a finite entropy, they should also have a finite temperature. In particular, they would come to equilibrium with a thermal gas of photons. This means that black holes would not only absorb photons, but they would also have to emit them in the right amount to maintain detailed balance.\nTime-independent solutions to field equations do not emit radiation, because a time-independent background conserves energy. Based on this principle, Hawking set out to show that black holes do not radiate. But, to his surprise, a careful analysis convinced him that they do, and in just the right way to come to equilibrium with a gas at a finite temperature. Hawking's calculation fixed the constant of proportionality at 1/4; the entropy of a black hole is one quarter its horizon area in Planck units.\nThe entropy is proportional to the logarithm of the number of microstates, the enumerated ways a system can be configured microscopically while leaving the macroscopic description unchanged. Black hole entropy is deeply puzzling \u2013 it says that the logarithm of the number of states of a black hole is proportional to the area of the horizon, not the volume in the interior.\nThere were attempts to generalize the entropy bound to more general spacetimes, notably through the Fischler\u2013Susskind holographic bound. Later, Raphael Bousso generalized this to the covariant entropy bound based upon null hypersurfaces which works in any surface in any spacetimes.\nBlack hole information paradox.\nHawking interpreted this to mean that when black holes absorb some photons in a pure state described by a wave function, they re-emit new photons in a thermal mixed state described by a density matrix. This would mean that quantum mechanics would have to be modified because, in quantum mechanics, states which are superpositions with probability amplitudes never become states which are probabilistic mixtures of different possibilities.\nTroubled by this paradox, Gerard 't Hooft analyzed the emission of Hawking radiation in more detail.{{self-published inline|date=February 2020}} He noted that when Hawking radiation escapes, there is a way in which incoming particles can modify the outgoing particles. Their gravitational field would deform the horizon of the black hole, and the deformed horizon could produce different outgoing particles than the undeformed horizon. When a particle falls into a black hole, it is boosted relative to an outside observer, and its gravitational field assumes a universal form. 't Hooft showed that this field makes a logarithmic tent-pole shaped bump on the horizon of a black hole, and like a shadow, the bump is an alternative description of the particle's location and mass. For a four-dimensional spherical uncharged black hole, the deformation of the horizon is similar to the type of deformation which describes the emission and absorption of particles on a string-theory world sheet. Since the deformations on the surface are the only imprint of the incoming particle, and since these deformations would have to completely determine the outgoing particles, 't Hooft believed that the correct description of the black hole would be by some form of string theory.\nThis idea was made more precise by Leonard Susskind, who had also been developing holography, largely independently. Susskind argued that the oscillation of the horizon of a black hole is a complete description{{refn|\"Complete description\" means all the \"primary\" qualities. For example, John Locke (and before him Robert Boyle) determined these to be \"size, shape, motion, number, \"and\" solidity\". Such \"secondary quality\" information as \"color, aroma, taste \"and\" sound\", or internal quantum state is not information that is implied to be preserved in the surface fluctuations of the event horizon. (See however \"path integral quantization\")|group=note}} of both the infalling and outgoing matter, because the world-sheet theory of string theory was just such a holographic description. While short strings have zero entropy, he could identify long highly excited string states with ordinary black holes. This was a deep advance because it revealed that strings have a classical interpretation in terms of black holes.\nThis work showed that the black hole information paradox is resolved when quantum gravity is described in an unusual string-theoretic way assuming the string-theoretical description is complete, unambiguous and non-redundant. The space-time in quantum gravity would emerge as an effective description of the theory of oscillations of a lower-dimensional black-hole horizon, and suggest that any black hole with appropriate properties, not just strings, would serve as a basis for a description of string theory.\nIn 1995, Susskind, along with collaborators Tom Banks, Willy Fischler, and Stephen Shenker, presented a formulation of the new M-theory using a holographic description in terms of charged point black holes, the D0 branes of type IIA string theory. The matrix theory they proposed was first suggested as a description of two branes in eleven-dimensional supergravity by Bernard de Wit, Jens Hoppe, and Hermann Nicolai. The later authors reinterpreted the same matrix models as a description of the dynamics of point black holes in particular limits. Holography allowed them to conclude that the dynamics of these black holes give a complete non-perturbative formulation of M-theory. In 1997, Juan Maldacena gave the first holographic descriptions of a higher-dimensional object, the 3+1-dimensional type IIB membrane, which resolved a long-standing problem of finding a string description which describes a gauge theory. These developments simultaneously explained how string theory is related to some forms of supersymmetric quantum field theories.\nLimit on information density.\nInformation content is defined as the logarithm of the reciprocal of the probability that a system is in a specific microstate, and the information entropy of a system is the expected value of the system's information content. This definition of entropy is equivalent to the standard Gibbs entropy used in classical physics. Applying this definition to a physical system leads to the conclusion that, for a given energy in a given volume, there is an upper limit to the density of information (the Bekenstein bound) about the whereabouts of all the particles which compose matter in that volume. In particular, a given volume has an upper limit of information it can contain, at which point it will collapse into a black hole.\nThis suggests that matter itself cannot be subdivided infinitely many times and there must be an ultimate level of fundamental particles. As the degrees of freedom of a particle are the product of all the degrees of freedom of its sub-particles, were a particle to have infinite subdivisions into lower-level particles, the degrees of freedom of the original particle would be infinite, violating the maximal limit of entropy density. The holographic principle thus implies that the subdivisions must stop at some level.\nThe most rigorous realization of the holographic principle is the AdS/CFT correspondence by Juan Maldacena. However, J. David Brown and Marc Henneaux had rigorously proved in 1986, that the asymptotic symmetry of 2+1 dimensional gravity gives rise to a Virasoro algebra, whose corresponding quantum theory is a 2-dimensional conformal field theory.\nExperimental tests.\nThe Fermilab physicist Craig Hogan claims that the holographic principle would imply quantum fluctuations in spatial position that would lead to apparent background noise or \"holographic noise\" measurable at gravitational wave detectors, in particular GEO 600. However these claims have not been widely accepted, or cited, among quantum gravity researchers and appear to be in direct conflict with string theory calculations.\nAnalyses in 2011 of measurements of gamma ray burst GRB 041219A in 2004 by the INTEGRAL space observatory launched in 2002 by the European Space Agency, shows that Craig Hogan's noise is absent down to a scale of 10\u221248\u00a0meters, as opposed to the scale of 10\u221235\u00a0meters predicted by Hogan, and the scale of 10\u221216\u00a0meters found in measurements of the GEO 600 instrument. Research continued at Fermilab under Hogan as of 2013.\nJacob Bekenstein claimed to have found a way to test the holographic principle with a tabletop photon experiment.\nReferences.\n | first = Raphael | last = Bousso | title = The holographic principle\n | journal = Reviews of Modern Physics\n | volume = 74\n | year = 2002\n | pages = 825\u2013874\n | arxiv = hep-th/0203101\n | doi = 10.1103/RevModPhys.74.825\n | bibcode=2002RvMP...74..825B"}
{"id": "14288", "revid": "1320287528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14288", "title": "Hamilton, Ontario", "text": "City in Ontario, Canada\nHamilton is a port city in the Canadian province of Ontario. Hamilton has a population of 569,353 as of the 2021 Canadian census, and its census metropolitan area, which encompasses Burlington and Grimsby, has a population of 785,184. The city is situated approximately southwest of Toronto in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area (GTHA).\nConceived by George Hamilton when he purchased the Durand farm shortly after the War of 1812, the town of Hamilton became the centre of a densely populated and industrialized region at the west end of Lake Ontario known as the Golden Horseshoe. On January 1, 2001, the current boundaries of Hamilton were created through the amalgamation of the original city with other municipalities of the Regional Municipality of Hamilton\u2013Wentworth. Residents of the city are known as Hamiltonians.\nTraditionally, the local economy has been led by the steel and heavy manufacturing industries. During the 2010s, a shift toward service sector industries such as health and sciences occurred. Hamilton is home to the Royal Botanical Gardens, the Canadian Warplane Heritage Museum, the Bruce Trail, McMaster University, Mohawk College, and Redeemer University. McMaster University is ranked 4th in Canada and 69th in the world by Times Higher Education Rankings 2021.\nHistory.\nIn pre-colonial times, the Neutral First Nation used much of the land. They were gradually driven out by the Five (later Six) Nations (Iroquois) who were allied with the British against the Huron and their French allies. The hamlet of Westover was built in an area that was originally a Seneca Iroquois tribal village, Tinawatawa, which was first visited by the French in September 1699.\nAfter the American Revolutionary War, about 10,000 United Empire Loyalists left the United States to settle in Upper Canada, now southern Ontario. In 1792, the Crown purchased the land on which Hamilton now stands from the Mississaugas in Treaty 3, also known as the Between the Lakes Purchase. The Crown granted the Loyalists lands from this purchase to encourage settlement in the region. These new settlers were soon followed by many more Americans, attracted by the availability of inexpensive, arable land. At the same time, large numbers of Iroquois who had allied with Britain arrived from the United States and were settled on reserves west of Lake Ontario as compensation for lands they lost in what was now the United States. During the War of 1812, British regulars and local militia defeated invading American troops at the Battle of Stoney Creek, fought in what is now a park in eastern Hamilton.\nThe town of Hamilton was conceived by George Hamilton (a son of a Queenston entrepreneur and founder, Robert Hamilton), when he purchased farm holdings of James Durand, the local member of the Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada, shortly after the War of 1812. Nathaniel Hughson, a property owner to the north, cooperated with George Hamilton to prepare a proposal for a courthouse and jail on Hamilton's property. Hamilton offered the land to the crown for the future site. Durand was empowered by Hughson and Hamilton to sell property holdings which later became the site of the town. As he had been instructed, Durand circulated the offers at York during a session of the Legislative Assembly, which established a new Gore District, of which the Hamilton townsite was a member.\nInitially, this town was not the most important centre of the Gore District. An early indication of Hamilton's sudden prosperity occurred in 1816 when it was chosen over Ancaster, Ontario to be the new Gore District's administrative centre. Another dramatic economic turnabout for Hamilton occurred in 1832 when a canal was finally cut through the outer sand bar that enabled Hamilton to become a major port. A permanent jail was not constructed until 1832, when a cut-stone design was completed on Prince's Square, one of the two squares created in 1816. Subsequently, the first police board and the town limits were defined by statute on February 13, 1833. Official city status was achieved on June 9, 1846, by an act of Parliament of the Province of Canada.\nBy 1845, the population was 6,475. In 1846, there were useful roads to many communities as well as stagecoaches and steamboats to Toronto, Queenston, and Niagara. Eleven cargo schooners were owned in Hamilton. Eleven churches were in operation. A reading room provided access to newspapers from other cities and from England and the U.S. In addition to stores of all types, four banks, tradesmen of various types, and sixty-five taverns, industry in the community included three breweries, ten importers of dry goods and groceries, five importers of hardware, two tanneries, three coachmakers, and a marble and a stone works.\nAs the city grew, several prominent buildings were constructed in the late 19th century, including the Grand Lodge of Canada in 1855, West Flamboro Methodist Church in 1879 (later purchased by Dufferin Masonic Lodge in 1893), a public library in 1890, and the Right House department store in 1893. The first commercial telephone service in Canada, the first telephone exchange in the British Empire, and the second telephone exchange in all of North America were each established in the city between 1877 and 1878. The city had several interurban electric street railways and two inclines, all powered by the Cataract Power Co.\nThough suffering through the Hamilton Street Railway strike of 1906, with industrial businesses expanding, Hamilton's population doubled between 1900 and 1914. Two steel manufacturing companies, Stelco and Dofasco, were formed in 1910 and 1912, respectively. Procter &amp; Gamble and the Beech-Nut Packing Company opened manufacturing plants in 1914 and 1922, respectively, their first outside the US. In June and July 1916, the a strike of up to 2,000 machinists was caused by a failure of employers to improve working conditions or pay during a booming World War I economy. The strike disrupted production at many of the largest manufacturers and was the largest dispute in the city's history. Population and economic growth continued until the 1960s. In 1929 the city's first high-rise building, the Pigott Building, was constructed; in 1930 McMaster University moved from Toronto to Hamilton, in 1934 the second Canadian Tire store in Canada opened here; in 1940 the airport was completed; and in 1948, the Studebaker assembly line was constructed. Infrastructure and retail development continued, with the Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway opening in 1958, and the first Tim Hortons store in 1964.\nSince then, many of the large industries have moved or shut down operations in a restructuring that also affected the United States. In 1997, there was a devastating fire at the Plastimet plastics plant. Approximately 300 firefighters battled the blaze, and many sustained severe chemical burns and inhaled volatile organic compounds when at least 400 tonnes of PVC plastic were consumed in the fire.\nOn January 1, 2001, the new city of Hamilton was formed from the amalgamation of Hamilton and its five neighbouring municipalities: Ancaster, Dundas, Flamborough, Glanbrook, and Stoney Creek. Before amalgamation, the \"old\" City of Hamilton had 331,121 residents and was divided into 100 neighbourhoods. The former region of Hamilton-Wentworth had a population of 490,268. The amalgamation created a single-tier municipal government ending subsidization of its suburbs. The new amalgamated city had 519,949 people in more than 100 neighbourhoods, and surrounding communities.\nThe city was impacted by a widespread blackout in 2003 and a tornado in 2005. In 2007, the Red Hill Valley Parkway opened after extensive delays. The Stelco mills were idled in 2010 and permanently closed in 2013. This closure capped a significant shift in the city's economy: the percentage of the population employed in manufacturing declined from 22 to 12 percent between 2003 and 2013.\nGeography.\nHamilton is in Southern Ontario on the western end of the Niagara Peninsula and wraps around the westernmost part of Lake Ontario; most of the city, including the downtown section, is on the south shore. Hamilton is in the geographic centre of the Golden Horseshoe. Its major physical features are Hamilton Harbour, marking the northern limit of the city, and the Niagara Escarpment running through the middle of the city across its entire breadth, bisecting the city into \"upper\" and \"lower\" parts. The maximum high point is 250m (820') above the level of Lake Ontario.\nAccording to all records from local historians, this district was called \"Attiwandaronia\" by the native Neutral people. Hamilton is one of 11 cities showcased in the book, \"Green City: People, Nature &amp; Urban Places\" by Quebec author Mary Soderstrom, which examines the city as an example of an industrial powerhouse co-existing with nature. Soderstrom credits Thomas McQuesten and family in the 1930s who \"became champions of parks, greenspace and roads\" in Hamilton.\nHamilton Harbour is a natural harbour with a large sandbar called the Beachstrip. This sandbar was deposited during a period of higher lake levels during the last ice age and extends southeast through the central lower city to the escarpment. Hamilton's deep sea port is accessed by ship canal through the beach strip into the harbour and is traversed by two bridges, the QEW's Burlington Bay James N. Allan Skyway and the lower Canal Lift Bridge.\nBetween 1788 and 1793, the townships at the Head-of-the-Lake were surveyed and named. The area was first known as The Head-of-the-Lake for its location at the western end of Lake Ontario. John Ryckman, born in Barton township (where present day downtown Hamilton is), described the area in 1803 as he remembered it: \"The city in 1803 was all forest. The shores of the bay were difficult to reach or see because they were hidden by a thick, almost impenetrable mass of trees and undergrowth\".\nGeorge Hamilton, a settler and local politician, established a town site in the northern portion of Barton Township in 1815. He kept several east\u2013west roads which were originally Indian trails, but the north\u2013south streets were on a regular grid pattern. Streets were designated \"East\" or \"West\" if they crossed James Street or Highway 6. Streets were designated \"North\" or \"South\" if they crossed King Street or Highway 8. The townsite's design, likely conceived in 1816, was commonplace. George Hamilton employed a grid street pattern used in most towns in Upper Canada and throughout the American frontier. The eighty original lots had frontages of fifty feet; each lot faced a broad street and backed onto a twelve-foot lane. It took at least a decade to sell all the original lots, but the construction of the Burlington Canal in 1823, and a new court-house in 1827 encouraged Hamilton to add more blocks around 1828\u20139. At this time he included a market square in an effort to draw commercial activity onto his lands, but the town's natural growth occurred to the north of Hamilton's plot.\nThe Hamilton Conservation Authority owns, leases or manages about of land with the city operating of parkland at 310 locations. Many of the parks are along the Niagara Escarpment, which runs from Tobermory at the tip of the Bruce Peninsula in the north, to Queenston at the Niagara River in the south, and provides views of the cities and towns at Lake Ontario's western end. The hiking path Bruce Trail runs the length of the escarpment. Hamilton is home to more than 100 waterfalls and cascades, most of which are on or near the Bruce Trail as it winds through the Niagara Escarpment. Visitors can often be seen swimming in the waterfalls during the summertime, although it is strongly recommended to stay away from the water: much of the watershed of the Chedoke and Red Hill creeks originates in storm sewers running beneath neighbourhoods atop the Niagara escarpment, and water quality in many of Hamilton's waterfalls is seriously degraded. High \"e. coli\" counts are regularly observed through testing by McMaster University near many of Hamilton's waterfalls, sometimes exceeding the provincial limits for recreational water use by as much as 400 times. The storm sewers in upstream neighbourhoods carry polluted runoff from streets and parking lots, as well as occasional raw sewage from sanitary lines that were improperly connected to the storm sewers instead of the separate sanitary sewer system. Notably, in March 2020, it was revealed that as much as 24 billion litres of untreated wastewater has been leaking into the Chedoke creek and Cootes' Paradise areas since at least 2014 due to insufficiencies in the city's sewerage and storm water management systems.\nClimate.\nHamilton's climate is humid-continental, characterized by changeable weather patterns. In the K\u00f6ppen classification, Hamilton is on the Dfb/Dfa boundary, found in southern Ontario because the average temperature in July is . However, its climate is moderate compared with most of Canada. The airport's open, rural location and higher altitude results in lower temperatures, generally windier conditions, and higher snowfall amounts than lower, built-up areas of the city. The highest temperature ever recorded in Hamilton was 41.1\u00a0\u00b0C (106\u00a0\u00b0F) on July 14, 1868. The coldest temperature ever recorded was \u221230.6\u00a0\u00b0C (\u221223\u00a0\u00b0F) on January 25, 1884. In 2023, it was found that the city has areas of poor air quality with a high concentration of benzo(a)pyrene, particularly in neighbourhoods near industrial sites.\nEconomy.\nManufacturing is important to Ontario's economy, and the Toronto\u2013Hamilton region is Canada's most industrialized area. The area from Oshawa, Ontario around the west end of Lake Ontario to Niagara Falls, with Hamilton at its centre, is known as the Golden Horseshoe and had a population of approximately 8.1 million people in 2006.\nWith sixty percent of Canada's steel produced in Hamilton by Stelco and Dofasco, the city has become known as the Steel Capital of Canada. After nearly declaring bankruptcy, Stelco returned to profitability in 2004. On August 26, 2007 United States Steel Corporation acquired Stelco for C$38.50 in cash per share, owning more than 76 percent of Stelco's outstanding shares. On September 17, 2014, US Steel Canada announced it was applying for bankruptcy protection and it would close its Hamilton operations.\nA stand-alone subsidiary of ArcelorMittal, the world's largest steel producer, Dofasco produces products for the automotive, construction, energy, manufacturing, pipe and tube, appliance, packaging, and steel distribution industries. It has approximately 7,300 employees at its Hamilton plant, and the four million tons of steel it produces each year is about 30% of Canada's flat-rolled sheet steel shipments. Dofasco was North America's most profitable steel producer in 1999, the most profitable in Canada in 2000, and a long-time member of the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index. Ordered by the U.S. Department of Justice to divest itself of the Canadian company, ArcelorMittal has been allowed to retain Dofasco provided it sells several of its American assets.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Hamilton had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Hamilton CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nIn the 2016 Canadian census, 24.69% of the city's population was not born in Canada. Hamilton is home to 26,330 immigrants who arrived in Canada between 2001 and 2010 and 13,150 immigrants who arrived between 2011 and 2016. In February 2014, the city's council voted to declare Hamilton a sanctuary city, offering municipal services to undocumented immigrants at risk of deportation.\nChildren aged 14 years and under accounted for 16.23% of the city's population, a decline of 1.57% from the 2011 census. Hamiltonians aged 65 years and older constituted 17.3% of the population, an increase of 2.4% since 2011. The city's average age is 41.3 years. 54.9% of Hamiltonians are married or in a common-law relationship, while 6.4% of city residents are divorced. Same-sex couples (married or in common-law relationships) constitute 0.8% (2,710 individuals) of the partnered population in Hamilton.\nEnvironics Analytics, a geodemographic marketing firm that created 66 different \"clusters\" of people complete with profiles of how they live, what they think and what they consume, sees a future Hamilton with younger upscale Hamiltonians \u2014 who are tech-savvy and university-educated \u2014 choosing to live in the downtown and surrounding areas rather than just visiting intermittently. More two and three-storey townhouses and apartments will be built on downtown lots; small condos will be built on vacant spaces in areas such as Dundas, Ainslie Wood and Westdale to accommodate newly retired seniors. Furthermore, additional retail and commercial zones will be created.\nEthnicity.\nHamilton maintains significant Italian, English, Scottish, German and Irish ancestry. 130,705 Hamiltonians claim English heritage, while 98,765 indicate their ancestors arrived from Scotland, 87,825 from Ireland, 62,335 from Italy, and 50,400 from Germany. The top countries of birth for the newcomers living in Hamilton in the 1990s were: former Yugoslavia, Poland, India, China, the Philippines, and Iraq.\nHamilton also has a notable French community for which provincial services are offered in French. In Ontario, urban centres where there are at least 5,000 Francophones are designated areas where bilingual provincial services have to be offered. As per the 2016 census, the Francophone community maintains a population of 6,760, while 30,530 residents, or 5.8% of the city's population, have knowledge of both official languages. The Franco-Ontarian community of Hamilton boasts two school boards, the public \"Conseil scolaire Viamonde\" and the Catholic \"Conseil scolaire catholique MonAvenir\", which operate five schools (2 secondary and 3 elementary). Additionally, the city maintains a Francophone community health centre that is part of the LHIN (Centre de sant\u00e9 communautaire Hamilton/Niagara), a cultural centre (Centre fran\u00e7ais Hamilton), three daycare centres, a provincially funded employment centre (Options Emploi), a community college site (Coll\u00e8ge Bor\u00e9al) and a community organization that supports the development of the francophone community in Hamilton (ACFO R\u00e9gionale Hamilton).\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in Hamilton included:\nThe most described religion in Hamilton is Christianity although other religions brought by immigrants are also growing. The 2011 census indicates that 67.6% of the population adheres to a Christian denomination, with Catholics being the largest at 34.3% of the city's population. The Christ the King Cathedral is the seat of the Diocese of Hamilton. Other denominations include the United Church (6.5%), Anglican (6.4%), Presbyterian (3.1%), Christian Orthodox (2.9%), and other denominations (9.8%). Other religions with significant populations include Islam (3.7%), Buddhist (0.9%), Sikh (0.8%), Hindu (0.8%), and Jewish (0.7%). Those with no religious affiliation accounted for 24.9% of the population.\nGovernment.\nCitizens of Hamilton are represented at all three levels of Canadian government: federal, provincial, and municipal. Hamilton is represented in the Parliament of Canada by five members of Parliament and in the Legislature of Ontario by five members of Provincial Parliament.\nHamilton's municipal government has a mayor, elected citywide, and 15 city councillors\u2014one per city ward\u2014to serve on the Hamilton City Council. The province grants the Hamilton City Council authority to govern through the Municipal Act of Ontario. Hamilton's current mayor is Andrea Horwath, elected on October 24, 2022. Hamilton's next municipal election will be held in 2026.\nHamilton is served by four school boards: the English language Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board and Hamilton-Wentworth Catholic District School Board and the French language Conseil scolaire Viamonde and Conseil scolaire catholique MonAvenir. Each school board is governed by trustees. The English language school boards are represented by trustees elected from wards in Hamilton. The HWDSB has 11 trustees and the HWCDB has 9 trustees. The French language school boards are represented by one trustee each from Hamilton and the surrounding area.\nThe Canadian Military maintains a presence in Hamilton, with the John Weir Foote Armoury in the downtown core on James Street North, housing the Royal Hamilton Light Infantry as well as the 11th Field Hamilton-Wentworth Battery and the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada. The Hamilton Reserve Barracks on Pier Nine houses the naval reserve division , 23 Service Battalion and the 23 Field Ambulance.\nCrime.\nThe Criminal Code of Canada is the chief piece of legislation defining criminal conduct and penalty. The Hamilton Police Service is chiefly responsible for the enforcement of federal and provincial law. Although the Hamilton Police Service has authority to enforce, bylaws passed by the Hamilton City Council are mainly enforced by Provincial Offences Officers employed by the City of Hamilton.\nIn 2020, the city saw 18 murders and 51 shootings (up from 47 in 2019), the most shootings the city seen in at least a decade. 2021 saw the homicides in the city increase to 20, giving the city a rate of around 3.5 per 100,000 residents. Hamilton ranked first in Canada for police-reported hate crimes in 2016, with 12.5 hate crimes per 100,000 population. Organized crime also has a notable presence in Hamilton with three centralized Mafia organizations: the Luppino crime family, the Papalia crime family, and the Musitano crime family. Street gangs such as the Original/Oriental Blood Brothers &amp; the Oriole Crescent Crips, and biker crews such as Satan's Choice MC and the Hells Angels also have presence in Hamilton.\nCulture.\nHamilton's local attractions include the Canadian Warplane Heritage Museum, the National Historic Site, Dundurn Castle (the residence of an Allan MacNab, the 8th Premier of Canada West), the Royal Botanical Gardens, the Canadian Football Hall of Fame, the African Lion Safari Park, the Cathedral of Christ the King, the Workers' Arts and Heritage Centre, and the Hamilton Museum of Steam &amp; Technology.\nAs of September\u00a02018[ [update]], there are 40 pieces in the city's Public Art Collection. The works are owned and maintained by the city. Founded in 1914, the Art Gallery of Hamilton is Ontario's third largest public art gallery. The gallery has over 9,000 works in its permanent collection that focus on three areas: 19th-century European, Historical Canadian and Contemporary Canadian. The McMaster Museum of Art (MMA), founded at McMaster University in 1967, houses and exhibits the university's art collection of more than 7,000 objects.\nSupercrawl is a large community arts and music festival that takes place in September in the James Street North area of the city. In 2018, Supercrawl celebrated its 10th anniversary with over 220,000 visitors. In March 2015, Hamilton was host to the JUNO Awards.\nThe Hamilton Film Festival stages an annual program of over 100 independent feature and short films annually, many but not all with direct production connections to the city.\nGrowth in the arts and culture sector has garnered media attention for Hamilton. A 2006 article in \"The Globe and Mail\", entitled \"Go West, Young Artist\", focused on Hamilton's growing art scene. The Factory: Hamilton Media Arts Centre, opened a new home on James Street North in 2006. Art galleries have sprung up on streets across the city: James Street, King William Street, Locke Street and King Street. The opening of the Downtown Arts Centre on Rebecca Street has spurred creative activities in the core. The Community Centre for Media Arts (CCMA) continues to operate in downtown Hamilton. The CCMA works with marginalized populations and combines new media services with arts education and skills development programming.\nSports.\nHamilton hosted Canada's first major international athletic event, the first Commonwealth Games (then called the British Empire Games) in 1930. Hamilton bid for the Commonwealth Games in 2010 but lost to New Delhi. On November 7, 2009, in Guadalajara, Mexico, it was announced Toronto would host the 2015 Pan Am Games after beating out two rival South American cities, Lima, Peru, and Bogot\u00e1, Colombia. The city of Hamilton co-hosted the Games with Toronto. Hamilton Mayor Fred Eisenberger said \"the Pan Am Games will provide a 'unique opportunity for Hamilton to renew major sport facilities giving Hamiltonians a multi-purpose stadium, a 50-metre swimming pool, and an international-calibre velodrome to enjoy for generations to come'.\" Hamilton's major sports complexes include Hamilton Stadium and TD Coliseum.\nHamilton is represented by the Tiger-Cats in the Canadian Football League. The team traces its origins to the 1869 \"Hamilton Foot Ball Club\". Hamilton is also home to the Canadian Football Hall of Fame museum. The museum hosts an annual induction event in a week-long celebration that includes school visits, a golf tournament, a formal induction dinner and concludes with the Hall of Fame game involving the local CFL Hamilton Tiger-Cats at Tim Hortons Field. The 108th championship game of the Canadian Football League, the Grey Cup, was played in Hamilton in 2021 and won by the Winnipeg Blue Bombers.\nIn 2019, Forge FC debuted as Hamilton's soccer team in the Canadian Premier League. The team plays at Hamilton Stadium and shares the venue with the Tiger-Cats. They finished their inaugural season as champions of the league.\nIn 2019, the Hamilton Honey Badgers debuted as Hamilton's basketball team in the Canadian Elite Basketball League. The team played its home games at the FirstOntario Centre. In 2022, the Honey Badgers relocated to Brampton, Ontario due to the renovations occurring at FirstOntarioCentre.\nSince 1958, the Hamilton Cardinals have been Hamilton's baseball team in the Intercounty Baseball League. The team has played its home games at Bernie Arbour Memorial Stadium since 1971.\nThe Around the Bay Road Race circumnavigates Hamilton Harbour. Although it is not a marathon distance, it is the longest continuously held long-distance foot race in North America. The local newspaper also hosts the amateur Spectator Indoor Games.\nIn addition to team sports, Hamilton is home to an auto race track, Flamboro Speedway and Canada's fastest half-mile harness horse racing track, Flamboro Downs. Another auto race track, Cayuga International Speedway, is near Hamilton in the Haldimand County community of Nelles Corners, between Hagersville and Cayuga.\nEducation.\nHamilton is home to several post-secondary institutions.\nFour school boards administer public education for students from kindergarten through high school. The Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board manages 93 public schools, while the Hamilton-Wentworth Catholic District School Board operates 57 schools in the greater Hamilton area. The Conseil scolaire Viamonde operates one elementary and one secondary school (\u00c9cole secondaire Georges-P.-Vanier) in the area, and the Conseil scolaire catholique MonAvenir operates two elementary schools and one secondary school.\nCalvin Christian School, Providence Christian School and Timothy Christian School are independent Christian elementary schools. Hamilton District Christian High School, Rehoboth Christian High School and Guido de Bres Christian High School are independent Christian high schools in the area. Both HDCH and Guido de Br\u00e8s participate in the city's interscholastic athletics. Hillfield Strathallan College is on the West Hamilton mountain and is a CAIS member, non-profit school for children from early Montessori ages through grade twelve and has around 1,300 students. Columbia International College is Canada's largest private boarding high school, with 1,700 students from 73 countries.\nThe Dundas Valley School of Art is an independent art school founded in the city in 1964. In 1998, as a joint venture with McMaster University, a full-time diploma program was launched for students. The Hamilton Conservatory for the Arts is home to many of the area's young actors, dancers, musicians, singers and visual artists. The school is known for having a keyboard studio, dance studios, art and sculpting studios, gallery space and a 300-seat recital hall.\nHamilton is home to two think tanks, the Centre for Cultural Renewal and Cardus, which deals with social architecture, culture, urbanology, economics and education and also publishes the \"LexView Policy Journal\" and \"Comment Magazine\".\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nThe primary highways serving Hamilton are Highway 403, the QEW, the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway, and the Red Hill Valley Parkway. Other highways connecting Hamilton include Highway 5, Highway 6 and Highway 8. Public transportation is provided by the Hamilton Street Railway, which operates an extensive local bus system. Hamilton and Metrolinx will build a provincially-funded LRT line (Hamilton LRT) in the 2020s. \nIntercity public transportation, including frequent service to Toronto, is provided by GO Transit. The Hamilton GO Centre (formerly the Toronto, Hamilton and Buffalo Railway station), as well as Confederation GO Station and West Harbour GO Station are three commuter rail stations on the Lakeshore West line of GO Transit that serve the city, with the latter having hourly service to Toronto. Regional bus services operated by GO Transit also run to Brantford, Kitchener, and cities along the Ontario Highway 407. Aldershot station in nearby Burlington, is the intercity (Via Rail) station for both Burlington and Hamilton.\nIn the 1940s, the John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport was a wartime air force training station. Today, managed by TradePort International Corporation, passenger traffic at the Hamilton terminal has grown from 90,000 in 1996 to approximately 900,000 in 2002 with mostly domestic and vacation destinations in the United States, Mexico and Central America. The airport's mid-term growth target for its passenger service is five million air travellers annually. The airport's air cargo sector has 24\u20137 operational capability and strategic geographic location, allowing its capacity to increase by 50% since 1996; 91,000\u00a0metric tonnes (100,000\u00a0tons) of cargo passed through the airport in 2002. Courier companies with operations at the airport include United Parcel Service and Cargojet Canada. In 2003, the city began developing a 30-year growth management strategy which called, in part, for a massive aerotropolis industrial park centred on Hamilton Airport. Advocates of the aerotropolis proposal, now known as the \"Airport Employment Growth District\", tout it as a solution to the city's shortage of employment lands. The closest other international airport to Hamilton is Toronto Pearson International Airport, located northeast of the city in Mississauga.\nA report by Hemson Consulting identified an opportunity to develop of greenfields (the size of the Royal Botanical Gardens) that could create an estimated 90,000 jobs by 2031. A proposed aerotropolis industrial park at Highway 6 and 403, has been debated at City Hall for years. Opponents feel the city needs to do more investigation about the cost to taxpayers.\nHamilton also plays a major role in Ontario's marine shipping industry as the Port of Hamilton is Ontario's busiest port handling between 9 and 12 million tonnes of cargo annually.\nHealth.\nThe city is served by the Hamilton Health Sciences hospital network of five hospitals with more than 1,100 beds: Hamilton General Hospital, Juravinski Hospital, McMaster University Medical Centre (which includes McMaster Children's Hospital), St. Peter's Hospital and West Lincoln Memorial Hospital. Other buildings under Hamilton Health Sciences include Juravinski Cancer Centre, Regional Rehabilitation Centre, Ron Joyce Children's Health Centre, and the West End Clinic and Urgent Care Centre. Hamilton Health Sciences is the largest employer in the Hamilton area and serves as academic teaching hospital affiliated with McMaster University and Mohawk College. The only hospital in Hamilton not under Hamilton Health Sciences is St. Joseph's Healthcare Hamilton, which has 777 beds and three campuses (Charlton Campus, King Campus, and West 5th Campus). This healthcare group provides inpatient and outpatient services, and mental illness or addiction help.\nSister cities.\nThe City of Hamilton is twinned with ten sister cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14291", "revid": "45320532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14291", "title": "Hussites", "text": "Czech pre-Protestant Christian movement\nThe Hussites (Czech: \"Husit\u00e9\" or \"Kali\u0161n\u00edci\", \"Chalice People\"; Latin: \"Hussitae\") were a Czech proto-Protestant Christian movement influenced by both the Byzantine Rite and John Wycliffe that followed the teachings of reformer Jan Hus (fl. 1401\u20131415), a part of the Bohemian Reformation.\nThe Czech lands had originally been Christianized by Byzantine Greek missionaries Saints Cyril and Methodius, who introduced the Byzantine Rite in the Old Church Slavonic liturgical language and the Byzantine tradition of Communion in both kinds administered by the holy spoon. Over the centuries that followed, however, the Roman Rite in Ecclesiastical Latin, which is less easily understood than Slavonic by native speakers of Old Czech, was imposed upon the Czech people despite considerable public resistance, by German-speaking bishops, beginning with Wiching, from the Holy Roman Empire. (See also S\u00e1zava Monastery). As a cultural memory of both communion in both kinds and the Divine Liturgy in a language closer to the vernacular is believed to have survived well into the Renaissance, the ideas of Jan Hus and others like him swiftly gained a wide public following. After the trial and execution of Hus at the Council of Constance, a series of crusades, civil wars, victories and compromises between various factions with different theological agendas broke out. At the end of the Hussite Wars (1420\u20131434), the now Catholic-supported Utraquist side came out victorious from protracted conflict against Jan \u017di\u017eka and the Taborites, who embraced the more radical theological teachings of John Wycliffe and the Lollards, and became the dominant Hussite group in Bohemia.\nCatholics and Utraquists were given legal equality in Bohemia after the religious peace of Kutn\u00e1 Hora in 1485. Bohemia and Moravia, or what is now the territory of the Czech Republic, remained majority Hussite for two centuries. Roman Catholicism was only reimposed by the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II following the 1620 Battle of White Mountain and during the Thirty Years' War.\nThe Hussite tradition continues in the Moravian Church, Unity of the Brethren and, since the dissolution of Austria-Hungary, by the re-founded Czechoslovak Hussite Church. The revived legacy of Saints Cyril and Methodius also continues in both the Orthodox Church in the Czech Lands and the Apostolic Exarchate of the Greek Catholic Church in the Czech Republic.\nHistory.\nThe Hussite movement began in the Kingdom of Bohemia and quickly spread throughout the remaining Lands of the Bohemian Crown, including Moravia and Silesia. It also made inroads into the northern parts of the Kingdom of Hungary (now Slovakia), but was rejected and gained infamy for the plundering behaviour of the Hussite soldiers. There were also small temporary communities in Poland-Lithuania and Transylvania which moved to Bohemia after being confronted with religious intolerance. It was a regional movement that failed to expand farther. Hussites emerged as a majority Utraquist movement with a significant Taborite faction, and smaller regional ones that included Adamites, Orebites and Orphans.\nMajor Hussite theologians included Petr Chel\u010dick\u00fd and Jerome of Prague. A number of Czech national heroes were Hussite, including Jan \u017di\u017eka, who led a fierce resistance to five consecutive crusades proclaimed on Hussite Bohemia by the Papacy. Hussites were one of the most important forerunners of the Protestant Reformation. This predominantly religious movement was propelled by social issues and strengthened Czech national awareness.\nHus's death.\nThe Council of Constance lured Jan Hus in with a letter of indemnity, then tried him for heresy and put him to death at the stake on 6 July 1415.\nThe arrest of Hus in 1414 caused considerable resentment in Czech lands. The authorities of both countries appealed urgently and repeatedly to King Sigismund to release Jan Hus.\nWhen news of his death at the Council of Constance arrived, disturbances broke out, directed primarily against the clergy and especially against the monks. Even the Archbishop narrowly escaped from the effects of this popular anger. The treatment of Hus was felt to be a disgrace inflicted upon the whole country and his death was seen as a criminal act. King Wenceslaus IV., prompted by his grudge against Sigismund, at first gave free vent to his indignation at the course of events in Constance. His wife openly favoured the friends of Hus. Avowed Hussites stood at the head of the government.\nA league was formed by certain lords, who pledged themselves to protect the free preaching of the Gospel upon all their possessions and estates and to obey the power of the Bishops only where their orders accorded with the injunctions of the Bible. The university would arbitrate any disputed points. The entire Hussite nobility joined the league. Other than verbal protest of the council's treatment of Hus, there was little evidence of any actions taken by the nobility until 1417. At that point several of the lesser nobility and some barons, signatories of the 1415 protest letter, removed Catholic priests from their parishes, replacing them with priests willing to give communion in both wine and bread. The chalice of wine became the central identifying symbol of the Hussite movement. If the king had joined, its resolutions would have received the sanction of the law; but he refused, and approached the newly formed Roman Catholic League of lords, whose members pledged themselves to support the king, the Catholic Church, and the council. The prospect of a civil war began to emerge.\nPrior to becoming pope, Martin V, then known as Cardinal Otto of Colonna had attacked Hus with relentless severity. He energetically resumed the battle against Hus's teaching after the enactments of the Council of Constance. He wished to eradicate completely the doctrine of Hus, for which purpose the co-operation of King Wenceslaus had to be obtained. In 1418, Sigismund succeeded in winning his brother over to the standpoint of the council by pointing out the inevitability of a religious war if the heretics in Bohemia found further protection. Hussite statesmen and army leaders had to leave the country and Roman Catholic priests were reinstated. These measures caused a general commotion which hastened the death of King Wenceslaus by a paralytic stroke in 1419. His heir was Sigismund.\nHussite Wars (1419\u20131434).\nThe news of the death of King Wenceslaus in 1419 produced a great commotion among the people of Prague. A revolution swept over the country: churches and monasteries were destroyed, and church property was seized by the Hussite nobility. It was then, and remained till much later, in question whether Bohemia was a hereditary or an elective monarchy, especially as the line through which Sigismund claimed the throne had accepted that the Kingdom of Bohemia was an elective monarchy elected by the nobles, and thus the regent of the kingdom (\u010cen\u011bk of Wartenberg) also explicitly stated that Sigismund had not been elected as reason for Sigismund's claim to not be accepted. Sigismund could get possession of \"his\" kingdom only by force of arms. Pope Martin V called upon Catholics of the West to take up arms against the Hussites, declaring a crusade, and twelve years of warfare followed.\nThe Hussites initially campaigned defensively, but after 1427 they assumed the offensive. Apart from their religious aims, they fought for the national interests of the Czechs. The moderate and radical parties were united, and they not only repelled the attacks of the army of crusaders but crossed the borders into neighboring countries. On March 23, 1430, Joan of Arc dictated a letter that threatened to lead a crusading army against the Hussites unless they returned to the Catholic faith, but her capture by English and Burgundian troops two months later would keep her from carrying out this threat.\nCouncil of Basel and Compacta of Prague.\nEventually, the opponents of the Hussites found themselves forced to consider an amicable settlement. The Hussites were sent an invitation to attend the ecumenical Council of Basel on October 15, 1431. The discussions began on 10 January 1432, focusing chiefly on the four articles of Prague. No agreement emerged. After repeated negotiations between the Basel Council and Bohemia, a Bohemian\u2013Moravian state assembly in Prague accepted the \"Compactata\" of Prague on 30 November 1433. The agreement granted communion in both kinds to all who desired it, but with the understanding that Christ was entirely present in each kind, though on the condition that the rest of the Hussite reforms would no longer be emphasised. Free preaching was granted conditionally: the Church hierarchy had to approve and place priests, and the power of the bishop must be considered. The article which prohibited the secular power of the clergy was almost reversed.\nThe Taborites refused to conform. The Calixtines united with the Roman Catholics and destroyed the Taborites at the Battle of Lipany on 30 May 1434. From that time, the Taborites lost their importance, though the Hussite movement would continue in Poland for another five years, until the Royalist forces of Poland defeated the Polish Hussites at the Battle of Grotniki. The state assembly of Jihlava in 1436 confirmed the \"Compactata\" and gave them the sanction of law. This accomplished the reconciliation of Bohemia with Rome and the Western Church, and at last Sigismund obtained possession of the Bohemian crown. His reactionary measures caused a ferment in the whole country, but he died in 1437. The state assembly in Prague rejected Wyclif's doctrine of the Lord's Supper, which was obnoxious to the Utraquists, as heresy in 1444. Most of the Taborites now went over to the party of the Utraquists; the rest joined the \"Brothers of the Law of Christ\" () (see history of the Moravian Church).\nHussite Bohemia, Luther and the Reformation (1434\u20131618).\nIn 1462, Pope Pius II declared the \"Compacta\" null and void, prohibited communion in both kinds, and acknowledged King George of Podebrady as king on condition that he would promise an unconditional harmony with the Roman Church. This he refused, leading to the Bohemian\u2013Hungarian War (1468\u20131478). His successor, King Vladislaus II, favored the Roman Catholics and proceeded against some zealous clergymen of the Calixtines. The troubles of the Utraquists increased from year to year. In 1485, at the Diet of Kutn\u00e1 Hora, an agreement was made between the Roman Catholics and Utraquists that lasted for thirty-one years. It was only later, at the Diet of 1512, that the equal rights of both religions were permanently established. The appearance of Martin Luther was hailed by the Utraquist clergy, and Luther himself was astonished to find so many points of agreement between the doctrines of Hus and his own. But not all Utraquists approved of the German Reformation; a schism arose among them, and a number of them returned to the Roman doctrine, while other elements had organised the \"Unitas Fratrum\" already in 1457.\nBohemian Revolt and harsh persecution under the Habsburgs (1618\u20131918).\nUnder Emperor Maximilian II, the Bohemian state assembly established the Confessio Bohemica, upon which Lutherans, Reformed, and Bohemian Brethren agreed. From that time forward Hussitism began to die out. After the Battle of White Mountain on 8 November 1620 the Roman Catholic Faith was re-established with vigour, which fundamentally changed the religious conditions of the Czech lands.\nLeaders and members of Unitas Fratrum were forced to choose to either leave the southeastern principalities of what was the Holy Roman Empire (mainly Austria, Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia and parts of Germany and its states), or to practice their beliefs secretly. As a result, members were forced underground and dispersed across northwestern Europe. The largest remaining communities of the Brethren were located in Lissa (Leszno) in Poland, which had historically strong ties with the Czechs, and in small, isolated groups in Moravia. Some, among them Jan Amos Comenius, fled to western Europe, mainly the Low Countries. A settlement of Hussites in Herrnhut, Saxony, now Germany, in 1722 caused the emergence of the Moravian Church.\nPost-Habsburg era and modern times (1918\u2013present).\nIn 1918, as a result of World War I, the Czech lands regained independence from Austria-Hungary controlled by the Habsburg monarchy as Czechoslovakia (due to Masaryk and Czechoslovak legions with Hussite tradition, in the name of the troops).\nToday, the Hussite tradition is represented in the Moravian Church, Unity of the Brethren, and Czechoslovak Hussite Church.\nFactions.\nHussitism organised itself during the years 1415\u20131419. Hussites were not a unitary movement, but a diverse one with multiple factions that held different views and opposed each other in the Hussite Wars. From the beginning, there formed two parties, with a smaller number of people withdrawing from both parties around the pacifist Petr Chel\u010dick\u00fd, whose teachings would form the foundation of the Unitas Fratrum. Hussites can be divided into:\nModerates.\nThe more conservative Hussites (the moderate party, or Utraquists), who followed Hus more closely, sought to conduct reform while leaving the whole hierarchical and liturgical order of the Church untouched.\nTheir programme is contained in the Four Articles of Prague, which were written by Jacob of Mies and agreed upon in July 1420, promulgated in the Latin, Czech, and German languages. They can be summarised as follows: \nThe views of the moderate Hussites were widely represented at the university and among the citizens of Prague; they were therefore called the Prague Party, but also Calixtines (Latin \"calix\" chalice) or Utraquists (Latin \"utraque\" both), because they emphasized the second article of Prague, and the chalice became their emblem.\nRadicals.\nThe more radical parties, the Taborites, Orebites and Orphans, identified itself more boldly with the doctrines of John Wycliffe, sharing his passionate hatred of the monastic clergy, and his desire to return the Church to its supposed condition during the time of the apostles. This required the removal of the existing hierarchy and the secularisation of ecclesiastical possessions. Above all they clung to Wycliffe's doctrine of the Lord's Supper, denying transubstantiation, and this is the principal point by which they are distinguished from the moderate party, the Utraquists.\nThe radicals preached the \"sufficientia legis Christi\"\u2014the divine law (i.e. the Bible) is the sole rule and canon for human society, not only in the church, but also in political and civil matters. They rejected therefore, as early as 1416, everything that they believed had no basis in the Bible, such as the veneration of saints and images, fasts, superfluous holidays, the oath, intercession for the dead, auricular Confession, indulgences, the sacraments of Confirmation and the Anointing of the Sick, and chose their own priests.\nThe radicals had their gathering-places all around the country. Their first armed assault fell on the small town of \u00dast\u00ed, on the river Lu\u017enice, south of Prague (today's Sezimovo \u00dast\u00ed). However, as the place did not prove to be defensible, they settled in the remains of an older town upon a hill not far away and founded a new town, which they named T\u00e1bor (a play on words, as \"T\u00e1bor\" not only meant \"camp\" or \"encampment\" in Czech, but is also the traditional name of the mountain on which Jesus was expected to return; see Mark 13); hence they were called T\u00e1borit\u00e9 (Taborites). They comprised the essential force of the radical Hussites.\nTheir aim was to destroy the enemies of the law of God, and to defend his kingdom (which had been expected to come in a short time) by the sword. Their end-of-world visions did not come true. In order to preserve their settlement and spread their ideology, they waged bloody wars; in the beginning they observed a strict regime, inflicting the severest punishment equally for murder, as for less severe faults as adultery, perjury, and usury, and also tried to apply rigid Biblical standards to the social order of the time. The Taborites usually had the support of the Orebites (later called Orphans), an eastern Bohemian sect of Hussitism based in Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14292", "revid": "35463430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14292", "title": "HMS Ark Royal", "text": "Five ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS \"Ark Royal\":\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "14293", "revid": "50180924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14293", "title": "Herman of Alaska", "text": "Russian Orthodox monk and saint (c. 1736 \u2013 1837)\nHerman of Alaska (; c. 1756 \u2013 November 15, 1837) was a Russian Orthodox monk and missionary to Alaska, which was then part of Russian America. He is considered by many Orthodox Christians to be the patron saint of North America.\nEarly life.\nBiographers disagree about Herman's early life. His official biography, which Valaam Monastery published in 1867, said that his pre-monastic name was unknown, but that Herman was born into a merchant's family in Serpukhov, a city in Moscow Governorate. He was said to later become a novice at the Trinity-St. Sergius Hermitage near St. Petersburg before going to Valaam to complete his training and receive full tonsure as a monk. But, modern biographer Sergei Korsun found this account to be based on erroneous information provided by Semyon Yanovsky, an administrator from 1818 through part of 1820 of the Russian-American Company (RAC) in Alaska. He confused Herman's biographical information with that of another monk, Joseph (Telepnev).\nAnother former RAC Chief Manager, Ferdinand von Wrangel, stated Herman was originally from a prosperous peasant family in the Voronezh Governorate and served in the military. He then entered monastic life as a novice at Sarov Monastery. This concurred with testimony of Archimandrite Theophan (Sokolov), and a letter written by Herman himself. These agree that Herman began his monastic life as a novice at Sarov, and later received the full tonsure at Valaam. A young military clerk named Egor Ivanovich Popov, from the Voronezh Governorate, was tonsured with the name 'Herman' at Valaam in 1782.\nAll biographers agree that at Valaam, Herman studied under Abbot Nazarius, previously of Sarov Monastery. The abbot had been influenced by the hesychastic tradition of Paisius Velichkovsky. Herman undertook various obediences and was well-liked by the brethren, but wanted a more solitary life. He became a hermit with Abbot Nazarius' blessing. His hermitage, which later became known as \"Herman's field\" or Germanovo, was two kilometers from the monastery. Metropolitan Gabriel of St. Petersburg offered to ordain Herman to the priesthood and twice offered to send him to lead the Russian Orthodox Mission in China, but he refused, preferring the solitary life and remaining a simple monk. Years after he left for North America, Herman continued to keep in touch with his spiritual home. In a letter to Abbot Nazarius, he wrote, \"in my mind I imagine my beloved Valaam, and constantly behold it across the great ocean.\"\nMission in Alaska.\nThe Russian colonization of the Americas began when Vitus Bering and Aleksei Chirikov discovered Alaska on behalf of the Russian Empire in 1741. The expedition harvested 1,500 sea otter pelts, which Chinese merchants bought for 1,000 rubles apiece at their trading post near Lake Baikal. This spurred a \"fur rush\" from 1741 to 1798 in which frontiersmen known as \"promyshlenniki\" explored Alaska and the Aleutian Islands. They alternately fought with and intermarried the native peoples.\nGrigory Shelikhov, a fur-trader, subjugated the native population of Kodiak Island. With Ivan Golikov, he founded a fur-trading company that eventually received a monopoly from the Imperial government; it became known as the Russian-American Company. Shelikhov founded a school for the natives, and many were converted to Russian Orthodox Christianity.\nThe Shelikhov-Golikov Company appealed to the Most Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church to provide a priest for the natives. Catherine the Great decided instead to send an entire mission to America. She entrusted the task of recruiting missionaries to Metropolitan Gabriel of St. Petersburg, who sent ten monks from Valaam, including Herman. The missionaries arrived on Kodiak on September 24, 1794.\nHerman and the other missionaries encountered a harsh reality at Kodiak that did not correspond to Shelikhov's rosy descriptions. The native Kodiak population, called \"Americans\" by the Russian settlers, were subject to harsh treatment by the Russian-American Company, which was being overseen by Shelikhov's manager Alexander Baranov, who later became the first governor of the colony.\nThe men were forced to hunt for sea otter even during harsh weather, and women and children were abused. The monks were also shocked at the widespread alcoholism in the Russian population, and the fact that most of the settlers had taken native mistresses. The monks themselves were not given the supplies that Shelikhov promised them, and had to till the ground with wooden implements.\nDespite these difficulties, the monks baptized more than 7,000 natives in the Kodiak region, and set about building a church and monastery. Herman was assigned in the bakery and acted as the mission's steward (\"ekonom\").\nThe monks became the defenders of the native Kodiak population. Herman was especially noted for his zeal in protecting them from the excessive demands of the RAC, and Baranov disparaged him in a letter as a \"hack writer and chatterer.\" A contemporary historian compares him to Bartolom\u00e9 de las Casas, the Roman Catholic friar who defended the rights of native South Americans against the Spanish colonists.\nAfter over a decade spent in Alaska, Herman became the head of the mission in 1807, although he was not ordained to the priesthood. The local population loved and respected him, and he had established good relations with Baranov. Herman ran the mission school, where he taught church subjects such as singing and catechism, alongside reading and writing. He also taught agriculture on Spruce Island. But, because he still longed for the life of a hermit, he retired from active duty in the mission and moved to Spruce Island.\nLife on Spruce Island.\nHerman moved to Spruce Island around 1811 to 1817. The island is separated from Kodiak by a mile-wide strait, making it ideal for eremitic life. Herman named his hermitage \"New Valaam.\" He wore simple clothes and slept on a bench covered with a deerskin. When asked how he could bear to be alone in the forest, he replied, \"I am not alone. God is here, as God is everywhere.\"\nDespite his solitary life, he soon gained a following. He received many visitors\u2014especially native Alutiiq \u2014on Sundays and church feasts. Soon a chapel and guesthouse were built next to his hermitage, and then a school for orphans. Herman had a few disciples, including the Creole orphan Gerasim Ivanovich Zyrianov, a young Aleut woman named Sofia Vlasova, and others.\nEntire families moved to the island in order to be closer to the Elder, who helped to sort out their disputes. Herman had a deep love for the native Aleuts: he stood up for them against the excesses of the Russian-American Company, and once during an epidemic, he was the only Russian to visit them, working tirelessly to care for the sick and console the dying. Herman spent the rest of his life on Spruce Island, where he died on November 15, 1837.\nSainthood and legacy.\nCanonization.\nOn March 11, 1969, the bishops of the Orthodox Church in America (OCA) formally declared their intention to canonize Herman \"as a sublime example of the Holy Life, for our spiritual benefit, inspiration, comfort, and the confirmation of our Faith.\" On August 9, 1970, Metropolitan Ireney (Bekish) of the OCA along with Archbishop Paul (Olmari) of Finland and other hierarchs and clergy presided over the canonization service, which was held at Holy Resurrection Cathedral on Kodiak Island. His relics were transferred from his grave underneath the Sts. Sergius and Herman of Valaam Chapel (i.e., the Saints Sergius and Herman of Valaam Chapel), on Spruce Island, to the Holy Resurrection Cathedral.\nOn the same date, the bishops of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside of Russia (ROCOR) also canonized Herman at the Holy Virgin Cathedral (\"Joy of All Who Sorrow\") in San Francisco. At the all-night vigil, the canon to Herman was read for the first time by Gleb Podmoshensky, one of the founding brothers of the St. Herman of Alaska Serbian Orthodox Brotherhood in 1963. He, Eugene (Seraphim) Rose, and Lawrence Campbell gathered material for the Synod of Bishops in order to support the glorification of Herman, and also helped compose the liturgical service in his honor.\nFeast days.\nThere are several feast days throughout the year on which Saint Herman of Alaska is commemorated. Since there are two different calendars currently in use among various Orthodox churches, two dates are listed: the first date is the date on both the Revised Julian Calendar and the traditional Julian Calendar, the second date, after the slash, is the same day on the date on the more contemporary Gregorian Calendar date for the Julian Calendar date.\nIn 2022, Herman was officially added to the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar with a feast day on 15 November.\nRelics and legacy.\nThe major portion of his relics are preserved at Holy Resurrection Cathedral in Kodiak, Alaska, His burial site at the Sts. Sergius and Herman Chapel, Spruce Island, Alaska is an important pilgrimage site. The devout will often take soil from his grave and water from the spring named in his honor.\nA portion of his relics are enshrined at the St. Ignatius Chapel at the Antiochan Village in Pennsylvania, a conference and retreat center of the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America. He is regarded as one of their patron saints.\nIn 1963, with the blessing of John Maximovitch, Archbishop of Shanghai and San Francisco, a community of Orthodox booksellers and publishers called the St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood was formed to publish Orthodox missionary information in English.\nOne of the founders was Father Seraphim Rose. The Brotherhood did much to advance the cause of Herman's glorification as a saint. Saint Herman's Orthodox Theological Seminary in Kodiak, Alaska is named in his honor, as are numerous parish churches throughout the world.\nOn Tuesday, August 4, 1970, the 91st Congress of the United States acknowledged the glorification of Herman of Alaska with a speech in the Senate, and his biography was formally entered into the Congressional Record.\nIn 1993, Patriarch Alexis II visited Kodiak to venerate the relics of Saint Herman. He left as a gift an ornate \"lampada\" (oil lamp) which burns constantly over the reliquary. Pilgrims from all over the world are anointed with holy oil from this \"lampada\".\nFinnish Orthodox Espoo Church in Tapiola, Espoo, is dedicated to St. Herman of Alaska.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14294", "revid": "50876316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14294", "title": "Hausdorff dimension", "text": "Invariant measure of fractal dimension\nIn mathematics, Hausdorff dimension is a measure of \"roughness\", or more specifically, fractal dimension, that was introduced in 1918 by mathematician Felix Hausdorff. For instance, the Hausdorff dimension of a single point is zero, of a line segment is 1, of a square is 2, and of a cube is 3. That is, for sets of points that define a smooth shape or a shape that has a small number of corners\u2014the shapes of traditional geometry and science\u2014the Hausdorff dimension is an integer agreeing with the usual sense of dimension, also known as the topological dimension. However, formulas have also been developed that allow calculation of the dimension of other less simple objects, where, solely on the basis of their properties of scaling and self-similarity, one is led to the conclusion that particular objects\u2014including fractals\u2014have non-integer Hausdorff dimensions. Because of the significant technical advances made by Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch allowing computation of dimensions for highly irregular or \"rough\" sets, this dimension is also commonly referred to as the \"Hausdorff\u2013Besicovitch dimension.\"\nMore specifically, the Hausdorff dimension is a dimensional number associated with a metric space, i.e. a set where the distances between all members are defined. The dimension is drawn from the extended real numbers, formula_1, as opposed to the more intuitive notion of dimension, which is not associated to general metric spaces, and only takes values in the non-negative integers.\nIn mathematical terms, the Hausdorff dimension generalizes the notion of the dimension of a real vector space. That is, the Hausdorff dimension of an \"n\"-dimensional inner product space equals \"n\". This underlies the earlier statement that the Hausdorff dimension of a point is zero, of a line is one, etc., and that irregular sets can have noninteger Hausdorff dimensions. For instance, the Koch snowflake shown at right is constructed from an equilateral triangle; in each iteration, its component line segments are divided into 3 segments of unit length, the newly created middle segment is used as the base of a new equilateral triangle that points outward, and this base segment is then deleted to leave a final object from the iteration of unit length of 4. That is, after the first iteration, each original line segment has been replaced with N=4, where each self-similar copy is 1/S = 1/3 as long as the original. Stated another way, we have taken an object with Euclidean dimension, D, and reduced its linear scale by 1/3 in each direction, so that its length increases to N=SD. This equation is easily solved for D, yielding the ratio of logarithms (or natural logarithms) appearing in the figures, and giving\u2014in the Koch and other fractal cases\u2014non-integer dimensions for these objects.\nThe Hausdorff dimension is a successor to the simpler, but usually equivalent, box-counting or Minkowski\u2013Bouligand dimension.\nIntuition.\nThe intuitive concept of dimension of a geometric object \"X\" is the number of independent parameters one needs to pick out a unique point inside. However, any point specified by two parameters can be instead specified by one, because the cardinality of the real plane is equal to the cardinality of the real line (this can be seen by an argument involving interweaving the digits of two numbers to yield a single number encoding the same information). The example of a space-filling curve shows that one can even map the real line to the real plane surjectively (taking one real number into a pair of real numbers in a way so that all pairs of numbers are covered) and \"continuously\", so that a one-dimensional object completely fills up a higher-dimensional object.\nEvery space-filling curve hits some points multiple times and does not have a continuous inverse. It is impossible to map two dimensions onto one in a way that is continuous and continuously invertible. The topological dimension, also called Lebesgue covering dimension, explains why. This dimension is the greatest integer \"n\" such that in every covering of \"X\" by small open balls there is at least one point where \"n\"\u00a0+\u00a01 balls overlap. For example, when one covers a line with short open intervals, some points must be covered twice, giving dimension\u00a0\"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01.\nBut topological dimension is a very crude measure of the local size of a space (size near a point). A curve that is almost space-filling can still have topological dimension one, even if it fills up most of the area of a region. A fractal has an integer topological dimension, but in terms of the amount of space it takes up, it behaves like a higher-dimensional space.\nThe Hausdorff dimension measures the local size of a space taking into account the distance between points, the metric. Consider the number \"N\"(\"r\") of balls of radius at most \"r\" required to cover \"X\" completely. When \"r\" is very small, \"N\"(\"r\") grows polynomially with 1/\"r\". For a sufficiently well-behaved \"X\", the Hausdorff dimension is the unique number \"d\" such that N(\"r\") grows as 1/\"rd\" as \"r\" approaches zero. More precisely, this defines the box-counting dimension, which equals the Hausdorff dimension when the value \"d\" is a critical boundary between growth rates that are insufficient to cover the space, and growth rates that are overabundant.\nFor shapes that are smooth, or shapes with a small number of corners, the shapes of traditional geometry and science, the Hausdorff dimension is an integer agreeing with the topological dimension. But Benoit Mandelbrot observed that fractals, sets with noninteger Hausdorff dimensions, are found everywhere in nature. He observed that the proper idealization of most rough shapes one sees is not in terms of smooth idealized shapes, but in terms of fractal idealized shapes:\nClouds are not spheres, mountains are not cones, coastlines are not circles, and bark is not smooth, nor does lightning travel in a straight line.\nFor fractals that occur in nature, the Hausdorff and box-counting dimension coincide. The packing dimension is yet another similar notion which gives the same value for many shapes, but there are well-documented exceptions where all these dimensions differ.\nFormal definition.\nThe formal definition of the Hausdorff dimension is arrived at by defining first the d-dimensional Hausdorff measure, a fractional-dimension analogue of the Lebesgue measure. First, an outer measure is constructed:\nLet formula_2 be a metric space. If formula_3 and formula_4,\nformula_5\nwhere the infimum is taken over all countable covers formula_6 of formula_7. The Hausdorff d-dimensional outer measure is then defined as formula_8, and the restriction of the mapping to measurable sets justifies it as a measure, called the formula_9-dimensional Hausdorff Measure.\nHausdorff dimension.\nThe Hausdorff dimension formula_10 of formula_2 is defined by\nformula_12\nThis is the same as the supremum of the set of formula_4 such that the formula_9-dimensional Hausdorff measure of formula_2 is infinite (except that when this latter set of numbers formula_9 is empty the Hausdorff dimension is zero).\nHausdorff content.\nThe formula_9-dimensional unlimited Hausdorff content of formula_7 is defined by\nformula_19\nIn other words, formula_20 has the construction of the Hausdorff measure where the covering sets are allowed to have arbitrarily large sizes. (Here we use the standard convention that formula_21.) The Hausdorff measure and the Hausdorff content can both be used to determine the dimension of a set, but if the measure of the set is non-zero, their actual values may disagree.\nProperties of Hausdorff dimension.\nHausdorff dimension and inductive dimension.\nLet \"X\" be an arbitrary separable metric space. There is a topological notion of inductive dimension for \"X\" which is defined recursively. It is always an integer (or +\u221e) and is denoted dimind(\"X\").\nTheorem. Suppose \"X\" is non-empty. Then \nformula_25\nMoreover,\nformula_26\nwhere \"Y\" ranges over metric spaces homeomorphic to \"X\". In other words, \"X\" and \"Y\" have the same underlying set of points and the metric \"d\"\"Y\" of \"Y\" is topologically equivalent to \"d\"\"X\".\nThese results were originally established by Edward Szpilrajn (1907\u20131976), e.g., see Hurewicz and Wallman, Chapter VII.\nHausdorff dimension and Minkowski dimension.\nThe Minkowski dimension is similar to, and at least as large as, the Hausdorff dimension, and they are equal in many situations. However, the set of rational points in [0, 1] has Hausdorff dimension zero and Minkowski dimension one. There are also compact sets for which the Minkowski dimension is strictly larger than the Hausdorff dimension.\nHausdorff dimensions and Frostman measures.\nIf there is a measure \u03bc defined on Borel subsets of a metric space \"X\" such that \"\u03bc\"(\"X\") &gt; 0 and \"\u03bc\"(\"B\"(\"x\", \"r\")) \u2264 \"rs\" holds for some constant \"s\" &gt; 0 and for every ball \"B\"(\"x\", \"r\") in \"X\", then dimHaus(\"X\") \u2265 \"s\". A partial converse is provided by Frostman's lemma.\nBehaviour under unions and products.\nIf formula_27 is a finite or countable union, then\nformula_28\nThis can be verified directly from the definition.\nIf \"X\" and \"Y\" are non-empty metric spaces, then the Hausdorff dimension of their product satisfies\nformula_29\nThis inequality can be strict. It is possible to find two sets of dimension 0 whose product has dimension 1. In the opposite direction, it is known that when \"X\" and \"Y\" are Borel subsets of R\"n\", the Hausdorff dimension of \"X\" \u00d7 \"Y\" is bounded from above by the Hausdorff dimension of \"X\" plus the upper packing dimension of \"Y\". These facts are discussed in Mattila (1995).\nSelf-similar sets.\nMany sets defined by a self-similarity condition have dimensions which can be determined explicitly. Roughly, a set \"E\" is self-similar if it is the fixed point of a set-valued transformation \u03c8, that is \u03c8(\"E\") = \"E\", although the exact definition is given below.\nTheorem. Suppose\nformula_30\nare each a contraction mapping on R\"n\" with contraction constant \"ri\" &lt; 1. Then there is a unique \"non-empty\" compact set \"A\" such that\nformula_31\nThe theorem follows from Stefan Banach's contractive mapping fixed point theorem applied to the complete metric space of non-empty compact subsets of R\"n\" with the Hausdorff distance.\nThe open set condition.\nTo determine the dimension of the self-similar set \"A\" (in certain cases), we need a technical condition called the \"open set condition\" (OSC) on the sequence of contractions \u03c8\"i\".\nThere is an open set \"V\" with compact closure, such that\nformula_32\nwhere the sets in union on the left are pairwise disjoint.\nThe open set condition is a separation condition that ensures the images \u03c8\"i\"(\"V\") do not overlap \"too much\".\nTheorem. Suppose the open set condition holds and each \u03c8\"i\" is a similitude, that is a composition of an isometry and a dilation around some point. Then the unique fixed point of \u03c8 is a set whose Hausdorff dimension is \"s\" where \"s\" is the unique solution of\nformula_33\nThe contraction coefficient of a similitude is the magnitude of the dilation.\nIn general, a set \"E\" which is carried onto itself by a mapping\n formula_34\nis self-similar if and only if the intersections satisfy the following condition:\nformula_35\nwhere \"s\" is the Hausdorff dimension of \"E\" and \"Hs\" denotes s-dimensional Hausdorff measure. This is clear in the case of the Sierpinski gasket (the intersections are just points), but is also true more generally:\nTheorem. Under the same conditions as the previous theorem, the unique fixed point of \u03c8 is self-similar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14296", "revid": "751903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14296", "title": "Heckler &amp; Koch", "text": "German defence manufacturing company\nHeckler &amp; Koch GmbH (HK or H&amp;K; ) is a German firearms manufacturer that produces handguns, rifles, submachine guns, and grenade launchers. The company is located in Oberndorf am Neckar and also has subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, France, and the United States.\nHeckler &amp; Koch was founded in 1949 by former Mauser engineers Edmund Heckler, Theodor Koch, and Alex Seidel, who founded the company out of the shuttered Mauser factory in Oberndorf. The company initially produced machine tool and metal parts until 1956 when, in response to a contract for a new service rifle, HK developed the Heckler &amp; Koch G3. The success of the G3 rifle prompted HK to transition to the defense industry. HK was owned by Royal Ordnance from 1991 to 2002, and is currently part of the Heckler &amp; Koch Group, comprising Heckler &amp; Koch GmbH, Heckler &amp; Koch Defense, NSAF Ltd., and Heckler &amp; Koch France SAS. The company's motto is \"Keine Kompromisse\" (No Compromises).\nNicolas Walewski's financial holding company CDE has held a majority stake in Heckler &amp; Koch since July 2020.\nHistory.\nWith the fall of Nazi Germany and the following Allied occupation of Germany, Oberndorf came under French control, and the entire Waffenfabrik Mauser AG factory was dismantled by French occupying forces. All factory records were destroyed on orders of the local French Army commander. In 1948, three former Mauser engineers, Edmund Heckler, Theodor Koch, and Alex Seidel, saved what they could from the factory and used what they had salvaged to start a machine tool plant in the vacant factory that became known as the Engineering Office Heckler &amp; Co.\nOn 28 December 1949, the Engineering Office Heckler &amp; Co. changed its name and was registered officially as Heckler &amp; Koch GmbH. Initially the new company manufactured machine tools, bicycle and sewing machine parts, gauges, and other precision parts. In 1956, Heckler &amp; Koch responded to the West German government's tender for a new infantry rifle for the with the proposal of the G3 battle rifle, based on the Spanish CETME Model 58 rifle and developed in cooperation with CETME. The German government awarded Heckler &amp; Koch the tender and in 1959 declared the G3 the standard rifle of the . Later in 1961, Heckler &amp; Koch developed the 7.62\u00d751mm HK21 general-purpose machine gun, based on the G3.\nIn 1966, Heckler &amp; Koch introduced the HK54 machine pistol, which eventually launched in 1969 as the MP5 submachine gun. Two years later, the company introduced the HK33 assault rifle, a smaller version of the G3 chambered in 5.56\u00d745mm NATO.\nDiversification.\nIn 1974, Heckler &amp; Koch diversified into two more areas, HK Defense and Law Enforcement Technology and HK Hunting and Sports Firearms. Since then, HK has designed and manufactured more than 100 different types of firearms and devices for the world's military and law enforcement organizations as well as sports shooters and hunters. In 1990, Heckler &amp; Koch completed two decades of development of their caseless weapon system and produced prototypes of the G11 rifle. The company also produced prototypes of the G41 assault rifle intended for the . Due to the international political climate at the time (East and West Germany uniting and defense budget cuts) the company was unable to secure funded contracts from the German government to support production of either weapon system and became financially vulnerable. The following year, Heckler &amp; Koch was sold to British Aerospace's Royal Ordnance division.\nDuring 1994 and 1995, the German government awarded Heckler &amp; Koch contracts for producing an updated standard assault rifle and updated standard sidearm for the . Heckler &amp; Koch developed and produced the Project HK50, a lightweight carbon fiber assault rifle, which became the G36 assault rifle. In addition, Heckler &amp; Koch produced the P8 pistol, derived from its USP handguns produced since 1989. The USP was adopted as the standard sidearm of the in 1994, and the G36 was adopted as their standard-issue rifle in 1995.\nAs the result of a 1999 merger between British Aerospace and Marconi Electronic Systems, Heckler &amp; Koch was owned by the resulting BAE Systems; it was contracted to refurbish the British Army's SA80 rifles (which had been manufactured by Royal Ordnance) This contract entailed a modification program to the SA80 series of rifles to address a number of reliability issues with the design. In 2002, BAE Systems restructured and sold Heckler &amp; Koch to a group of private investors, who created the German group holding company HK Beteiligungs GmbH.\nIn 2003, HK Beteiligungs GmbH's business organization restructured as Heckler &amp; Koch Jagd und Sportwaffen GmbH (HKJS), and its business was separated into the two business areas similar to the 1974 business mission areas: Defense, and Law Enforcement and Sporting Firearms. In 2004, Heckler &amp; Koch was awarded a major handgun contract for the United States Department of Homeland Security, worth a potential $26.2 million for up to 65,000 handguns. This contract ranks as the single largest handgun procurement contract in U.S. law enforcement history.\nHK was contracted by the United States Army to produce the kinetic energy subsystem (see: kinetic projectiles or kinetic energy penetrator) of the Objective Individual Combat Weapon, a planned replacement for the M16 rifle/M203 grenade launcher combination. The OICW was designed to fire 5.56\u00a0mm rounds and 25\u00a0mm grenades. The kinetic energy component was also developed separately as the XM8, though both the OICW and XM8 are now indefinitely suspended.\nHeckler &amp; Koch developed an AR-15/M4 carbine variant, marketed as the HK416. HK replaced the direct impingement system used by the Stoner design on the original M16 with a short-stroke piston operating system. The civilian models are named the MR223 and, in the U.S., the MR556A1.\nIn 2007, United States Secretary of the Army Pete Geren agreed to hold a \"dust chamber\" test pitting the M4 against the Heckler &amp; Koch HK416 and XM8, as well as the rival FN SCAR design. The Heckler &amp; Koch XM8 and FN SCAR had the fewest failures in the test, closely followed by the HK416, while the M4 had by far the most. In 2007, the Norwegian Army became the first to field the HK416 as a standard-issue rifle. \nHK sells its pistols in the United States to both law enforcement and civilian markets, through its HK USA subsidiary. The company has locations in Virginia, New Hampshire, and Georgia.\nProducts.\nHeckler &amp; Koch has produced a variety of firearms including the G3, HK21, MP5, HK4, HK33, HK69, VP70, PSG1, USP, G36, MG4, UMP, MP7, and HK416 which have become some of the most iconic and widely adopted firearms in the world, used by dozens of militaries, police forces, and paramilitaries worldwide. Many of its prototype weapons including the G11, HK CAWS, XM29 OICW, and XM8, have also become recognizable. HK firearms use blowback operation, short-recoil, roller-delayed blowback, gas-delayed blowback, and short-stroke piston gas operation. HK is responsible for several innovations in firearms, such as the use of polymers in weapon designs, modern polygonal rifling, the feasibility of high-velocity caseless ammunition in prototype service rifles, and integral rails for handgun attachments.\nHK naming system.\nHeckler &amp; Koch products use an internal naming system, consisting of an abbreviation and a two- or three-digit \"Werknummern\" designation popularly referred to as the \"HK 3-digit system\". Each letter and digit is assigned a specific meaning outlined in the convention to make them easier to identify and differentiate by name.\nThe HK naming convention is not a fixed convention, but rather a guideline, and not all HK products follow it; this is typically done for marketing purposes or quirks in the weapon's development or intended role. For instance, the HK416 does not use a proper abbreviation (\"HK\" does not mean anything specific), nor does it use proper digits (the HK416 was originally two models, the \"HK M4\" and \"HK M16\", that were later amalgamated into the HK416); using the 3-digit system, the standard HK416 would likely be referred to as the G333. Such products tend to have proper internal designations anyway; the HK416 is internally referred to as the HK333.\nAbbreviations.\nMost HK products have a prefix of between one and three letters, corresponding to a word or term in German (though some refer to English terms instead, with no German equivalent). Several were only used for a single model, such as the \"Universal\" weapons (UMP, UCP, USC, and USP). Some abbreviations are used as a suffix to designate specific variants.\n\"Werknummern\" designations.\nThe \"Werknummern\" designation system assigns two or three digits which correspond to the product's technical specifics. They are placed after (or if a suffix, before) the abbreviation and denote the generation, form factor, and caliber or munition of the weapon.\nDate code.\nThe date code is a two-letter combination used to specify the year a weapon was manufactured in. These are not part of the product's name, but are printed for identification directly on the weapon itself. They are only used on handguns.\nHeckler &amp; Koch handguns produced at HK's German facilities are marked with \"DE\", Germany's ISO 3166-1 code. Handguns manufactured in HK facilities outside Germany, or those produced in Germany before 2008, do not have the DE marking.\nTrigger group.\nHeckler &amp; Koch long arms mostly follow a set of shared trigger group standards for selective fire and safety, with corresponding markings and pictograms.\nTrafficking.\nH&amp;K has been accused of shipping small arms to conflict regions such as Bosnia and Nepal, and has licensed its weapons for production by governments with poor human rights records such as Sudan, Thailand and Myanmar. It has been argued that the company effectively evaded EU export restrictions when these licensees sold HK weapons to conflict zones including Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Sierra Leone.\nAccording to the newspaper \"Stuttgarter Nachrichten\" (31 August 2011), as well as the state broadcaster ARD, a large stockpile of G36 assault rifles fell into rebel hands during the August 2011 attack on Muammar Gaddafi's compound in Tripoli. It is unclear how many were exported to Libya and by whom.\nIllegal arms sales to Mexico.\nOn 11 December 2011, federal, state and local Mexican police officers used battle rifles to fire on Ayotzinapa Rural Teachers' College students and peasant organizations to disperse a blockade on Mexican Federal Highway 95D, resulting in the deaths of students Jorge Alexis Herrera and Gabriel Echeverr\u00eda de Jes\u00fas. According to media reports, 7.62\u00d751mm NATO round casings were found at the scene, matching those used by H&amp;K G3 rifles. In Iguala and Cocula, corrupt police officers and cartelmen are known to have used H&amp;K G36 rifles during the 2014 Iguala mass kidnapping on 26\u201327 September 2013. At least six teaching students were murdered by cartelmen and corrupt local police, and 43 others are missing and presumed dead. Other than the six identified persons, no other bodies have been found, and they are believed to have been incinerated.\nAs a result of efforts by civil society and human rights organizations in Mexico and Germany, H&amp;K and two of its former employees were brought before the Provincial Court of Stuttgart. After ten months of trial, on 21 February 2019, the court convicted them of illegally selling arms to Mexican governmental institutions which failed to acknowledge their due observance of human rights. The two former employees (sales manager Sahlmann and administrative employee Beuter) had been found to have used fraudulent permits in the sale of 4,700 rifles and large quantities of ammunition. H&amp;K was issued a fine of 3.7 million euros, and the two men received suspended sentences of 17 and 22 months. The spokesman of the Presidency of the Republic of Mexico, Jes\u00fas Ram\u00edrez Cuevas, said that the amount of the fine should go to the victims and their families. \nOn 30 March 2021, Germany's Federal Court of Justice (BGH) upheld the lower court's decision, finding that H&amp;K employees knowingly falsified information on the nature and destination of arms sold by the company in order to attain federal export licenses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14297", "revid": "46432178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14297", "title": "Heckler &amp; Koch MP5", "text": "German 9\u00d719mm Parabellum submachine gun\nThe Heckler &amp; Koch MP5 (, lit.\u2009'Submachine gun 5') is a submachine gun developed in the 1960s by German firearms manufacturer Heckler &amp; Koch. It uses a similar modular design to the Heckler &amp; Koch G3, and has over 100 variants and clones, including selective fire, semi-automatic, suppressed, compact, and even marksman variants. The MP5 is one of the most widely used submachine guns in the world, having been adopted by over forty nations and numerous militaries, police forces, intelligence agencies, security organizations, paramilitaries, and non-state actors.\nAttempts at replacing the MP5 by Heckler &amp; Koch began in the 1980s, but despite functional prototype weapons having promising performance, a formal successor did not enter commercial production until 1999, when Heckler &amp; Koch developed the UMP. However, despite being more expensive, the MP5 remained the more successful of the two designs, because of its preexisting widespread use, design familiarity, and lower recoil due to its roller-delayed action as opposed to the UMP's straight blowback action.\nHistory.\nHeckler &amp; Koch, encouraged by the success of the G3 battle rifle in 1959, developed a family of small arms consisting of four types of firearms all based on a common G3 design layout and operating principle. The first type was chambered for 7.62\u00d751mm NATO, the second for 7.62\u00d739mm M43, the third for 5.56\u00d745mm NATO, and the fourth for 9\u00d719mm Parabellum. The MP5 was created for the fourth type as the HK54; under the HK naming system, this categorizes it as a selective fire carbine chambered in a handgun cartridge.\nDevelopment began in 1964, and in 1966 the HK54 was adopted by the \"Bundesgrenzschutz\" and by \"Bundeswehr\" special forces, initially as the \"MP64\", before being redesignated as the MP5. The MP5A1 was introduced in the late 1960s and was the first model to feature the front ring sight and \"Slimline\" handguard. In 1970, the MP5 and MP5A1 were superseded by the MP5A2 and MP5A3, improvements to the MP5A1 with a fixed stock and retracting stock respectively. In 1974, the MP5SD, an integrally-suppressed variant, was introduced, and in 1976, the MP5K, a redesigned compact variant, was developed per a request for a variant that suited close-quarters combat in South America. In 1977, the original straight magazines were replaced by curved steel magazines. In 1978, the \"Tropical\" handguard was introduced for the MP5.\nIn 1980, the MP5 achieved an iconic status during the Iranian Embassy siege, when British Army Special Air Service operatives used MP5s with top-mounted flashlights to assault the embassy and rescue the hostages held inside. Photos of the operation featuring MP5s were widely disseminated in the press and popular media, and drove other military and police units to purchase MP5s as well, quickly making the MP5 widely recognizable and associated with elite counterterrorist units. The MP5 has since become a mainstay in militaries, special forces, and police tactical units across the world, but has gradually been replaced since the late 1990s by rifles, carbines, and personal defense weapons due to changes in armament trends, including growing access to body armor that can stop handgun projectiles.\nThe MP5 is manufactured under license in several nations including Greece (formerly Hellenic Arms Industry, currently Hellenic Defence Systems), Iran (Defense Industries Organization), Mexico (SEDENA), Pakistan (Pakistan Ordnance Factories), Saudi Arabia, Sudan (Military Industry Corporation), Turkey (MKEK), and the United Kingdom (formerly Royal Ordnance, later moved to Heckler &amp; Koch Great Britain).\nDesign.\nThe primary version of the MP5 family is the \"MP5A2\", which is a selective fire delayed blowback-operated 9\u00d719mm Parabellum weapon. It fires from a closed bolt (bolt forward) position.\nThe fixed, free-floating, cold hammer-forged barrel has six right-hand grooves with a 1 in 250\u00a0mm (1:10 in) rifling twist rate and is pressed and pinned into the receiver.\nFeatures.\nThe first MP5 models used a double-column straight box magazine, but since 1977, slightly curved steel magazines have been used with a 15-round capacity (weighing 0.12\u00a0kg) or a 30-round capacity (0.17\u00a0kg empty).\nThe adjustable iron sights (closed type) consist of a rotating rear diopter drum and a front post installed in a hooded ring. The rear sight is mechanically adjustable for both windage and elevation with the use of a special tool, being adjusted at the factory for firing at with standard FMJ 9\u00d719mm NATO ammunition. The rear sight drum provides four apertures of varying diameters used to adjust the diopter system, according to the user's preference and tactical situation. Changing between apertures does not change the point of impact down range.\nThe MP5 has a hammer firing mechanism. The trigger group is housed inside an interchangeable polymer trigger module (with an integrated pistol grip) and equipped with a three-position fire mode selector that serves as the manual safety toggle. Per HK trigger group standards, most MP5 variants have the option of \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger groups, with further alterations based on the availability and type of burst fire; the \"SE\" and \"0-1\" trigger groups are only available for semi-automatic and civilian variants. While the \"SEF\" trigger group's fire selector lever is located on the left-hand side of the trigger, the SEF symbols themselves appear on both sides of the trigger grouping; the \"Navy\" trigger group, among others, are ambidextrous. The safety/selector is rotated into the various firing settings or safety position by depressing the tail end of the lever. Tactile clicks (stops) are present at each position to provide a positive stop and prevent inadvertent rotation. The \"safe\" setting disables the trigger by blocking the hammer release with a solid section of the safety axle located inside the trigger housing.\nThe non-reciprocating cocking handle is located above the handguard and protrudes from the cocking handle tube at approximately a 45\u00b0 angle. This rigid control is attached to a tubular piece within the cocking lever housing called the cocking lever support, which in turn makes contact with the forward extension of the bolt group. It is not however connected to the bolt carrier and therefore cannot be used as a forward assist to fully seat the bolt group. The cocking handle is held in a forward position by a spring detent located in the front end of the cocking lever support which engages in the cocking lever housing. The lever is locked back by pulling it fully to the rear and rotating it slightly clockwise where it can be hooked into an indent in the cocking lever tube.\nOperating mechanism.\nThe bolt rigidly engages the barrel extension\u2014a cylindrical component welded to the receiver into which the barrel is pinned. The delay mechanism is of the same design as that used in the G3 rifle. The two-part bolt consists of a bolt head with rollers and a bolt carrier. The heavier bolt carrier lies up against the bolt head when the weapon is ready to fire and inclined planes on the front locking piece lie between the rollers and force them out into recesses in the barrel extension.\nWhen fired, expanding propellant gases produced from the burning powder in the cartridge exert rearward pressure on the bolt head transferred through the base of the cartridge case as it is propelled out of the chamber. A portion of this force is transmitted through the rollers projecting from the bolt head, which are cammed inward against the inclined flanks of the locking recesses in the barrel extension and to the angled shoulders of the locking piece. The selected angles of the recesses and the incline on the locking piece produce a velocity ratio of about 4:1 between the bolt carrier and the bolt head. This results in a calculated delay, allowing the projectile to exit the barrel and gas pressure to drop to a safe level before the case is extracted from the chamber.\nThe delay results from the amount of time it takes for enough recoil energy to be transferred through to the bolt carrier in a sufficient quantity for it to be driven to the rear against the force of inertia of the bolt carrier and the forward pressure exerted against the bolt by the recoil spring. As the rollers are forced inward they displace the locking piece and propel the bolt carrier to the rear. The bolt carrier's rearward velocity is four times that of the bolt head since the cartridge remains in the chamber for a short period of time during the initial recoil impulse. After the bolt carrier has travelled rearward 4\u00a0mm, the locking piece is withdrawn fully from the bolt head and the rollers are compressed into the bolt head. Only once the locking rollers are fully cammed into the bolt head can the entire bolt group continue its rearward movement in the receiver, breaking the seal in the chamber and continuing the feeding cycle.\nSince the 9\u00d719mm Parabellum cartridge is relatively low powered, the bolt does not have an anti-bounce device like the G3, but instead the bolt carrier contains of tungsten granules that prevent the bolt group from bouncing back after impacting the barrel extension. The weapon has a fluted chamber that enhances extraction reliability by bleeding gases backwards into the shallow flutes running along the length of the chamber to prevent the cartridge case from expanding and sticking to the chamber walls (since the bolt is opened under relatively high barrel pressure). A spring extractor is installed inside the bolt head and holds the case securely until it strikes the ejector arm and is thrown out of the ejection port to the right of the receiver. The lever-type ejector is located inside the trigger housing (activated by the movement of the recoiling bolt).\nAccessories.\nBarrel accessories.\nThreading is provided at the muzzle to work with certain muzzle devices made by Heckler &amp; Koch, including a slotted flash suppressor, a blank-firing adapter (marked with a red-painted band denoting use with blank ammunition only), a rifle grenade adapter (for use with rifle-style grenades with an inside diameter of 22\u00a0mm using a special grenade launching cartridge), and cup-type tear gas rifle grenade adapter. An optional \"3-Lug\" barrel is also available on some variants for mounting a quick-detachable suppressor.\nMP5SD suppressor.\nThe MP5SD's barrel has 30 ports drilled forward of the chamber through which escaping gases are diverted to the surrounding sealed tubular casing that is screwed onto threading on the barrel's external surface just prior to the ported segment. The MP5SD's integral suppressor itself is divided into two stages: the initial segment surrounding the ported barrel serves as an expansion chamber for the propellant gases, reducing gas pressure to slow down the acceleration of the projectile. The second decompression stage occupies the remaining length of the suppressor tube and contains a stamped metal helix separator with several compartments which increase the gas volume and decrease its temperature, deflecting the gases as they exit the muzzle, so muffling the exit report. The bullet leaves the muzzle at subsonic velocity, so it does not generate a sonic shock wave in flight. As a result of reducing the barrel's length and venting propellant gases into the suppressor, the bullet's muzzle velocity was lowered anywhere from 16% to 26% (depending on the ammunition used) while maintaining the weapon's automation and reliability.\nReceiver.\nThe receiver housing has a proprietary claw-rail mounting system that permits the attachment of a standard Heckler &amp; Koch quick-detachable scope mount (also used with the G3, HK33, and G3SG/1). It can be used to mount daytime optical sights (telescopic 4\u00d724), night sights, reflex sights, and laser sights. The mount features two spring-actuated bolts, positioned along the base of the mount, which exert pressure on the receiver to hold the mount in the same position at all times assuring zero retention. All versions of the quick-detachable scope mount provide a sighting tunnel through the mount so that the shooter can continue to use the fixed iron sights with the scope mount attached to the top of the receiver.\nA Picatinny rail adapter can be placed on top that locks into the claw rails. This allows the mounting of STANAG scopes and has a lower profile than the claw-rail system.\nHandguard.\nStandard MP5 variants have the option of two handguards: \"Slimline\", the original slim checkered metal handguard; and \"Tropical\", a wider and smoother polymer handguard introduced in 1978.\nThe MP5SD, MP5K, and SP89 have unique handguards owing to their design differences: the MP5SD handguard is similar to Slimline but larger to fit the integrated suppressor, the MP5K handguard has a built-in foregrip and handstop, and the SP89 handguard is similar to the MP5K's but extended and without the foregrip.\nAftermarket handguards also exist, including newer vented handguards based on the \"Tropical\" handguard, \"dedicated forend\" handguards featuring a built-in underbarrel tactical light, and rail integration system-equipped handguards to fit attachments.\nOriginal pre-designation model, introduced in 1964. It has a charcoal-gray phosphated finish rather than the matte-black lacquered finish used on later models. The handguard resembles the \"Slimline\" handguard but is narrower and has slots along it. Its bolt carrier is longer and heavier than that of the final MP5, and it uses a flip-up \"ladder\" rear sight similar to that used on early G3 models. It uses straight steel magazines with plastic followers and distinctive \"waffle\" rib imprints for reinforcement.\nThe basic MP5, based on a modified and improved HK54, introduced in 1966. When first released, it had a gray phosphated finish, \"Slimline\" handguard, 8.9-inch barrel with \"3-Lug\" muzzle, and straight waffle magazines. Modernized improvements were introduced in the 1970s: proprietary \"claw mount\" rails for scope, laser, and flashlight attachments were introduced in 1973; un-ribbed curved magazines with chrome followers were introduced in 1977; the matte-black lacquered finish was introduced for export models also in 1977; and the polymer \"Tropical\" handguard was introduced in 1978.\nStandard MP5 with no stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5 with a fixed stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5 with a retractable stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5 with a fixed stock, the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group, and a straight pistol grip.\nStandard MP5 with a retractable stock, the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group, and a straight pistol grip.\nSemi-automatic variant of the MP5 intended for the law enforcement and military markets, introduced in 1986 to meet a Federal Bureau of Investigation request for a \"9mm semi-automatic carbine\". Unlike the HK94, the semi-automatic MP5 variant for the civilian market, the MP5SF retains its standard 8.9-inch barrel. It has two variants: the MP5SFA2 with a fixed stock, and the MP5SFA3 with a retractable stock. It uses the \"0-1\" trigger group, but since 1991, it has been delivered with select-fire bolt carriers that make it capable of automatic fire if paired with an appropriate trigger group.\nTraining variants of the MP5A4 and MP5A5. They are designed to use a plastic 9\u00d719mm round developed by Dynamit Nobel.\nNaval variant of the MP5, introduced in 1986 to meet a United States Navy request for a submachine gun effective aboard ships and in low-light conditions. It is essentially an MP5A3 with a retractable stock, \"Navy 2-Round Burst\" trigger group, tritium illuminated sights, and a custom \"3-Lug\" muzzle derivative for mounting a stainless steel suppressor produced by Knight's Armament Company (KAC).\nImproved French variant of the MP5, introduced in 1999 to meet a French National Gendarmerie request for a suitable standard-issue submachine gun. It is essentially a modified and improved MP5A3, featuring a padded retractable stock, \"Navy\" trigger group, ambidextrous sling mounts, and internal improvements to handle high-pressure ammunition.\nModernized refresh of the MP5, introduced in 2015. It is based on the MP5A5 and features the MP5F's padded retractable stock, triple-rail \"Slimline\" handguard, \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group, quick-release sight mount or sight rail, and a RAL 8000 finish. Compatible components of the MP5 MLI can be switched out and retrofitted with other compatible MP5 variants.\nVariants.\nMP5SD.\nThe MP5SD (\"SD\" meaning \"Schalld\u00e4mpfer\", German for \"sound suppressor\") is a variant of the MP5 with an integral suppressor, introduced in 1974. The integral suppressor, built around its 5.7-inch barrel, uses a unique two-stage design that allows it to operate silently in most environments, including when wet, while still remaining reliable. The distinctive size of the integral suppressor gives it a unique handguard design, with a modified charging handle to account for it. The MP5SD has a rate of fire of approximately 800 rounds per minute, and is intended for use with both standard and subsonic ammunition.\nStandard MP5SD with no stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5SD with a fixed stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5SD with a retractable stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5SD with no stock and the \"SEF\" or \"Navy\" trigger group. It is largely similar to the MP5SD1.\nStandard MP5SD with a fixed stock and the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group.\nStandard MP5SD with a retractable stock and the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group.\nNaval variant of the MP5SD, with a retractable stock, the \"Navy 2-Round Burst\" trigger group, and the MP5N's KAC stainless steel suppressor.\nNaval variant of the MP5SD, with a fixed stock, the \"Navy 2-Round Burst\" trigger group, and the MP5N's KAC stainless steel suppressor.\nMP5K.\nThe MP5K (\"K\" meaning \"Kurz\", German for \"short\") is a redesigned compact variant of the MP5, introduced in 1976. Developed from the stockless MP5A1, it features a 4.5-inch barrel incompatible with muzzle attachments, an endcap with sling mount instead of a stock, and a unique handguard with a built-in foregrip. Most components of the MP5K are shortened on account of its compact design, including its bolt, receiver, charging handle, cover, and trigger group frame; the lighter bolt gives it a higher rate of fire, at approximately 900 rounds per minute (as opposed to 800 rounds per minute with the regular MP5). Different variants of the MP5K use either unique open iron sights or redesigned fixed iron sights.\nStockless, cut-down MP5A2 with regular iron sights and an open vertical foregrip, developed in 1976.\nStandard MP5K with the \"SEF\" trigger group, smooth upper surface, and small low-profile iron sights.\nStandard MP5K with the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group and regular iron sights.\nStandard MP5K with the \"Navy 3-Round Burst\" trigger group, smooth upper surface, and small low-profile iron sights.\nNaval variant of the MP5K, with the \"Navy\" trigger group and a custom \"3-Lug\" muzzle similar to that of the MP5N.\n\"Full-size\" variant of the MP5K, introduced in 1991. It is designed to provide the benefits of the MP5K with the size and handling of a regular MP5, and is essentially a regular MP5K with a custom folding stock, \"Navy\" trigger group, and 5.5-inch barrel with a custom \"3-Lug\" muzzle similar to that of the MP5N but for a Qual-A-Tec suppressor. Despite its name, the MP5K-PDW is not a personal defense weapon, as it uses a handgun cartridge and not the sub-intermediate cartridges used by actual PDWs; rather, its name is derived from its intended use as a self-protection firearm for vehicle and aircraft crews.\nStandard MP5K intended for use with the \"Spezialkoffer\" (\"Special Case\"), a custom briefcase built by Hofbauer GmbH with a modified claw mount for holding the MP5K, a firing port, and a trigger built into the briefcase handgrip, introduced in 1978. Intended for security details in close-range defense or suppressive fire situations, the MP5K Operational Briefcase uses a firing mechanism built into the briefcase to allow the MP5K to fire without taking time to remove it; however, it cannot be reloaded, cleared of obstructions, or emptied of spent shell casings without opening the briefcase and detaching the MP5K.\nVariant of the MP5K Operational Briefcase introduced around 1978, using a leather suitcase called the \"Spezialtasche\" (\"Special Bag\"). Instead of using the handgrip as a trigger, the \"Spezialtasche\" features a hidden opening that allows the user to discreetly reach into the bag and fire the MP5K directly.\nVariant of the MP5K Operational Briefcase introduced around 1978, using a detachable briefcase called the \"Zerfallkoffer\" (\"Falling Case\"). Instead of allowing the MP5K to fire within the case, the \"Zerfallkoffer\"'s handgrip and claw mount is designed to be quickly detached from the briefcase, \"shedding\" it and allowing the MP5K to be used as normal, albeit with a carryhandle. The \"Zerfallkoffer\" is also compatible with the MP7.\nRechambered variants.\nThough the MP5 is normally chambered in 9\u00d719mm Parabellum, two variants and an unreleased kit existed that used different ammunition.\nMP5 chambered in 10mm Auto, introduced in 1992. It features either a fixed or retractable stock, the \"Navy 2-Round Burst\" trigger group, and the MP5N's custom \"3-Lug\" muzzle derivative and tritium illuminated sights. It includes a bolt hold-open device, which catches the bolt in its rear position when empty, and is released by pressing a lever on the left side of the receiver. It is fed by custom 30-round translucent straight magazines. The MP5/10 was discontinued in 2000, but HK still offers support and spare parts.\nMP5 chambered in .40 S&amp;W, introduced in 1992. It has largely the same features and configuration options of the MP5/10, and is fed by similar 30-round translucent straight magazines, but uses the regular \"Navy\" trigger group (without the burst-fire selection). The MP5/40 was discontinued in 2000, but HK still offers support and spare parts.\nMP5 chambered in .22 Long Rifle, introduced around 2021. It comes in two variants: the MP5 .22 LR Rifle, which resembles an MP5SD3 with a 16.1-inch barrel hidden by a faux \"integral suppressor\" barrel shroud; and the MP5 .22 LR Pistol, which resembles an MP5A1 or MP5A3 with an 8.5-inch barrel. Both variants use the \"Tropical\" handguard and the \"0-1\" trigger group. Like all civilian market MP5 variants, it is semi-automatic only.\nRechambering kit to convert an MP5 to .22 Long Rifle, introduced in the early 1970s and discontinued at an indeterminate point. The kit consisted of a barrel insert, a bolt group, and two 20-round magazines, and was mostly sold to law enforcement agencies for training purposes by easing trainees inexperienced with the MP5 into learning handling techniques and firing practice without the high recoil and cost of 9\u00d719mm rounds. The conversion reduced the MP5's rate of fire to 650 rounds per minute. It was ultimately replaced by the MP5 .22 LR in 2021.\nRechambering kit to convert an MP5 to 6.5\u00d725mm CBJ, which was proposed in the 2000s but never released. It would have allowed an MP5 to be rechambered simply by switching its barrel.\nCivilian market variant of the MP5, imported to the United States civilian market from 1983 to 1989 (with a one-off final order for the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation delivered in 1991). It has a 16.54-inch barrel, \"0-1\" trigger group, push-button magazine release (as opposed to the paddle magazine release on regular MP5s), and a straight pistol grip similar to that on the MP5A4 and MP5A5. It has two variants: the HK94A2 with a fixed stock, and the HK94A3 with a retractable stock. Optional accessories included a handguard-mounted foregrip and a ventilated barrel shroud. The HK94 was particularly popular as a prop in film and television productions of the era, and blank-firing HK94s with \"chopped\" 8.9-inch barrels and fake automatic conversions were often used as cost-effective MP5 stand-ins well into the 2010s.\nAccurized sharpshooting variant of the HK94, introduced in 1985. It was designed and intended for marksman fire in situations and environments where precise handgun cartridge fire may be needed, such as dense urban areas and indoor environments like prisons. It has a fixed match stock with a rubber buttpad and an adjustable cheekpiece, a folding bipod, a flash hider, and a Leupold 6x telescopic sight. A PSG1-inspired aftermarket trigger pack was also produced, featuring a target pistol grip and match trigger. The HK94/SG-1 did not sell very well due to its niche role and poor performance\u2014it had poor range, penetration, and stopping power, and its Leupold scope was calibrated for .223 Remington and not 9\u00d719mm\u2014and only 50 units were imported to the U.S., primarily to target shooters and firearm collectors.\nCivilian market variant of the MP5K, imported to the U.S. between 1989 and 1994. To comply with the National Firearms Act, the SP89 features a redesigned handguard that replaces the MP5K's built-in foregrip with an extended barrel shroud. Like all civilian market MP5 variants, it is semi-automatic only.\nModernized SP89 for the American civilian market, imported to the U.S. as a pistol in 2017. It largely resembles the SP89, with a redesigned extended barrel shroud and a top-mounted Picatinny rail for sights. Like all civilian market MP5 variants, it is semi-automatic only.\nModernized civilian market variant of the MP5 introduced in 2019, replacing the HK94. It resembles an MP5A2 with an 8.8-inch barrel, MP5K-style threaded adaptor, \"Tropical\" handguard, \"0-1\" trigger group, paddle magazine release, fluted chamber, and the buyer's choice of fixed stock, retractable stock, or endcap.\nModernized civilian market variant of the MP5K introduced in 2019, replacing the SP5K. It resembles an MP5K without its handguard foregrip. Like all civilian market MP5 variants, it is semi-automatic only.\nPrototypes.\nFive prototype firearms based on the MP5 were developed by Heckler &amp; Koch in the 1980s and 1990s, mostly intended as improved variants or potential successors, but were not developed any further.\nPrototype improvement of the HK54, designed for the U.S. Navy Naval Weapons Support Center Crane's (NWSC) Joint Service Small Arms Program (JSSAP) in 1980. It was essentially a refreshed ambidextrous MP5SD with a redesigned retractable stock and compatibility with a 50-round drum magazine. It was designed to be suitable for frogmen and paratroopers in any environment, and was thus also designed to be reliably functional in extreme temperatures and while wearing bulky gloves. HK's proposal for the HK54A1 noted it could be converted to .45 ACP if necessary. An unknown number were produced for testing purposes out of regular MP5 components. The HK54A1 was never properly developed for field use, but it met most JSSAP requirements, drawing the attention of the U.S. government and leading to the development of the SMG I and SMG II.\nPrototype derived from the HK54A1, first developed for the JSSAP between 1982 and 1983. It was intended to spawn a \"family\" of modular all-purpose submachine guns. Unique for HK, the SMG I used a simple blowback operation with separate lower and upper receivers and an easy-to-remove 5.8-inch barrel with an integral suppressor. It had a boxy body with a retractable stock and a diagonal foregrip. A mechanical and hydraulic buffer in the backplate and a timing device in the stock reduced its rate of fire to a manageable 500 rounds per minute, roughly half that of the HK54A1. The rear iron sight, resembling that of the HK21E, allowed for adjustments based on wind, ammunition type, and sight elevation, and also featured indents to assist with close-range point shooting. The trigger included an add-on to be used with bulkier gloves such as mittens. Only 20 handmade examples were produced. The SMG I was tested by NWSC Crane in 1984 and proved promising, but several minor issues prompted the development of the SMG II.\nPrototype derived from the SMG I, developed around 1985. It has a largely identical design but addresses the issues reported by NWSC Crane. Its combination of the MP5, MP5SD, and MP5K was made more clear: analogous to the MP5 by default, the addition of a custom suppressor made it akin to the MP5SD, and the removal of the suppressor and retractable stock converted it into an MP5K-like automatic pistol. The three-round burst fire setting returned from the HK54A1. Several components were made from plastic to reduce weight, while the over-engineered rear sight was abandoned for a simpler MP5-style sight. Uniquely, the SMG II had a gas cylinder in the handguard with a gas relief valve on the receiver, used to control round velocity and thus also sound: the \"L\" setting reduced the propellant gases to fire rounds below the speed of sound\u2014and thus without the usual crack of supersonic projectiles\u2014for almost silent suppressed fire, while the \"H\" setting used all available gas to fire rounds at full velocity for reliable unsuppressed fire. Other internal changes were made to reduce cost and simplify production and maintenance, but otherwise the SMG II was largely just an improvement of the SMG I. Like the SMG I, only 20 handmade examples were produced for testing by NWSC Crane. While the SMG II again proved promising, it was ultimately abandoned, not for budgetary or technical concerns, but simply due to the success of the regular MP5 and its derivatives, which were already popular enough with the U.S. Navy and all other potential customers to make a replacement unnecessary; HK ultimately developed the MP5N for the U.S. Navy instead. Allegedly, between 60 and 80 additional SMG IIs were secretly commissioned for an unidentified U.S. government agency, possibly a member of the U.S. Intelligence Community, where they were favored by their users, but the lack of spare parts and the gradual move to higher-caliber firearms for close-quarters combat led to all of them being retired and melted down for disposal some time around 1999. Technical knowledge from the SMG II and the concept of a universal submachine gun were later repurposed for the MP2000 prototype and the UMP.\nPrototype developed around the late 1980s and early 1990s. Very little is known about the MP5 PIP or why it was developed, but it had a boxier body resembling the later UMP, a shorter diagonal magazine, and the \"flipper\" charging handle later used on the G36. Only one non-functional wooden mockup was produced.\nPrototype derived from the SMG II, developed in the 1990s. It somewhat resembled the SMG II and featured a propellant gas-based round velocity silencing system similar to that of the SMG II. It was presumably an attempted revival of the SMG II concept to replace the MP5 for the 21st century. It is an immediate predecessor of the UMP, which was ultimately marketed as such.\nOther manufacturers.\nManufactured without license.\nIn the United States, PTR Industries, Zenith Firearms, Dakota Tactical, and Century International Arms manufacture semi-automatic clones of the MP5 that are legally classified as pistols. In 2007, Professional Arms demonstrated the MK5, an MP5 clone that could be rechambered between 9\u00d719mm, .45 ACP, and .40 S&amp;W."}
{"id": "14298", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14298", "title": "Henry Middleton", "text": "American politician ( (1717\u20131784)\nHenry Middleton (1717 \u2013 June 13, 1784) was an American politician and planter from South Carolina. A member of the colonial legislature, during the American Revolution he attended the First Continental Congress and served as that body's president for four days in 1774 after the passage of the Continental Association, which he signed. He left the Second Continental Congress before it declared independence. Back in South Carolina, he served as president of the provincial congress and senator in the newly created state government. After his capture by the British in 1780, he accepted defeat and returned to the status of a British subject until the end of the war.\nEarly life.\nHenry Middleton was born in 1717 on the family plantation, \"The Oaks\", near Charleston, Province of South Carolina. He was the second son of Susan (n\u00e9e Amory) Middleton (1690-1722) and Arthur Middleton (1681\u20131737), a wealthy planter who had served as an acting governor of South Carolina. His grandfather, Edward Middleton, emigrated from England via Barbados. He was educated in England before returning to South Carolina to inherit his father's plantation. He became one of the largest landowners in the colony, owning and about 800 slaves.\nPublic career.\nMiddleton served in a variety of public offices in South Carolina. He was a justice of the peace and a member of the Commons House of Assembly, where he was elected speaker in 1747, 1754, and 1755. He was a member of provincial council but resigned in 1770 in opposition to British policy.\nIn 1774, at the outset of the American Revolution, Middleton was selected as a delegate to the Continental Congress. He served as that body's president during the last few days of the First Continental Congress, following the departure of Peyton Randolph. Middleton opposed declaring independence from Great Britain and resigned from the Second Continental Congress in February 1776 when more radical delegates began pushing for independence. He was succeeded in Congress by his son Arthur who was more radical than his father and became a signer of the Declaration of Independence.\nAfter Middleton's return to South Carolina, he was elected president of the provincial congress and, beginning on November 16, 1775, served on the council of safety. In 1776, he and his son Arthur helped frame a temporary state constitution. In 1779, he became a state senator in the new government.\nWhen Charleston was captured by the British at the Siege of Charleston in 1780, Middleton accepted defeat and status as a British subject. This reversal apparently did not damage his reputation in the long run, because of his previous support of the Revolution, and he did not suffer the fate of having his estates confiscated, as many Loyalists did after the war.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1741, Middleton was married to Mary Baker Williams (1721\u20131761), the daughter of John Williams, an early South Carolina planter who began building what is today known as Middleton Place around 1730. Together, Henry and Mary were the parents of five sons and seven daughters, seven of whom survived to adulthood, including:\nAfter his wife's death in 1761, Middleton would go on to marry twice more. His second marriage was to Maria Henrietta Bull (1722\u20131772), daughter of William Bull Sr., the lieutenant governor of South Carolina, in 1762. His second wife's sister, Charlotta (n\u00e9e Bull) Drayton, was the mother of Continental Congressman William Henry Drayton, and her brother, William Bull II, served as governor of South Carolina before leaving the colony in 1782 when British troops were evacuated at the end of the War.\nAfter his second wife's death in 1772, he married for the third time, although it was her fourth marriage, to Lady Mary McKenzie, the daughter of George Mackenzie, 3rd Earl of Cromartie, in 1776. Among Lady Mary's brothers were John Mackenzie, Lord MacLeod and George Mackenzie. Her father was a Scottish nobleman who followed Charles Edward Stuart, the Jacobite Pretender. The Earl of Cromartie was tried and sentenced to death, but he obtained a conditional pardon although his peerage was forfeited.\nMiddleton died on June 13, 1784, in Charleston. He was buried at Goosecreek Churchyard, St. James Parish, Berkeley County, South Carolina.\nDescendants.\nHis grandson, also named Henry (1770\u20131846), had a long career in politics. He was governor of South Carolina (1810\u20131812), U.S. Representative (1815\u20131819), and the minister to Russia (1820\u20131830). Henry had fourteen children, including Williams Middleton and Edward Middleton.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14299", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14299", "title": "Ham", "text": "Pork from a leg cut that has been preserved by wet or dry curing\nHam is pork from a leg cut that has been preserved by wet or dry curing, with or without smoking. As a processed meat, the term \"ham\" includes both whole cuts of meat and ones that have been mechanically formed.\nHam is made around the world, including a number of regional specialties. In addition, numerous ham products have specific geographical naming protection.\nHistory.\nThe preserving of pork leg as ham has a long history, with traces of production of cured ham among the Etruscan civilisation known in the 6th and 5th century BC.\nCato the Elder wrote about the \"salting of hams\" in his \" tome around 160 BC.\nThere are claims that the Chinese were the first people to mention the production of cured ham. \" claims an origin from Gaul. It was certainly well established by the Roman period, as evidenced by an import trade from Gaul mentioned by Marcus Terentius Varro in his writings.\nThe modern word \"ham\" is derived from the Old English ' or ' meaning the hollow or bend of the knee, from a Germanic base where it meant 'crooked'. It began to refer to the cut of pork derived from the hind leg of a pig around the 15th century.\nBecause of the preservation process, ham is a compound foodstuff or ingredient, being made up of the original meat, as well as the remnants of the preserving agent(s), such as salt, but it is still recognised as a food in its own right.\nMethods.\nHam is produced by curing raw pork by salting, also known as dry curing, or brining, also known as wet curing. Additionally, smoking may be employed, and seasonings may be added.\nDry-cured.\nTraditional dry cure hams may use only salt as the curative agent, although this is comparatively rare. This process involves cleaning the raw meat, covering it in salt while it is gradually pressed to squeeze out fluid. Specific herbs and spices may be used to add flavour during this step. The hams are then washed and hung in a dark, temperature-regulated place until dry. It is then hung to air for another period of time.\nThe duration of the curing process varies by the type of ham. For example, Jinhua ham takes approximately 8 to 10 months to complete, \"jam\u00f3n serrano\" cures in 9\u201312 months, prosciutto di Parma takes more than 12 months, and Iberian ham can take up to 2 years to reach the desired flavour characteristics. Many dry-cured hams, such as prosciutto, are eaten without being cooked.\nMost modern dry cure hams also use nitrites (either sodium nitrite or potassium nitrite), which are added along with the salt. Nitrites are used because they prevent bacterial growth and, in a reaction with the meat's myoglobin, give the product a desirable dark red colour. The amount and mixture of salt and nitrites used have an effect on the shrinkage of the meat. Because of the toxicity of nitrite, some areas specify a maximum allowable content of nitrite in the final product. Under certain conditions, especially during cooking, nitrites in meat can react with degradation products of amino acids, forming nitrosamines, which are known carcinogens.\nThe dry curing of ham involves a number of enzymatic reactions. The enzymes involved are proteinases (cathepsins\u2014B, D, H &amp; L, and calpains) and exopeptidases (peptidase and aminopeptidase). These enzymes cause proteolysis of muscle tissue, which creates large numbers of small peptides and free amino acids, while the adipose tissue undergoes lipolysis to create free fatty acids. Salt and phosphates act as strong inhibitors of proteolytic activity. Animal factors influencing enzymatic activity include age, weight, and breed. During the process itself, conditions such as temperature, duration, water content, redox potential, and salt content all have an effect on the meat.\nThe salt content in dry-cured ham varies throughout a piece of meat, with gradients determinable through sampling and testing or non-invasively through CT scanning.\nWet-cured.\nWet-cured hams are brined, which involves the immersion of the meat in a brine, sometimes with other ingredients such as sugar also added for flavour. The meat is typically kept in the brine for around 3 to 14 days. Wet curing also has the effect of increasing volume and weight of the finished product, by about 4%.\nThe wet curing process can also be achieved by pumping the curing solution into the meat. This can be quicker, increase the weight of the finished product by more than immersion, and ensure a more even distribution of salt through the meat. This process is quicker than traditional brining, normally being completed in a few days.\nWet-cured ham is usually cooked, either during processing, or after ageing. A typical example of wet-cured ham made this way is Italian . It is first brined, then cooked in a container and finally surface pasteurised. Italian regulations allow it to contain salt, nitrites, sugar, dextrose, fructose, lactose, maltodextrin, milk protein, soy protein, natural or modified starches, spices, gelatine, and flavourings.\nSmoking.\nHam can also be additionally preserved through smoking, in which the meat is placed in a smokehouse (or equivalent) to be cured by the action of smoke.\nThe main flavour compounds of smoked ham are guaiacol, and its 4-, 5-, and 6-methyl derivatives as well as 2,6-dimethylphenol. These compounds are produced by combustion of lignin, a major constituent of wood used in the smokehouse.\nLabeling.\nIn many countries the term is now protected by statute, with a specific definition. For instance, in the United States, the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) says that \"the word 'ham', without any prefix indicating the species of animal from which derived, shall be used in labelling only in connection with the hind legs of swine\".\nIn addition to the main categories, some processing choices can affect legal labelling. For instance, in the United States, a \"smoked\" ham must have been smoked by hanging over burning wood chips in a smokehouse or an atomised spray of liquid smoke such that the product appearance is equivalent; a \"hickory-smoked\" ham must have been smoked using only hickory. However, injecting \"smoke flavour\" is not legal grounds for claiming the ham was \"smoked\"; these are labeled \"smoke flavour added\". Hams can only be labeled \"honey-cured\" if honey was at least 50% of the sweetener used, is at least 3% of the formula, and has a discernible effect on flavour. So-called \"lean\" and \"extra lean\" hams must adhere to maximum levels of fat and cholesterol per 100\u00a0grams of product.\nProtected designations.\nA number of hams worldwide have some level of protection of their unique characteristics, usually relating to their method of preservation or location of production or processing. Dependent on jurisdiction, rules may prevent any other product being sold with the particular appellation, such as through the European protected geographical indication.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUses.\nHam is typically used in its sliced form, often as a filling for sandwiches and similar foods, such as in the ham sandwich and ham and cheese sandwich. Other variations include toasted sandwiches such as the croque-monsieur and the Cubano. It is also a popular topping for pizza in the United States.\nIn the United Kingdom, a pork leg cut, either whole or sliced, that has been cured but requires additional cooking is known as gammon. Gammons were traditionally cured before being cut from a side of pork along with bacon. When cooked, gammon is ham. Cooked ham joints are a popular dish around Christmas time, particularly in the Anglosphere and Northern Europe. Gammon can also served as gammon steaks, which are fried or grilled, and served in a similar manner to bacon.\nNutrition and health effects.\nHam is a type of processed red meat. According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), processed meat causes cancer, particularly colorectal cancer. Strong evidence also links processed meat with higher risks of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes. The World Cancer Research Fund recommends minimizing consumption of processed meats.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14300", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14300", "title": "Henry Laurens", "text": "American Founding Father, slave trader, and merchant\nHenry Laurens (March 6, 1724 [O.S. February 24, 1723]\u00a0\u2013 December 8, 1792) was an American Founding Father, merchant, slave trader, and rice planter from South Carolina who became a political leader during the Revolutionary War. A delegate to the Second Continental Congress, Laurens succeeded John Hancock as its president. He was a signatory to the Articles of Confederation and, as president, presided over its passage.\nLaurens had earned great wealth as a partner in the largest slave-trading house in North America, Austin and Laurens. In the 1750s alone, this Charleston firm oversaw the sale of more than 8,000 enslaved Africans. Laurens served for a time as vice president of South Carolina and as the United States minister to the Dutch Republic during the Revolutionary War. He was captured at sea by the British and imprisoned for a little more than a year in the Tower of London. His oldest son, John Laurens, was an \"aide-de-camp\" to George Washington and a colonel in the Continental Army.\nEarly life.\nLaurens's forebears were Huguenots who fled France after the Edict of Nantes was revoked in 1685. His grandfather Andre Laurens left earlier, in 1682, and eventually made his way to America, settling first in New York City and then Charleston, South Carolina. Andre's son John married Hester (or Esther) Grasset, also a Huguenot refugee. Henry was their third child and eldest son. John Laurens became a saddler, and his business eventually grew to be the largest of its kind in the colonies. In 1744, Laurens was sent to London to augment his business training. This took place in the company of Richard Oswald. His father died in 1747, bequeathing a considerable estate to 23-year-old Henry.\nMarriage and family.\nLaurens married Eleanor Ball, also of a South Carolina rice planter family, on June 25, 1750. They had thirteen children, many of whom died in infancy or childhood. Eleanor died in 1770, one month after giving birth to their last child. Laurens took their three sons to England for their education, encouraging their oldest, John Laurens, to study law. Instead of completing his studies, John Laurens returned to the United States in 1776 to serve in the American Revolutionary War.\nPolitical career.\nLaurens served in the militia, as did most able-bodied men in his time. He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel in the campaigns against the Cherokee Indians in 1757\u20131761, during the French and Indian War (also known as the Seven Years' War). In 1757, he was elected to South Carolina's colonial assembly. Laurens was elected again every year but one until the Revolution replaced the assembly with a state convention as an interim government. The year he missed was 1773, when he visited England to arrange for his sons' educations. He was named to the colony's council in 1764 and 1768 but declined both times. In 1772, he joined the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia and carried on extensive correspondence with other members.\nAs colonial tensions with Great Britain increased, Laurens was at first inclined to support reconciliation with the Crown. But as relations deteriorated, he came to fully support the Patriot cause. When Carolina began to create a revolutionary government, Laurens was elected to the Provincial Congress, which first met on January 9, 1775. He was president of the Committee of Safety and presiding officer of that congress from June until March 1776. When South Carolina installed a fully independent government, he served as the vice president of South Carolina from March 1776 to June 27, 1777. Laurens was first named a delegate to the Continental Congress on January 10, 1777. He served in the Congress until 1780. He was the president of the Continental Congress from November 1, 1777, to December 9, 1778.\nIn the fall of 1779, Congress named Laurens their minister to the Dutch Republic. In early 1780, he took up that post and successfully negotiated Dutch support for the war. On his return voyage to Amsterdam that fall, the Royal Navy frigate intercepted the ship he was travelling on, the Continental packet boat \"Mercury\", off the banks of Newfoundland. Although his dispatches were tossed in the water, they were retrieved by the British, who discovered the draft of a planned American-Dutch treaty prepared in Aix-la-Chapelle in 1778 by William Lee and the Amsterdam banker Jean de Neufville. This prompted Britain to declare war on the Dutch Republic, initiating the Fourth Anglo-Dutch War.\nThe British, having captured Laurens, transported him to England. There, he was charged with treason and imprisoned in the Tower of London, becoming the only American to ever be held there. His imprisonment was protested by Congress; in the field, most captives were regarded as prisoners of war, and while conditions were frequently appalling, prisoner exchanges and mail privileges were accepted practice. During his imprisonment, Laurens was assisted by Oswald, his former business partner and the principal owner of Bunce Island, a slave-trading island base in the Sierra Leone River. Oswald argued on Laurens's behalf to the British government. Finally, on December 31, 1781, he was released in exchange for General Charles Cornwallis and completed his voyage to Amsterdam. There, he helped raise funds for the Patriot war effort.\nLaurens's oldest son, Colonel John Laurens, was killed in 1782 in the Battle of the Combahee River, as one of the last casualties of the Revolutionary War. He had supported enlisting and freeing slaves for the war effort and suggested to his father that he begin with the 40 he stood to inherit. John had urged his father to free the family's slaves, but although conflicted, Laurens never manumitted his 260 slaves.\nIn 1783, Laurens was sent to Paris as one of the peace commissioners for the negotiations leading to the Treaty of Paris. While he was not a signatory of the primary treaty, he was instrumental in reaching the secondary accords that resolved issues related to the Dutch Republic and Spain. Oswald was the principal negotiator for the British during the Paris peace talks.\nLaurens generally retired from public life in 1784. He was sought for a return to the Continental Congress, the Constitutional Convention in 1787 and the state assembly, but he declined all of these positions. He did serve in the state convention of 1788, where he voted to ratify the United States Constitution. British forces, during their occupation of Charleston, had burned the Laurens home at Mepkin during the war. When Laurens and his family returned in 1784, they lived in an outbuilding while the great house was rebuilt. He lived on the estate the rest of his life, working to recover the estimated \u00a340,000 that the revolution had cost him (equivalent to about $ in 2023).\nDeath and legacy.\nLaurens suffered from gout starting in his 40s and the affliction plagued him throughout the rest of his life. Laurens died on December 8, 1792, at his estate, Mepkin, in South Carolina. In his will he stated he wished to be cremated and his ashes be interred at his estate. It is reported that he was the first Caucasian cremation in the United States, which he chose because of a fear of being buried alive. Afterward, the estate passed through several hands. Large portions of the estate still exist. Part of the original estate was donated to the Roman Catholic Church in 1949 and is now the location of Mepkin Abbey, a monastery of the Order of Cistercians of the Strict Observance (Trappist monks).\nThe city of Laurens, South Carolina, and its county are named for him. The town and the village of Laurens, New York, are named for him. Laurens County, Georgia, is named for his son John. General Lachlan McIntosh, who worked for Laurens as a clerk and became close friends with him, named Fort Laurens in Ohio after him.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14301", "revid": "2175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14301", "title": "British Aerospace HOTOL", "text": "UK spaceplane design of the 1980s\nHOTOL, for Horizontal Take-Off and Landing, was a 1980s British design for a single-stage-to-orbit (SSTO) reusable spaceplane that was to be powered by an airbreathing jet engine. Development was being conducted by a consortium led by Rolls-Royce and British Aerospace (BAe).\nHOTOL was to be fitted with a unique air-breathing engine, the RB545 or Swallow, that was under development by British engine manufacturer Rolls-Royce. The propellant for the engine technically consisted of a combination of liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen; however, it was to employ a new means of dramatically reducing the amount of oxidizer needed to be carried on board by utilising atmospheric oxygen as the spacecraft climbed through the lower atmosphere. Since the oxidizer typically represents the majority of the takeoff weight of a rocket, HOTOL was to be considerably smaller than normal pure-rocket designs, roughly the size of a medium-haul airliner such as the McDonnell Douglas DC-9/MD-80.\nWhile HOTOL's proof-of-concept design study was being carried out, attempts were made by both industry and the British government to establish international cooperation to develop, produce, and deploy the spacecraft. Despite American interest in the programme, there was little appetite amongst the members of the European Space Agency (ESA), and the British government was not prepared to depart from ESA cooperation. Additionally, technical issues were encountered, and there were allegations that comparisons with alternative launch systems such as conventional rocket vehicle using similar construction techniques failed to show much advantage to HOTOL.\nIn 1989, funding for the project ended. The termination of development work on HOTOL led to the formation of Reaction Engines Limited (REL) to develop and produce Skylon, a proposed spacecraft based on HOTOL technologies, including its air-breathing engine.\nDevelopment.\nOrigins.\nThe ideas behind HOTOL originated from work done by British engineer Alan Bond in the field of pre-cooled jet engines. Bond had specifically performed this research with the intention of producing a viable engine for powering a space launch system. In 1982, British Aerospace (BAe), which was Europe's principal satellite-builder, began studying a prospective new launch system with the aim of providing launch costs that were 20 per cent of the American Space Shuttle operated by NASA. BAe became aware of work by British engine manufacturer Rolls-Royce on a suitable engine, and soon conceived of an uncrewed, fully reusable single-stage-to-orbit (SSTO) winged spaceplane as a launch vehicle.\nThus, the project had soon become a joint venture between BAe and Rolls-Royce, led by John Scott-Scott and Bob Parkinson. Early on, there was an ambition to 'Europeanise' the project and to involve other nations in its development and manufacture as it was recognised that an estimated \u00a34 billion would be needed to fund full-scale development. In August 1984, BAe unveiled a public display of the HOTOL satellite launcher project and released details on its proposed operations.\nIn December 1984, a Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) memorandum noted that West Germany was interested in the programme, while France had adopted a critical attitude towards HOTOL, which the ministry viewed as potentially due to it being seen as a competitor to French-led projects. According to Minister of Trade and Industry Geoffrey Pattie, French diplomatic pressure to gather support for its own proposed Hermes space vehicle had inadvertently generated support and interest amongst European Space Agency (ESA) members in the HOTOL project. Despite this climate of tentative interest and possible European support, there was a general attitude of reluctance within the British government to take the lead on a new space launcher.\nAmerican interest and design study.\nIn March 1985, there were claims that Rolls-Royce was in the process of conducting licensing talks for HOTOL engine technology with American propulsion company Rocketdyne. In April 1985, Pattie wrote to Secretary of State for Defence Michael Heseltine to propose a two-year \u00a33 million proof of concept study be performed under a public-private partnership arrangement, consisting of \u00a31 million provided by the UK government and the remainder being financed by Rolls-Royce and BAe themselves. Pattie reasoned that the project would serve Britain's \"strategic capability\", and that tests of key technologies could foster international collaboration. According to aerospace publication \"Flight International\", the support of the Ministry of Defense (MoD) was critical as the design of HOTOL's engine had been classified.\nIn July 1985, Rolls-Royce's technical director Gordon Lewis stated that the firm sought the involvement of the Royal Aircraft Establishment's (RAE) propulsion group, and that Rolls-Royce was not prepared to invest its own funds into engine development for HOTOL. By the second half of 1985, work had commenced on the two-year concept-of-proof study. Early on, there was considerable pressure to demonstrate the project's feasibility and credibility in advance of final decisions being taken by ESA on the Hermes and what would become the Ariane 5 launch system, thus the work concentrated on the validation of critical technologies involved.\nBy November 1985, DTI and RAE discussions noted that Rolls-Royce were seeking American data on ramjet technology to support their work on the engine, which it referred to by the name \"Swallow\". Reportedly, the United States Air Force were interested in the technology used in the Swallow engine for its own purposes. In November 1985, discussions between Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, Minister without portfolio David Young and US President Ronald Reagan's scientific adviser George Keyworth noted American interest in collaboration on developing hypersonic vehicles such as HOTOL, and that a prototype could be flying as early as 1990.\nAccording to British government files, neither BAe nor the MoD were enthusiastic for the prospects of American involvement in the programme, expressing reluctance out of a belief that the outcome of such a move could result in the UK becoming a junior member in a project that it once led. There was also a belief that if Britain chose to pair up with the United States, it would find itself frozen out of work on future European launchers. However, Rolls-Royce viewed transatlantic cooperation as necessary. BAe's head of future business, Peter Conchie, stated that, if possible, HOTOL should become a part of the European space framework. In early 1986, the British government formally approved the two-year study.\nProblems and criticism.\nIn December 1984, project management consultant David Andrews issued an eight-page critique of the programme, noting that the design was optimised for the ascent while exposing itself to extended thermal loads during descent due to a low level of drag. He also claimed that the vehicle offered no capability that was not already available; BAe responded that the criticisms made had been answered. In April 1985, the Ministry of Defence's research and development department deputy controller James Barnes claimed that HOTOL lacked a justification, and that there was no defence requirement for such vehicles. He also noted that the \"engineering problems are considerable\" and that it was unlikely to enter service until the 2020s; Barnes also observed the HOTOL engine to be \"ingenious\".\nIn November 1985, the RAE issued an assessment of HOTOL's study proposal; the organisation believed that HOTOL would take up to 20 years to develop, rather than the 12-year timetable that had been envisioned by industry. The RAE also projected that the project would have an estimated total cost of \u00a35 billion (as of its value in 1985), \u00a3750 million of which would be required in a six-year definition phase and an estimated \u00a325 million in a pre-definition feasibility study.\nDuring development, it was found that the comparatively heavy rear-mounted engine moved the centre of mass of the vehicle rearwards. This meant that the vehicle had to be designed to push the centre of drag as far rearward as possible to ensure stability during the entire flight regime. Redesign of the vehicle to do this required a large mass of hydraulic systems, which cost a significant proportion of the payload, and made the economics unclear. In particular, some of the analysis seemed to indicate that similar technology applied to a pure rocket approach would give approximately the same performance at less cost.\nShutdown.\nBy 1989, the outlook for HOTOL had become bleak. From the onset of the project, support between the British government and industrial partners had been uneven, while the United States had emerged as the only foreign nation that showed willingness to contribute to the programme, in part because of the secrecy surrounding it. There was little prospect for European involvement, ESA having elected to pursue development of what would become the Ariane 5, a conventional space launch system. Rolls-Royce withdrew from the project, judging the eventual market for the engine was unlikely to be large enough to repay the development costs. The British government declined to offer further funding for HOTOL. The project was almost at the end of its concept-design phase while much of the plans remained in a speculative state; the craft was reportedly still dogged with aerodynamic problems and operational disadvantages at this point.\nSuccessors.\nA cheaper redesign, Interim HOTOL or HOTOL 2, which was to be launched from the back of a modified Antonov An-225 transport aircraft, specifically was promoted by BAe in 1991; however, this proposal was rejected as well. The design for Interim HOTOL was to have dispensed with an air-breathing engine cycle and was designed to use a more conventional mix of LOX and liquid hydrogen as fuel instead.\nIn 1989, HOTOL co-creator Alan Bond and engineers John Scott-Scott and Richard Varvill formed Reaction Engines Limited (REL) which worked on a new air-breathing engine, SABRE, which used alternative designs to work around (and improve upon) the Rolls-Royce patents, and the Skylon vehicle intended to solve the problems of HOTOL. They first published these engine and spacecraft concepts in 1993, and continued developing the core technologies, particularly the engine and its frost-controlled pre-cooler; initially supported by private funding, but latterly with support from the European Space Agency, the British National Space Centre, the United Kingdom Space Agency, BAe, and the Air Force Research Laboratory. As of 2017[ [update]] REL planned to demonstrate a flight-ready pre-cooler operating under simulated flight conditions in 2018, and statically test a demonstration engine core in 2020. REL fell into administration in 2024, ceasing all operations. Neither SABRE (a full-scale working engine; partial prototypes and components for testing not counted) nor Skylon were ever built.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nHOTOL was envisioned as an uncrewed, fully reusable single-stage-to-orbit (SSTO) winged spaceplane. The uncrewed craft was intended to put a payload of around 7 to 8 tonnes in orbit, at 300\u00a0km altitude. It was intended to take off from a runway, mounted on the back of a large rocket-boosted trolley that would help get the craft up to \"working speed\". The engine was intended to switch from jet propulsion to pure rocket propulsion at 26\u201332\u00a0km high, by which time the craft would be travelling at Mach 5 to 7. After reaching low Earth orbit (LEO), HOTOL was intended to re-enter the atmosphere and glide down to land on a conventional runway (approx 1,500 metres minimum). Only a single payload would have been carried at a time as BAe had judged this to be more economic as it removed any need for satellite interfacing and allowed for missions to be tailored to individual requirements.\nDuring its high-altitude phase, its flight control system would have been linked to ground stations and to space-based global navigation system navigation, while radar would have been used during the take-off and landing phases. In addition to the placing of satellites into geosynchronous orbit or LEO, HOTOL was also projected as being able to also perform the retrieval of satellites and hardware from LEO. BAe promotional material depicts HOTOL docking with the International Space Station (ISS), a feat that the company claimed would have required crewed operation as automated systems were not capable of performing such docking manoeuvres at that time. HOTOL was designed to conduct fully automated uncrewed flights; however, it had been intended at a later stage to potentially re-introduce a pilot. Crewed operations would have required the installation of a dedicated pressurised module within the payload bay.\nAs designed, HOTOL would have been 62 metres long, 12.8 metres high, a fuselage diameter of 5.7 metres and a wingspan of 19.7 metres.\nThe final vehicle design (HOTOL-K) had a take-off mass of 275 tonnes. Approximately 82% of that mass was propellant with the vehicle structure being a further 16%. This left just 2% (approximately 5 tonnes) for the payload, leaving little margin for design changes to the basic vehicle structure.\nIt featured a wing design that had been derived from that of Concorde; its large area resulted in relatively low wing loading, which would have resulted in lower reentry temperatures (never rising above 1,400\u00a0\u00b0C). Built out of carbon composite materials, there would have been no need for the use of insulating tiles akin to those that comprised the Space Shuttle thermal protection system. The internally stowed landing gear would have been too small to carry the weight of the fully fuelled rocket, so emergency landings would have required the fuel to be dumped.\nAlmost the entire forward fuselage, ahead of the payload bay, comprised a single hydrogen tank.\nHOTOL was designed to have a vertical fin, just aft of the nose, for lateral stability. However, later discussions with NPO Molniya about Interim Hotol made it clear that the fin would have been subject to excessive heating on re-entry (due to interactions between two shock-waves). Consequently, Interim Hotol switched back to a more conventional (but larger) tail-fin.\nEngine.\nThe RB545, which was given the name \"Swallow\" by its manufacturer, British engine maker Rolls-Royce, was an air-breathing rocket engine. It would have functioned as an integrated dual-role powerplant, having been capable of air-breathing while operating within the atmosphere and operating in a similar manner to that of a rocket when having attained close to and within LEO. This engine would have also been capable of powering the spacecraft to hypersonic speeds. It was a crucial element of the programme, having been publicly attributed as \"the heart of Hotol's very low launch costs\".\nThe exact details of this engine were covered by the Official Secrets Act of the United Kingdom; consequently, there is relatively little public information about its development and on its operation. However, material was later declassified when government policy changed to prevent the keeping of secret patents without an attributed justification.\nWithin the atmosphere, air would be taken in through two vertically mounted intake ramps, then the flow would be split, passing the correct amount to the pre-coolers, and the excess to spill ducts. Hydrogen from the fuel tanks would be passed through two heat exchangers to pre-cool the air prior to entering a high overall pressure-ratio turbojet-like engine cycle \u2014 the heated hydrogen driving a compressor to compress and feed the cooled air into the rocket engine, where it was combusted with some of the hydrogen used to cool the air. The majority of the remaining hot hydrogen was released from the back of the engine, with a small amount drawn off to reheat the air in the spill ducts in a ramjet arrangement to produce \"negative intake momentum drag\".\nTo prevent the pre-coolers from icing up, the first pre-cooler cooled the air to around 10 degrees above freezing point, to liquefy the water vapour in the air. Then liquid oxygen (LOX) would have been injected into the airflow to drop the temperature to flash freezing the water into microscopic ice crystals, sufficiently cold that they wouldn't melt due to kinetic heating if they struck the second pre-cooler elements. A water trap could have been added after the first pre-cooler if operating conditions resulted in an excess of moisture.\nWhen it was no longer possible to use the atmosphere for combustion, the RB545 would switch to using on-board LOX to burn with the hydrogen as a high-efficiency hydrogen/oxygen rocket.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14303", "revid": "1166329301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14303", "title": "Homo sapiens sapiens", "text": ""}
{"id": "14306", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14306", "title": "Hammerhead shark", "text": "Family of sharks\nThe hammerhead sharks are a group of sharks that form the family Sphyrnidae, named for the unusual and distinctive form of their heads, which are flattened and laterally extended into a cephalofoil (a T-shape or \"hammer\"). The shark's eyes are placed one on each end of this T-shaped structure, with their small mouths directly centered and underneath. Most hammerhead species are placed in the genus \"Sphyrna\", while the winghead shark is placed in its own genus, \"Eusphyra\". Many different\u2014but not necessarily mutually exclusive\u2014functions have been postulated for the cephalofoil, including sensory reception, manoeuvering, and prey manipulation. The cephalofoil gives the shark superior binocular vision and depth perception.\nHammerheads are found worldwide, preferring life in warmer waters along coastlines and continental shelves. Unlike most sharks, some hammerhead species will congregate and swim in large schools during the day, becoming solitary hunters at night.\nDescription.\nHammerhead shark species vary in length and weight. The largest species, the Great Hammerhead, has an average length of and weight of . The smallest species, the bonnethead shark, can reach 5 feet in length and 24 pounds in weight. One specimen caught off the Florida coast in 1906 weighed over . They are usually light gray and have a greenish tint. Their bellies are white, which allows them to blend into the background when viewed from below and sneak up to their prey. Their heads have lateral projections that give them a hammer-like shape. While overall similar, this shape differs somewhat between species; examples are: a distinct T-shape in the great hammerhead, a rounded head with a central notch in the scalloped hammerhead, and an unnotched rounded head in the smooth hammerhead.\nHammerheads have disproportionately small mouths compared to other shark species. Some species are also known to form schools. In the evening, like most other sharks, they become solitary hunters. \"National Geographic\" explained that hammerheads can be found in warm, tropical waters, but during the summer, they begin a mass migration period in search of colder waters.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nBecause sharks do not have mineralized bones and rarely fossilize, only their teeth are commonly found as fossils. Their closest relatives are the requiem sharks (Carcharinidae). Based on a recent combined molecular and paleontological study, the ancestor of the hammerheads probably lived in the Cretaceous or Paleocene. Definitive fossils of the family date back to the Eocene. Prior DNA studies had estimated the family to have arisen in the Miocene, about 20\u00a0million years ago.\nUsing mitochondrial DNA, a phylogenetic tree of the hammerhead sharks showed the winghead shark as sister to the rest of the hammerhead sharks. As the winghead shark has proportionately the largest \"hammer\" of the hammerhead sharks, this suggests that the first ancestral hammerhead sharks also had large hammers.\nCephalofoil.\nThe hammer-like shape of the head may have evolved at least in part to enhance the animal's vision. The positioning of the eyes, mounted on the sides of the shark's distinctive hammer head, allows 360\u00b0 of vision in the vertical plane, meaning the animals can see above and below them at all times. They also have an increased binocular vision and depth of visual field as a result of the cephalofoil. The shape of the head was previously thought to help the shark find food, aiding in close-quarters maneuverability, and allowing sharp turning movement without losing stability. The unusual structure of its vertebrae, though, has been found to be instrumental in making the turns correctly, more often than the shape of its head, though it would also shift and provide lift. From what is known about the winghead shark, the shape of the hammerhead apparently has to do with an evolved sensory function. Like all sharks, hammerheads have electroreceptory sensory pores called ampullae of Lorenzini. The pores on the shark's head lead to sensory tubes, which detect electric fields generated by other living creatures. By distributing the receptors over a wider area, like a larger radio antenna, hammerheads can sweep for prey more effectively.\nReproduction.\nReproduction occurs only once a year for hammerhead sharks, and usually occurs with the male shark biting the female shark violently until she agrees to mate with him. The hammerhead sharks exhibit a viviparous mode of reproduction with females giving birth to live young. Like other sharks, fertilization is internal, with the male transferring sperm to the female through one of two intromittent organs called claspers. The developing embryos are at first sustained by a yolk sac. When the supply of yolk is exhausted, the depleted yolk sac transforms into a structure analogous to a mammalian placenta (called a \"yolk sac placenta\" or \"pseudoplacenta\"), through which the mother delivers sustenance until birth. Once the baby sharks are born, they are not taken care of by the parents in any way. Usually, a litter consists of 12 to 15 pups, except for the great hammerhead, which gives birth to litters of 20 to 40 pups. These baby sharks huddle together and swim toward warmer water until they are old and large enough to survive on their own.\nIn 2007, the bonnethead shark was found to be capable of asexual reproduction via automictic parthenogenesis, in which a female's ovum fuses with a polar body to form a zygote without the need for a male. This was the first shark known to do this.\nDiet.\nHammerhead sharks eat a large range of prey such as fish (including other sharks), squid, octopus, and crustaceans. Stingrays are a particular favorite, with the positioning of their (comparatively) smaller, crescent-shaped mouths underneath their T-shaped heads allowing for skilled skate, ray, and flounder hunting, among other seafloor-dwellers. These sharks will often be found swimming above the sand along the bottom of the ocean, stalking their prey. Their unique heads are further utilized as a tool (or weapon) if hunting rays and flatfishes; the shark uses its head to pin down and briefly stun the prey, and only eats once their quarry is clearly weakened and in shock. The great hammerhead, tending to be larger and more aggressive to its own kind than other hammerheads, occasionally engages in cannibalism, eating other hammerhead sharks, including mothers consuming their own young. In addition to the typical animal prey, bonnetheads have been found to feed on seagrass, which sometimes makes up as much as half their stomach contents. They may swallow it unintentionally, but they are able to partially digest it. At the time of discovery, this was the only known case of a potentially omnivorous species of shark (since then, whale sharks were also found to be omnivorous).\nSpecies.\nThere are ten distinct species of Hammerhead sharks in the wild:\nRelationship with humans.\nAccording to the International Shark Attack File, humans have been subjects of 17 documented, unprovoked attacks by hammerhead sharks within the genus \"Sphyrna\" since AD 1580. No human fatalities have been recorded. Most hammerhead shark species are too small to inflict serious damage to humans.\nThe great and the scalloped hammerheads are listed on the World Conservation Union's (IUCN) 2008 Red List as endangered, whereas the smalleye hammerhead is listed as vulnerable. The status given to these sharks is as a result of overfishing and demand for their fins, an expensive delicacy. Among others, scientists expressed their concern about the plight of the scalloped hammerhead at the American Association for the Advancement of Science annual meeting in Boston. The young swim mostly in shallow waters along shores all over the world to avoid predators.\nShark fins are prized as a delicacy in certain countries in Asia (such as China and Japan), and overfishing is putting many hammerhead sharks at risk of extinction. Fishermen who harvest the animals typically cut off the fins and toss the remainder of the fish, which is often still alive, back into the sea. This practice, known as finning, is lethal to the shark.\nIn captivity.\nThe relatively small bonnethead is regular at public aquariums, as it has proven easier to keep in captivity than the larger hammerhead species, and it has been bred at a handful of facilities. Nevertheless, at up to in length and with highly specialized requirements, very few private aquarists have the experience and resources necessary to maintain a bonnethead in captivity. The larger hammerhead species can reach more than twice that size and are considered difficult, even compared to most other similar-sized sharks (such as \"Carcharhinus\" species, lemon shark, and sand tiger shark) regularly kept by public aquariums. They are particularly vulnerable during transport between facilities, may rub on surfaces in tanks, and may collide with rocks, causing injuries to their heads, so they require very large, specially adapted tanks. As a consequence, relatively few public aquaria have kept them for long periods. The scalloped hammerhead is the most frequently maintained large species, and it has been kept long term at public aquaria in most continents, but primarily in North America, Europe, and Asia. In 2014, fewer than 15 public aquaria in the world kept scalloped hammerheads. Great hammerheads have been kept at a few facilities in North America, including Atlantis Paradise Island Resort (Bahamas), Adventure Aquarium (New Jersey), Georgia Aquarium (Atlanta), Mote Marine Laboratory (Florida), and the Shark Reef at Mandalay Bay (Las Vegas). Smooth hammerheads have also been kept in the past.\nProtection.\nHumans are the main threat to hammerhead sharks. Although they are not usually the primary target, hammerhead sharks are caught in fisheries all over the world. Tropical fisheries are the most common place for hammerheads to be caught because of their preference to reside in warm waters. The total number of hammerheads caught in fisheries is recorded in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Global Capture Production dataset. The number steadily increased from 75 metric tons in 1990, to 6,313 metric tons by 2010.\nShark fin traders say that hammerheads have some of the best quality fin needles which makes them good to eat when prepared properly. Hong Kong is the world's largest fin trade market and accounts for about 1.5% of the total annual amount of fins traded. It is estimated that around 375,000 great hammerhead sharks alone are traded per year which is equivalent to 21,000 metric tons of biomass. However, most sharks that are caught are only used for their fins and then discarded. The meat of hammerheads is generally unwanted. Consumption of hammerhead meat has been recorded in Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Kenya and Japan. Hammerhead sharks are particularly vulnerable to overfishing due to their tendency to form large aggregations, making them easy targets for commercial fishing operations. Recent genetic studies indicate that population fragmentation may further threaten their long-term survival, as isolated populations show reduced genetic diversity.\nIn March 2013, three endangered, commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads, the oceanic whitetip, and porbeagle, were added to Appendix II of CITES, bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.\nCultural significance.\nAmong Torres Strait Islanders, the hammerhead shark, known as the \"beizam\", is a common family totem and often represented in cultural artefacts such as the elaborate headdresses worn for ceremonial dances, known as dhari (dari). They are associated with law and order. Renowned artist Ken Thaiday Snr is known for his representations of\" beizam\" in his sculptural \"dari\" and other works.\nIn native Hawaiian culture, sharks are considered to be gods of the sea, protectors of humans, and cleaners of excessive ocean life. Some of these sharks are believed to be family members who died and have been reincarnated into shark form, but others are considered man-eaters, also known as \"niuhi\". These sharks include great white sharks, tiger sharks, and bull sharks. The hammerhead shark, also known as \"mano kihikihi\", is not considered a man-eater or \"niuhi\"; it is considered to be one of the most respected sharks of the ocean, an \"aumakua\". Many Hawaiian families believe that they have an \"aumakua\" watching over them and protecting them from the \"niuhi\". The hammerhead shark is thought to be the birth animal of some children. Hawaiian children who are born with the hammerhead shark as an animal sign are believed to be warriors and are meant to sail the oceans. Hammerhead sharks rarely pass through the waters of Maui, but many Maui natives believe that their swimming by is a sign that the gods are watching over the families, and the oceans are clean and balanced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14307", "revid": "50584765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14307", "title": "Hall effect", "text": "Electromagnetic effect in physics\nThe Hall effect is the production of a potential difference, across an electrical conductor, that is transverse to an electric current in the conductor and to an applied magnetic field perpendicular to the current. Such potential difference is known as the Hall voltage. It was discovered by Edwin Hall in 1879.\nThe Hall coefficient is defined as the ratio of the induced electric field to the product of the current density and the applied magnetic field. It is a characteristic of the material from which the conductor is made, since its value depends on the type, number, and properties of the charge carriers that constitute the current.\nDiscovery.\nWires carrying current in a magnetic field experience a mechanical force perpendicular to both the current and magnetic field. \nIn the 1820s, Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re observed this underlying mechanism that led to the discovery of the Hall effect. However it was not until a solid mathematical basis for electromagnetism was systematized by James Clerk Maxwell's \"On Physical Lines of Force\" (published in 1861\u20131862) that details of the interaction between magnets and electric current could be understood.\nEdwin Hall then explored the question of whether magnetic fields interacted with the conductors \"or\" the electric current, and reasoned that if the force was specifically acting on the current, it should crowd current to one side of the wire, producing a small measurable voltage. In 1879, he discovered this \"Hall effect\" while he was working on his doctoral degree at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. Eighteen years before the electron was discovered, his measurements of the tiny effect produced in the apparatus he used were an experimental tour de force, published under the name \"On a New Action of the Magnet on Electric Currents\".\nTheory.\nThe Hall effect is due to the nature of the current in a conductor. Current consists of the movement of many small charge carriers, typically electrons, holes, ions (see Electromigration) or all three. When a magnetic field is present, these charges experience a force, called the Lorentz force. When such a magnetic field is absent, the charges follow approximately straight paths between collisions with impurities, phonons, etc. However, when a magnetic field with a perpendicular component is applied, their paths between collisions are curved; thus, moving charges accumulate on one face of the material. This leaves equal and opposite charges exposed on the other face, where there is a scarcity of mobile charges. The result is an asymmetric distribution of charge density across the Hall element, arising from a force that is perpendicular to both the straight path and the applied magnetic field. The separation of charge establishes an electric field that opposes the migration of further charge, so a steady electric potential is established for as long as the charge is flowing.\nIn classical electromagnetism, electrons move in the opposite direction of the current \"I\" (by convention \"current\" describes a theoretical \"hole flow\"). In some metals and semiconductors it \"appears\" \"holes\" are actually flowing because the direction of the voltage is opposite to the derivation below.\nFor a simple metal where there is only one type of charge carrier (electrons), the Hall voltage \"V\"H can be derived by using the Lorentz force and seeing that, in the steady-state condition, charges are not moving in the \"y\"-axis direction. Thus, the magnetic force on each electron in the \"y\"-axis direction is cancelled by a \"y\"-axis electrical force due to the buildup of charges. The \"vx\" term is the drift velocity of the current which is assumed at this point to be holes by convention. The \"vxBz\" term is negative in the \"y\"-axis direction by the right hand rule.\nformula_1\nIn steady state, F = 0, so 0 = \"Ey\" \u2212 \"vxBz\", where \"Ey\" is assigned in the direction of the \"y\"-axis, (and not with the arrow of the induced electric field \"\u03bey\" as in the image (pointing in the \u2212\"y\" direction), which tells you where the field caused by the electrons is pointing).\nIn wires, electrons instead of holes are flowing, so \"vx\" \u2192 \u2212\"vx\" and \"q\" \u2192 \u2212\"q\". Also \"Ey\" = \u2212. Substituting these changes gives\nformula_2\nThe conventional \"hole\" current is in the negative direction of the electron current and the negative of the electrical charge which gives \"Ix\" = \"ntw\"(\u2212\"vx\")(\u2212\"e\") where \"n\" is charge carrier density, \"tw\" is the cross-sectional area, and \u2212\"e\" is the charge of each electron. Solving for formula_3 and plugging into the above gives the Hall voltage:\nformula_4\nIf the charge build up had been positive (as it appears in some metals and semiconductors), then the \"V\"H assigned in the image would have been negative (positive charge would have built up on the left side).\nThe Hall coefficient is defined as\nformula_5\nor\nformula_6\nwhere j is the current density of the carrier electrons, and \"Ey\" is the induced electric field. In SI units, this becomes\nformula_7\n(The units of \"R\"H are usually expressed as m3/C, or \u03a9\u00b7cm/G, or other variants.) As a result, the Hall effect is very useful as a means to measure either the carrier density or the magnetic field.\nOne very important feature of the Hall effect is that it differentiates between positive charges moving in one direction and negative charges moving in the opposite. In the diagram above, the Hall effect with a negative charge carrier (the electron) is presented. But consider the same magnetic field and current are applied but the current is carried inside the Hall effect device by a positive particle. The particle would of course have to be moving in the opposite direction of the electron in order for the current to be the same\u2014down in the diagram, not up like the electron is. And thus, mnemonically speaking, your thumb in the , representing (conventional) current, would be pointing the \"same\" direction as before, because current is the same\u2014an electron moving up is the same current as a positive charge moving down. And with the fingers (magnetic field) also being the same, interestingly \"the charge carrier gets deflected to the left in the diagram regardless of whether it is positive or negative.\" But if positive carriers are deflected to the left, they would build a relatively \"positive voltage\" on the left whereas if negative carriers (namely electrons) are, they build up a negative voltage on the left as shown in the diagram. Thus for the same current and magnetic field, the electric polarity of the Hall voltage is dependent on the internal nature of the conductor and is useful to elucidate its inner workings.\nThis property of the Hall effect offered the first real proof that electric currents in most metals are carried by moving electrons, not by protons. It also showed that in some substances (especially p-type semiconductors), it is contrarily more appropriate to think of the current as positive \"holes\" moving rather than negative electrons. A common source of confusion with the Hall effect in such materials is that holes moving one way are really electrons moving the opposite way, so one expects the Hall voltage polarity to be the same as if electrons were the charge carriers as in most metals and n-type semiconductors. Yet we observe the opposite polarity of Hall voltage, indicating positive charge carriers. However, of course there are no actual positrons or other positive elementary particles carrying the charge in p-type semiconductors, hence the name \"holes\". In the same way as the oversimplistic picture of light in glass as photons being absorbed and re-emitted to explain refraction breaks down upon closer scrutiny, this apparent contradiction too can only be resolved by the modern quantum mechanical theory of quasiparticles wherein the collective quantized motion of multiple particles can, in a real physical sense, be considered to be a particle in its own right (albeit not an elementary one).\nUnrelatedly, inhomogeneity in the conductive sample can result in a spurious sign of the Hall effect, even in ideal van der Pauw configuration of electrodes. For example, a Hall effect consistent with positive carriers was observed in evidently n-type semiconductors. Another source of artefact, in uniform materials, occurs when the sample's aspect ratio is not long enough: the full Hall voltage only develops far away from the current-introducing contacts, since at the contacts the transverse voltage is shorted out to zero.\nHall effect in semiconductors.\nWhen a current-carrying semiconductor is kept in a magnetic field, the charge carriers of the semiconductor experience a force in a direction perpendicular to both the magnetic field and the current. At equilibrium, a voltage appears at the semiconductor edges.\nThe simple formula for the Hall coefficient given above is usually a good explanation when conduction is dominated by a single charge carrier. However, in semiconductors and many metals the theory is more complex, because in these materials conduction can involve significant, simultaneous contributions from both electrons and holes, which may be present in different concentrations and have different mobilities. For moderate magnetic fields the Hall coefficient is\nformula_8\nor equivalently\nformula_9\nwith\nformula_10\nHere \"n\" is the electron concentration, \"p\" the hole concentration, \"\u03bc\"e the electron mobility, \"\u03bc\"h the hole mobility and \"e\" the elementary charge.\nFor large applied fields the simpler expression analogous to that for a single carrier type holds.\nRelationship with star formation.\nAlthough it is well known that magnetic fields play an important role in star formation, research models indicate that Hall diffusion critically influences the dynamics of gravitational collapse that forms protostars.\nQuantum Hall effect.\nFor a two-dimensional electron system which can be produced in a MOSFET, in the presence of large magnetic field strength and low temperature, one can observe the quantum Hall effect, in which the Hall conductance \u03c3 undergoes quantum Hall transitions to take on quantized values.\nSpin Hall effect.\nThe spin Hall effect consists in the spin accumulation on the lateral boundaries of a current-carrying sample. No magnetic field is needed. It was predicted by Mikhail Dyakonov and V. I. Perel in 1971 and observed experimentally more than 30 years later, both in semiconductors and in metals, at cryogenic as well as at room temperatures.\nThe quantity describing the strength of the Spin Hall effect is known as Spin Hall angle, and it is defined as:\nformula_11\nWhere formula_12 is the spin current generated by the applied current density formula_13.\nQuantum spin Hall effect.\nFor mercury telluride two dimensional quantum wells with strong spin-orbit coupling, in zero magnetic field, at low temperature, the quantum spin Hall effect has been observed in 2007.\nAnomalous Hall effect.\nIn ferromagnetic materials (and paramagnetic materials in a magnetic field), the Hall resistivity includes an additional contribution, known as the anomalous Hall effect (or the extraordinary Hall effect), which depends directly on the magnetization of the material, and is often much larger than the ordinary Hall effect. (Note that this effect is \"not\" due to the contribution of the magnetization to the total magnetic field.) For example, in nickel, the anomalous Hall coefficient is about 100 times larger than the ordinary Hall coefficient near the Curie temperature, but the two are similar at very low temperatures. Although a well-recognized phenomenon, there is still debate about its origins in the various materials. The anomalous Hall effect can be either an \"extrinsic\" (disorder-related) effect due to spin-dependent scattering of the charge carriers, or an \"intrinsic\" effect which can be described in terms of the Berry phase effect in the crystal momentum space (\"k\"-space).\nHall effect in ionized gases.\nThe Hall effect in an ionized gas (plasma) is significantly different from the Hall effect in solids (where the Hall parameter is always much less than unity). In a plasma, the Hall parameter can take any value. The Hall parameter, \"\u03b2\", in a plasma is the ratio between the electron gyrofrequency, \"\u03a9\"e, and the electron-heavy particle collision frequency, \u03bd:\nformula_14\nwhere\nThe Hall parameter value increases with the magnetic field strength.\nPhysically, the trajectories of electrons are curved by the Lorentz force. Nevertheless, when the Hall parameter is low, their motion between two encounters with heavy particles (neutral or ion) is almost linear. But if the Hall parameter is high, the electron movements are highly curved. The current density vector, J, is no longer collinear with the electric field vector, E. The two vectors J and E make the Hall angle, \u03b8, which also gives the Hall parameter:\nformula_15\nOther Hall effects.\nThe Hall Effects family has expanded to encompass other quasi-particles in semiconductor nanostructures. Specifically, a set of Hall Effects has emerged based on excitons and exciton-polaritons in 2D materials and quantum wells.\nApplications.\nHall sensors amplify and use the Hall effect for a variety of sensing applications.\nHall-effect thrusters use the Hall effect to limit electrons' axial motion and use them to accelerate a propellant.\nCorbino effect.\nThe Corbino effect, named after its discoverer Orso Mario Corbino, is a phenomenon involving the Hall effect, but a disc-shaped metal sample is used in place of a rectangular one. Because of its shape the Corbino disc allows the observation of Hall effect\u2013based magnetoresistance without the associated Hall voltage.\nA radial current through a circular disc, subjected to a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the disc, produces a \"circular\" current through the disc. The absence of the free transverse boundaries renders the interpretation of the Corbino effect simpler than that of the Hall effect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14308", "revid": "458237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14308", "title": "Hoover Dam", "text": "Dam in Clark County, Nevada, and Mohave County, Arizona, US\nThe Hoover Dam is a concrete arch-gravity dam in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River, on the border between the U.S. states of Nevada and Arizona. Constructed between 1931 and 1936, during the Great Depression, it was dedicated on September 30, 1935, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Its construction was the result of a massive effort involving thousands of workers, and cost over 100 lives. Bills passed by Congress during its construction referred to it as Hoover Dam (after President Herbert Hoover), but the Roosevelt administration named it Boulder Dam. In 1947, Congress restored the name Hoover Dam.\nSince about 1900, the Black Canyon and nearby Boulder Canyon had been investigated for their potential to support a dam that would control floods, provide irrigation water, and produce hydroelectric power. In 1928, Congress authorized the project. The winning bid to build the dam was submitted by a consortium named Six Companies, Inc., which began construction in early 1931. Such a large concrete structure had never been built before, and some of the techniques used were unproven. The torrid summer weather and lack of facilities near the site also presented difficulties. Nevertheless, Six Companies turned the dam over to the federal government on March 1, 1936, more than two years ahead of schedule.\nHoover Dam impounds Lake Mead and is located near Boulder City, Nevada, a municipality originally constructed for workers on the construction project, about southeast of Las Vegas, Nevada. The dam's generators provide power for public and private utilities in Nevada, Arizona, and California. Hoover Dam is a major tourist attraction, with 7 million tourists a year. The heavily traveled U.S. Route 93 (US 93) ran along the dam's crest until October 2010, when the Hoover Dam Bypass opened.\nBackground.\nSearch for resources.\nAs the United States developed the Southwest, the Colorado River was seen as a potential source of irrigation water. An initial attempt at diverting the river for irrigation purposes occurred in the late 1890s, when land speculator William Beatty built the Alamo Canal just north of the Mexican border; the canal dipped into Mexico before running to a desolate area Beatty named the Imperial Valley. Though water from the Alamo Canal allowed for the widespread settlement of the valley, the canal proved expensive to operate. After a catastrophic breach that caused the Colorado River to fill the Salton Sea, the Southern Pacific Railroad spent $3\u00a0million in 1906\u201307 to stabilize the waterway, an amount it hoped in vain that it would be reimbursed for by the federal government. Even after the waterway was stabilized, it proved unsatisfactory because of constant disputes with landowners on the Mexican side of the border.\nAs the technology of electric power transmission improved, the Lower Colorado was considered for its hydroelectric-power potential. In 1902, the Edison Electric Company of Los Angeles surveyed the river in the hope of building a rock dam which could generate . However, at the time, the limit of transmission of electric power was , and there were few customers (mostly mines) within that limit. Edison allowed land options it held on the river to lapse\u2014including an option for what became the site of Hoover Dam.\nIn the following years, the Bureau of Reclamation (BOR), known as the Reclamation Service at the time, also considered the Lower Colorado as the site for a dam. Service chief Arthur Powell Davis proposed using dynamite to collapse the walls of Boulder Canyon, north of the eventual dam site, into the river. The river would carry off the smaller pieces of debris, and a dam would be built incorporating the remaining rubble. In 1922, after considering it for several years, the Reclamation Service finally rejected the proposal, citing doubts about the unproven technique and questions as to whether it would, in fact, save money.\nPlanning and agreements.\nIn 1922, the Reclamation Service presented a report calling for the development of a dam on the Colorado River for flood control and electric power generation. The report was principally authored by Davis and was called the Fall-Davis report after Interior Secretary Albert Fall. The Fall-Davis report cited use of the Colorado River as a federal concern because the river's basin covered several states, and the river eventually entered Mexico. Though the Fall-Davis report called for a dam \"at or near Boulder Canyon\", the Reclamation Service (which was renamed the Bureau of Reclamation the following year) found that canyon unsuitable. One potential site at Boulder Canyon was bisected by a geologic fault; two others were so narrow there was no space for a construction camp at the bottom of the canyon or for a spillway. The Service investigated Black Canyon and found it ideal; a railway could be laid from the railhead in Las Vegas to the top of the dam site. Despite the site change, the dam project was referred to as the \"Boulder Canyon Project\".\nWith little guidance on water allocation from the Supreme Court, proponents of the dam feared endless litigation. Delph Carpenter, a Colorado attorney, proposed that the seven states which fell within the river's basin (California, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, New Mexico, Colorado and Wyoming) form an interstate compact, with the approval of Congress. Such compacts were authorized by Article I of the United States Constitution but had never been concluded among more than two states. In 1922, representatives of seven states met with then-Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover. Initial talks produced no result, but when the Supreme Court handed down the \"Wyoming v. Colorado\" decision undermining the claims of the upstream states, they became anxious to reach an agreement. The resulting Colorado River Compact was signed on November 24, 1922.\nLegislation to authorize the dam was introduced repeatedly by two California Republicans, Representative Phil Swing and Senator Hiram Johnson, but representatives from other parts of the country considered the project as hugely expensive and one that would mostly benefit California. The 1927 Mississippi flood made Midwestern and Southern congressmen and senators more sympathetic toward the dam project. On March 12, 1928, the failure of the St. Francis Dam, constructed by the city of Los Angeles, caused a disastrous flood that killed up to 600 people. As that dam was a curved-gravity type, similar in design to the arch-gravity as was proposed for the Black Canyon dam, opponents claimed that the Black Canyon dam's safety could not be guaranteed. Congress authorized a board of engineers to review plans for the proposed dam. The Colorado River Board found the project feasible, but warned that should the dam fail, every downstream Colorado River community would be destroyed, and that the river might change course and empty into the Salton Sea. The Board cautioned: \"To avoid such possibilities, the proposed dam should be constructed on conservative if not ultra-conservative lines.\"\nOn December 21, 1928, President Coolidge signed the bill authorizing the dam. The Boulder Canyon Project Act appropriated $165\u00a0million for the project along with the downstream Imperial Dam and All-American Canal, a replacement for Beatty's canal entirely on the U.S. side of the border. It also permitted the compact to go into effect when at least six of the seven states approved it. This occurred on March 6, 1929, with Utah's ratification; Arizona did not approve it until 1944.\nDesign, preparation and contracting.\nEven before Congress approved the Boulder Canyon Project, the Bureau of Reclamation was considering what kind of dam should be used. Officials eventually decided on a massive concrete arch-gravity dam, the design of which was overseen by the Bureau's chief design engineer John L. Savage. The monolithic dam would be thick at the bottom and thin near the top and would present a convex face towards the water above the dam. The curving arch of the dam would transmit the water's force into the abutments, in this case the rock walls of the canyon. The wedge-shaped dam would be thick at the bottom, narrowing to at the top, leaving room for a highway connecting Nevada and Arizona.\nOn January 10, 1931, the Bureau made the bid documents available to interested parties, at five dollars a copy. The government was to provide the materials, and the contractor was to prepare the site and build the dam. The dam was described in minute detail, covering 100\u00a0pages of text and 76\u00a0drawings. A $2\u00a0million bid bond was to accompany each bid; the winner would have to post a $5\u00a0million performance bond. The contractor had seven years to build the dam, or penalties would ensue.\nThe Wattis Brothers, heads of the Utah Construction Company, were interested in bidding on the project, but lacked the money for the performance bond. They lacked sufficient resources even in combination with their longtime partners, Morrison-Knudsen, which employed the nation's leading dam builder, Frank Crowe. They formed a joint venture to bid for the project with Pacific Bridge Company of Portland, Oregon; Henry J. Kaiser &amp; W. A. Bechtel Company of San Francisco; MacDonald &amp; Kahn Ltd. of Los Angeles; and the J.F. Shea Company of Portland, Oregon. The joint venture was called Six Companies, Inc. as Bechtel and Kaiser were considered one company for purposes of Six in the name. The name was descriptive and was an inside joke among the San Franciscans in the bid, where \"Six Companies\" was also a Chinese benevolent association in the city. There were three valid bids, and Six Companies' bid of $48,890,955 was the lowest, within $24,000 of the confidential government estimate of what the dam would cost to build, and five million dollars less than the next-lowest bid.\nThe city of Las Vegas had lobbied hard to be the headquarters for the dam construction, closing its many speakeasies when the decision maker, Secretary of the Interior Ray Wilbur, came to town. Instead, Wilbur announced in early 1930 that a model city was to be built in the desert near the dam site. This town became known as Boulder City, Nevada. Construction of a rail line joining Las Vegas and the dam site began in September 1930.\nConstruction.\nLabor force.\nSoon after the dam was authorized, increasing numbers of unemployed people converged on southern Nevada. Las Vegas, then a small city of some 5,000, saw between 10,000 and 20,000 unemployed descend on it. A government camp was established for surveyors and other personnel near the dam site; this soon became surrounded by a squatters' camp. Known as McKeeversville, the camp was home to men hoping for work on the project, together with their families. Another camp, on the flats along the Colorado River, was officially called Williamsville, but was known to its inhabitants as \"Ragtown\". When construction began, Six Companies hired large numbers of workers, with more than 3,000 on the payroll by 1932 and with employment peaking at 5,251 in July 1934. \"Mongolian\" (Chinese) labor was prevented by the construction contract, while the number of black people employed by Six Companies never exceeded thirty, mostly lowest-pay-scale laborers in a segregated crew, who were issued separate water buckets.\nAs part of the contract, Six Companies, Inc. was to build Boulder City to house the workers. The original timetable called for Boulder City to be built before the dam project began, but President Hoover ordered work on the dam to begin in March 1931 rather than in October. The company built bunkhouses, attached to the canyon wall, to house 480\u00a0single men at what became known as River Camp. Workers with families were left to provide their own accommodations until Boulder City could be completed, and many lived in Ragtown. The site of Hoover Dam endures extremely hot weather, and the summer of 1931 was especially torrid, with the daytime high averaging . Sixteen workers and other riverbank residents died of heat prostration between June 25 and July 26, 1931.\nMabel Macferran Rockwell was the only woman involved in the design and installation of the power generating machinery for Hoover Dam. She worked on the economic design of the company's transmission for the dam, which was the basis for her prize-winning paper \"Power Limits of 220 Kv Transmission Lines\" (co-authored with A. A. Kroneberg).\nThe Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or \"Wobblies\"), though much-reduced from their heyday as militant labor organizers in the early years of the century, hoped to unionize the Six Companies workers by capitalizing on their discontent. They sent eleven organizers, several of whom were arrested by Las Vegas police. On August 7, 1931, the company cut wages for all tunnel workers. Although the workers sent the organizers away, not wanting to be associated with the \"Wobblies\", they formed a committee to represent them with the company. The committee drew up a list of demands that evening and presented them to Crowe the following morning. He was noncommittal. The workers hoped that Crowe, the general superintendent of the job, would be sympathetic; instead, he gave a scathing interview to a newspaper, describing the workers as \"malcontents\".\nOn the morning of the 9th, Crowe met with the committee and told them that management refused their demands, was stopping all work, and was laying off the entire work force, except for a few office workers and carpenters. The workers were given until 5\u00a0p.m. to vacate the premises. Concerned that a violent confrontation was imminent, most workers took their paychecks and left for Las Vegas to await developments. Two days later, the remainder were talked into leaving by law enforcement. On August 13, the company began hiring workers again, and two days later, the strike was called off. While the workers received none of their demands, the company guaranteed there would be no further reductions in wages. Living conditions began to improve as the first residents moved into Boulder City in late 1931.\nA second labor action took place in July 1935, as construction on the dam wound down. When a Six Companies manager altered working times to force workers to take lunch on their own time, workers responded with a strike. Emboldened by Crowe's reversal of the lunch decree, workers raised their demands to include a $1-per-day raise. The company agreed to ask the Federal government to supplement the pay, but no money was forthcoming from Washington. The strike ended.\nRiver diversion.\nBefore the dam could be built, the Colorado River needed to be diverted away from the construction site. To accomplish this, four diversion tunnels were driven through the canyon walls, two on the Nevada side and two on the Arizona side. These tunnels were in diameter. Their combined length was nearly 16,000\u00a0ft, or more than . The contract required these tunnels to be completed by October 1, 1933, with a $3,000-per-day fine to be assessed for any delay. To meet the deadline, Six Companies had to complete work by early 1933, since only in late fall and winter was the water level in the river low enough to safely divert.\nTunneling began at the lower portals of the Nevada tunnels in May 1931. Shortly afterward, work began on two similar tunnels in the Arizona canyon wall. In March 1932, work began on lining the tunnels with concrete. First the base, or invert, was poured. Gantry cranes, running on rails through the entire length of each tunnel were used to place the concrete. The sidewalls were poured next. Movable sections of steel forms were used for the sidewalls. Finally, using pneumatic guns, the overheads were filled in. The concrete lining is thick, reducing the finished tunnel diameter to . The river was diverted into the two Arizona tunnels on November 13, 1932; the Nevada tunnels were kept in reserve for high water. This was done by exploding a temporary cofferdam protecting the Arizona tunnels while at the same time dumping rubble into the river until its natural course was blocked.\nFollowing the completion of the dam, the entrances to the two outer diversion tunnels were sealed at the opening and halfway through the tunnels with large concrete plugs. The downstream halves of the tunnels following the inner plugs are now the main bodies of the spillway tunnels. The inner diversion tunnels were plugged at approximately one-third of their length, beyond which they now carry steel pipes connecting the intake towers to the power plant and outlet works. The inner tunnels' outlets are equipped with gates that can be closed to drain the tunnels for maintenance.\nGroundworks, rock clearance and grout curtain.\nTo protect the construction site from the Colorado River and to facilitate the river's diversion, two cofferdams were constructed. Work on the upper cofferdam began in September 1932, even though the river had not yet been diverted. The cofferdams were designed to protect against the possibility of the river's flooding a site at which two thousand men might be at work, and their specifications were covered in the bid documents in nearly as much detail as the dam itself. The upper cofferdam was high, and thick at its base, thicker than the dam itself. It contained of material.\nWhen the cofferdams were in place and the construction site was drained of water, excavation for the dam foundation began. For the dam to rest on solid rock, it was necessary to remove accumulated erosion soils and other loose materials in the riverbed until sound bedrock was reached. Work on the foundation excavations was completed in June 1933. During this excavation, approximately of material was removed. Since the dam was an arch-gravity type, the side-walls of the canyon would bear the force of the impounded lake. Therefore, the side-walls were also excavated to reach virgin rock, as weathered rock might provide pathways for water seepage. Shovels for the excavation came from the Marion Power Shovel Company.\nThe men who removed this rock were called \"high scalers\". While suspended from the top of the canyon with ropes, the high-scalers climbed down the canyon walls and removed the loose rock with jackhammers and dynamite. Falling objects were the most common cause of death on the dam site; the high scalers' work thus helped ensure worker safety. One high scaler was able to save a life in a more direct manner: when a government inspector lost his grip on a safety line and began tumbling down a slope towards almost certain death, a high scaler was able to intercept him and pull him into the air. The construction site had become a magnet for tourists. The high scalers were prime attractions and showed off for the watchers. The high scalers received considerable media attention, with one worker dubbed the \"Human Pendulum\" for swinging co-workers (and, at other times, cases of dynamite) across the canyon. To protect themselves against falling objects, some high scalers dipped cloth hats in tar and allowed them to harden. When workers wearing such headgear were struck hard enough to inflict broken jaws, they sustained no skull damage. Six Companies ordered thousands of what initially were called \"hard boiled hats\" (later \"hard hats\") and strongly encouraged their use.\nThe cleared, underlying rock foundation of the dam site was reinforced with grout, forming a grout curtain. Holes were driven into the walls and base of the canyon, as deep as into the rock, and any cavities encountered were to be filled with grout. This was done to stabilize the rock, to prevent water from seeping past the dam through the canyon rock, and to limit \"uplift\"\u2014upward pressure from water seeping under the dam. The workers were under severe time constraints due to the beginning of the concrete pour. When they encountered hot springs or cavities too large to readily fill, they moved on without resolving the problem. A total of 58 of the 393 holes were incompletely filled. After the dam was completed and the lake began to fill, large numbers of significant leaks caused the Bureau of Reclamation to examine the situation. It found that the work had been incompletely done, and was based on less than a full understanding of the canyon's geology. New holes were drilled from inspection galleries inside the dam into the surrounding bedrock. It took nine years (1938\u201347) under relative secrecy to complete the supplemental grout curtain.\nConcrete.\nThe first concrete was poured into the dam on June 6, 1933, 18\u00a0months ahead of schedule. Since concrete heats and contracts as it cures, the potential for uneven cooling and contraction of the concrete posed a serious problem. Bureau of Reclamation engineers calculated that if the dam were to be built in a single continuous pour, the concrete would take 125 years to cool, and the resulting stresses would cause the dam to crack and crumble. Instead, the ground where the dam would rise was marked with rectangles, and concrete blocks in columns were poured, some as large as and high. Each five-foot form contained a set of steel pipes; cool river water would be poured through the pipes, followed by ice-cold water from a refrigeration plant. When an individual block had cured and had stopped contracting, the pipes were filled with grout. Grout was also used to fill the hairline spaces between columns, which were grooved to increase the strength of the joints.\nThe concrete was delivered in huge steel buckets and almost 7\u00a0feet in diameter; Crowe was awarded two patents for their design. These buckets, which weighed when full, were filled at two massive concrete plants on the Nevada side, and were delivered to the site in special railcars. The buckets were then suspended from aerial cableways which were used to deliver the bucket to a specific column. As the required grade of aggregate in the concrete differed depending on placement in the dam (from pea-sized gravel to stones), it was vital that the bucket be maneuvered to the proper column. When the bottom of the bucket opened up, disgorging of concrete, a team of men worked it throughout the form. Although there are myths that men were caught in the pour and are entombed in the dam to this day, each bucket deepened the concrete in a form by only , and Six Companies engineers would not have permitted a flaw caused by the presence of a human body.\nA total of of concrete was used in the dam before concrete pouring ceased on May 29, 1935. In addition, were used in the power plant and other works. More than of cooling pipes were placed within the concrete. Overall, there is enough concrete in the dam to pave a two-lane highway from San Francisco to New York. Concrete cores were removed from the dam for testing in 1995; they showed that \"Hoover Dam's concrete has continued to slowly gain strength\" and the dam is composed of a \"durable concrete having a compressive strength exceeding the range typically found in normal mass concrete\". Hoover Dam concrete is not subject to alkali\u2013silica reaction (ASR), as the Hoover Dam builders happened to use nonreactive aggregate, unlike that at downstream Parker Dam, where ASR has caused measurable deterioration.\nDedication and completion.\nWith most work finished on the dam itself (the powerhouse remained uncompleted), a formal dedication ceremony was arranged for September 30, 1935, to coincide with a western tour being made by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The morning of the dedication, it was moved forward three hours from 2\u00a0p.m. Pacific time to 11\u00a0a.m.; this was done because Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes had reserved a radio slot for the President for 2\u00a0p.m. but officials did not realize until the day of the ceremony that the slot was for 2\u00a0p.m. Eastern Time. Despite the change in the ceremony time, and temperatures of , 10,000\u00a0people were present for the President's speech, in which he avoided mentioning the name of former President Hoover, who was not invited to the ceremony. To mark the occasion, a three-cent stamp was issued by the United States Post Office Department\u2014bearing the name \"Boulder Dam\", the official name of the dam between 1933 and 1947. After the ceremony, Roosevelt made the first visit by any American president to Las Vegas.\nMost work had been completed by the dedication, and Six Companies negotiated with the government through late 1935 and early 1936 to settle all claims and arrange for the formal transfer of the dam to the Federal Government. The parties came to an agreement and on March 1, 1936, Secretary Ickes formally accepted the dam on behalf of the government. Six Companies was not required to complete work on one item, a concrete plug for one of the bypass tunnels, as the tunnel had to be used to take in irrigation water until the powerhouse went into operation.\nConstruction deaths.\nThere were 112 deaths reported as associated with the construction of the dam. The first was Bureau of Reclamation employee Harold Connelly who died on May 15, 1921, after falling from a barge while surveying the Colorado River for an ideal spot for the dam. Surveyor John Gregory (\"J.G.\") Tierney, who drowned on December 20, 1922, in a flash flood while looking for an ideal spot for the dam was the second person. The official list's final death occurred on December 20, 1935, when Patrick Tierney, electrician's helper and the son of J.G. Tierney, fell from one of the two Arizona-side intake towers. Included in the fatality list are three workers who took their own lives on site, one in 1932 and two in 1933. Of the 112 fatalities, 91 were Six Companies employees, three were Bureau of Reclamation employees, and one was a visitor to the site; the remainder were employees of various contractors not part of Six Companies.\nNinety-six of the deaths occurred during construction at the site. Not included in the official number of fatalities were deaths that were recorded as pneumonia. Workers alleged that this diagnosis was a cover for death from carbon monoxide poisoning (brought on by the use of gasoline-fueled vehicles in the diversion tunnels), and a classification used by Six Companies to avoid paying compensation claims. The site's diversion tunnels frequently reached , enveloped in thick plumes of vehicle exhaust gases. A total of 42 workers were recorded as having died from pneumonia and were not included in the above total; none were listed as having died from carbon monoxide poisoning. No deaths of non-workers from pneumonia were recorded in Boulder City during the construction period.\nArchitectural style.\nThe initial plans for the facade of the dam, the power plant, the outlet tunnels and ornaments clashed with the modern look of an arch dam. The Bureau of Reclamation, more concerned with the dam's functionality, adorned it with a Gothic-inspired balustrade and eagle statues. This initial design was criticized by many as being too plain and unremarkable for a project of such immense scale, so Los Angeles-based architect Gordon B. Kaufmann, then the supervising architect to the Bureau of Reclamation, was brought in to redesign the exteriors. Kaufmann greatly streamlined the design and applied an elegant Art Deco style to the entire project. He designed sculpted turrets rising seamlessly from the dam face and clock faces on the intake towers set for the time in Nevada and Arizona\u2014both states are in different time zones, but since Arizona does not observe daylight saving time, the clocks display the same time for more than half the year.\nAt Kaufmann's request, Denver artist Allen Tupper True was hired to handle the design and decoration of the walls and floors of the new dam. True's design scheme incorporated motifs of the Navajo and Pueblo tribes of the region. Although some were initially opposed to these designs, True was given the go-ahead and was officially appointed consulting artist. With the assistance of the National Laboratory of Anthropology, True researched authentic decorative motifs from Indian sand paintings, textiles, baskets and ceramics. The images and colors are based on Native American visions of rain, lightning, water, clouds, and local animals\u2014lizards, serpents, birds\u2014and on the Southwestern landscape of stepped mesas. In these works, which are integrated into the walkways and interior halls of the dam, True also reflected on the machinery of the operation, making the symbolic patterns appear both ancient and modern.\nWith the agreement of Kaufmann and the engineers, True also devised for the pipes and machinery an innovative color-coding which was implemented throughout all BOR projects. True's consulting artist job lasted through 1942; it was extended so he could complete design work for the Parker, Shasta and Grand Coulee dams and power plants. True's work on the Hoover Dam was humorously referred to in a poem published in \"The New Yorker\", part of which read, \"lose the spark, and justify the dream; but also worthy of remark will be the color scheme\".\nComplementing Kaufmann and True's work, sculptor Oskar J. W. Hansen designed many of the sculptures on and around the dam. His works include the monument of dedication plaza, a plaque to memorialize the workers killed and the bas-reliefs on the elevator towers. In his words, Hansen wanted his work to express \"the immutable calm of intellectual resolution, and the enormous power of trained physical strength, equally enthroned in placid triumph of scientific accomplishment\", because \"[t]he building of Hoover Dam belongs to the sagas of the daring.\" Hansen's dedication plaza, on the Nevada abutment, contains a sculpture of two winged figures flanking a flagpole.\nSurrounding the base of the monument is a terrazzo floor embedded with a \"star map\". The map depicts the Northern Hemisphere sky at the moment of President Roosevelt's dedication of the dam. This is intended to help future astronomers, if necessary, calculate the exact date of dedication. The bronze figures, dubbed \"Winged Figures of the Republic\", were both formed in a continuous pour. To put such large bronzes into place without marring the highly polished bronze surface, they were placed on ice and guided into position as the ice melted. Hansen's bas-relief on the Nevada elevator tower depicts the benefits of the dam: flood control, navigation, irrigation, water storage, and power. The bas-relief on the Arizona elevator depicts, in his words, \"the visages of those Indian tribes who have inhabited mountains and plains from ages distant.\"\nOperation.\nPower plant and water demands.\nExcavation for the powerhouse was carried out simultaneously with the excavation for the dam foundation and abutments. The excavation of this U-shaped structure located at the downstream toe of the dam was completed in late 1933 with the first concrete placed in November 1933. Filling of Lake Mead began February 1, 1935, even before the last of the concrete was poured that May. The powerhouse was one of the projects uncompleted at the time of the formal dedication on September 30, 1935; a crew of 500\u00a0men remained to finish it and other structures. To make the powerhouse roof bombproof, it was constructed of layers of concrete, rock, and steel with a total thickness of about , topped with layers of sand and tar.\nIn the latter half of 1936, water levels in Lake Mead were high enough to permit power generation, and the first three Allis Chalmers built Francis turbine-generators, all on the Nevada side, began operating. In March 1937, one more Nevada generator went online and the first Arizona generator by August. By September 1939, four more generators were operating, and the dam's power plant became the largest hydroelectricity facility in the world. The final generator was not placed in service until 1961, bringing the maximum generating capacity to 1,345 megawatts at the time. Original plans called for 16\u00a0large generators, eight on each side of the river, but two smaller generators were installed instead of one large one on the Arizona side for a total of 17. The smaller generators were used to serve smaller communities at a time when the output of each generator was dedicated to a single municipality, before the dam's total power output was placed on the grid and made arbitrarily distributable.\nBefore water from Lake Mead reaches the turbines, it enters the intake towers and then four gradually narrowing penstocks which funnel the water down towards the powerhouse. The intakes provide a maximum hydraulic head (water pressure) of as the water reaches a speed of about . The entire flow of the Colorado River usually passes through the turbines. The spillways and outlet works (jet-flow gates) are rarely used. The jet-flow gates, located in concrete structures above the river and also at the outlets of the inner diversion tunnels at river level, may be used to divert water around the dam in emergency or flood conditions, but have never done so, and in practice are used only to drain water from the penstocks for maintenance. Following an uprating project from 1986 to 1993, the total gross power rating for the plant, including two 2.4-megawatt Pelton turbine-generators that power Hoover Dam's own operations, is a maximum capacity of 2080 megawatts. The annual generation of Hoover Dam varies. The maximum net generation was 10.348 TWh in 1984, and the minimum since 1940 was 2.648 TWh in 1956. The average power generated was 4.2 TWh/year for 1947\u20132008. In 2015, the dam generated 3.6 TWh.\nThe amount of electricity generated by Hoover Dam has been decreasing along with the falling water level in Lake Mead due to the prolonged drought since year 2000 and high demand for the Colorado River's water. By 2014 its generating capacity was downrated by 23% to 1592\u00a0MW and was providing power only during periods of peak demand. Lake Mead fell to a new record low elevation of on July 1, 2016, before beginning to rebound slowly. Under its original design, the dam would no longer be able to generate power once the water level fell below , which might have occurred in 2017 had water restrictions not been enforced. To lower the minimum power pool elevation from , five wide-head turbines, designed to work efficiently with less flow, were installed. Water levels were maintained at over in 2018 and 2019, but fell to a new record low of on June 10, 2021 and were projected to fall below by the end of 2021.\nControl of water was the primary concern in the building of the dam. Power generation has allowed the dam project to be self-sustaining: proceeds from the sale of power repaid the 50-year construction loan, and those revenues also finance the multimillion-dollar yearly maintenance budget. Power is generated in step with and only with the release of water in response to downstream water demands.\nLake Mead and downstream releases from the dam also provide water for both municipal and irrigation uses. Water released from the Hoover Dam eventually reaches several canals. The Colorado River Aqueduct and Central Arizona Project branch off Lake Havasu while the All-American Canal is supplied by the Imperial Dam. In total, water from Lake Mead serves 18 million people in Arizona, Nevada, and California and supplies the irrigation of over of land.\nIn 2018, the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) proposed a $3 billion pumped-storage hydroelectricity project\u2014a \"battery\" of sorts\u2014that would use wind and solar power to recirculate water back up to Lake Mead from a pumping station downriver.\nPower distribution.\nElectricity from the dam's powerhouse was originally sold pursuant to a fifty-year contract, authorized by Congress in 1934, which ran from 1937 to 1987. In 1984, Congress passed a new statute which set power allocations to southern California, Arizona, and Nevada from the dam from 1987 to 2017. The powerhouse was run under the original authorization by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and Southern California Edison; in 1987, the Bureau of Reclamation assumed control. In 2011, Congress enacted legislation extending the current contracts until 2067, after setting aside 5% of Hoover Dam's power for sale to Native American tribes, electric cooperatives, and other entities. The new arrangement began on October 1, 2017.\nThe Bureau of Reclamation reports that the energy generated under the contracts ending in 2017 was allocated as follows:\nSpillways.\nThe dam is protected against over-topping by two spillways. The spillway entrances are located behind each dam abutment, running roughly parallel to the canyon walls. The spillway entrance arrangement forms a classic side-flow weir with each spillway containing four and steel-drum gates. Each gate weighs and can be operated manually or automatically. Gates are raised and lowered depending on water levels in the reservoir and flood conditions. The gates cannot entirely prevent water from entering the spillways but can maintain an extra of lake level.\nWater flowing over the spillways falls dramatically into , spillway tunnels before connecting to the outer diversion tunnels and reentering the main river channel below the dam. This complex spillway entrance arrangement combined with the approximate elevation drop from the top of the reservoir to the river below was a difficult engineering problem and posed numerous design challenges. Each spillway's capacity of was empirically verified in post-construction tests in 1941.\nThe large spillway tunnels have only been used twice, for testing in 1941 and because of flooding in 1983. Both times, when inspecting the tunnels after the spillways were used, engineers found major damage to the concrete linings and underlying rock. The 1941 damage was attributed to a slight misalignment of the tunnel invert (or base), which caused cavitation, a phenomenon in fast-flowing liquids in which vapor bubbles collapse with explosive force. In response to this finding, the tunnels were patched with special heavy-duty concrete and the surface of the concrete was polished mirror-smooth. The spillways were modified in 1947 by adding flip buckets, which both slow the water and decrease the spillway's effective capacity, in an attempt to eliminate conditions thought to have contributed to the 1941 damage. The 1983 damage, also due to cavitation, led to the installation of aerators in the spillways. Tests at Grand Coulee Dam showed that the technique worked, in principle.\nRoadway and tourism.\nThere are two lanes for automobile traffic across the top of the dam, which formerly served as the Colorado River crossing for U.S. Route 93. In the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks, authorities expressed security concerns and the Hoover Dam Bypass project was expedited. Pending the completion of the bypass, restricted traffic was permitted over Hoover Dam. Some types of vehicles were inspected prior to crossing the dam while semi-trailer trucks, buses carrying luggage, and enclosed-box trucks over long were not allowed on the dam at all, and were diverted to U.S. Route 95 or Nevada State Routes 163/68. The four-lane Hoover Dam Bypass opened on October 19, 2010. It includes a composite steel and concrete arch bridge, the Mike O'Callaghan\u2013Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge, downstream from the dam.\nWith the opening of the bypass, through traffic is no longer allowed across Hoover Dam; dam visitors are allowed to use the existing roadway to approach from the Nevada side and cross to parking lots and other facilities on the Arizona side.\nHoover Dam opened for tours in 1937 after its completion but following Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, it was closed to the public when the United States entered World War II, during which only authorized traffic, in convoys, was permitted. After the war, it reopened September 2, 1945, and by 1953, annual attendance had risen to 448,081. The dam closed on November 25, 1963, and March 31, 1969, days of mourning in remembrance of Presidents Kennedy and Eisenhower. In 1995, a new visitors' center was built, and the following year, visits exceeded one million for the first time. The dam closed again to the public on September 11, 2001; modified tours were resumed in December and a new \"Discovery Tour\" was added the following year. Today, nearly a million people per year take the tours of the dam offered by the Bureau of Reclamation. The government's increased security concerns have led to the exclusion of visitors from most of the interior structures. As a result, few of True's decorations can now be seen by visitors. Visitors can only purchase tickets on-site and have the options of a guided tour of the whole facility or only the power plant area. The only self-guided tour option is for the visitor center itself, where visitors can view various exhibits and enjoy a 360-degree view of the dam.\nEnvironmental impact.\nThe changes in water flow and use caused by Hoover Dam's construction and operation have had a large impact on the Colorado River Delta. The construction of the dam has been implicated in causing the decline of this estuarine ecosystem. For six years after the construction of the dam, while Lake Mead filled, virtually no water reached the mouth of the river. The delta's estuary, which once had a freshwater-saltwater mixing zone stretching south of the river's mouth, was turned into an inverse estuary where the level of salinity was higher close to the river's mouth.\nThe Colorado River had experienced natural flooding before the construction of the Hoover Dam. The dam eliminated the natural flooding, threatening many species adapted to the flooding, including both plants and animals. The construction of the dam devastated the populations of native fish in the river downstream from the dam. Four species of fish native to the Colorado River, the Bonytail chub, Colorado pikeminnow, Humpback chub, and Razorback sucker, are listed as endangered.\nNaming controversy.\nDuring the years of lobbying leading up to the passage of legislation authorizing the dam in 1928, the press generally referred to the dam as \"Boulder Dam\" or as \"Boulder Canyon Dam\", even though the proposed site had shifted to Black Canyon. The Boulder Canyon Project Act of 1928 (BCPA) never mentioned a proposed name or title for the dam. The BCPA merely allows the government to \"construct, operate, and maintain a dam and incidental works in the main stream of the Colorado River at Black Canyon or Boulder Canyon\".\nWhen Secretary of the Interior Ray Wilbur spoke at the ceremony starting the building of the railway between Las Vegas and the dam site on September 17, 1930, he named the dam \"Hoover Dam\", citing a tradition of naming dams after Presidents, though none had been so honored during their terms of office. Wilbur justified his choice on the ground that Hoover was \"the great engineer whose vision and persistence\u00a0... has done so much to make [the dam] possible\". One writer complained in response that \"the Great Engineer had quickly drained, ditched, and dammed the country.\"\nAfter Hoover's election defeat in 1932 and the accession of the Roosevelt administration, Secretary Ickes ordered on May 13, 1933, that the dam be referred to as Boulder Dam. Ickes stated that Wilbur had been imprudent in naming the dam after a sitting president, that Congress had never ratified his choice, and that it had long been referred to as Boulder Dam. Unknown to the general public, Attorney General Homer Cummings informed Ickes that Congress had indeed used the name \"Hoover Dam\" in five different bills appropriating money for construction of the dam. The official status this conferred to the name \"Hoover Dam\" had been noted on the floor of the House of Representatives by Congressman Edward T. Taylor of Colorado on December 12, 1930, but was likewise ignored by Ickes.\nWhen Ickes spoke at the dedication ceremony on September 30, 1935, he was determined, as he recorded in his diary, \"to try to nail down for good and all the name Boulder Dam.\" At one point in the speech, he spoke the words \"Boulder Dam\" five times within thirty seconds. Further, he suggested that if the dam were to be named after any one person, it should be for California Senator Hiram Johnson, a lead sponsor of the authorizing legislation. Roosevelt also referred to the dam as Boulder Dam, and the Republican-leaning \"Los Angeles Times\", which at the time of Ickes' name change had run an editorial cartoon showing Ickes ineffectively chipping away at an enormous sign \"HOOVER DAM\", reran it showing Roosevelt reinforcing Ickes, but having no greater success.\nIn the following years, the name \"Boulder Dam\" failed to fully take hold, with many Americans using both names interchangeably and mapmakers divided as to which name should be printed. Memories of the Great Depression faded, and Hoover to some extent rehabilitated himself through good works during and after World War II. In 1947, a bill passed both Houses of Congress unanimously restoring the name \"Hoover Dam.\" Ickes, who was by then a private citizen, opposed the change, stating, \"I didn't know Hoover was that small a man to take credit for something he had nothing to do with.\"\nRecognition.\nHoover Dam was recognized as a National Historic Civil Engineering Landmark in 1984. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1981 and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1985, cited for its engineering innovations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) documentation:"}
{"id": "14309", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14309", "title": "Holger Pedersen", "text": "Holger Pedersen may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "14311", "revid": "50377587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14311", "title": "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn", "text": "1885 novel by Mark Twain\nAdventures of Huckleberry Finn is a picaresque novel by American author Mark Twain that was first published in the United Kingdom in December 1884 and in the United States in February 1885. It is commonly named among the Great American Novels, and it is among the first in major American literature to be written throughout in vernacular English, characterized by local color regionalism. Being the direct sequel to \"The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,\" it is told in the first person by Huckleberry \"Huck\" Finn, the narrator of two other later Twain novels (\"Tom Sawyer Abroad\" and \"Tom Sawyer, Detective\") and a friend of Tom Sawyer.\nThe book is noted for \"changing the course of children's literature\" in the United States for the \"deeply felt portrayal of boyhood\". It is also known for its colorful description of people and places along the Mississippi River. Set in a Southern antebellum society that had ceased to exist over 20 years before the work was published, \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" is an often scathing satire on entrenched attitudes, particularly racism.\nPerennially popular with readers, \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" has also been the continued object of study by literary critics since its publication. The book was widely criticized upon release because of its extensive use of coarse language and racial epithets. Throughout the 20th century, and despite arguments that the protagonist and the tenor of the book are anti-racist, criticism of the book continued due to both its perceived use of racial stereotypes and its frequent use of the racial slur \"nigger\".\nPlot.\nIn 1840s St. Petersburg, Missouri, Huckleberry Finn has received a considerable sum of money following \"The Adventures of Tom Sawyer\", and the Widow Douglas and her sister Miss Watson become his guardians. Despite preferring life as an errant boy, Huck stays so he can be part of Tom Sawyer's gang. Huck's father, \"Pap\", an abusive alcoholic, tries to appropriate Huck's fortune. When this fails, Pap imprisons him in a remote cabin.\nAfter a delirium tremens crisis in which Pap tries to kill Huck, Huck fakes his own murder and settles on Jackson's Island, where he reunites with Miss Watson's slave Jim, who ran away after overhearing she was planning to sell him. Huck and Jim decide to go down the Mississippi River to Cairo, in the free state of Illinois. After a flood, they find a timber raft and a house floating downstream. Inside the house, Jim finds a man who was shot to death but prevents Huck from seeing. Huck sneaks into town disguised as a girl, where he discovers from Judith Loftus that there is a reward for Jim's capture and that Jim is suspected of killing Huck. They flee on their raft.\nHuck and Jim come across a grounded steamboat on which two thieves discuss murdering a third. Finding their raft has drifted away, they flee in the thieves' boat. They find their raft and sink the thieves' boat, then Huck tricks a night watchman into a rescue attempt, which fails when the steamboat sinks. Huck and Jim are separated in a fog. When they reunite, Huck tricks Jim into thinking he dreamed the event. Jim is disappointed in Huck when Huck admits the truth. Huck is surprised by Jim's strong feelings and apologizes.\nHuck is conflicted about supporting a runaway slave, but when two white men seeking runaways come upon the raft, his lies convince them to leave. Jim and Huck realize they have passed Cairo. With no way to go upriver, they decide to continue downriver. The raft is struck by a passing steamship, again separating them. On the riverbank, Huck meets the Grangerfords, who are engaged in a 30-year feud with the Shepherdsons. After a Grangerford daughter elopes with a Shepherdson boy, all the Grangerford men are killed in a Shepherdson ambush. Huck escapes and is reunited with Jim, who has found and repaired the raft.\nJim and Huck are joined by two confidence men claiming to be a King and a Duke, and they rope Huck and Jim into aiding in several scams. In one town, the King and the Duke cheat the townsfolk over two nights with a short, overpriced stage performance. On the third, the grifters collect the admission fee from previous audience members bent on revenge, then flee. In the next town, the swindlers impersonate the brothers of the recently deceased Peter Wilks and attempt to steal his estate. Huck tries to retrieve the money for Wilks's orphaned nieces. Two other men claiming to be Wilks' brothers arrive, causing an uproar. Huck flees but is caught by the King and the Duke. He escapes but finds they sold Jim to the Phelpses. Huck vows to free Jim, despite believing he will go to hell for it.\nThe Phelpses mistake Huck for their nephew Tom, who is expected for a visit, and Huck plays along. Their nephew is Tom Sawyer; when he arrives he pretends to be his brother Sid and develops a theatrical plan to free Jim. Huck attempts to warn the King and the Duke that Jim alerted local residents to their scam but sees them tarred and feathered and being run out of town on a rail.\nTom is wounded during Jim's escape. Instead of fleeing, Jim stays to tend to him and is arrested and returned to the Phelpses. Tom's Aunt Polly arrives and reveals Huck's and Tom's true identities. She explains that Miss Watson has died, and that she freed Jim in her will. Tom admits he knew but wanted to \"rescue\" Jim in style. Jim tells Huck that Pap was the dead man in the floating house. Huck declares he will flee to Indian Territory to escape adoption by the Phelpses.\nCharacters.\nIn order of appearance:\nThemes.\n\"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" explores themes of race and identity; what it means to be free and civilized; and the ideas of humanity and social responsibility in the changing landscape of America. A complexity exists concerning Jim's character. While some scholars point out that Jim is good-hearted and moral, and he is not unintelligent (in contrast to several of the more negatively depicted white characters), others have criticized the novel as racist, citing the use of the word \"nigger\" and emphasizing the stereotypically \"comic\" treatment of Jim's lack of education, superstition and ignorance. This argument is supported by incidents early in the novel where Huck deliberately \"tricks\" Jim, taking advantage of his gullibility and Jim still remains loyal to him.\nBut this novel is also Huck's 'coming of age' story where he overcomes his initial biases and forms a deeper bond with Jim. Throughout the story, Huck is in moral conflict with the received values of the society in which he lives. Huck is unable consciously to rebut those values even in his thoughts, but he makes a moral choice based on his own valuation of Jim's friendship and human worth, a decision in direct opposition to the things he has been taught. Twain, in his lecture notes, proposes that \"a sound heart is a surer guide than an ill-trained conscience\" and goes on to describe the novel as \"a book of mine where a sound heart and a deformed conscience come into collision and conscience suffers defeat\".\nTo highlight the hypocrisy required to condone slavery within an ostensibly moral system, Twain has Huck's father enslave his son, isolate him and beat him. When Huck escapes, he immediately encounters Jim \"illegally\" doing the same thing. The treatments both of them receive are radically different, especially in an encounter with Mrs. Judith Loftus. She takes pity on Huck, whom she presumes to be a runaway apprentice, yet boasts about her husband sending the hounds after Jim, a runaway slave.\nSome scholars discuss Huck's own character, and the novel itself, in the context of its relation to African-American culture as a whole. John Alberti quotes Shelley Fisher Fishkin, who writes in her 1990s book \"Was Huck Black?: Mark Twain and African-American Voices\", \"by limiting their field of inquiry to the periphery, [white scholars] have missed the ways in which African-American voices shaped Twain's creative imagination at its core.\" It is suggested that the character of Huckleberry Finn illustrates the correlation, and even interrelatedness, between white and Black culture in the United States.\nIllustrations.\nThe original illustrations were done by E. W. Kemble, at the time a young artist working for \"Life\" magazine. Kemble was hand-picked by Twain, who admired his work. Hearn suggests that Twain and Kemble had a similar skill, writing that:\nWhatever he may have lacked in technical grace ... Kemble shared with the greatest illustrators the ability to give even the minor individual in a text his own distinct visual personality; just as Twain so deftly defined a full-rounded character in a few phrases, so too did Kemble depict with a few strokes of his pen that same entire personage.\nAs Kemble could afford only one model, most of his illustrations produced for the book were done by guesswork. When the novel was published, the illustrations were praised even as the novel was harshly criticized. E.W. Kemble produced another set of illustrations for Harper's and the American Publishing Company in 1898 and 1899 after Twain lost the copyright.\nEffects on literary climate.\nTwain initially conceived of the work as a sequel to \"The Adventures of Tom Sawyer\" that would follow Huckleberry Finn through adulthood. Beginning with a few pages he had removed from the earlier novel, Twain began work on a manuscript he originally titled \"Huckleberry Finn's Autobiography.\" Twain worked on the manuscript off and on for the next several years, ultimately abandoning his original plan of following Huck's development into adulthood. He appeared to have lost interest in the manuscript while it was in progress and set it aside for several years. After making a trip down the Hudson River, Twain returned to his work on the novel. Upon completion, the novel's title closely paralleled its predecessor's: \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (Tom Sawyer's Comrade)\".\nMark Twain composed the story in pen on notepaper between 1876 and 1883. Paul Needham, who supervised the authentication of the manuscript for Sotheby's books and manuscripts department in New York in 1991, stated, \"What you see is [Clemens'] attempt to move away from pure literary writing to dialect writing\". For example, Twain revised the opening line of \"Huck Finn\" three times. He initially wrote, \"You will not know about me\", which he changed to, \"You do not know about me\", before settling on the final version, \"You don't know about me, without you have read a book by the name of 'The Adventures of Tom Sawyer'; but that ain't no matter.\" The revisions also show how Twain reworked his material to strengthen the characters of Huck and Jim, as well as his sensitivity to the then-current debate over literacy and voting. A later version was the first typewritten manuscript delivered to a printer.\nDemand for the book spread outside of the United States. \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" was eventually published on December 10, 1884, in Canada and the United Kingdom, and on February 18, 1885, in the United States. The illustration on page 283 became a point of issue after an engraver, whose identity was never discovered, made a last-minute addition to the printing plate of Kemble's picture of old Silas Phelps, which drew attention to Phelps' groin. Thirty thousand copies of the book had been printed before the obscenity was discovered. A new plate was made to correct the illustration and repair the existing copies.\nIn 1885, the Buffalo Public Library's curator, James Fraser Gluck, approached Twain to donate the manuscript to the library. Twain did so. Later it was believed that half of the pages had been misplaced by the printer. In 1991, the missing first half turned up in a steamer trunk owned by descendants of Gluck's. The library successfully claimed possession and, in 1994, opened the Mark Twain Room to showcase the treasure.\nIn relation to the literary climate at the time of the book's publication in 1885, Henry Nash Smith describes the importance of Mark Twain's already established reputation as a \"professional humorist\", having already published over a dozen other works. Smith suggests that while the \"dismantling of the decadent Romanticism of the later nineteenth century was a necessary operation,\" \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" illustrated \"previously inaccessible resources of imaginative power, but also made vernacular language, with its new sources of pleasure and new energy, available for American prose and poetry in the twentieth century.\"\nCritical reception and banning.\nWhile it is clear that \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" was controversial from the outset, Norman Mailer, writing in \"The New York Times\" in 1984, concluded that Twain's novel was not initially \"too unpleasantly regarded.\" In fact, Mailer writes: \"the critical climate could hardly anticipate T. S. Eliot and Ernest Hemingway's encomiums 50 years later,\" reviews that would remain longstanding in the American consciousness.\nAlberti suggests that the academic establishment responded to the book's challenges both dismissively and with confusion. During Twain's time and today, defenders of \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" \"lump all nonacademic critics of the book together as extremists and 'censors', thus equating the complaints about the book's 'coarseness' from the genteel bourgeois trustees of the Concord Public Library in the 1880s with more recent objections based on race and civil rights.\"\nUpon issue of the American edition in 1885, several libraries banned it from their shelves. The early criticism focused on what was perceived as the book's crudeness. One incident was recounted in the newspaper the \"Boston Transcript\":\nThe Concord (Mass.) Public Library committee has decided to exclude Mark Twain's latest book from the library. One member of the committee says that, while he does not wish to call it immoral, he thinks it contains but little humor, and that of a very coarse type. He regards it as the veriest trash. The library and the other members of the committee entertain similar views, characterizing it as rough, coarse, and inelegant, dealing with a series of experiences not elevating, the whole book being more suited to the slums than to intelligent, respectable people.\nWriter Louisa May Alcott criticized the book's publication as well, saying that if Twain \"[could not] think of something better to tell our pure-minded lads and lasses he had best stop writing for them\".\nIn 1905, New York's Brooklyn Public Library also banned the book due to \"bad word choice\" and Huck's having \"not only itched but scratched\" within the novel, which was considered obscene. When asked by a Brooklyn librarian about the situation, Twain sardonically replied: I am greatly troubled by what you say. I wrote 'Tom Sawyer' &amp; 'Huck Finn' for adults exclusively, &amp; it always distressed me when I find that boys and girls have been allowed access to them. The mind that becomes soiled in youth can never again be washed clean. I know this by my own experience, &amp; to this day I cherish an unappeased bitterness against the unfaithful guardians of my young life, who not only permitted but compelled me to read an unexpurgated Bible through before I was 15 years old. None can do that and ever draw a clean sweet breath again on this side of the grave.\nMany subsequent critics, Ernest Hemingway among them, have deprecated the final chapters, claiming the book \"devolves into little more than minstrel-show satire and broad comedy\" after Jim is detained. Although Hemingway declared, \"All modern American literature comes from\" \"Huck Finn\", and hailed it as \"the best book we've had\", he cautioned, \"If you must read it you must stop where the Nigger Jim is stolen from the boys. That is the real end. The rest is just cheating.\" The African-American writer Ralph Ellison argued that \"Hemingway completely missed the structural, symbolic and moral necessity for that part of the plot in which the boys rescue Jim. Yet it is precisely this part which gives the novel its significance.\" Pulitzer Prize winner Ron Powers states in his Twain biography (\"Mark Twain: A Life\") that \"Huckleberry Finn endures as a consensus masterpiece despite these final chapters\", in which Tom Sawyer leads Huck through elaborate machinations to rescue Jim.\nControversy.\nIn his introduction to \"The Annotated Huckleberry Finn\", Michael Patrick Hearn writes that Twain \"could be uninhibitedly vulgar\", and quotes critic William Dean Howells, a Twain contemporary, who wrote that the author's \"humor was not for most women\". However, Hearn continues by explaining that \"the reticent Howells found nothing in the proofs of Huckleberry Finn so offensive that it needed to be struck out\".\nRacial stereotyping.\nMuch of modern scholarship of \"Huckleberry Finn\" has focused on its treatment of race. Many Twain scholars have argued that the book, by humanizing Jim and exposing the fallacies of the racist assumptions of slavery, is an attack on racism. Others have argued that the book falls short on this score, especially in its depiction of Jim. According to Professor Stephen Railton of the University of Virginia, Twain was unable to fully rise above the stereotypes of Black people that White readers of his era expected and enjoyed, and, therefore, resorted to minstrel show-style comedy to provide humor at Jim's expense, and ended up confirming rather than challenging late 19th-century racist stereotypes.\nIn one instance, the controversy caused a drastically altered interpretation of the text: in 1955, CBS tried to avoid controversial material in a televised version of the book, by deleting all mention of slavery and omitting the character of Jim entirely.\nUse of the word \"nigger\".\nBecause of this controversy over whether \"Huckleberry Finn\" is racist or anti-racist, and because the word \"nigger\" is frequently used in the novel (a commonly used word in Twain's time that has since become vulgar and taboo), many have questioned the appropriateness of teaching the book in the U.S. public school system\u2014this questioning of the word \"nigger\" is illustrated by a school administrator of Virginia in 1982 calling the novel the \"most grotesque example of racism I've ever seen in my life\". According to the American Library Association, \"Huckleberry Finn\" was the fifth-most frequently challenged book in the United States during the 1990s.\nThere have been several more recent cases involving protests for the banning of the novel. In 2003, high school student Calista Phair and her grandmother, Beatrice Clark, in Renton, Washington, proposed banning the book from classroom learning in the Renton School District, though not from any public libraries, because of the word \"nigger\". The two curriculum committees that considered her request eventually decided to keep the novel on the 11th grade curriculum, though they suspended it until a panel had time to review the novel and set a specific teaching procedure for the novel's controversial topics.\nIn 2009, a white Washington state high school teacher, John Foley, called for replacing \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" with a more modern novel. In an opinion column that Foley wrote in the \"Seattle Post Intelligencer\", he states that all \"novels that use the 'N-word' repeatedly need to go.\" He states that teaching the novel is not only unnecessary, but difficult due to the offensive language within the novel with many students becoming uncomfortable at \"just hear[ing] the N-word.\"\nIn 2016, \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" was removed from a public school district in Virginia, along with the novel \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", due to their use of racial slurs.\nExpurgated editions.\nPublishers have made their own attempts at easing the controversy by way of releasing editions of the book with the word \"nigger\" replaced with less controversial words. A 2011 edition of the book, published by NewSouth Books, employed the word \"slave\" (although the word is not properly applied to a freed man). Their argument for making the change was to offer the reader a choice of reading a \"sanitized\" version if they were not comfortable with the original. Mark Twain scholar Alan Gribben said he hoped the edition would be more friendly for use in classrooms, rather than have the work banned outright from classroom reading lists due to its language.\nAccording to publisher Suzanne La Rosa, \"At NewSouth, we saw the value in an edition that would help the works find new readers. If the publication sparks good debate about how language impacts learning or about the nature of censorship or the way in which racial slurs exercise their baneful influence, then our mission in publishing this new edition of Twain's works will be more emphatically fulfilled.\" Another scholar, Thomas Wortham, criticized the changes, saying the new edition \"doesn't challenge children to ask, 'Why would a child like Huck use such reprehensible language?'\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14312", "revid": "20726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14312", "title": "Harpsichord", "text": "Plucked-string keyboard instrument\nA harpsichord is a keyboard instrument that makes its sound by plucking a set of strings. In a harpsichord, depressing a key raises its back end within the instrument, which in turn lifts one or more jacks, each a thin strip of wood holding a small plectrum made from quill or plastic; each plectrum plucks a single string. The strings are under tension on a soundboard, which is mounted in a wooden case; the soundboard amplifies the vibrations from the strings so that the listeners can hear them. Harpsichord often include more than one choir of strings. Various devices are used to select which choir will sound when playing; these can include simple levers, or in more elaborate instruments the deployment of more than one keyboard . \nThe term denotes the whole family of similar plucked-keyboard instruments, including the smaller virginals, muselar, and spinet. The harpsichord was widely used in Renaissance and Baroque music, both for purposes of accompaniment and as a solo instrument. During the Baroque era, the harpsichord was a standard part of the continuo group. During the late 18th century, with the spread of the piano, the harpsichord gradually disappeared from the musical scene (except in opera, where it continued to be used to accompany recitative). In the 20th century, it made a resurgence, being used in historically informed performance of older music, in new compositions, and in certain styles of popular music.\nHistory.\nThe harpsichord was most likely invented in the late 14th century. The earliest instruments were quite small and sounded at relatively high pitch. By the 16th century, harpsichord makers in Italy had evolved a design that survived well into later centuries: lightweight instruments with thin case walls and low tension brass strings arranged in two choirs with a single manual. A different approach was taken in the Southern Netherlands starting in the late 16th century, notably by the Ruckers family. Their harpsichords used a heavier construction and produced a more powerful and distinctive tone with higher tension steel treble stringing. These included the first harpsichords with two keyboards, used for transposition.\nThe Flemish instruments served as the model for 18th-century harpsichord construction in other nations. In France, the double keyboards were adapted to control different choirs of strings, making a more musically flexible instrument (so-called 'expressive doubles'). Instruments from the peak of the French tradition, by makers such as the Blanchet family and Pascal Taskin, are among the most widely admired of all harpsichords, and are frequently used as models for the construction of modern instruments. In England, the Kirkman and Shudi firms produced sophisticated harpsichords of great power and sonority. German builders such as Hieronymus Albrecht Hass extended the sound repertoire of the instrument by adding sixteen-foot and two-foot choirs; instruments by the German builder Michael Mietke have recently served as models for modern builders.\nAround the year 1700 the first piano was built by Bartolomeo Cristofori. In the piano, the strings are not plucked but rather are struck with hammers, which makes it possible for the player to control the volume of each note (in a harpsichord, a note sounds equally loud no matter how hard the key is pressed). With time and changes in compositional style, the expressive nuances made possible by the piano came to be increasingly valued, and by the late 18th century the piano (often called the fortepiano at that time) had largely supplanted the harpsichord. The harpsichord, now considered obsolete, almost disappeared from view for most of the 19th century. An exception was its continued use in opera for accompanying recitative, but the piano sometimes displaced it even there.\nTwentieth-century efforts to revive the harpsichord began with instruments that used piano technology, with heavy strings and metal frames. Starting in the middle of the 20th century, ideas about harpsichord making underwent a major change, when builders such as Frank Hubbard, William Dowd, and Martin Skowroneck sought to re-establish the building traditions of the Baroque period. Harpsichords of this type of historically informed building practice dominate the current scene.\nMechanism.\nHarpsichords vary in size and shape, but all have the same basic mechanism. The player depresses a key that rocks over a pivot in the middle of its length. The other end of the key lifts a jack (a long strip of wood) that holds a small plectrum (a wedge-shaped piece of quill, in modern times often made of plastic), which plucks the string. When the player releases the key, the far end returns to its rest position, and the jack falls back; the plectrum, mounted on a tongue mechanism that can swivel backwards away from the string, passes the string without plucking it again. As the key reaches its rest position, a felt damper atop the jack stops the string's vibrations. These basic principles are explained in detail below. \nStrings, tuning, and soundboard.\nEach string is wound around a \"tuning pin\" (also known as a \"wrest pin\") at the end nearest the player. When rotated with a wrench or tuning hammer, the tuning pin adjusts the tension so that the string sounds the correct pitch. Tuning pins are held tightly in holes drilled in the \"pinblock\" or \"wrestplank\", an oblong hardwood plank. Proceeding from the tuning pin, a string next passes over the \"nut\", a sharp edge that is made of hardwood and is normally attached to the wrestplank. The section of the string beyond the nut forms its \"vibrating length\", which is plucked and creates sound.\nAt the other end of its vibrating length, the string passes over the bridge, another sharp edge made of hardwood. As with the nut, the horizontal position of the string along the bridge is determined by a vertical metal pin inserted into the bridge, against which the string rests. The bridge itself rests on a \"soundboard\", a thin panel of wood usually made of spruce, fir or\u2014in some Italian harpsichords\u2014cypress. The soundboard efficiently transmits the vibrations of the strings into vibrations in the air; without a soundboard, the strings would produce only a very feeble sound. A string is attached at its far end by a loop to a \"hitchpin\" that secures it to the case.\nMultiple manuals and choirs of strings.\nWhile many harpsichords have one string per note, more elaborate harpsichords can have two or more strings for each note. When there are multiple strings for each note, these additional strings are called \"choirs\" of strings. This provides two advantages: the ability to vary volume and the ability to vary tonal quality. Volume is increased when the mechanism of the instrument is set up by the player (see below) so that the press of a single key plucks more than one string. Tonal quality can be varied in two ways. First, different choirs of strings can be designed to have distinct tonal qualities, usually by having one set of strings plucked closer to the nut, which emphasizes the higher harmonics, and produces a \"nasal\" sound quality. The mechanism of the instrument, called \"stops\" (following the use of the term in pipe organs), permits the player to select one choir or the other. Second, having one key pluck two strings at once changes not just volume but also tonal quality; for instance, when two strings tuned to the same pitch are plucked simultaneously, the note is not just louder but also richer and more complex.\nA particularly vivid effect is obtained when the strings plucked simultaneously are an octave apart. This is normally heard by the ear not as two pitches but as one: the sound of the higher string is blended with that of the lower one, and the ear hears the lower pitch, enriched in tonal quality by the additional strength in the upper harmonics of the note sounded by the higher string.\nWhen describing a harpsichord, it is customary to specify its choirs of strings, often called its disposition. To describe the pitch of the choirs of strings, pipe organ terminology is used. Strings at eight-foot pitch (8') sound at the normal expected pitch; strings at four-foot pitch (4') sound an octave higher. Harpsichords occasionally include a sixteen-foot (16') choir (one octave lower than eight-foot) or a two-foot (2') choir (two octaves higher; quite rare). When there are multiple choirs of strings, the player is often able to control which choirs sound. This is usually done by having a set of jacks for each choir, and a mechanism for \"turning off\" each set, often by moving the upper register (through which the jacks slide) sideways a short distance, so that their plectra miss the strings. In simpler instruments, this is done by manually moving the registers, but as the harpsichord evolved, builders invented levers, knee levers and pedal mechanisms to make it easier to change registration.\nHarpsichords with more than one keyboard (this usually means two keyboards, stacked one on top of the other in a step-wise fashion, as with pipe organs) provide flexibility in selecting which strings play, since each manual can be set to control the plucking of a different set of strings. This means that a player can have, for instance, an 8' manual and a 4' manual ready for use, making it possible to switch between them to obtain higher (or lower) pitches or different tone. In addition, such harpsichords often have a mechanism (the \"coupler\") that couples manuals together, so that a single manual plays both sets of strings.\nThe most flexible system is the French \"shove coupler\", in which the lower manual slides forward and backward. In the backward position, \"dogs\" attached to the upper surface of the lower manual engage the lower surface of the upper manual's keys. Depending on choice of keyboard and coupler position, the player can select any of the sets of jacks labeled in \"figure 4\" as A, or B and C, or all three.\nThe English \"dogleg\" jack system (also used in Baroque Flanders) does not require a coupler. The jacks labeled A in Figure 5 have a \"dogleg\" shape that permits either keyboard to play A. If the player wishes to play the upper 8' from the upper manual only and not from the lower manual, a stop handle disengages the jacks labeled A and engages instead an alternative row of jacks called \"lute stop\" (not shown in the Figure). A lute stop is used to imitate the gentle sound of a plucked lute.\n The use of multiple manuals in a harpsichord was not originally provided for the flexibility in choosing which strings would sound, but rather for transposition of the instrument to play in different keys (see \"History of the harpsichord\").\nThe choice of the strings to be plucked is not the only way that sound quality can be modified. Some harpsichords may have a buff stop, which brings a strip of buff leather or other material in contact with the strings, muting their sound to simulate the sound of a plucked lute. This stop is typically controlled by an independent lever.\nSome early harpsichords used a short octave for the lowest register. The rationale behind this system was that the low notes F\u266f and G\u266f are seldom needed in early music. Deep bass notes typically form the root of the chord, and F\u266f and G\u266f chords were seldom used at this time. In contrast, low C and D, both roots of very common chords, are sorely missed if a harpsichord with lowest key E is tuned to match the keyboard layout. When scholars specify the pitch range of instruments with this kind of short octave, they write \"C/E\", meaning that the lowest note is a C, played on a key that normally would sound E. In another arrangement, known as \"G/B', the apparent lowest key B is tuned to G, and apparent C-sharp and D-sharp are tuned to A and B respectively.\nCase.\nThe wooden case holds in position all of the important structural members: pinblock, soundboard, hitchpins, keyboard, and the jack action. It usually includes a solid bottom, and also internal bracing to maintain its form without warping under the tension of the strings. Cases vary greatly in weight and sturdiness: Italian harpsichords are often of light construction; heavier construction is found in the later Flemish instruments and those derived from them.\nThe case also gives the harpsichord its external appearance and protects the instrument. A large harpsichord is, in a sense, a piece of furniture, as it stands alone on legs and may be styled in the manner of other furniture of its place and period. Early Italian instruments, on the other hand, were so light in construction that they were treated rather like a violin: kept for storage in a protective outer case, and played after taking it out of its case and placing it on a table. Such tables were often quite high \u2013 until the late 18th century people usually played standing up. Eventually, harpsichords came to be built with just a single case, though an intermediate stage also existed: the \"false inner\u2013outer\", which for purely aesthetic reasons was built to look as if the outer case contained an inner one, in the old style. Even after harpsichords became self-encased objects, they often were supported by separate stands, and some modern harpsichords have separate legs for improved portability.\nMany harpsichords have a lid that can be raised, a cover for the keyboard, and a music stand for holding sheet music and scores.\nHarpsichords have been decorated in a great many different ways: with plain buff paint (e.g. some Flemish instruments), with paper printed with patterns, with leather or velvet coverings, with chinoiserie, or occasionally with highly elaborate painted artwork.\nVariants.\nVirginals.\nThe virginal is a smaller and simpler rectangular form of the harpsichord having only one string per note; the strings run parallel to the keyboard, which is on the long side of the case.\nSpinet.\nA spinet is a harpsichord with the strings set at an angle (usually about 30 degrees) to the keyboard. The strings are too close together for the jacks to fit between them. Instead, the strings are arranged in pairs, and the jacks are in the larger gaps between the pairs. The two jacks in each gap face in opposite directions, and each plucks a string adjacent to the gap.\nThe English diarist Samuel Pepys mentions his \"tryangle\" several times. This was not the percussion instrument that we call triangle today; rather, it was a name for octave-pitched spinets, which were triangular in shape.\nClavicytherium.\nA clavicytherium is a harpsichord with the soundboard and strings mounted vertically facing the player, the same space-saving principle as an upright piano. In a clavicytherium, the jacks move horizontally without the assistance of gravity, so that clavicytherium actions are more complex than those of other harpsichords.\nOttavino.\nOttavini are small spinets or virginals at four-foot pitch. Harpsichords at octave pitch were more common in the early Renaissance, but lessened in popularity later on. However, the ottavino remained very popular as a domestic instrument in Italy until the 19th century. In the Low Countries, an ottavino was commonly paired with an 8' virginals, encased in a small cubby under the soundboard of the larger instrument. The ottavino could be removed and placed on top of the virginal, making, in effect, a double manual instrument. These are sometimes called 'mother-and-child' or 'double' virginals.\nPedal harpsichord.\nOccasionally, harpsichords were built which included another set or sets of strings underneath and played by foot-operated pedal keyboard which trigger the plucking of the lowest-pitched keys of the harpsichord. Although there are no known extant pedal harpsichords from the 18th century or before, from Adlung (1758): the lower set of usually 8' strings \"...is built like an ordinary harpsichord, but with an extent of two octaves only. The jacks are similar, but they will benefit from being arranged back to back, since the two [bass] octaves take as much space as four in an ordinary harpsichord Prior to 1980 when Keith Hill introduced his design for a pedal harpsichord, most pedal harpsichords were built based on the designs of extant pedal pianos from the 19th century, in which the instrument is as wide as the pedalboard. While these were mostly intended as practice instruments for organists, a few pieces are believed to have been written specifically for the pedal harpsichord. However, the set of pedals can augment the sound from any piece performed on the instrument, as demonstrated on several albums by E. Power Biggs.\nOther variants.\nThe archicembalo, built in the 16th century, had an unusual keyboard layout, designed to accommodate variant tuning systems demanded by compositional practice and theoretical experimentation. More common were instruments with split sharps, also designed to accommodate the tuning systems of the time.\nThe folding harpsichord was an instrument that could be folded up to make it more compact, thus facilitating travelling with it.\nCompass and pitch range.\nOn the whole, earlier harpsichords have smaller ranges than later ones, although there are many exceptions. The largest harpsichords have a range of just over five octaves, and the smallest have under four. Usually, the shortest keyboards were given extended range in the bass with a \"short octave\". The traditional pitch range for a 5-octave instrument is F1\u2013F6 (FF\u2013f\u2034).\nTuning pitch is often taken to be A4\u00a0=\u00a0415\u00a0Hz, roughly a semitone lower than the modern standard concert pitch of A4\u00a0=\u00a0440\u00a0Hz. An accepted exception is for French baroque repertoire, which is often performed with a\u00a0=\u00a0392\u00a0Hz, approximately a semitone lower again. See Jean-Philippe Rameau's \"Treatise on Harmony\" (1722) [Dover Publications], Book One, chapter five, for insight into French baroque tuning; \"Since most of these semitones are absolutely necessary in the tuning of organs and other similar instruments, the following chromatic system has been drawn up.\" Tuning an instrument nowadays usually starts with setting an A; historically it would commence from a C or an F. The harpsichord uses the bass clef (F clef).\nSome modern instruments are built with keyboards that can shift sideways, allowing the player to align the mechanism with strings at either A\u00a0=\u00a0415\u00a0Hz or A\u00a0=\u00a0440\u00a0Hz. If a tuning other than equal temperament is used, the instrument requires retuning once the keyboard is shifted.\nDecoration.\nThroughout the historical period, the harpsichord was characteristically decorated; for extensive discussion and illustration see Kottick (2003). Cases were painted in bright colors (especially in 18th century France), or covered with elaborate wood veneer (18th century England), or adorned with sculptural moldings and knobs (Italy). Soundboards bore paintings, either of individual items such as flowers and animals (Flanders, also France), or even (in expensive instruments), full-scale paintings of the kind usually executed on canvas. Keyboards could have the same \"white keys\" and \"black keys\" that pianos have today, but builders frequently employed the opposite pattern, with white sharps and black naturals. The study of harpsichord decoration became an important scholarly field in the 20th century, notably with the work of Sheridan Germann (2002), whose knowledge extended to the point of being able to pin down the particular anonymous artists who worked with particular builders.\nMusic.\nThe great bulk of the standard repertoire for the harpsichord was written during its first historical flowering, the Renaissance and Baroque eras.\nRenaissance.\nThe first music written specifically for solo harpsichord was published around the early 16th century. Composers who wrote solo harpsichord music were numerous during the whole Baroque era in European countries including Italy, Germany, England and France. Solo harpsichord compositions included dance suites, fantasias, and fugues. Among the most famous composers who wrote for the harpsichord were the members of English virginal school of the late Renaissance, notably William Byrd (c. 1540\u20131623). \nBaroque era.\nIn France, a great number of highly characteristic solo works were created and compiled into four books of \"ordres\" by Fran\u00e7ois Couperin (1668\u20131733). Domenico Scarlatti (1685\u20131757) began his career in Italy but wrote most of his solo harpsichord works in Spain; his most famous work is his series of 555 harpsichord sonatas. Perhaps the most celebrated composers who wrote for the harpsichord were Georg Friedrich H\u00e4ndel (1685\u20131759), who composed numerous suites for harpsichord, and especially J. S. Bach (1685\u20131750), whose solo works (for instance, \"The Well-Tempered Clavier\" and the \"Goldberg Variations\"), continue to be performed very widely, often on the piano. Bach was also a pioneer of the harpsichord concerto, both in works designated as such, and in the harpsichord part of his Fifth Brandenburg Concerto.\nClassical period.\nTwo of the most prominent composers of the Classical era, Joseph Haydn (1732\u20131809) and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756\u20131791), wrote harpsichord music. For both, the instrument featured in the earlier period of their careers, and was largely supplanted by the piano starting roughly in the late 1770s.\nMusic of the harpsichord revival.\nThrough the 19th century, the harpsichord was almost completely supplanted by the piano. In the 20th century, composers returned to the instrument, as they sought out variation in the sounds available to them. Under the influence of Arnold Dolmetsch, the harpsichordists Violet Gordon-Woodhouse (1872\u20131951) and in France, Wanda Landowska (1879\u20131959), were at the forefront of the instrument's renaissance. Concertos for the instrument were written by Francis Poulenc (the \"Concert champ\u00eatre\", 1927\u201328), and Manuel de Falla. Elliott Carter's \"Double Concerto\" is scored for harpsichord, piano and two chamber orchestras. For a detailed account of music composed for the revived harpsichord, see Contemporary harpsichord.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14313", "revid": "41288992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14313", "title": "Hair", "text": "Protein filament that grows from follicles found in the dermis, or skin\nHair is a protein filament that grows from follicles found in the dermis. Hair is one of the defining characteristics of mammals.\nThe human body, apart from areas of glabrous skin, is covered in follicles which produce thick terminal and fine vellus hair. Most common interest in hair is focused on hair growth, hair types, and hair care, but hair is also an important biomaterial primarily composed of protein, notably alpha-keratin.\nAttitudes towards different forms of hair, such as hairstyles and hair removal, vary widely across different cultures and historical periods, but it is often used to indicate a person's personal beliefs or social position, such as their age, gender, or religion.\nOverview.\nMeaning.\nThe word \"hair\" usually refers to two distinct structures: \nHair fibers have a structure consisting of several layers, starting from the outside:\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hair\" is derived from and , in turn derived from and , with influence from . Both the Old English and Old Norse words derive from and are related to terms for hair in other Germanic languages such as , Dutch and , and . The now broadly obsolete word \"fax\" refers specifically to head hair and is found in compounds such as Fairfax and Halifax. It is derived from and is cognate with terms such as Old Norse and .\nDescription.\nEach strand of hair is made up of the medulla, cortex, and cuticle. The innermost region, the medulla, is an open and unstructured region that is not always present. The highly structural and organized cortex, or second of three layers of the hair, is the primary source of mechanical strength and water uptake. The cortex contains melanin, which colors the fiber based on the number, distribution and types of melanin granules. The melanin may be evenly spaced or cluster around the edges of the hair. The shape of the follicle determines the shape of the cortex, and the shape of the fiber is related to how straight or curly the hair is. People with straight hair have round hair fibers. Oval and other shaped fibers are generally more wavy or curly. The cuticle is the outer covering. Its complex structure slides as the hair swells and is covered with a single molecular layer of lipid that makes the hair repel water. The diameter of human hair varies from . Some of these characteristics in humans' head hair vary by race: people of mostly African ancestry tend to have hair with a diameter of 60\u201390 \u03bcm and a flat cross-section, while people of mostly European or Middle Eastern ancestry tend to have hair with a diameter of 70\u2013100 \u03bcm and an oval cross-section, and people of mostly Asian or Native American ancestry tend to have hair with a diameter of 90\u2013120 \u03bcm and a round cross-section. There are roughly two million small, tubular glands and sweat glands that produce watery fluids that cool the body by evaporation. The glands at the opening of the hair produce a fatty secretion that lubricates the hair.\nHair growth begins inside the hair follicle. The only \"living\" portion of the hair is found in the follicle. The hair that is visible is the hair shaft, which exhibits no biochemical activity and is considered \"dead\". The base of a hair's root (the \"bulb\") contains the cells that produce the hair shaft. Other structures of the hair follicle include the oil producing sebaceous gland which lubricates the hair and the arrector pili muscles, which are responsible for causing hairs to stand up. In humans with little body hair, the effect results in goose bumps.\nRoot of the hair.\nThe \"root of the hair\" ends in an enlargement, the \"hair bulb\", which is whiter in color and softer in texture than the shaft and is lodged in a follicular involution of the epidermis called the hair follicle. The bulb of hair consists of fibrous connective tissue, glassy membrane, external root sheath, internal root sheath composed of epithelium stratum (Henle's layer) and granular stratum (Huxley's layer), cuticle, cortex and medulla.\nNatural color.\nAll natural hair colors are the result of two types of hair pigments. Both of these pigments are melanin types, produced inside the hair follicle and packed into granules found in the fibers. Eumelanin is the dominant pigment in brown hair and black hair, while pheomelanin is dominant in red hair. Blond hair is the result of having little pigmentation in the hair strand. Gray hair occurs when melanin production decreases or stops, while poliosis is white hair (and often the skin to which the hair is attached), typically in spots that never possessed melanin at all, or ceased for natural reasons, generally genetic, in the first years of life.\nHuman hair growth.\nHair grows everywhere on the external body except for mucous membranes and glabrous skin, such as that found on the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and lips. The body has different types of hair, including vellus hair and androgenic hair, each with its own type of cellular construction. The different construction gives the hair unique characteristics, serving specific purposes, mainly, warmth and protection.\nThe three stages of hair growth are the anagen, catagen, and telogen phases. Each strand of hair on the human body is at its own stage of development. Once the cycle is complete, it restarts and a new strand of hair begins to form. The growth rate of hair varies from individual to individual depending on their age, genetic predisposition and a number of environmental factors. It is commonly stated that hair grows about 1\u00a0cm per month on average; however reality is more complex, since not all hair grows at once. Scalp hair was reported to grow between 0.6\u00a0cm and 3.36\u00a0cm per month. The growth rate of scalp hair somewhat depends on age (hair tends to grow more slowly with age), sex, and ethnicity. Thicker hair (&gt;60\u00a0\u03bcm) grows generally faster (11.4\u00a0mm per month) than thinner (20-30\u00a0\u03bcm) hair (7.6\u00a0mm per month).\nIt was previously thought that Caucasian hair grew more quickly than Asian hair and that the growth rate of women's hair was faster than that of men. However, more recent research has shown that the growth rate of hair in men and women does not significantly differ and that the hair of Chinese people grew more quickly than the hair of French Caucasians and West and Central Africans. The quantity of hair hovers in a certain range depends on hair colour. An average blonde person has 150,000 hairs, a brown-haired person has 110,000, a black-haired person has 100,000, and a redhead has 90,000. Hair growth stops after a human's death. Visible growth of hair on the dead body happens only because of skin drying out due to water loss.\nThe world record for longest hair on a living person stands with Smita Srivastava of Uttar Pradesh, India. At 7 feet and 9 inches long, she broke a Guinness World Record in November 2023, having grown her hair for 32 years.\nTexture.\nHair exists in a variety of textures. Three main aspects of hair texture are the curl pattern, volume, and consistency. All mammalian hair is composed of keratin, so the make-up of hair follicles is not the source of varying hair patterns. There are a range of theories pertaining to the curl patterns of hair. Scientists have come to believe that the shape of the hair shaft has an effect on the curliness of the individual's hair. A very round shaft allows for fewer disulfide bonds to be present in the hair strand. This means the bonds present are directly in line with one another, resulting in straight hair.\nThe flatter the hair shaft becomes, the curlier hair gets, because the shape allows more cysteines to become compacted together resulting in a bent shape that, with every additional disulfide bond, becomes curlier in form. As the hair follicle shape determines curl pattern, the hair follicle size determines thickness. While the circumference of the hair follicle expands, so does the thickness of the hair follicle. An individual's hair volume, as a result, can be thin, normal, or thick. The consistency of hair can almost always be grouped into three categories: fine, medium, and coarse. This trait is determined by the hair follicle volume and the condition of the strand. Fine hair has the smallest circumference, coarse hair has the largest circumference, and medium hair is anywhere between the other two. Coarse hair has a more open cuticle than thin or medium hair, causing it to be the most porous.\nClassification systems.\nThere are various systems that people use to classify their curl patterns. Being knowledgeable of an individual's hair type is a good start to knowing how to take care of one's hair. There is not just one method to discovering one's hair type. Additionally, it is possible and quite normal to have more than one kind of hair type, for instance having a mixture of both type 3a and 3b curls.\nAndre Walker system.\nThe Andre Walker Hair Typing System is the most widely used system to classify hair. The system was created by Oprah Winfrey's hairstylist, Andre Walker. According to this system there are four types of hair: straight, wavy, curly, and kinky.\nFIA system.\nThis is a method which classifies the hair by curl pattern, hair-strand thickness and overall hair volume.\nComposition.\nHair is mainly composed of keratin proteins and keratin-associated proteins (KRTAPs). The human genome encodes 54 different keratin proteins which are present in various amounts in hair. Similarly, humans encode more than 100 different KRTAPs which crosslink keratins in hair. The content of KRTAPs ranges from less than 3% in human hair to 30\u201340% in echidna quill.\nFunctions.\nMany mammals have fur and other hairs that serve different functions. Hair provides thermal regulation and camouflage for many animals; for others it provides signals to other animals such as warnings, mating, or other communicative displays; and for some animals hair provides defensive functions and, rarely, even offensive protection. Hair also has a sensory function, extending the sense of touch beyond the surface of the skin. Guard hairs give warnings that may trigger a recoiling reaction.\nWarmth.\nWhile humans have developed clothing and other means of keeping warm, the hair found on the head serves primarily as a source of heat insulation and cooling (when sweat evaporates from soaked hair) as well as protection from ultra-violet radiation exposure. The function of hair in other locations is debated. Hats and coats are still required while doing outdoor activities in cold weather to prevent frostbite and hypothermia, but the hair on the human body does help to keep the internal temperature regulated. When the body is too cold, the arrector pili muscles found attached to hair follicles stand up, causing the hair in these follicles to do the same. These hairs then form a heat-trapping layer above the epidermis. This process is formally called piloerection, derived from the Latin words 'pilus' ('hair') and 'erectio' ('rising up'), but is more commonly known as 'having goose bumps' in English. This is more effective in other mammals whose fur fluffs up to create air pockets between hairs that insulate the body from the cold. The opposite actions occur when the body is too warm; the arrector muscles make the hair lie flat on the skin which allows heat to leave.\nProtection.\nIn some mammals, such as hedgehogs and porcupines, the hairs have been modified into hard spines or quills. These are covered with thick plates of keratin and serve as protection against predators. Thick hair such as that of the lion's mane and grizzly bear's fur do offer some protection from physical damages such as bites and scratches.\nTouch sense.\nDisplacement and vibration of hair shafts are detected by hair follicle nerve receptors and nerve receptors within the skin. Hairs can sense movements of air as well as touch by physical objects and they provide sensory awareness of the presence of ectoparasites. Some hairs, such as eyelashes, are especially sensitive to the presence of potentially harmful matter.\nEyebrows and eyelashes.\nThe eyebrows provide moderate protection to the eyes from dirt, sweat and rain. They also play a key role in non-verbal communication by displaying emotions such as sadness, anger, surprise and excitement. In many other mammals, they contain much longer, whisker-like hairs that act as tactile sensors.\nThe eyelash grows at the edges of the eyelid and protects the eye from dirt. The eyelash is to humans, camels, horses, ostriches etc., what whiskers are to cats; they are used to sense when dirt, dust, or any other potentially harmful object is too close to the eye. The eye reflexively closes as a result of this sensation.\nEyebrows and eyelashes do not grow beyond a certain length (eyelashes are rarely more than 10\u00a0mm long). However, trichomegaly can cause the lashes to grow remarkably long and prominent (in some cases the upper lashes grow to 15\u00a0mm long).\nEvolution.\nHair has its origins in the common ancestor of mammals, the synapsids, about 300 million years ago. It is currently unknown at what stage the synapsids acquired mammalian characteristics such as body hair and mammary glands, as the fossils only rarely provide direct evidence for soft tissues. Skin impression of the belly and lower tail of a pelycosaur, possibly \"Haptodus\" shows the basal synapsid stock bore transverse rows of rectangular scutes, similar to those of a modern crocodile, so the age of acquirement of hair logically could not have been earlier than \u2248299 ma, based on the current understanding of the animal's phylogeny. An exceptionally well-preserved skull of \"Estemmenosuchus\", a therapsid from the Upper Permian, shows smooth, hairless skin with what appears to be glandular depressions, though as a semi-aquatic species it might not have been particularly useful to determine the integument of terrestrial species. The oldest undisputed known fossils showing unambiguous imprints of hair are the Callovian (late middle Jurassic) \"Castorocauda\" and several contemporary haramiyidans, both near-mammal cynodonts, giving the age as no later than \u2248220 ma based on the modern phylogenetic understanding of these clades. More recently, studies on terminal Permian Russian coprolites may suggest that non-mammalian synapsids from that era had fur. If this is the case, these are the oldest hair remnants known, showcasing that fur occurred as far back as the latest Paleozoic.\nSome modern mammals have a special gland in front of each orbit used to preen the fur, called the harderian gland. Imprints of this structure are found in the skull of the small early mammals like \"Morganucodon\", but not in their cynodont ancestors like \"Thrinaxodon\".\nThe hairs of the fur in modern animals are all connected to nerves, and so the fur also serves as a transmitter for sensory input. Fur could have evolved from sensory hair (whiskers). The signals from this sensory apparatus is interpreted in the neocortex, a section of the brain that expanded markedly in animals like \"Morganucodon\" and \"Hadrocodium\". The more advanced therapsids could have had a combination of naked skin, whiskers, and scutes. A full pelage likely did not evolve until the therapsid-mammal transition. The more advanced, smaller therapsids could have had a combination of hair and scutes, a combination still found in some modern mammals, such as rodents and the opossum.\nThe high interspecific variability of the size, color, and microstructure of hair often enables the identification of species based on single hair filaments.\nIn varying degrees most mammals have some skin areas without natural hair. On the human body, glabrous skin is found on the ventral portion of the fingers, palms, soles of feet and lips, which are all parts of the body most closely associated with interacting with the world around us, as are the labia minora and glans penis. There are four main types of mechanoreceptors in the glabrous skin of humans: Pacinian corpuscles, Meissner's corpuscles, Merkel's discs, and Ruffini corpuscles.\nThe naked mole-rat (\"Heterocephalus glaber\") has evolved skin lacking in general, pelagic hair covering, yet has retained long, very sparsely scattered tactile hairs over its body. Glabrousness is a trait that may be associated with neoteny.\nEvolutionary variation.\nPrimates are relatively hairless compared to other mammals, and Hominini such as chimpanzees, have less dense hair than would be expected given their body size for a primate. Evolutionary biologists suggest that the genus \"Homo\" arose in East Africa approximately 2 million years ago. Part of this evolution was the development of endurance running and venturing out during the hot times of the day that required efficient thermoregulation through perspiration. The loss of heat through heat of evaporation by means of sweat glands is aided by air currents next to the skin surface, which are facilitated by the loss of body hair.\nAnother factor in human evolution that also occurred in the prehistoric past was a preferential selection for neoteny, particularly in females. The idea that adult humans exhibit certain neotenous (juvenile) features, not evinced in the other great apes, is about a century old. Louis Bolk made a long list of such traits, and Stephen Jay Gould published a short list in \"Ontogeny and Phylogeny\". In addition, paedomorphic characteristics in women are often acknowledged as desirable by men in developed countries. For instance, vellus hair is a juvenile characteristic. However, while men develop longer, coarser, thicker, and darker terminal hair through sexual differentiation, women do not, leaving their vellus hair visible.\nTexture.\nCurly hair.\nJablonski asserts head hair was evolutionarily advantageous for pre-humans to retain because it protected the scalp as they walked upright in the intense African (equatorial) UV light. While some might argue that, by this logic, humans should also express hairy shoulders because these body parts would putatively be exposed to similar conditions, the protection of the head, the seat of the brain that enabled humanity to become one of the most successful species on the planet (and which also is very vulnerable at birth) was arguably a more urgent issue (axillary hair in the underarms and groin were also retained as signs of sexual maturity). Sometime during the gradual process by which \"Homo erectus\" began a transition from furry skin to the naked skin expressed by \"Homo sapiens\", hair texture putatively gradually changed from straight hair (the condition of most mammals, including humanity's closest cousins\u2014chimpanzees) to Afro-textured hair or 'kinky' (i.e. tightly coiled). This argument assumes that curly hair better impedes the passage of UV light into the body relative to straight hair (thus curly or coiled hair would be particularly advantageous for light-skinned hominids living at the equator).\nIt is substantiated by Iyengar's findings (1998) that UV light can enter into straight human hair roots (and thus into the body through the skin) via the hair shaft. Specifically, the results of that study suggest that this phenomenon resembles the passage of light through fiber optic tubes (which do not function as effectively when kinked or sharply curved or coiled). In this sense, when hominids (i.e. \"Homo erectus\") were gradually losing their straight body hair and thereby exposing the initially pale skin underneath their fur to the sun, straight hair would have been an adaptive liability. By inverse logic, later, as humans traveled farther from Africa and/or the equator, straight hair may have (initially) evolved to aid the entry of UV light into the body during the transition from dark, UV-protected skin to paler skin.\nJablonski's assertions suggest that the adjective \"woolly\" in reference to Afro-hair is a misnomer in connoting the high heat insulation derivable from the true wool of sheep. Instead, the relatively sparse density of Afro-hair, combined with its springy coils actually results in an airy, almost sponge-like structure that in turn, Jablonski argues, more likely facilitates an increase in the circulation of cool air onto the scalp. Further, wet Afro-hair does not stick to the neck and scalp unless totally drenched and instead tends to retain its basic springy puffiness because it less easily responds to moisture and sweat than straight hair does. In this sense, the trait may enhance comfort levels in intense equatorial climates more than straight hair (which, on the other hand, tends to naturally fall over the ears and neck to a degree that provides slightly enhanced comfort levels in cold climates relative to tightly coiled hair).\nFurther, it is notable that the most pervasive expression of this hair texture can be found in sub-Saharan Africa; a region of the world that abundant genetic and paleo-anthropological evidence suggests, was the relatively recent (\u2248200,000-year-old) point of origin for modern humanity. In fact, although genetic findings (Tishkoff, 2009) suggest that sub-Saharan Africans are the most genetically diverse continental group on Earth, Afro-textured hair approaches ubiquity in this region. This points to a strong, long-term selective pressure that, in stark contrast to most other regions of the genomes of sub-Saharan groups, left little room for genetic variation at the determining loci. Such a pattern, again, does not seem to support human sexual aesthetics as being the sole or primary cause of this distribution.\nThe EDAR locus.\nA group of studies have recently shown that genetic patterns at the EDAR locus, a region of the modern human genome that contributes to hair texture variation among most individuals of East Asian descent, support the hypothesis that (East Asian) straight hair likely developed in this branch of the modern human lineage subsequent to the original expression of tightly coiled natural afro-hair. Specifically, the relevant findings indicate that the EDAR mutation coding for the predominant East Asian 'coarse' or thick, straight hair texture arose within the past \u224865,000 years, which is a time frame that covers from the earliest of the 'Out of Africa' migrations up to now.\nDisease.\nRingworm is a fungal disease that targets hairy skin.\nPremature greying of hair is another condition that results in greying before the age of 20 years in Europeans, before 25 years in Asians, and before 30 years in Africans.\nHair care.\nHair care involves the hygiene and cosmetology of hair including hair on the scalp, facial hair (beard and moustache), pubic hair and other body hair. Hair care routines differ according to an individual's culture and the physical characteristics of one's hair. Hair may be colored, trimmed, shaved, plucked, or otherwise removed with treatments such as waxing, sugaring, and threading.\nRemoval practices.\nDepilation is the removal of hair from the surface of the skin. This can be achieved through methods such as shaving. Epilation is the removal of the entire hair strand, including the part of the hair that has not yet left the follicle. A popular way to epilate hair is through waxing.\nShaving.\nShaving is accomplished with bladed instruments, such as razors. The blade is brought close to the skin and stroked over the hair in the desired area to cut the terminal hairs and leave the skin feeling smooth. Depending upon the rate of growth, one can begin to feel the hair growing back within hours of shaving. This is especially evident in men who develop a five o'clock shadow after having shaved their faces. This new growth is called stubble. Stubble typically appears to grow back thicker because the shaved hairs are blunted instead of tapered off at the end, although the hair never actually grows back thicker.\nWaxing.\nWaxing involves using a sticky wax and strip of paper or cloth to pull hair from the root. Waxing is the ideal hair removal technique to keep an area hair-free for long periods of time. It can take three to five weeks for waxed hair to begin to resurface again. Hair in areas that have been waxed consistently is known to grow back finer and thinner, especially compared to hair that has been shaved with a razor.\nLaser removal.\nLaser hair removal is a cosmetic method where a small laser beam pulses selective heat on dark target matter in the area that causes hair growth without harming the skin tissue. This process is repeated several times over the course of many months to a couple of years with hair regrowing less frequently until it finally stops; this is used as a more permanent solution to waxing or shaving. Laser removal is practiced in many clinics along with many at-home products.\nCutting and trimming.\nBecause the hair on one's head is normally longer than other types of body hair, it is cut with scissors or clippers. People with longer hair will most often use scissors to cut their hair, whereas shorter hair is maintained using a trimmer. Depending on the desired length and overall health of the hair, periods without cutting or trimming the hair can vary.\nCut hair may be used in wigs. Global imports of hair in 2010 was worth $US 1.24 billion.\nSocial role.\nHair has great social significance for human beings. It can grow on most external areas of the human body, except on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (among other areas). Hair is most noticeable on most people in a small number of areas, which are also the ones that are most commonly trimmed, plucked, or shaved. These include the face, ears, head, eyebrows, legs, and armpits, as well as the pubic region. The highly visible differences between male and female body and facial hair are a notable secondary sex characteristic.\nThe world's longest documented hair belongs to Xie Qiuping (in China), at when measured on 8 May 2004. She has been growing her hair since 1973, from the age of 13.\nIndication of status.\nHealthy hair indicates health and youth (important in evolutionary biology). Hair color and texture can be a sign of ethnic ancestry. Facial hair is a sign of puberty in men. White or gray hair is a sign of age or genetics, which may be concealed with hair dye (not easily for some), although many prefer to assume it (especially if it is a poliosis characteristic of the person since childhood). Pattern baldness in men is usually seen as a sign of aging that may be concealed with a toupee, hats, or religious and cultural adornments; however, the condition can be triggered by various hormonal factors at any age following puberty and is not uncommon in younger men. Although pattern baldness can be slowed down by drugs such as Finasteride and Minoxidil or treated with hair transplants, many men see this as unnecessary effort for the sake of vanity and instead shave their heads. In early modern China, the queue was a male hairstyle in which the hair at the front and top was shaved every 10 days in a style mimicking pattern baldness, while the remaining hair at the back was braided into a long pigtail.\nA hairstyle may be an indicator of group membership. During the English Civil War, followers of Oliver Cromwell cropped their hair close to their head in an act of defiance against the curls and ringlets of the king's men, which led to them being nicknamed Roundheads. Recent isotopic analysis of hair is helping to shed further light on sociocultural interaction, giving information on food procurement and consumption in the 19th century. Having bobbed hair was popular among the flappers in the 1920s as a sign of rebellion against traditional roles for women. Female art students known as the Cropheads also adopted the style, notably at the Slade School in London. Regional variations in hirsutism has caused practices regarding hair on the arms and legs to differ. Some religious groups may follow certain rules regarding hair as part of religious observance. The rules often differ for men and women.\nMany subcultures have hairstyles which may indicate an unofficial membership. Many hippies, metalheads, and Indian sadhus have long hair, as well many older hipsters. Many punks wear a hairstyle known as a mohawk or other spiked and dyed hairstyles, while skinheads have short-cropped or completely shaved heads. Long stylized bangs were very common for emos, scene kids, and younger hipsters in the 2000s and early 2010s.\nHeads were shaved in concentration camps, and head-shaving has been used as punishment, especially for women with long hair. The shaven head is common in military haircuts, while Western monks are known for the tonsure. By contrast, among some Indian holy men, the hair is worn extremely long.\nIn the time of Confucius (5th century BCE), the Chinese grew out their hair and often tied it, as a symbol of filial piety. Regular hairdressing in some cultures is considered a sign of wealth or status. The dreadlocks of the Rastafari movement were despised early in the movement's history. In some cultures, having one's hair cut can symbolize a liberation from one's past, usually after a trying time in one's life. Cutting the hair also may be a sign of mourning.\nTightly coiled hair in its natural state may be worn in an Afro. This hairstyle was once worn among African Americans as a symbol of racial pride. Given that the coiled texture is the natural state of some African Americans' hair, or perceived as being more \"African\", this simple style is now often seen as a sign of self-acceptance and an affirmation that the beauty norms of the (eurocentric) dominant culture are not absolute. African Americans as a whole have a variety of hair textures, as they are not an ethnically homogeneous group, but an ad-hoc of many diverse genetic backgrounds.\nThe film \"Easy Rider\" (1969) includes the assumption that the two main characters could have their long hairs forcibly shaved with a rusty razor when jailed, symbolizing the intolerance of some conservative groups toward members of the counterculture. At the conclusion of England's 1971 \"Oz\" trials, the defendants had their heads shaved by the police, causing public outcry. During the appeal trial, they appeared in the dock wearing wigs. A case where a 14-year-old student was expelled from school in Brazil in the mid-2000s, allegedly because of his fauxhawk haircut, sparked national debate and legal action resulting in compensation.\nReligious practices.\nWomen's hair may be hidden using headscarves, a common part of the \"hijab\" in Islam and a symbol of modesty required for certain religious rituals in Eastern Orthodoxy. The Russian Orthodox Church requires all married women to wear headscarves inside the church; this tradition is often extended to all women, regardless of marital status. Orthodox Judaism also commands the use of scarves and other head coverings for married women for modesty reasons. Certain Hindu sects also wear head scarves for religious reasons. Sikhs have an obligation not to cut hair (a Sikh cutting hair becomes 'apostate' which means fallen from religion) and men keep it tied in a bun on the head, which is then covered appropriately using a turban. Multiple religions, both ancient and contemporary, require or advise one to allow their hair to become dreadlocks, though people also wear them for fashion. For men, Islam, Orthodox Judaism, Orthodox Christianity, Roman Catholicism, and other religious groups have at various times recommended or required the covering of the head and sections of the hair of men, and some have dictates relating to the cutting of men's facial and head hair. Some Christian sects throughout history and up to modern times have also religiously proscribed the cutting of women's hair. For some Sunni madhabs, the donning of a kufi or topi is a form of sunnah. Brahmin males are prescribed to shave their heads, but leave a tuft of hair unshaved, worn in the form of a topknot.\nIn Arabic poetry.\nSince ancient times, women's long, thick, wavy hair has featured prominently in Arabic poetry. Pre-Islamic poets used only limited imagery to describe women's hair. For example, al-A'sha wrote a verse comparing a lover's hair to \"a garden whose grapes dangle down upon me\", but Bashshar ibn Burd considered this unusual. One comparison used by early poets, such as Imru al-Qays, was to bunches of dates. In Abbasid times, however, the imagery for hair expanded significantly - particularly for the then-fashionable \"love-locks\" (\"sudgh\") framing the temples, which came into style at the court of the caliph al-Amin. Hair curls were compared to hooks and chains, letters (such as \"fa\", \"waw\", \"lam\", and \"nun\"), scorpions, annelids, and polo sticks. An example was the poet Ibn al-Mu'tazz, who compared a lock of hair and a birthmark to a polo stick driving a ball.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14314", "revid": "41219559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14314", "title": "Hawker Siddeley Harrier", "text": "British ground attack aircraft\nThe Hawker Siddeley Harrier is a British jet-powered attack aircraft designed and produced by the British aerospace company Hawker Siddeley. It was the first operational ground attack and reconnaissance aircraft with vertical/short takeoff and landing (V/STOL) capabilities and the only truly successful V/STOL design of its era.\nIt was the first of the Harrier series of aircraft, being developed directly from the Hawker Siddeley Kestrel prototype aircraft following the cancellation of a more advanced supersonic aircraft, the Hawker Siddeley P.1154. In the mid 1960s, the \"Harrier GR.1\" and \"GR.3\" variants were ordered by the British government for the Royal Air Force (RAF). The Harrier GR.1 made its first flight on 28 December 1967, and entered RAF service in April 1969. During the 1970s, the United States opted to procure the aircraft as the \"AV-8A\"; it was operated by the US Marine Corps (USMC).\nIntroduced to service amid the Cold War, the RAF positioned the bulk of their Harriers across West Germany to defend against a potential invasion of Western Europe by the Warsaw Pact forces; the unique abilities of the Harrier allowed the RAF to disperse their forces away from vulnerable airbases. The USMC used their Harriers primarily for close air support, operating from amphibious assault ships, and, if needed, forward operating bases. Harrier squadrons saw several deployments overseas. Its ability to operate with minimal ground facilities and very short runways allowed it to be used at locations unavailable to other fixed-wing aircraft. The Harrier received criticism for having a high accident rate and for a time-consuming maintenance process.\nIn the 1970s, the British Aerospace Sea Harrier was developed from the Harrier for use by the Royal Navy (RN) on s. Both the Sea Harrier and the Harrier fought in the 1982 Falklands War, in which the aircraft proved to be crucial and versatile. The RN Sea Harriers provided fixed-wing air defence while the RAF Harriers focused on ground-attack missions in support of the advancing British land force. The Harrier was also extensively redesigned as the AV-8B Harrier II and British Aerospace Harrier II by the team of McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace. During the late 1980s and 1990s, the first-generation aircraft were gradually replaced by the newer Harrier IIs.\nDevelopment.\nOrigins.\nThe Harrier's design was derived from the Hawker P.1127. Prior to developing the P.1127, Hawker Aircraft had been working on a replacement for the Hawker Hunter, the Hawker P.1121. The P.1121 was cancelled after the release of the British Government's 1957 Defence White Paper, which advocated a policy shift away from manned aircraft and towards missiles. This policy resulted in the termination of the majority of aircraft development projects then underway for the British military. Hawker sought to quickly move on to a new project and became interested in Vertical Take Off/Landing (VTOL) aircraft, which did not need runways. According to Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick Hine this interest may have been stimulated by the presence of Air Staff Requirement 345, which sought a V/STOL ground attack fighter for the Royal Air Force.\nDesign work on the P.1127 was formally started in 1957 by Sir Sydney Camm, Ralph Hooper of Hawker Aircraft, and Stanley Hooker of the Bristol Engine Company. The close cooperation between Hawker, the airframe company, and Bristol, the engine company, was viewed by project engineer Gordon Lewis as one of the key factors that allowed the development of the Harrier to continue in spite of technical obstacles and political setbacks. Rather than using rotors or a direct jet thrust, the P.1127 had an innovative vectored thrust turbofan engine, the Pegasus. The Pegasus I was rated at of thrust and first ran in September 1959. A contract for two development prototypes was signed in June 1960 and the first flight followed in October 1960. Of the six prototypes built, three crashed, including one during an air display at the 1963 Paris Air Show.\nTripartite evaluation.\nIn 1961, the United Kingdom, the United States and West Germany jointly agreed to purchase nine aircraft developed from the P.1127, for the evaluation of the performance and potential of V/STOL aircraft. These aircraft were built by Hawker Siddeley and were designated \"Kestrel FGA.1\" by the UK. The Kestrel was strictly an evaluation aircraft and to save money the Pegasus 5 engine was not fully developed as intended, only having of thrust instead of the projected . The Tripartite Evaluation Squadron numbered ten pilots; four each from the UK and US and two from West Germany. The Kestrel's first flight took place on 7 March 1964.\nA total of 960 sorties had been made during the trials, including 1,366 takeoffs and landings, by the end of evaluations in November 1965. One aircraft was destroyed in an accident and six others were transferred to the United States, assigned the US designation \"XV-6A Kestrel\", and underwent further testing. The two remaining British-based Kestrels were assigned to further trials and experimentation at RAE Bedford with one being modified to use the uprated Pegasus 6 engine.\nP.1154.\nAt the time of the development of the P.1127 Hawker and Bristol had also undertaken considerable development work on a supersonic version, the Hawker Siddeley P.1154, to meet a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) requirement issued for such an aircraft. The design used a single Bristol Siddeley BS100 engine with four swivelling nozzles, in a fashion similar to the P.1127, and required the use of plenum chamber burning (PCB) to achieve supersonic speeds. The P.1154 won the competition to meet the requirement against strong competition from other aircraft manufacturers such as Dassault Aviation's Mirage IIIV. The French government did not accept the decision and withdrew; the NATO requirement was cancelled shortly after in 1965.\nThe Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy planned to develop and introduce the supersonic P.1154 independently of the cancelled NATO requirement. This ambition was complicated by the conflicting requirements between the two services\u2014while the RAF wanted a low-level supersonic strike aircraft, the Navy sought a twin-engine air defence fighter. Following the election of the Labour Government of 1964 the P.1154 was cancelled, as the Royal Navy had already begun procurement of the McDonnell Douglas Phantom II and the RAF placed a greater importance on the BAC TSR-2's ongoing development. Work continued on elements of the project, such as a supersonic PCB-equipped Pegasus engine, with the intention of developing a future Harrier variant for the decades following cancellation.\nProduction.\nFollowing the collapse of the P.1154's development the RAF began considering a simple upgrade of the existing subsonic Kestrel and issued Requirement ASR 384 for a V/STOL ground attack jet. Hawker Siddeley received an order for six pre-production aircraft in 1965, designated \"P.1127 (RAF)\", of which the first made its maiden flight on 31 August 1966. An order for 60 production aircraft, designated as Harrier GR.1, was received in early 1967. The aircraft was named after the Harrier, a bird of prey.\nThe Harrier GR.1 made its first flight on 28 December 1967, and it officially entered service with the RAF on 1 April 1969. The aircraft was built in two factories\u2014one in Kingston upon Thames, southwest London, and the other at Dunsfold Aerodrome, Surrey\u2014and underwent initial testing at Dunsfold. The ski-jump technique for launching Harriers from Royal Navy aircraft carriers was extensively trialled at RNAS Yeovilton from 1977. Following these tests ski-jumps were added to the flight decks of all RN carriers from 1979 onwards, in preparation for the new variant for the navy, the Sea Harrier.\nIn the late 1960s the British and American governments held talks on producing Harriers in the United States. Hawker Siddeley and McDonnell Douglas formed a partnership in 1969 in preparation for American production, but Congressman Mendel Rivers and the House Appropriations Committee held that it would be cheaper to produce the AV-8A on the pre-existing production lines in the United Kingdom\u2014hence all AV-8A Harriers were purchased from Hawker Siddeley. Improved Harrier versions with better sensors and more powerful engines were developed in later years. The USMC received 102 AV-8A and 8 TAV-8A Harriers between 1971 and 1976.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe Harrier was typically used as a ground attack aircraft, though its manoeuvrability also allows it to effectively engage other aircraft at short ranges. The Harrier is powered by a single Pegasus turbofan engine mounted in the fuselage. The engine is fitted with two air intakes and four vectoring nozzles for directing the thrust generated: two for the bypass flow and two for the jet exhaust. Several small reaction nozzles are also fitted, in the nose, tail and wingtips, for the purpose of balancing during vertical flight. It has two landing gear units on the fuselage and two outrigger landing gear units, one near each wing tip. The Harrier is equipped with four wing and three fuselage pylons for carrying a variety of weapons and external fuel tanks.\nThe Kestrel and the Harrier were similar in appearance, though approximately 90 per cent of the Kestrel's airframe was redesigned for the Harrier. The Harrier was powered by the more powerful Pegasus 6 engine; new air intakes with auxiliary blow-in doors were added to produce the required airflow at low speed. Its wing was modified to increase area and the landing gear was strengthened. Several hardpoints were installed, two under each wing and one underneath the fuselage; two ADEN cannon gun pods could also be fitted to the underside of the fuselage. The Harrier was outfitted with updated avionics to replace the basic systems used in the Kestrel; a navigational-attack system incorporating an inertial navigation system, originally for the P.1154, was installed and information was presented to the pilot by a head-up display and a moving map display.\nThe Harrier's VTOL abilities allowed it to be deployed from very small prepared clearings or helipads as well as normal airfields. It was believed that, in a high-intensity conflict, air bases would be vulnerable and likely to be quickly knocked out. The capability to scatter Harrier squadrons to dozens of small \"alert pads\" on the front lines was highly prized by military strategists and the USMC procured the aircraft because of this ability. Hawker Siddeley noted that STOL operation provided additional benefits over VTOL operation, saving fuel and allowing the aircraft to carry more ordnance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I still don't believe the Harrier. Think of the millions that have been spent on VTO in America and Russia, and quite a bit in Europe, and yet the only vertical take-off aircraft which you can call a success is the Harrier. When I saw the Harrier hovering and flying backwards under control, I reckoned I'd seen everything. And it's not difficult to fly.\u2014\u200a\nThe Harrier, while serving for many decades in various forms, has been criticised on multiple issues; in particular a high accident rate, though Nordeen notes that several conventional single-engine strike aircraft like the Douglas A-4 Skyhawk and LTV A-7 Corsair II had worse accident rates. The \"Los Angeles Times\" reported in 2003 that the Harrier \"...has amassed the highest major accident rate of any military plane now in service. Forty-five Marines have died in 148 noncombat accidents\". Colonel Lee Buland of the USMC declared the maintenance of a Harrier to be a \"challenge\"; the need to remove the wings before performing most work upon the engine, including engine replacements, meant the Harrier required considerable man-hours in maintenance, more than most aircraft. Buland noted however that the maintenance difficulties were unavoidable in order to create a V/STOL aircraft.\nEngine.\nThe Pegasus turbofan jet engine, developed in tandem with the P.1127 then the Harrier, was designed specifically for V/STOL manoeuvring. Bristol Siddeley developed it from their earlier conventional Orpheus turbofan engine as the core with Olympus compressor blades for the fan. The engine's thrust is directed through the four rotatable nozzles. The engine is equipped for water injection to increase thrust and takeoff performance in hot and high altitude conditions; in normal V/STOL operations the system would be used in landing vertically with a heavy weapons load. The water injection function had originally been added following the input of US Air Force Colonel Bill Chapman, who worked for the Mutual Weapons Development Team. Water injection was necessary in order to generate maximum thrust, if only for a limited time, and was typically used during landing, especially in high ambient temperatures.\nThe aircraft was initially powered by the Pegasus 6 engine which was replaced by the more powerful Pegasus 11 during the Harrier GR.1 to GR.3 upgrade process. The primary focus throughout the engine's development was on achieving high performance with as little weight as possible, tempered by the amount of funding that was available. Following the Harrier's entry to service the focus switched to improving reliability and extending engine life; a formal joint US\u2013UK Pegasus Support Program operated for many years and spent a \u00a33-million annual budget to develop engine improvements. Several variants have been released; the latest is the Pegasus 11\u201361 (Mk 107), which provides of thrust, more than any previous engine.\nControls and handling.\nThe aircraft is capable of both forward flight where it behaves in the manner of a typical fixed-wing aircraft above its stall speed, as well as VTOL and STOL manoeuvres where the traditional lift and control surfaces are useless, requiring skills and technical knowledge usually associated with helicopters. Most services demand great aptitude and extensive training for Harrier pilots, as well as experience in piloting both types of aircraft. Trainee pilots are often drawn from highly experienced and skilled helicopter pilots.\nThe Harrier has two control elements not found in conventional fixed-wing aircraft: the thrust vector and the reaction control system. The thrust vector refers to the slant of the four engine nozzles and can be set between 0\u00b0 (horizontal, pointing directly backwards), for level flight, and 98\u00b0 (pointing down and slightly forwards). The 90\u00b0 vector is normally deployed for VTOL manoeuvring. The reaction control is similar to the cyclic control of a helicopter, and is achieved by manipulating a control stick forward for horizontal flight, or back for short or vertical takeoffs and landings. Senior RAF officers considered the ability to control the aircraft's vertical flight with just one lever a considerable design success.\nThe wind direction is a critical factor in VTOL manoeuvres, and aircraft face the wind for take-off. For vertical takeoff, the thrust vector is set to 90\u00b0 and the throttle is brought up to maximum, at which point the aircraft leaves the ground. The throttle is trimmed until a hover state is achieved at the desired altitude. The short-takeoff procedure involves proceeding with normal takeoff and then applying a thrust vector (less than 90\u00b0) at a runway speed below normal takeoff speed, usually around . For lower takeoff speeds the thrust vector is greater. The reaction control system involves the thrusters at key points in the aircraft's fuselage, nose and wingtips. Thrust from the engine can be temporarily syphoned to control and correct the aircraft's pitch and roll during vertical flight.\nRotating the vectored thrust nozzles into a forward-facing position during normal flight is called vectoring in forward flight, or \"VIFFing\". This is a dog-fighting tactic, allowing for more sudden braking and higher turn rates. Braking could cause a chasing aircraft to overshoot and present itself as a target for the Harrier it was chasing, a combat technique formally developed by the USMC for the Harrier in the early 1970s.\nBecause of the added learning curve and complex capabilities, the Harrier has been described by pilots as \"unforgiving\", with three of the first six prototypes crashing.\nDifferences between versions.\nThe two largest users of the Harrier were the Royal Air Force and the United States Marine Corps (USMC). The exported model of the aircraft operated by the USMC was designated the AV-8A Harrier, which was broadly similar to the RAF's Harrier GR.1. Changes included the removal of all magnesium components, which corroded quickly at sea, and the integration of American radios and identification friend or foe (IFF) systems; furthermore the outer pylons, unlike the RAF aircraft, were designed from delivery to be equipped with self-defence AIM-9 Sidewinder heat-seeking air-to-air missiles. Most of the AV-8As had been delivered with the more powerful Pegasus engine used in the GR.3 instead of the one used in the earlier GR.1. Two-seat Harriers were operated for training purposes; the body was stretched and a taller tail fin added. The RAF trained in the T.2 and T.4 versions, while T.4N and T.8 were training versions the Navy's Sea Harrier, with appropriate fittings. The US and Spain flew the TAV-8A and TAV-8S, respectively.\nAll RAF GR.1s and the initial AV-8As were fitted with the Ferranti FE541 inertial navigation/attack suite, but these were replaced in the USMC Harriers by a simpler Interface/Weapon Aiming Computer to aid quick turnaround between missions. The Martin-Baker ejection seats were also replaced by the Stencel SEU-3A in the American aircraft. The RAF had their GR.1 aircraft upgraded to the GR.3 standard, which featured improved sensors, a nose-mounted laser tracker, the integration of electronic countermeasure (ECM) systems and a further upgraded Pegasus Mk 103. The USMC upgraded their AV-8As to the AV-8C configuration; this programme involved the installation of ECM equipment and adding a new inertial navigation system to the aircraft's avionics. Substantial changes were the Lift Improvement Devices, to increase VTOL performance; at the same time several airframe components were restored or replaced to extend the life of the aircraft. Spain's Harriers, designated AV-8S or VA.1 Matador for the single-seater and TAV-8S or VAE.1 for the two-seater, were almost identical to USMC Harriers differing only in the radios fitted.\nThe Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm (FAA) operated a substantially modified variant of the Harrier, the British Aerospace Sea Harrier. The Sea Harrier was intended for multiple naval roles and was equipped with radar and Sidewinder missiles for air combat duties as part of fleet air defence. The Sea Harrier was also fitted with navigational aids for carrier landings, modifications to reduce corrosion by seawater and a raised bubble-canopy covered cockpit for better visibility. The aircraft were later equipped to use AIM-120 AMRAAM beyond-visual-range anti-aircraft missiles and the more advanced Blue Vixen radar for longer range air-to-air combat, as well as Sea Eagle missiles for conducting anti-ship missions.\nThe McDonnell Douglas AV-8B Harrier II is the latest Harrier variant, a second-generation series to replace the first generation of Harrier jets already in service; all the above variants of the Harrier have mainly been retired with the Harrier II taking their place in the RAF, USMC and FAA. In the 1970s the United Kingdom considered two options for replacing their existing Harriers: joining McDonnell Douglas (MDC) in developing the BAE Harrier II, or the independent development of a \"Big Wing\" Harrier. This proposal would have increased the wing area from , allowing for significant increases in weapons load and internal fuel reserves. The option of cooperation with MDC was chosen in 1982 over the more risky isolated approach. The original Harrier served as the basis for the British Aerospace Sea Harrier as it was required to fill the fighter role.\nOperational history.\nRoyal Air Force.\nThe first RAF squadron to be equipped with the Harrier GR.1, No. 1 Squadron, started to convert to the aircraft at RAF Wittering in April 1969. An early demonstration of the Harrier's capabilities was the participation of two aircraft in the \"Daily Mail\" Transatlantic Air Race in May 1969, flying between St Pancras railway station, London and central Manhattan with the use of aerial refuelling. The overall journey between the Post Office Tower and Empire State Building took 6 hours 11 minutes; the Harrier had a flight time of 5 hours 57 minutes. Two Harrier squadrons were established in 1970 at the RAF's air base in Wildenrath to be part of its air force in Germany; another squadron was formed there two years later. In 1977, these three squadrons were moved forward to the air base at G\u00fctersloh, closer to the prospective front line in the event of an outbreak of a European war. One of the squadrons was disbanded and its aircraft distributed between the other two.\nIn RAF service, the Harrier was used in close air support (CAS), reconnaissance, and other ground-attack roles. The flexibility of the Harrier led to a long-term heavy deployment in West Germany as a conventional deterrent and potential strike weapon against Soviet aggression; from camouflaged rough bases the Harrier was expected to launch attacks on advancing armour columns from East Germany. Harriers were also deployed to bases in Norway and Belize, a former British colony. No. 1 Squadron was specifically earmarked for Norwegian operations in the event of war, operating as part of Allied Forces Northern Europe. The Harrier's capabilities were necessary in the Belize deployment, as it was the only RAF combat aircraft capable of safely operating from the airport's short runway; British forces had been stationed in Belize for several years due to tensions over a Guatemalan claim to Belizean territory; the forces were withdrawn in 1993, two years after Guatemala recognized the independence of Belize.\nFalklands War.\nIn the Falklands War () in 1982, 10 Harrier GR.3s of No. 1 Squadron operated from the aircraft carrier . As the RAF Harrier GR.3 had not been designed for naval service, the 10 aircraft had to be rapidly modified prior to the departure of the task force. Special sealants against corrosion were applied and a new deck-based inertial guidance aid was devised to allow the RAF Harrier to land on a carrier as easily as the Sea Harrier. Transponders to guide aircraft back to the carriers during night-time operations were also installed, along with flares and chaff dispensers.\nDue to limited space aboard the aircraft carriers, two requisitioned merchant container ships, and , were modified with temporary flight decks to transport Harrier aircraft and helicopters to the South Atlantic.\nHarrier GR.3s were primarily employed in providing close air support for ground forces on the Falklands, with a particular emphasis on suppressing Argentine artillery. Sea Harriers were primarily tasked with conducting combat air patrols in response to the threat posed by Argentine aircraft. Both Sea Harriers and Harrier GR.3s were employed in ground-attack operations against the airfield and runway at Stanley.\nHad additional Sea Harriers been lost, Harrier GR.3s would have been reassigned to air patrol duties, despite not being designed for air defence operations. Consequently, their outboard weapons pylons were rapidly modified to carry air-to-air Sidewinder missiles. Between 10 and 24 May 1982, prior to the British landings in the Falklands, a detachment of three GR.3s was deployed to provide air defence for Ascension Island until the arrival of three F-4 Phantom IIs, which subsequently assumed the role.\nDuring the conflict, the principal threats to Harrier aircraft were assessed as surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), anti-aircraft artillery, and small arms fire, with four Harrier GR.3s and six Sea Harriers lost.\nMore than 2,000 Harrier sorties were flown during the conflict, an average of six sorties per aircraft per day.\nSkyhook and post Falklands deployment.\nFollowing the Falklands War, British Aerospace explored the Skyhook, a new technique to operate Harriers from smaller ships. Skyhook would have allowed the launching and landing of Harriers from smaller ships by holding the aircraft in midair by a crane; secondary cranes were to hold weapons for rapid re-arming. This would potentially have saved fuel and allowed for operations in rougher seas. The system was marketed to foreign customers, and it was speculated that Skyhook could be applied to large submarines such as the Russian , but the system attracted no interest.\nThe first generation of Harriers did not see further combat with the RAF after the Falklands War, although they continued to serve for years afterwards. As a deterrent against further Argentine invasion attempts, No. 1453 Flight RAF was deployed to the Falkland Islands from August 1983 to June 1985. However the second generation Harrier IIs saw action in Bosnia, Iraq, and Afghanistan. The first generation Hawker Siddeley airframes were replaced by the improved Harrier II, which had been developed jointly between McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace.\nUnited States Marine Corps.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"In my mind the AV-8A Harrier was like the helicopter in Korea. [It] had limited capability, but that's how the first-generation automobile, boat, or other major systems evolved... it brought us into the world of flexible basing and the Marine Corps into the concept of vertical development\"\n Major General Joe Anderson.\nThe United States Marine Corps began showing a significant interest in the aircraft around the time the first RAF Harrier squadron was established in 1969, and this motivated Hawker Siddeley to further develop the aircraft to encourage a purchase. Although there were concerns in Congress about multiple coinciding projects in the close air support role, the Marine Corps were enthusiastic about the Harrier and managed to overcome efforts to obstruct its procurement.\nThe Marine Corps accepted its first AV-8A on 6 January 1971, at Dunsfold Aerodrome, England and began testing it at Naval Air Station Patuxent River on 26 January. The AV-8A entered service with the Marine Corps in 1971, replacing other aircraft in the Marines' attack squadrons. The service became interested in performing ship-borne operations with the Harrier. Admiral Elmo Zumwalt promoted the concept of a Sea Control Ship, a 15,000-ton light carrier equipped with Harriers and helicopters, to supplement the larger aircraft carriers of the US Navy. An amphibious assault ship, , was converted into the \"Interim Sea Control Ship\" and operated as such between 1971 and 1973 with the purpose of studying the limits and possible obstacles for operating such a vessel. Since then the Sea Control Ship concept has been subject to periodic re-examinations and studies, often in the light of budget cuts and questions over the use of supercarriers.\nOther exercises were performed to demonstrate the AV-8A's suitability for operating from various amphibious assault ships and aircraft carriers, including a deployment of 14 Harriers aboard for six months in 1976. The tests showed, amongst other things, that the Harrier was capable of performing in weather where conventional carrier aircraft could not. In support of naval operations, the USMC devised and studied several methods to further integrate the Harrier. One result was \"Arapaho\", a stand-by system to rapidly convert civilian cargo ships into seagoing platforms for operating and maintaining a handful of Harriers, to be used to augment the number of available ships to deploy upon.\nWhen the reactivation of the s was under consideration, a radical design for a battleship-carrier hybrid emerged that would have replaced the ship's rear turret with a flight deck, complete with a hangar and two ski jumps, for operating several Harriers. However, the USMC considered the need for naval gunfire support to be a greater priority than additional platforms for carrier operations, while the cost and delay associated with such elaborate conversions was significant, and the concept was dropped.\nThe Marines Corps' concept for deploying the Harriers in a land-based expeditionary role focused on aggressive speed. Harrier forward bases and light maintenance facilities were to be set up in under 24 hours on any prospective battle area. The forward bases, containing one to four aircraft, were to be located from the forward edge of battle (FEBA), while a more established permanent airbase would be located around from the FEBA. The close proximity of forward bases allowed for a far greater sortie rate and reduced fuel consumption.\nThe AV-8A's abilities in air-to-air combat were tested by the Marine Corps by conducting mock dogfights with McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom IIs; these exercises trained pilots to use the vectoring-in-forward-flight (VIFF) capability to outmanoeuvre their opponents and showed that the Harriers could act as effective air-to-air fighters at close range. The success of Harrier operations countered scepticism of V/STOL aircraft, which had been judged to be expensive failures in the past. Marine Corps officers became convinced of the military advantages of the Harrier and pursued extensive development of the aircraft.\nStarting in 1979, the USMC began upgrading their AV-8As to the AV-8C configuration\u2014the work focused mainly on extending useful service lives and improving VTOL performance. The AV-8C and the remaining AV-8A Harriers were retired by 1987. These were replaced by the Harrier II, designated as the AV-8B, which was introduced into service in 1985. The performance of the Harrier in USMC service led to calls for the United States Air Force to procure Harrier IIs in addition to the USMC's own plans, but these never resulted in Air Force orders. Since the late 1990s, the AV-8B has been slated to be replaced by the F-35B variant of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II, a more modern V/STOL jet aircraft.\nLike the next generation AV-8Bs, nevertheless, the AV-8A/C Harriers suffered many accidents, with around 40 aircraft lost and some 30 pilots killed during the 1970s and 1980s.\nOther operators.\nDue to the Harrier's unique characteristics it attracted a large amount of interest from other nations, often as attempts to make their own V/STOL jets were unsuccessful, such as in the cases of the American XV-4 Hummingbird and the German VFW VAK 191B. Operations by the USMC aboard in 1981 and by British Harriers and Sea Harriers in the Falklands War proved that the aircraft was highly effective in combat. These operations also demonstrated that \"Harrier Carriers\" provided a powerful presence at sea without the expense of big deck carriers.\nFollowing the display of Harrier operations from small carriers, the navies of Spain and later Thailand bought the Harrier for use as their main carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft. Spain's purchase of Harriers was complicated by long-standing political friction between the British and Spanish governments of the era; even though the Harriers were manufactured in the UK they were sold to Spain with the US acting as an intermediary. During tests in November 1972, the British pilot John Farley showed that the wooden deck of their aircraft carrier was able to withstand the temperature of the gases generated by the Harrier. Since 1976, the Spanish Navy operated the AV-8S Matador from their aircraft carrier \"D\u00e9dalo\"; the aircraft provided both air defence and strike capabilities for the Spanish fleet. Spain later purchased five Harriers directly from the British government mainly to replace losses.\nSpain sold seven single-seat and two twin-seat Harriers to Thailand in 1998. The Royal Thai Navy's AV-8S Matadors were delivered as part of the air wing deployed on the new light aircraft carrier . The Thai Navy had from the start significant logistical problems keeping the Harriers operational due to a shortage of funds for spare parts and equipment, leaving only a few Harriers serviceable at a time. In 1999, two years after being delivered, only one airframe was in airworthy condition. Around 2003, Thailand considered acquiring former Royal Navy Sea Harriers, which were more suitable for maritime operations and better equipped for air defence, to replace their AV-8S Harriers; this investigation did not progress to a purchase. The last first-generation Harriers were retired by Thailand in 2006.\nPotential operators.\nSome countries almost purchased Harriers. British Aerospace held talks with Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, Switzerland and Japan.\nArgentina.\nWhen the Argentinian Navy looked for newer fighters in 1968 the US government only offered old A-4A planes instead of the A-4Fs Argentina wanted. Argentina contacted the British government in 1969 and expressed interest in buying from six to twelve Harrier GR.1s. In 1969 the Argentinian Navy received its second carrier, ARA \"Veinticinco de Mayo\", from the Netherlands. On her voyage home, Hawker Siddeley demonstrated a RAF Harrier GR.Mk.1 (XV757) but Argentina opted for the A-4Q Skyhawk instead. There were several problems to supply Argentina with Harrier jets and engines that prevented the deal from being closed, and when the US learned of the Harrier negotiations they quickly offered a better deal to Argentina. Some years later, before the 1982 war, British officials again offered Argentina an aircraft carrier and Sea Harrier aircraft.\nAustralia.\nPlanning for a \"HMAS Melbourne\" aircraft carrier replacement began in 1981. After considering American, Italian, and Spanish designs, the Australian government accepted a British offer to sell , which would be operated with Harriers and helicopters. However, the Royal Navy withdrew the offer after the Falklands War, and the 1983 election of the Australian Labor Party led to the cancellation of plans to replace \"Melbourne\".\nChina.\nAs early as 1972 the Chinese government started negotiating a purchase of up to 200 Harrier aircraft. Due to internal political issues, China put the negotiations on hold. In 1977 Li Chiang, the Chinese Minister of Foreign Trade, visited the UK and British Aerospace organised a Harrier flying demonstration. In November 1978, the Harrier-demonstration was repeated for the Chinese Vice-Premier Wang Chen during his UK visit. The Harrier deal would have meant British Government ignored United States laws that prohibited such sales to communist countries. British Prime Minister James Callaghan noted significant hostility from the USSR over the sales bid. In spite of that, British Aerospace convinced China that the Harrier was an effective close-support fighter and was good enough to act in a defensive role. In 1979, the Anglo-Sino deal was nearly finalised before being cancelled by the Sino-Vietnamese War.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Swiss Air Force was interested in purchasing some Harriers as its doctrine was to operate in hidden and dispersed locations during the Cold War. British Aerospace held talks with Switzerland offering AV-8s to replace de Havilland Venoms. A demonstration was made by test pilot John Farley and XV742/G-VSTO in 1971.\nAircraft on display.\nBelize.\nNo. 1417 Flight RAF\nGermany.\nZD670 cockpit section \u2013 Flugplatzmuseum G\u00fctersloh at G\u00fctersloh\nSpecifications (Harrier GR.3).\n\"Data from\" Jane's All The World's Aircraft 1988\u201389General characteristics* Crew: 1* Aspect ratio: 3.175\n4.08 with ferry tips fitted* Airfoil: root: Hawker 10%; tip: Hawker 3.3%* Fuel capacity: internal\n2\u00d7 , drop-tanks for combat\n2\u00d7 , drop-tanks for ferry\nPerformance* Endurance: 1 hour 30 minutes combat air patrol from base.\n7 hours plus with one AAR* g limits: +7.8 \u22124.2* Roll rate: * Maximum glide ratio: * Time to altitude: in 2 minutes 23 seconds from a vertical take-off* Take-off run CTOL: at max. TO weight\nArmament\nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14315", "revid": "19196342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14315", "title": "Hawker Harrier", "text": "Experimental biplane torpedo bomber aircraft built by Hawker Aircraft\nThe Hawker Harrier was a British experimental biplane torpedo bomber aircraft built by Hawker Aircraft to a specification issued in the 1920s for the Royal Air Force.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1925, the British Air Ministry laid down specifications for a high altitude bomber to replace the Hawker Horsley and for a coastal torpedo bomber (Specifications 23/25 and 24/25). As these specifications were similar, the Air Ministry announced that a single competition would be held to study aircraft submitted for both specifications.\nSydney Camm of Hawker Aircraft designed the Harrier to meet the requirements of Specification 23/25, with the prototype (\"J8325\") first flying in February 1927, the first of the competitors for the two specifications to fly. The Harrier was a two-seat biplane with single-bay wings powered by a geared Bristol Jupiter VIII radial engine. It was armed with one .303\u00a0in (7.7\u00a0mm) Vickers machine gun and one .303\u00a0in (7.7\u00a0mm) Lewis gun carrying a maximum of of bombs.\nThe prototype Harrier was tested at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment (A &amp; AEE) at Martlesham Heath in November 1927, where, while it met the requirements of Specification 23/25 and had satisfactory handling, the geared engine meant that it was underpowered, and it had an inferior bombload to the Hawker Horsley, the aircraft it was meant to replace. It was therefore modified to carry a torpedo. On testing the modified aircraft, however, it was found to still be underpowered, being incapable of taking off with a torpedo, gunner and full fuel load. It was therefore not considered further, the competition ultimately being won by the Vickers Vildebeest.\nThe prototype was used by Bristol as an engine testbed, flying with the Bristol Hydra and the Bristol Orion engines.\nSpecifications (Harrier, as bomber).\n\"Data from\" Mason, The British Bomber since 1914 General characteristics* Crew: two* Aspect ratio: * Fuel capacity: * Propellers: 2-bladed Watts wooden propeller\nPerformance* Endurance: * Time to altitude: 18 min 30 s\nArmament\nSee also.\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14317", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14317", "title": "Herg\u00e9", "text": "Belgian cartoonist (1907\u20131983)\nGeorges Prosper Remi (; 22 May 1907\u00a0\u2013 3 March 1983), known by the pen name Herg\u00e9 ( ; ), from the French pronunciation of his reversed initials \"RG\", was a Belgian comic strip artist. He is best known for creating \"The Adventures of Tintin\", the series of comic albums that are considered one of the most popular European comics of the 20th century. He was also responsible for two other well-known series, \"Quick &amp; Flupke\" (1930\u20131940) and \"The Adventures of Jo, Zette and Jocko\" (1936\u20131957). His works were executed in his distinctive \"ligne claire\" drawing style.\nBorn to a lower-middle-class family in Etterbeek, Brussels, Herg\u00e9 began his career by contributing illustrations to Scouting magazines, developing his first comic series, \"The Adventures of Totor\", for \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\" in 1926. Working for the conservative Catholic newspaper \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\", he created \"The Adventures of Tintin\" in 1929 on the advice of its editor Norbert Wallez. Revolving around the actions of boy reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy, the series' early instalments\u00a0\u2013 \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\", \"Tintin in the Congo\", and \"Tintin in America\"\u00a0\u2013 were designed as conservative propaganda for children. Domestically successful, after serialisation the stories were published in book form, with Herg\u00e9 continuing the series and also developing both the \"Quick &amp; Flupke\" and \"Jo, Zette and Jocko\" series for \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\". Influenced by his friend Zhang Chongren, from 1934 Herg\u00e9 placed far greater emphasis on conducting background research for his stories, resulting in increased realism from \"The Blue Lotus\" onward. Following the German occupation of Belgium in 1940, \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" was closed, but Herg\u00e9 continued his series in \"Le Soir\", a popular newspaper controlled by the Nazi administration.\nAfter the Allied liberation of Belgium in 1944, \"Le Soir\" was shut down and its staff\u00a0\u2013 including Herg\u00e9\u00a0\u2013 accused of having been collaborators. An official investigation was launched, and although no charges were brought against Herg\u00e9, in subsequent years he repeatedly faced accusations of having been a traitor and collaborator. With Raymond Leblanc he established \"Tintin\" magazine in 1946, through which he serialised new \"Adventures of Tintin\" stories. As the magazine's artistic director, he also oversaw the publication of other successful comics series, such as Edgar P. Jacobs' \"Blake and Mortimer\". In 1950 he established Studios Herg\u00e9 as a team to aid him in his ongoing projects; prominent staff members Jacques Martin and Bob de Moor greatly contributed to subsequent volumes of \"The Adventures of Tintin\". Amid personal turmoil following the collapse of his first marriage, he produced \"Tintin in Tibet\", his personal favourite of his works. In later years he became less prolific, and unsuccessfully attempted to establish himself as an abstract artist.\nHerg\u00e9's works have been widely acclaimed for their clarity of draughtsmanship and meticulous, well-researched plots. They have been the source of a wide range of adaptations, in theatre, radio, television, cinema, and computer gaming. He remains a strong influence on the comic book medium, particularly in Europe. He is widely celebrated in Belgium: a Herg\u00e9 Museum was established in Louvain-la-Neuve in 2009.\nEarly life.\nChildhood and youth: 1907\u20131925.\nGeorges Prosper Remi was born on 22 May 1907 in his parental home in Etterbeek, a central suburb in Brussels, the capital city of Belgium. His was a lower-middle-class family. His Walloon father, Alexis Remi, worked in a confectionery factory, whilst his Flemish mother, Elisabeth Dufour, was a housewife. Married on 18 January 1905, they moved into a house at 25 rue Cranz (now 33 rue Philippe Baucq), where Georges was born, although a year later they moved to a house at 34 rue de Theux. His primary language was his father's French, but growing up in the bilingual Brussels, he also learned Dutch, developing a Marollien accent from his maternal grandmother. A younger brother, Paul, was born five years after Georges. Like most Belgians, his family belonged to the Roman Catholic Church, though they were not particularly devout. He later characterised his life in Etterbeek as dominated by a monochrome grey, considering it extremely boring. Biographer Beno\u00eet Peeters suggested that this childhood melancholy might have been exacerbated through being sexually abused by a maternal uncle, Charles Arthur Dufour.\nRemi developed a love of cinema, favouring Winsor McCay's \"Gertie the Dinosaur\" and the films of Charlie Chaplin, Harry Langdon and Buster Keaton; his later work in the comic strip medium displayed an obvious influence from them in style and content. Although not a keen reader, he enjoyed the novels of British and US authors, such as \"Huckleberry Finn\", \"Treasure Island\", \"Robinson Crusoe\" and \"The Pickwick Papers\", as well as the novels of Frenchman Alexandre Dumas. Drawing as a hobby, he sketched out scenes from daily life along the edges of his school books. Some of these illustrations were of German soldiers, because his four years of primary schooling at the Ixelles Municipal School No. 3 coincided with World War I, during which Brussels was occupied by the German army. In 1919, his secondary education began at the secular Place de Londres in Ixelles, but in 1920 he was moved to Saint-Boniface School, an institution controlled by the archbishop where the teachers were Roman Catholic priests. Remi proved a successful student, being awarded prizes for excellence. He completed his secondary education in July 1925 at the top of his class.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy childhood was extremely ordinary. It happened in a very average place, with average events and average thoughts. For me, the poet's \"green paradise\" was rather gray\u00a0... My childhood, my adolescence, Boy Scouting, military service\u00a0\u2013 all of it was gray. Neither a sad boyhood nor a happy one\u00a0\u2013 rather a lackluster one.\nHerg\u00e9\nAged 12, Remi joined the Boy Scout brigade attached to Saint-Boniface School, becoming troop leader of the Squirrel Patrol and earning the name \"Curious Fox\" (\"Renard curieux\"). With the Scouts, he travelled to summer camps in Italy, Switzerland, Austria and Spain, and in the summer of 1923 his troop hiked 200 miles across the Pyrenees. His experiences with Scouting would have a significant influence on the rest of his life, sparking his love of camping and the natural world, and providing him with a moral compass that stressed personal loyalty and keeping one's promises.\nHis Scoutmaster, Rene Weverbergh, encouraged his artistic ability, and published one of Remi's drawings in the newsletter of the Saint-Boniface Scouts, \"Jamais Assez\" (\"Never Enough\"): his first published work. When Weverbergh became involved in the publication of \"Boy-Scout\", the newsletter of the Federation of Scouts, he published more of Remi's illustrations, the first of which appeared in the fifth issue, from 1922. Remi continued publishing cartoons, drawings and woodcuts in subsequent issues of the newsletter, which was soon renamed \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\" (\"The Belgian Boy Scout\"). During this time, he experimented with different pseudonyms, using \"J\u00e9r\u00e9mie\" and \"J\u00e9r\u00e9miades\" before settling on \"Herg\u00e9\", the French pronunciation of his reversed initials (R.G.) His work was first published under this name in December 1924.\n\"Totor\" and early career: 1925\u20131928.\nAlongside his stand-alone illustrations, in July 1926 Herg\u00e9 began production of a comic strip for \"Le Boy-Scout Belge\", \"Les Aventures de Totor\" (\"The Adventures of Totor\"), which continued intermittent publication until 1929. Revolving around the adventures of a Boy Scout patrol leader, the comic initially featured written captions underneath the scenes, but Herg\u00e9 began to experiment with other forms of conveying information, including speech balloons. Illustrations were also published in \"Le Bl\u00e9 qui l\u00e8ve\" (\"The Wheat That Grows\") and other publications of the Catholic Action for the Belgian Youth (\"Action catholique de la jeunesse belge\"), and Herg\u00e9 produced a book jacket for Weverbergh's novel, \"The Soul of the Sea\". Being young and inexperienced, still learning his craft, Herg\u00e9 sought guidance from an older cartoonist, Pierre Ickx, and together they founded the short-lived \"Atelier de la Fleur de Lys\" (AFL), an organisation for Christian cartoonists.\nAfter graduating from secondary school in 1925, Herg\u00e9 enrolled in the \u00c9cole Saint-Luc art school, but finding the teaching boring, he left after one lesson. He hoped for a job as an illustrator alongside Ickx at \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" (\"The Twentieth Century\")\u00a0\u2013 a conservative \"Catholic Newspaper of Doctrine and Information\"\u00a0\u2013 but no positions were available. Instead he got a job in the paper's subscriptions department, starting in September 1925. Despising the boredom of this position, he enlisted for military service before he was called up, and in August 1926 was assigned to the Dailly barracks at Schaerbeek. Joining the first infantry regiment, he was also bored by his military training, but continued sketching and producing episodes of \"Totor\".\nToward the end of his military service, in August 1927, Herg\u00e9 met the editor of \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\", the Abb\u00e9 Norbert Wallez, a vocal fascist who kept a signed photograph of the Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini on his desk. Impressed by Herg\u00e9's repertoire, Wallez agreed to give him a job as a photographic reporter and cartoonist for the paper, something for which Herg\u00e9 always remained grateful, coming to view the Abb\u00e9 as a father figure. Supplemented by commissions for other publications, Herg\u00e9 illustrated a number of texts for \"The Children's Corner\" and the literary pages; the illustrations of this period show his interest in woodcuts and the early prototype of his \"ligne claire\" style.\nFounding \"Tintin\" and \"Quick &amp; Flupke\": 1929\u20131932.\nBeginning a series of newspaper supplements in late 1928, Wallez founded a supplement for children, \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" (\"The Little Twentieth\"), which subsequently appeared in \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" every Thursday. Carrying strong Catholic and fascist messages, many of its passages were explicitly anti-semitic. For this new venture, Herg\u00e9 illustrated \"L'Extraordinaire Aventure de Flup, N\u00e9nesse, Poussette et Cochonnet\" (\"The Extraordinary Adventure of Flup, N\u00e9nesse, Poussette and Cochonnet\"), a comic strip authored by one of the paper's sport columnists, which told the story of two boys, one of their little sisters, and her inflatable rubber pig. Herg\u00e9 was unsatisfied, and eager to write and draw a comic strip of his own. He was fascinated by new techniques in the medium\u00a0\u2013 such as the systematic use of speech bubbles\u00a0\u2013 found in such US comics as George McManus' \"Bringing Up Father\", George Herriman's \"Krazy Kat\" and Rudolph Dirks's \"The Katzenjammer Kids\", copies of which had been sent to him from Mexico by the paper's reporter L\u00e9on Degrelle, stationed there to report on the Cristero War.\nHerg\u00e9 developed a character named Tintin as a Belgian boy reporter who could travel the world with his fox terrier, Snowy\u00a0\u2013 \"Milou\" in the original French\u00a0\u2013 basing him in large part on his earlier character of Totor and also on his own brother, Paul. Degrelle later falsely claimed that Tintin had been based on him, while he and Herg\u00e9 fell out when Degrelle used one of his designs without permission; they settled out-of-court. Although Herg\u00e9 wanted to send his character to the United States, Wallez instead ordered him to set his adventure in the Soviet Union, acting as a work of anti-socialist propaganda for children. The result, \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\", began serialisation in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" on 10 January 1929, and ran until 8 May 1930. Popular in Francophone Belgium, Wallez organized a publicity stunt at the Gare de Nord station, following which he organized the publication of the story in book form. The popularity of the story led to an increase in sales, and so Wallez granted Herg\u00e9 two assistants, Eug\u00e8ne Van Nyverseel and Paul \"Jam\" Jamin.\nIn January 1930, Herg\u00e9 introduced \"Quick &amp; Flupke\" (\"Quick et Flupke\"), a new comic strip about two street kids from Brussels, in the pages of \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\". At Wallez's direction, in June he began serialisation of the second Tintin adventure, \"Tintin in the Congo\", designed to encourage colonial sentiment towards the Belgian Congo. Authored in a paternalistic style that depicted the Congolese as childlike idiots, in later decades it would be accused of racism; however, at the time it was un-controversial and popular, with further publicity stunts held to increase sales. For the third adventure, \"Tintin in America\", serialised from September 1931 to October 1932, Herg\u00e9 finally got to deal with a scenario of his own choice, although he used the work to push an anti-capitalist, anti-consumerist agenda in keeping with the paper's ultra-conservative ideology. Although the \"Adventures of Tintin\" had been serialised in the French Catholic \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\" (\"Brave Hearts\") since 1930, he was soon receiving syndication requests from Swiss and Portuguese newspapers too. Though wealthier than most Belgians at his age, and despite increasing success, he remained an unfazed \"conservative young man\" dedicated to his work.\nHerg\u00e9 sought work elsewhere too, creating \"The Lovable Mr. Mops\" cartoon for the Bon March\u00e9 department store, and \"The Adventures of Tim the Squirrel Out West\" for the rival L'Innovation department store.\nFirst marriage.\nAt the offices of in 1928, Herg\u00e9 met the woman who would become his first wife, Germaine Kieckens (1906\u00a0\u2013 26 October 1995). A redhead described by Pierre Assouline as \"elegant and popular\", she had obtained work as the secretary for Norbert Wallez. At the time of her birth, her parents were relatively elderly and, having lost an earlier child, they were particularly overprotective of her. Greatly admiring Wallez, whom she looked up to as a father figure, she adopted his fascist political beliefs. She was appointed editor of , a supplement for women for which Herg\u00e9 sometimes drew the cover. She also began writing articles for using the pseudonym Tantine. The first 500 copies of \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\" were numbered and signed by Herg\u00e9 using Tintin's signature, with Snowy's paw print being drawn next to it by Kieckens.\nIn 1930, Herg\u00e9 escorted her home from work almost every night, though she expressed little romantic interest in him at the time. Instead she desired an older, or more mature man, such as the Abb\u00e9 himself. Wallez however encouraged the two to enter into a relationship, and one evening at the Taverne du Palace she indicated to Herg\u00e9 that she would be interested in a relationship.\nOn 20 July 1932, Herg\u00e9 and Kieckens were married; although neither of them was entirely happy with the union, they had been encouraged to do so by Wallez, who insisted that all his single staff married and who personally carried out the wedding ceremony at the Saint-Roch Church in Laeken. Spending their honeymoon in Vianden, Luxembourg, the couple moved into an apartment in the rue Knapen, Schaerbeek.\nRising fame.\n\"Tintin in the Orient\" and \"Jo, Zette &amp; Jocko\": 1932\u20131939.\nIn November 1932 Herg\u00e9 announced that the following month he would send Tintin on an adventure to Asia. Although initially titled \"The Adventures of Tintin, Reporter, in the Orient\", it would later be renamed \"Cigars of the Pharaoh\". A mystery story, the plot began in Egypt before proceeding to Arabia and India, during which the recurring characters of Thomson and Thompson and Rastapopoulos were introduced. Through his friend Charles Lesne, Herg\u00e9 was hired to produce illustrations for the company Casterman, and in late 1933 they proposed taking over the publication of both \"The Adventures of Tintin\" and \"Quick and Flupke\" in book form, to which Herg\u00e9 agreed; the first Casterman book was the collected volume of \"Cigars\". Continuing to subsidise his comic work with commercial advertising, in January 1934 he also founded the \"Atelier Herg\u00e9\" advertising company with two partners, but it was liquidated after six months.\nAfter Wallez was removed from the paper's editorship in August 1933 following a scandal, Herg\u00e9 became despondent; in March 1934 he tried to resign, but was encouraged to stay after his monthly salary was increased from 2000 to 3000 francs and his workload was reduced, with Jamin taking responsibility for the day-to-day running of \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\".\nFrom February to August 1934 Herg\u00e9 serialised \"Popol Out West\" in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\", a story using animal characters that was a development of the earlier \"Tim the Squirrel\" comic.\nFrom August 1934 to October 1935, \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" serialised Tintin's next adventure, \"The Blue Lotus\", which was set in China and dealt with the recent Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Herg\u00e9 had been greatly influenced in the production of the work by his friend Zhang Chongren, a Catholic Chinese student studying at Brussels' Acad\u00e9mie Royale des Beaux-Arts, to whom he had been introduced in May 1934. Zhang gave him lessons in Taoist philosophy, Chinese art and Chinese calligraphy, influencing not only his artistic style, but also his general outlook on life. As a token of appreciation Herg\u00e9 added a fictional \"Chang Chong-Chen\" to \"The Blue Lotus\", a young Chinese boy who meets and befriends Tintin. For \"The Blue Lotus\", Herg\u00e9 devoted far more attention to accuracy, resulting in a largely realistic portrayal of China. As a result, \"The Blue Lotus\" has been widely hailed as \"Herg\u00e9's first masterpiece\" and a benchmark in the series' development. Casterman published it in book form, also insisting that Herg\u00e9 include colour plates in both the volume and in reprints of \"America\" and \"Cigars\". In 1936, they also began production of Tintin merchandise, something Herg\u00e9 supported, having ideas of an entire shop devoted to \"The Adventures of Tintin\", something that would come to fruition 50 years later. Nevertheless, while his serialised comics proved lucrative, the collected volumes sold less well, something Herg\u00e9 blamed on Casterman, urging them to do more to market his books.\nHerg\u00e9's next Tintin story, \"The Broken Ear\" (1935\u20131937), was the first for which the plot synopsis had been outlined from the start, being a detective story that took Tintin to South America. It introduced the character of General Alcazar, and also saw Herg\u00e9 introduce the first fictional countries into the series, San Theodoros and Nuevo Rico, two republics based largely on Bolivia and Paraguay. The violent elements within \"The Broken Ear\" upset the publishers of \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\", who asked Herg\u00e9 to create a more child-appropriate story for them. The result was \"The Adventures of Jo, Zette, and Jocko\", a series about a young brother and sister, plus their pet monkey and the parents. The series began with \"The Secret Ray\", which was serialised in \"C\u0153urs Vaillants\" and then \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\", and continued with \"The Stratoship H-22\" and finally \"The Valley of the Cobras\". Herg\u00e9 nevertheless disliked the series, commenting that the characters \"bored me terribly.\" Now writing three series simultaneously, Herg\u00e9 was working every day of the year, and felt stressed.\nThe next Tintin adventure was \"The Black Island\" (1937\u20131938), which saw the character travel to Britain to battle counterfeiters and introduced a new antagonist, the German Dr. M\u00fcller. Herg\u00e9 followed this with \"King Ottokar's Sceptre\" (1938\u20131939), in which Tintin saves the fictional Eastern European country of Syldavia from being invaded by its expansionist neighbour, Borduria; the event was an anti-fascist satire of Nazi Germany's expansion into Austria and Czechoslovakia. In May 1939, Herg\u00e9 moved to a new house in Watermael-Boitsfort, although following the German invasion of Poland, he was conscripted into the Belgian army and temporarily stationed in Herenthout. Demobbed within the month, he returned to Brussels and adopted a more explicit anti-German stance when beginning his next Tintin adventure, \"Land of Black Gold\", which was set in the Middle East and featured Dr. M\u00fcller sabotaging oil lines.\nDuring this period, Herg\u00e9 also contributed to \"L'Ouest\" (\"The West\"), a newspaper run by his friend Raymond De Becker. \"L'Ouest\" urged Belgium to remain neutral in World War II, a stance Herg\u00e9 supported, creating the \"Mr Bellum\" strip to argue this position. Herg\u00e9 was invited to visit China by Chinese Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek, who had enjoyed \"The Blue Lotus\", although due to the political situation in Europe, this was not possible. He was re-mobilized in December, and stationed in Antwerp, from where he continued to send the Tintin strip to \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\". However, he fell ill with sinusitis and boils and was declared unfit for military service in May 1940. That same day, Germany invaded Belgium. \"Le Vingti\u00e8me Si\u00e8cle\" was shut down, part way through the serialisation of \"Land of Black Gold\".\nGerman occupation and \"Le Soir\": 1939\u20131945.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is certain that Raymond De Becker sympathized with the National Socialist system, and on this point he was in agreement with Henri de Man. I admit that I believed myself that the future of the West could depend on the New Order. For many people democracy had proven deceptive, and the New Order brought fresh hope. In Catholic circles such views were widely held. Given everything that happened, it was naturally a terrible error to have believed even for an instant in the New Order.\nHerg\u00e9, 1973\nAs the Belgian Army clashed with the invading Germans, Herg\u00e9 and his wife fled by car to France along with tens of thousands of other Belgians, first staying in Paris and then heading south to Puy-de-D\u00f4me, where they remained for six weeks. On 28 May, King Leopold III of the Belgians surrendered the country to the German army to prevent further killing; a move that Herg\u00e9 supported. He followed the king's request that all of those Belgians who had fled the country return, arriving back in Brussels on 30 June. There, he found that his house had been occupied as an office for the German army's \"Propagandastaffel\", and also faced financial trouble, as he owed back taxes yet was unable to access his financial reserves. All Belgian publications were now under the control of the German occupying force, who refused permission to continue publication. Instead, Herg\u00e9 was offered employment as a cartoonist for by its editor, the Rexist Victor Matthys, but Herg\u00e9 perceived as an explicitly political publication, and thus declined the position.\nInstead, he took up a position with , Belgium's largest Francophone daily newspaper. Confiscated from its original owners, the German authorities had permitted \"Le Soir\" to be re-opened under the directorship of De Becker, although it remained firmly under Nazi control, supporting the German war effort and espousing anti-Semitism. After joining the \"Le Soir\" team on 15 October, Herg\u00e9 was involved in the creation of a children's supplement, \"Soir-Jeunesse\", aided by Jamin and Jacques Van Melkebeke. He relaunched \"The Adventures of Tintin\" with a new story, \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\", in which Tintin pursued drug smugglers in North Africa; the story was a turning point in the series for its introduction of Captain Haddock, who would become a major character in the rest of the \"Adventures\". This story, like the subsequent \"Adventures of Tintin\" published in \"Le Soir\", would reject the political themes present in earlier stories, instead remaining firmly neutral. Herg\u00e9 also included new \"Quick &amp; Flupke\" gags in the supplement, as well as illustrations for serialised stories by Edgar Allan Poe and the Brothers Grimm.\nIn May 1941, a paper shortage led to the \"Soir-Jeunesse\" being reduced to four pages, with the length of the Tintin strip being cut by two thirds. Several weeks later the supplement disappeared altogether, with \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\" being moved into \"Le Soir\" itself, where it became a daily strip. While some Belgians were upset that Herg\u00e9 was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the occupying Nazi administration, he was heavily enticed by the size of 's readership, which reached 600,000. With Van Melkebeke, Herg\u00e9 put together two Tintin plays. The first, \"Tintin in the Indies\", appeared at Brussels' Theatre des Galeries in April 1941, while the second, \"Mr Boullock's Disappearance\", was performed there in December. From October 1941 to May 1942, \"Le Soir\" serialised Herg\u00e9's next Tintin adventure, \"The Shooting Star\", followed by publication as a single volume by Casterman. In keeping with \"Le Soir\"'s editorial standpoint, \"The Shooting Star\" espoused an anti-Semitic and anti-American attitude, with the antagonist being a wealthy Jewish American businessman; it would thus prove particularly controversial in the post-war period, although Herg\u00e9 denied any malicious anti-Semitic intention.\nCasterman felt that the black-and-white volumes of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" were not selling as well as colour comic books, and thus that the series should be produced in colour. At the same time, Belgium was facing a paper-shortage, with Casterman wishing to cut down the volumes from 120-pages in length to 62. Herg\u00e9 was initially sceptical, but ultimately agreed to their demands in February 1942. For these new editions, Casterman introduced a four-colour system, although Herg\u00e9 insisted that colour should remain secondary to line, and that it would not be used for shading. To cope with this additional workload, Herg\u00e9 approached a friend whom he had met through Van Melkebeke, Edgar P. Jacobs, to aid him as a cartoonist and colourist. Jacobs could only work on the project part-time, and so in March 1942, Herg\u00e9 also employed a woman named Alice Devos to aid him. In July 1942, Herg\u00e9 then procured an agent, Bernard Thi\u00e8ry, who took 40% of his commissions; their working relationship would be strained. With their assistance, from 1942 to 1947, Herg\u00e9 adapted most of his previous \"Adventures of Tintin\" into 62-page colour versions.\nHerg\u00e9's next \"Adventure of Tintin\" would be \"The Secret of the Unicorn\", serialised in \"Le Soir\" from June 1942. He had collaborated closely with Van Melkebeke on this project, who had introduced many elements from the work of Jules Verne into the detective story, in which Tintin and Haddock searched for parchments revealing the location of hidden pirate treasure. \"The Secret of the Unicorn\" marked the first half of a story arc that was completed in \"Red Rackham's Treasure\", serialised in \"Le Soir\" from February 1943; in this story, Tintin and Haddock search for the pirate's treasure in the Caribbean, with the character of Professor Calculus being introduced to the series. Following \"Red Rackham's Treasure\", Herg\u00e9 drew illustrations for a serialised story titled \"Dupont et Dupond, d\u00e9tectives\" (\"Thomson and Thompson, Detectives\"), authored by the newspaper's crime editor, Paul Kinnet.\nIn September 1943, De Becker was removed as editor of \"Le Soir\" for stating that although the Nazis were motivated \"by undoubted good will, [they were also] extremely out of touch with reality\". Although Herg\u00e9 was close to De Becker, he decided to remain at the newspaper, which came under the editorship of Max Hodeige. In autumn 1943, Herg\u00e9 had decided that he wanted Jacobs to collaborate with him on \"The Adventures of Tintin\". Although initially hesitant, Jacobs eventually agreed, adopting the paid position in January 1944. Jacobs and Herg\u00e9 became close collaborators and greatly influenced each other, while together they developed the plot for the next \"Adventure of Tintin\", \"The Seven Crystal Balls\", which began serialisation in \"Le Soir\" in December 1943.\nPost-war controversy: 1944\u20131946.\nAs the Allied troops liberated Brussels from German occupation, \"Le Soir\" ceased publication on 2 September 1944, partway through its serialisation of \"The Seven Crystal Balls\". Herg\u00e9 was arrested on 3 September, having been named as a collaborator in a Resistance document known as the \"Gallery of Traitors\". This would be the first of four incidents in which Herg\u00e9 was arrested\u00a0\u2013 by the State Security, the Judiciary Police, the Belgian National Movement, and the Front for Independence respectively\u00a0\u2013 during the course of which he spent one night in jail. On 5 September the entire staff of \"Le Soir\" were fired and a new editorial team introduced, while on 8 September the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) issued a proclamation announcing that \"any journalist who had helped produce a newspaper during the occupation was for the time being barred from practising his profession.\" Blacklisted, Herg\u00e9 was now unemployed. Further, he was publicly lampooned as a collaborator by a newspaper closely associated with the Belgian Resistance, \"La Patrie\", which issued a satirical strip titled \"The Adventures of Tintin in the Land of the Nazis\".\nThe period witnessed widespread recriminations against accused collaborators, with military courts condemning 30,000 on minor charges and 25,000 on more serious charges; of those, 5,500 were sentenced to life imprisonment or capital punishment in Belgium. A judiciary inquiry into Herg\u00e9's case was launched by the deputy public prosecutor, Mr Vin\u00e7otte, although in his report he urged lenience, stating that \"I am inclined to close the case. I believe it would bring ridicule on the judicial system to go after an inoffensive children's book author and illustrator. On the other hand, Herg\u00e9 worked for \"Le Soir\" during the war, and his illustrations are what made people buy the newspaper.\" Although unable to work for the press, Herg\u00e9 continued to re-draw and colour the older \"Adventures of Tintin\" for publication in book form by Casterman, completing the second version of \"Tintin in the Congo\" and starting on \"King Ottokar's Sceptre\". Casterman supported Herg\u00e9 throughout his ordeal, for which he always remained grateful. Attempting to circumvent his blacklisting, with Jacobs he began producing comics under the anonymous pseudonym of \"Olav\", but upon sending them to publishers found none who would accept them. Although this period allowed him an escape from the pressure of daily production which had affected most of his working life, he also had to deal with family problems: His brother Paul returned to Brussels from a German prisoner-of-war camp, while their mother had become highly delusional and was moved to a psychiatric hospital.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[During the occupation] I worked, just like a miner, a tram driver or baker! But, while one found it normal for an engineer to operate a train, members of the press were labelled as 'traitors'.\nHerg\u00e9\nIn October 1945, Herg\u00e9 was approached by Raymond Leblanc, a former member of a conservative Resistance group, the National Royalist Movement, and his associates Andr\u00e9 Sinave and Albert Debaty. The trio were planning on launching a weekly magazine for children, and Leblanc\u00a0\u2013 who had fond childhood memories of \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\"\u00a0\u2013 thought Herg\u00e9 would be ideal for it. Herg\u00e9 agreed, and Leblanc obtained clearance papers for him, allowing him to work. Concerned about the judicial investigation into Herg\u00e9's wartime affiliations, Leblanc convinced William Ugeux, a leader of the Belgian Resistance who was now in charge of censorship and certificates of good citizenship, to look into the comic creator's file. Ugeux concluded that Herg\u00e9 had been \"a blunderer rather than a traitor\" for his work at \"Le Soir\". The decision as to whether Herg\u00e9 would stand trial belonged to the general auditor of the Military Tribunal, Walter Jean Ganshof van der Meersch. He closed the case on 22 December 1945, declaring that \"in regard to the particularly inoffensive character of the drawings published by Remi, bringing him before a war tribunal would be inappropriate and risky\".\nNow free from threat of prosecution, Herg\u00e9 continued to support his colleagues at \"Le Soir\" who were being charged as collaborators; six of them were sentenced to death, and others to lengthy prison sentences. Among those sentenced to death was Herg\u00e9's friend, Jamin, although his sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. In May 1946, Herg\u00e9 was issued a certificate of good citizenship, which became largely necessary to obtain employment in post-war Belgium. Celebrations were marred by his mother's death in April 1946; she was aged 60. Harry Thompson has described this post-war period as the \"greatest upheaval\" of Herg\u00e9's life. Herg\u00e9 later described it as \"an experience of absolute intolerance. It was horrible, horrible!\" He considered the post-war trials of alleged collaborators a great injustice inflicted upon many innocent people, and never forgave Belgian society for the way that he had been treated, although he hid this from his public persona.\nLater life.\nEstablishing \"Tintin\" magazine: 1946\u20131949.\nSinave devised the idea of naming their new magazine \"Tintin\", believing that this would attract a wide audience. The Dutch-language edition produced for release in Belgium's Flemish north was titled \"Kuifje\" after the character's Dutch-language name. Adopting the slogan of \"The Newspaper for the Young Aged 7 to 77\", the magazine also used a logo featuring the Tintin character himself. The capital for the project had been put up by those involved: as executive director, Leblanc provided 50%, while its managing director Georges Lallemand provided 40% and Herg\u00e9, its artistic director, provided 10%. Herg\u00e9 assembled a group of associates to aid him, including Van Melkebeke, Jacobs, Paul Cuvelier, and Jacques Laudy. Van Melkebeke was initially appointed editor-in-chief, although he was arrested for having worked for the collaborationist \"Le Nouveau journal\" shortly after, with his involvement in the project thus being kept secret so as to avoid further controversy. Van Melkebeke continued to provide work for the magazine under pseudonyms, although this ceased during his imprisonment from December 1947 to October 1949.\nThe first issue of \"Tintin\" magazine was published on 26 September 1946. Herg\u00e9 was assigned to produce a two-page spread each week, and began by concluding \"The Seven Crystal Balls\" before embarking on its successor story, \"Prisoners of the Sun\". Alongside Herg\u00e9's \"Adventures of Tintin\", the magazine also included Laudy's \"The Legend of the Four Aymon Brothers\" and Jacobs' \"The Secret of the Swordfish\", the first in his new \"Blake and Mortimer\" series. While the magazine was in competition with a number of rivals, most notably \"Spirou\", famous for serialising the \"Lucky Luke\" and \"Buck Danny\" comics, it proved an immediate success, with 60,000 copies being sold in three days of its release. Its publication resulted in a massive boost to Herg\u00e9's book sales too.\nIn 1947, a Belgian film adaptation of \"The Crab with the Golden Claws\" was produced, and believing that cinematic adaptations were a good way to proceed, Herg\u00e9 contacted Disney Studios in the United States; they declined his offer to adapt \"The Adventures of Tintin\" for the silver screen. In May 1947, the artistic collaboration between Herg\u00e9 and Jacobs ended after an argument. Herg\u00e9 had been jealous of the immediate success of Jacobs' \"Blake and Mortimer\" series, and had turned down Jacobs' request that he be credited as co-creator of the new \"Adventures of Tintin\". That same month, Herg\u00e9 broke from his manager, Thiery, after discovering that the latter had been siphoning off money for himself.\nMany Belgians were highly critical of the magazine due to its connections with Herg\u00e9, who was still deemed a collaborator and traitor by many; \"Le Soir\" and \"La Cit\u00e9\" publicly criticised the decision without referring to him by name while \"Le Quotidien\" and \"Le Drapeau Rouge\" specifically singled him out for denunciation. Herg\u00e9 believed that the children's author Jeanne Cappe was behind many of these accusations, and threatened her with a lawsuit. Unhappy with life in Belgium, Herg\u00e9 made plans to emigrate to Argentina, a nation that was welcoming many Europeans who had supported the defeated Axis powers and which had a thriving comic book scene. Ultimately, he changed his mind, for reasons that have remained unknown; it is possible that he was unable to secure any promise of work in the South American country.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI've just discovered ... that Tintin is no longer me, and that though he continued to live it is through a sort of artificial respiration that I must keep up constantly, and that is exhausting me more and more.\nHerg\u00e9, in a letter to his wife, 1947\nIn May, Herg\u00e9 and Germaine holidayed near to Gland on Lake Geneva, Switzerland, where they were accompanied by a friend of theirs, a young woman named Rosane. During the holiday, Herg\u00e9 and Rosane embarked on an extra-marital affair. He felt guilty, and returned to Brussels in June. Privately, he expressed the view that he had been led to commit such an act, which he viewed as immoral, through the influence of \"amoral friends\" with whom he was associating. Hoping to reignite the passion and stability of his marriage, he arranged to return to Switzerland with Germaine soon after; here they argued and embarked on a temporary separation. Remaining in Switzerland, he visited King Leopold III, who was then holidaying in Pr\u00e9gny, before briefly returning to Brussels in July. Back in Switzerland, he embarked on an affair with a married woman, although again informed Germaine before setting off to spend time in the Ardennes. In August, the couple sought to reunite by holidaying together in Brittany, but there they broke up again and Herg\u00e9 returned to his lover in Switzerland. In September, he finally returned to Brussels, but he then spent time with his close friend Marcel Dehaye in a retreat at the Abbey of Notre-Dame-de-Scourmont. That month, he revived \"Land of Black Gold\"\u00a0\u2013 the \"Adventure of Tintin\" that had been interrupted by the German invasion of 1940\u00a0\u2013 and began serialising it in \"Tintin\" magazine. However, the story was again interrupted, this time for 12 weeks as Herg\u00e9 took a further unannounced holiday to Gland, greatly annoying many of his colleagues.\nAlthough they retained respect for each other, Herg\u00e9's repeated absences had created a tense situation between himself and Leblanc. After a lengthy search, Leblanc had found a publisher willing to produce an edition of \"Tintin\" magazine in France: Georges Dargaud's Le Lombard, which began production of a French edition in October 1948. However, Herg\u00e9 was unhappy that Leblanc had appointed Andr\u00e9 Frenez as Van Melkebeke's replacement as editor-in-chief, describing Frenez as \"a cold functionary\". Herg\u00e9 was stubborn and uncompromising as the magazine's artistic director, known for strongly criticising the work of old friends like Pierre Ickx if he felt that they did not meet his exacting standards. He was particularly critical of the work of two of the newly hired staff at \"Tintin\" and \"Kuifje\", Jacques Martin and Willy Vandersteen, encouraging them to change their artistic style to better reflect his own preferences. To Leblanc, he expressed the concern that most of those working at \"Tintin\" were better illustrators than storytellers. He also opined that \"Tintin\" was not keeping up with the times and what he perceived as the increased maturity of children, encouraging the magazine to better reflect current events and scientific developments.\nStudios Herg\u00e9 and Fanny Vlamynck: 1950\u20131965.\nOn 6 April 1950, Herg\u00e9 established Studios Herg\u00e9 as a public company. The Studios were based in his Avenue Delleur house in Brussels, with Herg\u00e9 making a newly purchased country house in C\u00e9roux-Mousty his and Germaine's main residence. The Studios would provide both personal support to Herg\u00e9 and technical support for his ongoing work. The Studio initially had only three employees; the staff would increase to 15, all of whom were working on Herg\u00e9's projects. He hired Bob de Moor as his primary apprentice at the Studios in March 1951. Impressed by Jacques Martin's work on \"The Golden Sphinx\", Herg\u00e9 persuaded Martin to join the Studios in January 1954; Martin insisted on bringing with him his own two assistants, Roger Leloup and Michel Demarets. During the early 1950s, a number of those convicted for collaborating with the Nazi occupiers were freed from prison. Sympathetic to their plight, Herg\u00e9 lent money to some and aided others in getting jobs at \"Tintin\" magazine, much to Leblanc's annoyance. For instance, as well as lending him money, Herg\u00e9 used his connections to secure Raymond de Becker a job in Switzerland as a book shop sales inspector. He also hired those associated with collaboration for his Studios; his new colourist, Josette Baujot, was the wife of a recently assassinated member of the Walloon Legion, and his new secretary, Baudouin van der Branden de Reeth, had served a prison sentence for working at \"Le Nouveau Journal\" during the occupation.\nHerg\u00e9 had developed the idea of setting an \"Adventure of Tintin\" on the moon while producing \"Prisoners of the Sun\". He began serialisation of \"Destination Moon\", the first of a two part arc followed by \"Explorers on the Moon\", in \"Tintin\" magazine in March 1950. In September 1950, Herg\u00e9 broke off the story, feeling the need for a break from work, having fallen back into clinical depression. He and Germaine went on holiday to Gland before returning to Brussels in late September. Many readers sent letters to \"Tintin\" asking why \"Explorers on the Moon\" was no longer being serialised, with a rumour emerging that Herg\u00e9 had died. \"Explorers of the Moon\" would resume after an eighteen-month hiatus, returning in April 1952. Alongside his work on the new stories, Herg\u00e9 also made use of the Studios in revising more of his early works.\nIn February 1952, Herg\u00e9 was involved in a car crash in which Germaine's leg was shattered; she had to have a steel rod implanted in it, and was confined to a wheelchair for several months. Their relationship was further strained when they received news of Wallez' death in September 1952. His friendship with Van Melkebeke also broke apart in this period, in part due to advice gained from an alleged clairvoyant, Bertje Janueneau, upon whom both Herg\u00e9 and Germaine were increasingly relying for guidance. In January 1955 a young woman named Fanny Vlamynck was hired as a colourist at the Studios. Herg\u00e9 embarked on an extramarital affair with her in November 1956, with the rest of the studio staff soon finding out. Germaine grew suspicious of her husband's affections for Fanny, but was also experiencing a strong romantic attraction to her ballroom dance partner. Herg\u00e9 and Germaine went on a cruise for the former's 50th birthday in May 1957, during which they visited Casablanca, Rabat, Palermo, and Rome. They went on a second holiday to Ostend in October. Following the trip to Ostend, he revealed his affair with Fanny to Germaine. He began experiencing traumatic dreams dominated by the colour white and, seeking to explain them, he visited Franz Ricklin, a psychoanalyst who was a student of Carl Jung in Z\u00fcrich in May 1959. In February 1960, he returned to Switzerland, and upon his return to Brussels, he began renting an apartment in Uccle, away from Germaine. His relationship with Germaine had ended, although due to restrictions under Belgian law he was unable to obtain a divorce until 17 years later.\nIn September 1958, \"Tintin\" magazine moved its headquarters to a newly constructed building near the Gare du Midi. Herg\u00e9 continued to feud with Leblanc over the direction of the magazine; his constant absences had led to him being replaced as artistic director, and he demanded that he be reinstated. Leblanc relented in early 1965, although Herg\u00e9 soon departed to Sardinia for six weeks. In October 1965 Leblanc appointed the cartoonist Greg to be editor-in-chief of the magazine, believing him capable of reforming the paper to remain relevant to the youth of the day. By this point, \"Tintin\" magazine was at its commercial peak, with sales of 600,000 a week, although Herg\u00e9 had lost much of his interest in it.\nSupported by his studio, Herg\u00e9 produced \"The Calculus Affair\" in 1954\u20131956 and \"The Red Sea Sharks\" in 1956\u20131957. Herg\u00e9's book sales were higher than ever, and translations were being produced for the British, Spanish, and Scandinavian markets. He was receiving international press attention, with articles on his work appearing in \"France-Observateur\", \"The Listener\", and \"The Times Literary Supplement\". Paul Vandromme authored an uncritical book on Herg\u00e9, \"Le Monde de Tintin\" (\"The World of Tintin\"), published by \u00c9ditions Gallimard in 1959; Herg\u00e9 vetoed the inclusion of a proposed preface by Roger Nimier after finding its praise for his own work too embarrassing. Radio adaptations of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" were produced, as was an animated cartoon series produced by Belvision Studios, \"Herg\u00e9's Adventures of Tintin\". Two live-action films were also produced, \"Tintin and the Golden Fleece\" (1961) and \"Tintin and the Blue Oranges\" (1964), the former of which Herg\u00e9 had been closely involved with.\nDeveloping an interest in modern art, in the early 1960s Herg\u00e9 befriended the art dealer Marcel Stal, owner of the Carrefour gallery in Brussels. He was a particular fan of the work of Constant Permeke, Jakob Smits, Lucio Fontana, and Jean-Pierre Raynaurd, as well as the pop art movement, in particular the work of Roy Lichtenstein. He built up his own personal collection, which consisted of both modern paintings as well as African art and Chinese ceramics. In 1962, Herg\u00e9 decided he wanted to paint. He chose Louis Van Lint, one of the most respected Belgian abstract painters at the time, whose work he liked a lot, to be his private teacher. Herg\u00e9 took up painting as a hobby, producing abstract art works which were influenced by the styles of Joan Mir\u00f3 and Serge Poliakoff. He showed his work to the art historian L\u00e9o Van Puyvelde, who was the chief conservator of the Mus\u00e9es des Beaux-Arts, who believed that they showed promise, but that Herg\u00e9's real talent lay with cartooning. Herg\u00e9 abandoned painting shortly after, having produced 37 paintings in all. Spending less time on new \"Adventures of Tintin\", from June to December 1965 \"Tintin\" magazine serialised a redrawn and newly coloured version of \"The Black Island\" prepared by staff at Studios Herg\u00e9.\nFinal years: 1966\u20131983.\nIn the 1960s, Herg\u00e9 became increasingly annoyed at the success of Ren\u00e9 Goscinny and Albert Uderzo's \"Asterix\" comic book series, which various commentators had described as eclipsing \"The Adventures of Tintin\" as the foremost comic in the Franco-Belgian tradition. Hoping to imitate the success of the recent animated films \"Asterix the Gaul\" (1967) and \"Asterix and Cleopatra\" (1968), Herg\u00e9 agreed to the production of two animated Belvision films based on the \"Adventures of Tintin\". The first, \"Tintin and the Temple of the Sun\" (1969), was based on pre-existing comics, whereas the second, \"Tintin and the Lake of Sharks\" (1972) was an original story written by Greg. In 1982, the US filmmaker Steven Spielberg requested the film rights for a live-action adaptation of one of \"The Adventures of Tintin\", a prospect that excited Herg\u00e9, but the project would not come to fruition until long after his death.\nIn a wide-ranging interview with the journalist Numa Sadoul in October 1971, Herg\u00e9 opened up about many of the problems he had experienced in his personal life. Sadoul planned to publish the interview as a book, but Herg\u00e9 made many alterations to the transcript, both to improve its prose and to remove sections which cast him in a negative light. Editors at Casterman then removed even further sections, particularly those in which Herg\u00e9 expressed a negative view of Catholicism. The interview was published as \"Tintin et moi\" (\"Tintin and Me\") in 1975. Herg\u00e9 followed this by agreeing to be the subject of a documentary film produced by Henri Roane, \"Moi, Tintin\" (\"I, Tintin\"), which premiered in 1975. In January 1977 he attended an early comic book convention at Angoul\u00eame, where he was widely heralded as one of the masters of the discipline. To mark the fiftieth anniversary of \"The Adventures of Tintin\" in 1979, a celebratory event was held at Brussels' Hilton hotel, while an exhibit on \"Le Mus\u00e9e imaginaire de Tintin\" (\"The Imaginary Museum of Tintin\") was held at the Palais de Beaux-Arts.\nIn April 1971, Herg\u00e9 visited the U.S. for the first time, primarily to visit a liver specialist in Rochester, Minnesota; however, on the trip, he also visited a Sioux reservation in South Dakota, but was shocked at the conditions in which their inhabitants lived. On this visit he also spent time in Chicago, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Kansas City. In April 1972, he travelled to New York City for an international conference on the strip cartoon, and there presented Mayor John Lindsay with a cartoon of Tintin visiting the city and also met with the pop artist Andy Warhol. Several years later, in 1977, Warhol visited Europe, where he produced a pop art portrait of Herg\u00e9. In April 1973, Herg\u00e9 took up an invitation to visit Taiwan by the nation's government, in recognition of his promotion of Chinese culture in \"The Blue Lotus\". During the visit he also spent time in Thailand and Bali.\nHerg\u00e9 had long sought to regain contact with his old friend Zhang Chongren, with whom he had lost contact. He regularly asked any Chinese people that he met if they knew of Zhang, and in 1979, had some success when a staff member in a Brussels Chinese restaurant revealed that he was Zhang's godson. Herg\u00e9 was thus able to re-establish contact with his old friend. The journalist G\u00e9rard Valet organised for Zhang to visit Brussels so that he and Herg\u00e9 could be re-united. The event took place in March 1981, and was heavily publicised; Herg\u00e9, however, found the situation difficult, disliking the press attention and finding that he and Zhang had grown distant during the intervening years.\nIn June 1970, Herg\u00e9's father died, and after the funeral he holidayed near Lake Geneva. In 1974, his assistant Branden suffered a stroke and was left unable to write, with Herg\u00e9 replacing him with a young man, Alain Baran, who Herg\u00e9 biographer Pierre Assouline later termed Herg\u00e9's \"surrogate son\". In March 1977, Herg\u00e9's divorce with Germaine was finalised; although Herg\u00e9 continued to visit her and financially support her, Germaine took the divorce badly, viewing it as a further betrayal. Herg\u00e9 was then able to marry Fanny several weeks later, in a low-key ceremony on 20 May; he was 70 years old and she was 42.\nDeath.\nIn 1979, Herg\u00e9 was diagnosed with osteomyelofibrosis, necessitating a complete blood transfusion. His need for blood transfusions had increased, as he came to require them every two weeks, and then every week.\nOn 25 February 1983, Herg\u00e9 suffered cardiac arrest and was hospitalised in intensive care at Brussels' Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc. He had been scheduled to meet with Steven Spielberg, who later made \"The Adventures of Tintin\" (2011). He died at Saint-Luc on 3 March, at the age of 75. His death received front page coverage in numerous francophone newspapers, including \"Lib\u00e9ration\" and \"Le Monde\". In his will, he had left Fanny as his sole heir.\nIn November 1986, Fanny closed Studios Herg\u00e9, replacing it with the Herg\u00e9 Foundation.\nIn 1988, \"Tintin\" magazine was discontinued.\nPersonal life.\nHerg\u00e9 was a highly private person, being described by biographer Harry Thompson as \"reserved [and] unostentatious\". According to his biographer Pierre Sterckx, Herg\u00e9 appeared \"very conventional\" in public, but in reality was \"extremely erudite, with an insatiable curiosity, constantly on the watch\". He greatly enjoyed walking in the countryside, gardening, and art collecting, and he was a fan of jazz music. Although he disliked making public or press appearances, Herg\u00e9 insisted on personally responding to all fan mail received, which took up a considerable part of his time. He stated that \"not replying to children's letters would be to betray their dreams.\" Friends described him as a humorous man, known particularly for his self-deprecating jokes. Colleagues described Herg\u00e9 as egocentric, an assessment he agreed with. He was known to be authoritarian in dealing with his assistants and refused to share credit with them for their part in his work. Sterckx noted that \"on the one hand he could be distant, even frosty, but on the other he was affectionate\".\nThroughout his first marriage he had a number of affairs with other women. He had no children, having been rendered sterile by radiation treatment, but in the 1950s offered to adopt his brother Paul's two children, Denise and George, when their parents were experiencing trouble in their relationship. Paul declined the offer, with Denise and George later noting that they had no great affection for their uncle, deeming him awkward around children. Herg\u00e9 was raised as a Catholic, although he was never a devout practitioner of the religion. His adherence to Catholicism declined in later life as he developed a keen interest in Taoism, and became an agnostic. He was a fan of the \"Tao Te Ching\" and Arnaud Desjardins' \"The Path to Wisdom\", as well as Fritjof Capra's \"The Tao of Physics\" and the work of Jean-\u00c9mile Charon.\nPolitical views.\nPolitically, Herg\u00e9 was a fervent royalist, and remained so throughout his life, also believing in the unity of Belgium. In his early life, Herg\u00e9 was \"close to the traditional right-wing\" of Belgian society, with Sterckx noting that through his work he was \"plunged into rightist, even extreme right-wing circles\". According to Harry Thompson, such political ideas were not unusual in middle-class circles in Belgium of the 1920s and early 1930s, where \"patriotism, Catholicism, strict morality, discipline and naivety were so inextricably bound together in everyone's lives that right-wing politics were an almost inevitable by-product. It was a world view shared by everyone, distinguished principally by its complete ignorance of the world.\" When Herg\u00e9 took responsibility for , he followed Wallez's instruction and allowed the newspaper to contain explicitly pro-fascist and anti-semitic sentiment. Literary critic Jean-Marie Apostolid\u00e8s noted that the character of Tintin was a personification of the \"New Youth\" concept which was promoted by the European far-right. Under Wallez's guidance, the early \"Adventures of Tintin\" contained explicit political messages for its young readership. \"Tintin in the Land of the Soviets\" was a work of anti-socialist propaganda, while \"Tintin in the Congo\" was designed to encourage colonialist sentiment toward the Belgian Congo, and \"Tintin in America\" was designed as a work of anti-Americanism heavily critical of capitalism, commercialism, and industrialisation.\nIn contrast to Herg\u00e9's involvement in Belgium's right-wing, Sterckx thought the cartoonist to have been \"a liberal and independent spirit\", someone who was \"the very opposite of a conservative [or] a reactionary of the right\". Michael Farr asserted that Herg\u00e9 had \"an acute political conscience\" during his earlier days, as exemplified by his condemnation of racism in the United States evident in \"Tintin in America\". Literary critic Tom McCarthy went further, remarking that \"Tintin in America\" represented the emergence of a \"left-wing counter tendency\" in Herg\u00e9's work that rebelled against his right-wing milieu and which was particularly critical of wealthy capitalists and industrialists. This was furthered in \"The Blue Lotus\", in which Herg\u00e9 rejected his \"classically right-wing\" ideas to embrace an anti-imperialist stance, and in a contemporary \"Quick &amp; Flupke\" strip in which he lampooned the far-right leaders of Germany and Italy, Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini. Although many of his friends and colleagues did so in the mid-1930s, Herg\u00e9 did not join the far-right Rexist Party, later asserting that he \"had always had an aversion to it\" and commenting that \"to throw my heart and soul into an ideology is the opposite of who I am.\"\nAccusations of racism.\nHerg\u00e9 faced repeated accusations of racism due to his portrayal of diverse ethnic groups throughout \"The Adventures of Tintin\". According to McCarthy, in \"Tintin in the Congo\" Herg\u00e9 represented the Congolese as \"good at heart, but backwards and lazy, in need of European mastery\". Thompson argued that Herg\u00e9 had not written the book to be \"deliberately racist\" and that it reflected the average early 20th-century Belgian view of the Congolese, which was more patronising than malevolent. The book provoked no controversy at the time, coming to be perceived as racist only in the latter half of the 20th century.\nIn the following adventure, \"Tintin in America\", Herg\u00e9 depicted members of the Blackfoot tribe of Native Americans as \"gullible, even naive\", though it was nevertheless \"broadly sympathetic\" to their culture and plight, depicting their oppression at the hands of the United States Army. \"The Blue Lotus\" received both criticism for depicting the Japanese as militaristic and buck-toothed and praise for representing a less stereotypical vision of China than was the norm in Europe at the time.\nHerg\u00e9 has also been accused of utilising anti-semitic stereotypes, despite Herg\u00e9's protestations that the character of Rastapopoulos was Greek, and not Jewish.\nFrom his early years, Herg\u00e9 was openly critical of racism. He lambasted the pervasive racism of U.S. society in a prelude comment to \"Tintin in America\" published in \"Le Petit Vingti\u00e8me\" on 20 August 1931, and ridiculed racist attitudes toward the Chinese in \"The Blue Lotus\". Peeters asserted that \"Herg\u00e9 was no more racist than the next man\", an assessment shared by Farr, who after meeting Herg\u00e9 in the 1980s commented that \"you couldn't have met someone who was more open and less racist\". In contrast, Laurence Grove, president of the International \"Bande Dessin\u00e9e\" Society, opined that Herg\u00e9 adhered to prevailing societal trends in his work, noting, \"When it was fashionable to be a Nazi, he was a Nazi. When it was fashionable to be a colonial racist, that's what he was.\" Discussing Tintin's racist elements, the Vietnamese-American novelist Viet Thanh Nguyen observed that \"Herg\u00e9's work is deeply flawed, and yet riveting narratively and aesthetically. I have forgotten all the well-intentioned, moralistic children's literature that I have read, but I haven't forgotten Herg\u00e9.\"\nLegacy.\nAssouline described Herg\u00e9 as \"the personification of Belgium\".\nAwards and recognition.\nAccording to the UNESCO's Index Translationum, Herg\u00e9 is the ninth-most-often-translated French-language author, the second-most-often-translated Belgian author after Georges Simenon, and the second-most-often-translated French-language comics author behind Ren\u00e9 Goscinny. He also had an asteroid, 1652 Herg\u00e9, within the main belt, named after him in 1953.\nIn popular culture.\nA cartoon version of Herg\u00e9 makes a number of cameo appearances in the 1990s animated television series \"The Adventures of Tintin\". An animated version of Herg\u00e9 also makes a cameo appearance at the start of the 2011 motion capture film, \"The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn\", directed by Steven Spielberg and produced by Peter Jackson, where he is depicted as a street cartoonist drawing a portrait of Tintin in the style of the comic at the start of the film.\nHerg\u00e9 Museum.\nThe Mus\u00e9e Herg\u00e9 is located in the centre of Louvain-la-Neuve, a city to the south of Brussels. This location was originally chosen for the museum in 2001. The futuristic building was designed by Pritzker Prize-winning French architect Christian de Portzamparc and cost \u20ac15 million to build. On the centenary of the birth of Herg\u00e9, 22 May 2007, the museum's first stone was laid. The museum opened its doors in June 2009.\nThe idea of a museum dedicated to the work of Herg\u00e9 can be traced back to the end of the 1970s, when Herg\u00e9 was still alive. After his death in 1983, Herg\u00e9's widow, Fanny, led the efforts, undertaken at first by the Herg\u00e9 Foundation and then by the new Studios Herg\u00e9, to catalogue and choose the artwork and elements that would become part of the museum's exhibitions.\nThe Herg\u00e9 Museum contains eight permanent galleries displaying original artwork by Herg\u00e9, and telling the story of his life and career which had not previously been visible to the public. The museum also houses a temporary exhibition gallery. Although Tintin features prominently in the museum, Herg\u00e9's other comic strip characters, such as Jo, Zette and Jocko, and Quick and Flupke, as well as his work as a graphic designer, are also present.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14318", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14318", "title": "Horned God", "text": "Deity in Wicca and some forms of Neopaganism\nThe Horned God is one of the two primary deities found in Wicca and some related forms of Neopaganism. \nThe term \"Horned God\" itself predates Wicca, and is an early 20th-century syncretic term for a horned or antlered anthropomorphic god partly based on historical horned deities.\nThe Horned God represents the male part of the religion's duotheistic theological system, the consort of the female Triple goddess of the Moon or other Mother goddess. \nIn common Wiccan belief, he is associated with nature, wilderness, sexuality, hunting, and the life cycle. Whilst depictions of the deity vary, he is always shown with either horns or antlers upon his head, often depicted as being theriocephalic (having a beast's head), in this way emphasizing \"the union of the divine and the animal\", the latter of which includes humanity.\nIn traditional Wicca (British Traditional Wicca), he is generally regarded as a dualistic god of twofold aspects: bright and dark, night and day, summer and winter, the Oak King and the Holly King. In this dualistic view, his two horns symbolize, in part, his dual nature. (The use of horns to symbolize duality is also reflected in the phrase \"on the horns of a dilemma.\") The three aspects of the Goddess and the two aspects of the Horned god are sometimes mapped on to the five points of the Pentagram or Pentacle, although which points correspond to which deity aspects varies. In some other systems, he is represented as a triune god, split into three aspects that reflect those of the Triple goddess: the Youth (Warrior), the Father, and the Sage.\nThe Horned God has been explored within several psychological theories and has become a recurrent theme in fantasy literature.\nIn Wicca.\nIn traditional and mainstream Wicca, the Horned God is viewed as the divine male principality, being both equal and opposite to the Goddess. The Wiccan god himself can be represented in many forms, including as the Sun God, the Sacrificed God and the Vegetation God, although the Horned God is the most popular representation. The pioneers of the various Wiccan or Witchcraft traditions, such as Gerald Gardner, Doreen Valiente and Robert Cochrane, all claimed that their religion was a continuation of the pagan religion of the Witch-Cult following historians who had purported the Witch-Cult's existence, such as Jules Michelet and Margaret Murray.\nFor Wiccans, the Horned God is \"the personification of the life force energy in animals and the wild\" and is associated with the wilderness, virility and the hunt. Doreen Valiente writes that the Horned God also carries the souls of the dead to the underworld.\nWiccans generally, as well as some other neopagans, tend to conceive of the universe as polarized into gender opposites of male and female energies. In traditional Wicca, the Horned God and the Goddess are seen as equal and opposite in gender polarity. However, in some of the newer traditions of Wicca, and especially those influenced by feminist ideology, there is more emphasis on the Goddess, and consequently the symbolism of the Horned God is less developed than that of the Goddess.\nIn Wicca the cycle of the seasons is celebrated during eight sabbats called The Wheel of the Year. The seasonal cycle is imagined to follow the relationship between the Horned God and the Goddess. The Horned God is born in winter, impregnates the Goddess and then dies during the autumn and winter months and is then reborn by the Goddess at Yule. The different relationships throughout the year are sometimes distinguished by splitting the god into aspects, the Oak King and the Holly King. The relationships between the Goddess and the Horned God are mirrored by Wiccans in seasonal rituals. There is some variation between Wiccan groups as to which sabbat corresponds to which part of the cycle. Some Wiccans regard the Horned God as dying at Lammas, August 1; also known as Lughnasadh, which is the first harvest sabbat. Others may see him dying at Mabon, the autumn equinox, or the second harvest festival. Still other Wiccans conceive of the Horned God dying on October 31, which Wiccans call Samhain, the ritual of which is focused on death. He is then reborn on Winter Solstice, December 21.\nOther important dates for the Horned God include Imbolc when, according to Valiente, he leads a wild hunt. In Gardnerian Wicca, the Dryghten prayer recited at the end of every ritual meeting contains the lines referring to the Horned God:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to Sabina Magliocco, Gerald Gardner says (in 1959's \"The Meaning of Witchcraft\") that The Horned God is an Under-god, a mediator between an unknowable supreme deity and the people. (In Wiccan liturgy in the Book of Shadows, this conception of an unknowable supreme deity is referred to as \"Dryghtyn.\" It is not a personal god, but rather an impersonal divinity similar to the Tao of Taoism.)\nWhilst the Horned God is the most common depiction of masculine divinity in Wicca, he is not the only representation. Other examples include the Green Man and the Sun God. In traditional Wicca, however, these other representations of the Wiccan god are subsumed or amalgamated into the Horned God, as aspects or expressions of him. Sometimes this is shown by adding horns or antlers to the iconography. The Green Man, for example, may be shown with branches resembling antlers; and the Sun God may be depicted with a crown or halo of solar rays, that may resemble horns. These other conceptions of the Wiccan god should not be regarded as displacing the Horned God, but rather as elaborating on various facets of his nature. Doreen Valiente has called the Horned God \"the eldest of gods\" in both The Witches Creed and also in her Invocation To The Horned God.\nWiccans believe that The Horned God, as Lord of Death, is their \"comforter and consoler\" after death and before reincarnation; and that he rules the Underworld or Summerland where the souls of the dead reside as they await rebirth. Some, such as Joanne Pearson, believe that this is based on the Mesopotamian myth of Inanna's descent into the underworld, though this has not been confirmed.\nNames.\nDoreen Valiente, a former High Priestess of the Gardnerian tradition, claimed that Gerald Gardner's Bricket Wood coven referred to the god as Cernunnos, or Kernunno, which is a Latin word, discovered on a stone carving found in France, meaning \"the Horned One\". Valiente claimed that the coven also referred to the god as Janicot, which she theorised was of Basque origin, and Gardner also used this name in his novel \"High Magic's Aid\".\nStewart Farrar, a High Priest of the Alexandrian tradition referred to the Horned God as Karnayna, which he believed was a corruption of \"Cernunnos\". The historian Ronald Hutton suggests the term derived instead from the Arabic \"Dhul-Qarnayn\" meaning \"Horned One\", as Murray offered in her 1931 book \"The God of the Witches\", a source that likely influenced Alex Sanders. Prudence Jones has suggested that the name may instead derive from Karneios, a Spartan deity conflated with Apollo as a subordinate consort to Diana.\nIn the writings of Charles Cardell and Raymond Howard, the god was referred to as Atho. Howard had a wooden statue of Atho's head which he claimed was 2200 years old, but the statue was stolen in April 1967. Howard's son later admitted that his father had carved the statue himself.\nIn Cochrane's Craft, which was founded by Robert Cochrane, the Horned God was often referred to by a Biblical name; Tubal-cain, who, according to the Bible was the first blacksmith. In this neopagan concept, the god is also referred to as Br\u00e2n, a Welsh mythological figure, Wayland, the smith in Germanic mythology, and Herne, a horned figure from English folklore.\nIn the neopagan tradition of Stregheria, founded by Raven Grimassi and loosely inspired by the works of Charles Godfrey Leland, the Horned God goes by several names, including Dianus, Faunus, Cern, and Actaeon.\nIn the Hinduism, the Horned God is referred to Pashupati, See Pashupati seal.\nIn psychology.\nJungian analysis.\nSherry Salman considers the image of the Horned God in Jungian terms, as an archetypal protector and mediator of the outside world to the objective psyche. In her theory the male psyche's 'Horned God' frequently compensates for inadequate fathering.\nWhen first encountered, the figure is a dangerous, 'hairy chthonic wildman' possessed of kindness and intelligence. If repressed, later in life The Horned God appears as the lord of the Otherworld, or Hades. If split off entirely, he leads to violence, substance abuse and sexual perversion. When integrated he gives the male an ego \"in possession of its own destructiveness\" and for the female psyche gives an effective animus relating to both the physical body and the psyche.\nIn considering the Horned God as a symbol recurring in women's literature, Richard Sugg suggests the Horned God represents the 'natural Eros', a masculine lover subjugating the social-conformist nature of the female shadow, thus encompassing a combination of the shadow and animus. One such example is Heathcliff from Emily Bront\u00eb's \"Wuthering Heights\". Sugg goes on to note that female characters who are paired with this character usually end up socially ostracised, or worse\u2014in an inverted ending to the male hero-story.\nHumanistic psychology.\nFollowing the work of Robert Bly in the Mythopoetic men's movement, John Rowan proposes the Horned God as a \"Wild Man\" be used as a fantasy image or \"sub-personality\" helpful to men in humanistic psychology, and escaping from \"narrow societal images of masculinity\" encompassing excessive deference to women and paraphillia.\nTheories of historical origins.\nMany horned deities are known to have been worshipped in various cultures throughout history. Evidence for horned gods appear very early in the human record. The so-called Sorcerer dates from perhaps 13,000\u00a0BCE. Twenty-one red deer headdresses, made from the skulls of the red deer and likely fitted with leather laces, have been uncovered at the Mesolithic site of Star Carr. They are thought to date from roughly 9,000\u00a0BCE. Several theories have been created to establish historical roots for modern Neopagan worship of a Horned God.\nMargaret Murray.\nFollowing the writings of suffragist Matilda Joslyn Gage and others, Margaret Murray, in her 1921 book \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\", proposed the theory that the witches of the early-modern period were remnants of a pagan cult and that the Christian Church had declared the god of the witches was in fact the Devil. Without recourse to any specific representation of this deity, Murray speculates that the head coverings common in inquisition-derived descriptions of the devil \"may throw light on one of the possible origins of the cult.\"\nIn 1931 Murray published a sequel, \"The God of the Witches\", which tries to gather evidence in support of her witch-cult theory. In Chapter 1 \"The Horned God\". Murray claims that various depictions of humans with horns from European and Indian sources, ranging from the Paleolithic French cave painting of \"The Sorcerer\" to the Indic Pashupati to the modern English Dorset Ooser, are evidence for an unbroken, Europe-wide tradition of worship of a singular Horned God. Murray derived this model of a horned god cult from James Frazer and Jules Michelet.\nIn dealing with \"The Sorcerer\", the earliest evidence claimed, Murray based her observations on a drawing by Henri Breuil, which some modern scholars such as Ronald Hutton claim is inaccurate. Hutton states that modern photographs show the original cave art lacks horns, a human torso or any other significant detail on its upper half. However, others, such as celebrated prehistorian Jean Clottes, assert that Breuil's sketch is indeed accurate. Clottes stated that \"I have seen it myself perhaps 20 times over the years\".\nBreuil considered his drawing to represent a shaman or magician\u2014an interpretation which gives the image its name. Murray having seen the drawing called Breuil's image \"the first depiction of a deity\", an idea which Breuil and others later adopted.\nMurray also used an inaccurate drawing of a Mesolithic rock-painting at Cogul in northeast Spain as evidence of group religious ceremony of the cult, although the central male figure is not horned. The illustration she used of the Cogul painting leaves out a number of figures, human and animal, and the original is more likely a sequence of superimposed but unrelated illustrations, rather than a depiction of a single scene.\nDespite widespread criticism of Murray's scholarship some minor aspects of her work continued to have supporters.\nInfluences from literature.\nThe popular image of the Greek god Pan was removed from its classical context in the writings of the Romantics of the 18th century and connected with their ideals of a pastoral England. This, along with the general public's increasing lack of familiarity of Greek mythology at the time led to the figure of Pan becoming generalised as a 'horned god', and applying connotations to the character, such as benevolence that were not evident in the original Greek myths which in turn gave rise to the popular acceptance of Murray's hypothetical horned god of the witches.\nThe reception of \"Aradia\" amongst Neopagans has not been entirely positive. Clifton suggests that modern claims of revealing an Italian pagan witchcraft tradition, for example those of Leo Martello and Raven Grimassi, must be \"match[ed] against\", and compared with the claims in \"Aradia\". He further suggests that a lack of comfort with \"Aradia\" may be due to an \"insecurity\" within Neopaganism about the movement's claim to authenticity as a religious revival.\nValiente offers another explanation for the negative reaction of some neopagans; that the identification of Lucifer as the god of the witches in \"Aradia\" was \"too strong meat\" for Wiccans who were used to the gentler, romantic paganism of Gerald Gardner and were especially quick to reject any relationship between witchcraft and Satanism.\nIn 1985 Classical historian Georg Luck, in his \"Arcana Mundi: Magic and the Occult in the Greek and Roman Worlds\", theorised that the origins of the Witch-cult may have appeared in late antiquity as a faith primarily designed to worship the Horned God, stemming from the merging of Cernunnos, a horned god of the Celts, with the Greco-Roman Pan/Faunus, a combination of gods which he posits created a new deity, around which the remaining pagans, those refusing to convert to Christianity, rallied and that this deity provided the prototype for later Christian conceptions of the Devil, and his worshippers were cast by the Church as witches.\nInfluences from occultism.\nEliphas Levi's image of \"Baphomet\" serves as an example of the transformation of the Devil into a benevolent fertility deity and provided the prototype for Murray's horned god. Murray's central thesis that images of the Devil were actually of deities and that Christianity had demonised these worshippers as following Satan, is first recorded in the work of Levi in the fashionable 19th-century Occultist circles of England and France. Levi created his image of Baphomet, published in his \"Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie\" (1855), by combining symbolism from diverse traditions, including the \"Diable\" card of the 16th and 17th century Tarot of Marseille. L\u00e9vi called his image \"The Goat of Mendes\", possibly following Herodotus' account that the god of Mendes\u2014the Greek name for Djedet, Egypt\u2014was depicted with a goat's face and legs. Herodotus relates how all male goats were held in great reverence by the Mendesians, and how in his time a woman publicly copulated with a goat. E. A. Wallis Budge writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At several places in the Delta, e.g. Hermopolis, Lycopolis, and Mendes, the god Pan and a goat were worshipped; Strabo, quoting (xvii. 1, 19) Pindar, says that in these places goats had intercourse with women, and Herodotus (ii. 46) instances a case which was said to have taken place in the open day. The Mendisians, according to this last writer, paid reverence to all goats, and more to the males than to the females, and particularly to one he-goat, on the death of which public mourning is observed throughout the whole Mendesian district; they call both Pan and the goat Mendes, and both were worshipped as gods of generation and fecundity. Diodorus (https://) compares the cult of the goat of Mendes with that of Priapus, and groups the god with the Pans and the Satyrs. The goat referred to by all these writers is the famous Mendean Ram, or Ram of Mendes, the cult of which was, according to Manetho, established by Kakau, the king of the IInd dynasty.\nHistorically, the deity that was venerated at Egyptian Mendes was a ram deity Banebdjedet (literally Ba of the lord of djed, and titled \"the Lord of Mendes\"), who was the soul of Osiris. L\u00e9vi combined the images of the Tarot of Marseilles Devil card and refigured the ram \"Banebdjed\" as a he-goat, further imagined by him as \"copulator in Anep and inseminator in the district of Mendes\".\nGerald Gardner and Wicca.\nMargaret Murray's theory of the historical origins of the Horned God has been used by Wiccans to create a myth of historical origins for their religion. There is no verifiable evidence to support claims that the religion originates earlier than the mid-20th century.\nModern scholarship has disproved Margaret Murray's theory. However, various horned gods and mother goddesses were indeed worshipped in the British Isles during the ancient and early medieval periods.\nThe \"father of Wicca\", Gerald Gardner, who adopted Margaret Murray's thesis, claimed Wicca was a modern survival of an ancient pan-European pagan religion. Gardner states that he had reconstructed elements of the religion from fragments, incorporating elements from Freemasonry, the Occult, and Theosophy, which came together in the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, where Gardner met Aleister Crowley.\nGerald Gardner was initiated into the O.T.O. by Aleister Crowley and subsequently went on to found the Neopagan religion of Wicca. Various scholars on early Wiccan history, such as Ronald Hutton, Philip Heselton, and Leo Ruickbie concur that witchcraft's early rituals, as devised by Gardner, contained much from Crowley's writings such as the Gnostic Mass.\nRomano-Celtic fusion.\nGeorg Luck, repeats part of Murray's theory, stating that the Horned God may have appeared in late antiquity, stemming from the merging of Cernunnos, an antlered god of the Continental Celts, with the Greco-Roman Pan/Faunus, a combination of gods which he posits created a new deity, around which the remaining pagans, those refusing to convert to Christianity, rallied and that this deity provided the prototype for later Christian conceptions of the devil, and his worshippers were cast by the Church as witches.\nArt, fantasy and science fiction.\nIn 1908's \"The Wind in the Willows\" by Kenneth Grahame, in Chapter 7, \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\", Ratty and Mole meet a mystical horned being, powerful, fearsome and kind. Grahame's work was a significant part of the cultural milieu which stripped the Greek god Pan of his cultural identity in favor of an unnamed, generic horned deity which led to Murray's thesis of historical origins.\nOutside of works that predate the publication of Murray's thesis, horned god motifs and characters appear in fantasy literature that draws upon her work and that of her followers.\nThe 1947 short story \"Cwm Garon\" by L. T. C. Rolt (published in Rolt's collection \"Sleep No More\") describes a traveller encountering a remote Welsh village, where the inhabitants worship a demonic entity that appears as a horned god.\nIn the novel \"Childhood's End\" (1953) by Arthur C. Clarke, all humans have a collective premonition, also described as a memory of the future, of horned aliens which arrive to usher in a new phase of human evolution. The collective subconscious image of the horned aliens is what accounts for mankind's image of the devil or Satan. This theme is also explored in the \"Doctor Who\" story \"The D\u00e6mons\" in 1971, where the local superstitions around a landmark known as The Devil's Hump prove to be based on reality, as aliens from the planet D\u00e6mos have been affecting man's progress over the millennia and the Hump actually contains a spacecraft. The only D\u00e6mon to appear is a classic interpretation of a horned satyr-like being with hooves.\nIn the 1950s TV series created by Nigel Kneale, \"Quatermass and the Pit\", depictions of supernatural horned entities, with specific reference to prehistoric cave-art and shamanistic horned head-dress are revealed to be a \"race-memory\" of psychic Martian grasshoppers, manifested at the climax of the film by a fiery horned god.\nThe 1956 novel \"The Golden Strangers\" by Henry Treece features a \"Hornman\", a priest of the \"Children of the Sun\" tribe. The Hornman performs numerous human sacrifices while wearing a hood with stag's horns attached to it. According to historian Marion Gibson, Treece based the Hornman character on Murray's conception of the Horned God.\nThe Philip Jos\u00e9 Farmer novel \"Flesh\" depicts a future society where the protagonist, Peter Stagg, adopts the role of the \"Horned King\". The Horned King serves as a figure of male fertility to a goddess-worshipping female priesthood, and resembles Murray's conception of the Horned God. \nIn some of Rosemary Sutcliff's novels, including the medieval-set novel \"Knight's Fee\" (1960) and the Arthurian novel \"Sword at Sunset\" (1963), several of the heroes worship a stag-antlered deity called the Horned One. The depiction of this deity is similar to that given in Murray's writings.\nMurray's theories have been seen to have had influence on the horror film \"The Blood on Satan's Claw\" (1971), where a murderous female-led cult worships a horned deity named Behemoth.\nIn the fantasy novel \"Too Long A Sacrifice\" by Mildred Downey Broxon (1981), a male character, Tadhg, is an avatar of a benevolent Horned God.\nMarion Zimmer Bradley, who acknowledges the influence of Murray, uses the figure of the \"horned god\" in her feminist fantasy transformation of Arthurian myth, \"Mists of Avalon\" (1984), and portrays ritualistic incest between King Arthur as the representative of the horned god and his sister Morgaine as the \"spring maiden\".\nIn the Richard Carpenter television series \"Robin of Sherwood\" (1984), Robin Hood is taught and guided by a shaman-like figure called Herne the Hunter (a figure from English legend). Herne wears a headdress of a horned stag's head. Carpenter stated in an interview that Herne was based on the Pagan idea of the Horned God.\nIn June 1986, the comic book \"2000\u00a0AD\" published the first part of a serial story called \"Sl\u00e1ine and the Horned God\", written by Pat Mills and illustrated by Simon Bisley. Based in Celtic mythology, the Horned God is identified with Cernunnos and is the primary antagonist in a story rich with antagonists. He presents as a Fertility God who has largely lost his mind and become nihilistic. \nThe titular smith of the Fay Sampson novel \"Black Smith's Telling\" (1990) is depicted as the leader of a benevolent \"Old Religion\" that worships a Horned God.\nThe 1992 \"Discworld\" novel \"Lords and Ladies\", by Terry Pratchett, features a King of the Elves who is strongly reminiscent of the Horned God. Although not worshipped by the witches who are the heroines of the book (indeed, quite the reverse), they temporarily ally themselves with him out of necessity.\nThe 1995 fantasy novel \"The Wild Hunt\" by Jane Yolen features a supernatural being named the Horned King, who resembles the Horned God, as the novel's antagonist.\nIn the popular video game ', its expansion ' (2003) has a plot enemy known as Hircine, the Daedric god of the Hunt, who appears as a horned man with the face of a deer skull. He condemned his \"hounds\" (werewolves) to walk the mortal ground during the Bloodmoon until a champion defeats him or Bloodmoon falls. When in combat, Hircine appears as a horned wolf or bear.\nThe historical novel \"The White Mare\" (2004) by Jules Watson, set in Scotland in the year 79\u00a0CE, features a scene where the heroine is partnered with a priest of the Horned God during a religious ceremony.\nThe historical novel \"Outlaw\" (2009) by Angus Donald, has Robin Hood take part in a violent pagan ceremony where Robin plays the part of Cernunnos, here named as the Horned God. \nTim Powers' novella \"Salvage and Demolition\" (2013) involves a quest for a manuscript written by a being called Aker, who is also designated as the Horned God. \nThe 2015 film \"The Witch\", which takes place in 17th century New England during the latter end of the early modern inquisition against witchcraft that swept across Europe, deals with an interpretation of the Horned God, which takes the form of Black Phillip, the family goat.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14320", "revid": "4788526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14320", "title": "Haggis", "text": "Scottish savoury pudding containing sheep's pluck\nHaggis ( ) is a savoury pudding containing sheep's pluck (heart, liver, and lungs), minced with chopped onion, oatmeal, suet, seasonings, and salt, mixed with stock, and cooked while traditionally encased in the animal's stomach though now an artificial casing is often used instead. According to the 2001 English edition of the \"Larousse Gastronomique\": \"Although its description is not immediately appealing, haggis has an excellent nutty texture and delicious savoury flavour\".\nIt is believed that food similar to haggis \u2014 perishable offal quickly cooked inside an animal's stomach, all conveniently available after a hunt \u2014 was eaten from ancient times.\nAlthough the name \"hagws\" or \"hagese\" was first recorded in England c. 1430, the dish is considered traditionally of Scottish origin. It is even the national dish as a result of Scots poet Robert Burns' poem \"Address to a Haggis\" of 1786. Haggis is traditionally served with \"neeps and tatties\", boiled and mashed separately, and a dram (a glass of Scotch whisky), especially as the main course of a Burns supper.\nHistory and etymology.\nScottish theory.\nHaggis is popularly assumed to be of Scottish origin, but many countries have produced similar dishes with different names. However, the recipes as known and standardised now are distinctly Scottish. The first known written recipes for a dish of the name, made with offal and herbs, are as \"hagese\", in the verse cookbook \"Liber Cure Cocorum\" dating from around 1430 in Lancashire, north west England, and, as \"hagws of a schepe\" from an English cookbook also of c. 1430.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe earlier (1390) book \"The Forme of Cury\" by Richard II's master cooks includes a dish of grated meat in a pig's caul, without using such a name. \nThe Scottish poem \"Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy\", which is dated before 1520 (the generally accepted date prior to the death of William Dunbar, one of the composers), refers to \"haggeis\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAn early printed recipe for haggis appears in 1615 in \"The English Huswife\" by Gervase Markham. It contains a section entitled \"Skill in Oate meale\": \"The use and vertues of these two severall kinds of Oate-meales in maintaining the Family, they are so many (according to the many customes of many Nations) that it is almost impossible to recken all\"; and then proceeds to give a description of \"oat-meale mixed with blood, and the Liver of either Sheepe, Calfe or Swine, maketh that pudding which is called the Haggas or Haggus, of whose goodnesse it is in vaine to boast, because there is hardly to be found a man that doth not affect them.\" (Gervase Markham, \"The English Huswife\")\nIn her book \"The Haggis: A Little History\", Dickson Wright suggests that haggis was invented as a way of cooking quick-spoiling offal near the site of a hunt, without the need to carry along an additional cooking vessel. The liver and kidneys could be grilled directly over a fire, but this treatment was unsuitable for the stomach, intestines, or lungs. Chopping up the lungs and stuffing the stomach with them and whatever fillers might have been on hand, then boiling the assembly \u2013 probably in a vessel made from the animal's hide \u2013 was one way to make sure these parts were not wasted.\nRoman theory.\nFood writer Alan Davidson suggests that the ancient Romans were the first known to have made products of the haggis type. Haggis was \"born of necessity, as a way to utilize the least expensive cuts of meat and the innards as well\".\nNorse theory.\nClarissa Dickson Wright says that it \"came to Scotland in a longship [i.e., from Scandinavia] even before Scotland was a single nation\". She cites etymologist Walter William Skeat as further suggestion of possible Scandinavian origins: Skeat claimed that the \"hag\u2013\" element of the word is derived from or the Old Icelandic \"hoggva\", meaning 'to hew \u2192 chop \u2192 hack', same as in Modern Scots: \"hag\", 'to hew' or strike with a sharp weapon, relating to the chopped-up contents of the dish.\nThe related Nordic variations of the root dish are traditionally called \u201dhew/chop-food\u201d: , , , in modern Swedish renamed to \"p\u00f6lsa\".\nFolklore.\nIn the absence of hard facts as to haggis' origins, popular folklore has provided some notions. One is that the dish originates from the days of the old Scottish cattle drovers. When the men left the Highlands to drive their cattle to market in Edinburgh, the women would prepare rations for them to eat during the long journey down through the glens. They used the ingredients that were most readily available in their homes and conveniently packaged them in a sheep's stomach allowing for easy transport during the journey. Other speculations have been based on Scottish slaughtering practices. When a chieftain or laird required an animal to be slaughtered for meat (whether sheep or cattle) the workmen were allowed to keep the offal as their share.\nA joke sometimes maintained is that a haggis is a small Scottish animal with longer legs on one side, so that it can run around the steep hills of the Scottish highlands without falling over. According to one poll, 33 percent of American visitors to Scotland believed haggis to be an animal.\nModern use.\nHaggis is traditionally served as part of the Burns supper on or near January 25, the birthday of Scotland's national poet Robert Burns. Burns wrote the poem \"Address to a Haggis\", which starts \"Fair fa' your honest, sonsie face, Great chieftain o' the puddin-race!\" In Burns's lifetime haggis was a common dish of the poor as it was nourishing yet very cheap, being made from leftover parts of sheep otherwise discarded.\nHaggis is widely available in supermarkets in Scotland all year, with cheaper brands normally packed in artificial casings, rather than stomachs. Sometimes haggis is sold in tins or a container which can be cooked in a microwave or conventional oven. Some commercial haggis is largely made from pig, rather than sheep, offal. Kosher haggis, not only pork-free but fully conformant to Jewish dietary laws, is produced.\nHaggis is often served in Scottish fast-food establishments, in the shape of a large sausage and deep fried in batter. Together with chips, this comprises a \"haggis supper\". A \"haggis burger\" is a patty of fried haggis served on a bun. A \"haggis pakora\" is another deep fried variant, available in some Indian restaurants in Scotland. Haggis can be used as an ingredient in other dishes, even pizza, rather than the main part of a dish.\nA traditional haggis recipe describes haggis as \"sheep's 'pluck' (heart, liver, and lungs), minced with onion, oatmeal, suet, spices, and salt, mixed with stock, and traditionally encased in the animal's stomach and boiled\". Ingredients are sheep stomach, heart and lungs of one lamb, onions, oatmeal, salt, pepper, stock, and water, with optional ingredients dried coriander, cinnamon, and nutmeg. It can be boiled, baked, or deep fried.\nIn the north-east of Scotland, from Aberdeen northwards, in addition to the customary neeps and tatties, haggis is commonly served with mince.\nVegetarian.\nVegetarian haggis was first available commercially in 1984, and now can account for between 25% and 40% of haggis sales. It substitutes various pulses, nuts and vegetables for the meat. Oats and barley may be included as may different types of lentils, split peas, adzuki beans, kidney beans, borlotti beans, peanuts, other nuts and mushrooms, onions, and carrots.\nOutside Scotland.\nHaggis remains popular with Scottish immigrants in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, owing to the strong influence of Scottish culture, especially for Burns Suppers. It can be made in any country, but is sometimes imported from Scotland.\nLegality.\nIn 1971, it became illegal to import haggis into the US from the UK due to a ban on food containing sheep lung, which constitutes 10\u201315% of the traditional recipe. The ban encompasses all lungs, as fluids such as stomach acid and phlegm may enter the lung during slaughter. The situation was further complicated in 1989 when all UK beef and lamb was banned from importation to the US due to the United Kingdom BSE outbreak. The ban on importing British lamb to the US was lifted in 2022 but the ban on food containing sheep lung remained in force. \nAs haggis cannot be exported to the United States, it is instead made there, sometimes by Scottish companies. In one such use, which is stated to be otherwise the same 150-year-old recipe having the same ingredients as in Scotland, sheep lung is not used and the casing is artificial rather than stomach.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14321", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14321", "title": "Hank Aaron", "text": "American baseball player (1934\u20132021)\nHenry Louis Aaron (February 5, 1934 \u2013 January 22, 2021), nicknamed \"Hammer\" or \"Hammerin' Hank\", was an American professional baseball right fielder who played 23 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB), from 1954 through 1976. Considered one of the greatest baseball players in history, he spent 21 seasons with the Milwaukee / Atlanta Braves in the National League (NL) and two seasons with the Milwaukee Brewers in the American League (AL). At the time of his retirement, Aaron held most of the game's key career power-hitting records. He broke the long-standing MLB record for career home runs held by Babe Ruth and remained the career leader for 33 years, until Barry Bonds surpassed his famous total of 755 in 2007. He hit 24 or more home runs every year from 1955 through 1973 and is one of only two players (the other being Alex Rodriguez) to hit 30 or more home runs in a season at least fifteen times.\nAaron holds the MLB records for the most career runs batted in (RBIs) (2,297), extra base hits (1,477), and total bases (6,856). Aaron is also third all-time for career hits (3,771) and fifth in runs scored (2,174). He is one of only four players to have at least 17 seasons with 150 or more hits. Aaron's ability as a hitter can be illustrated by his still having over 3,000 hits even without counting any of his home runs. He was an NL All-Star for 20 seasons and an AL All-Star for one season, and he holds the record for the most All-Star selections (25), while sharing the record for most All-Star Games played (24) with Willie Mays and Stan Musial. He was a three-time Gold Glove winner, and in 1957, he won the NL Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award when the Milwaukee Braves won the World Series.\nAaron was born and raised in and around Mobile, Alabama, one of eight children. He appeared briefly in the Negro American League and in minor league baseball before starting his major league career. By his final MLB season, Aaron was the last former Negro league baseball player on a major league roster. During his time in Major League Baseball, and especially during his run for the home run record, Aaron and his family endured extensive racist threats. His experiences fueled his activism during the civil rights movement.\nAaron was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility in 1982 and Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 1988. In 1999, MLB introduced the Hank Aaron Award to recognize the top offensive players in each league. That same year, he was one of 30 baseball players elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2002. After his retirement, Aaron held front office roles with the Atlanta Braves, including the senior vice president. He resided near Atlanta until his death in 2021.\nEarly life.\nHenry Louis Aaron was born on February 5, 1934, in Mobile, Alabama, to Herbert Aaron Sr. and Estella (Pritchett) Aaron. His father worked as a shipyard riveter. He had seven siblings. Tommie Aaron, one of his brothers, also went on to play Major League Baseball. By the time Aaron retired, he and his brother held the record for most career home runs by a pair of siblings (768).\nWhile he was born in a section of Mobile referred to as \"Down the Bay\", he spent most of his youth in Toulminville. Aaron grew up in a poor family. His family could not afford baseball equipment, so he practiced by hitting bottle caps with sticks. He would create his own bats and balls out of materials he found on the streets. His boyhood idol was baseball star Jackie Robinson. Aaron attended Central High School as a freshman and a sophomore. Like most high schools, they did not have organized baseball, so he played outfield and third base for the Mobile Black Bears, a semipro team. Aaron was a member of the Boy Scouts of America, and he filmed a commercial for the organization in the 1970s.\nAlthough he batted cross-handed (as a right-handed hitter, with his left hand above his right), Aaron established himself as a power hitter. As a result, in 1949, at the age of 15, Aaron had his first tryout with an MLB franchise, the Brooklyn Dodgers; however, he did not make the team. After this, Aaron returned to school to finish his secondary education, attending the Josephine Allen Institute, a private high school in Alabama. During his junior year, Aaron joined the Prichard Athletics, an independent Negro league team, followed by the Mobile Black Bears, another independent Negro league team. While on the Bears, Aaron earned $3 per game ($ today), which was a dollar more than he got while on the Athletics.\nProfessional career.\nNegro and minor leagues.\nOn November 20, 1951, baseball scout Ed Scott signed Aaron to a contract on behalf of the Indianapolis Clowns of the Negro American League, where he played for three months.\nHe started play as a , shortstop, and earned $200 per month. As a result of his standout play with the Indianapolis Clowns, Aaron received two offers from MLB teams via telegram, one from the New York Giants and the other from the Boston Braves. Years later, Aaron remembered:\nI had the Giants' contract in my hand. But the Braves offered fifty dollars a month more. That's the only thing that kept Willie Mays and me from being teammates\u00a0\u2014 fifty dollars.\nWhile with the Clowns he experienced racism. Of a time his team was in Washington, D.C. Aaron recalled:\nWe had breakfast while we were waiting for the rain to stop, and I can still envision sitting with the Clowns in a restaurant behind Griffith Stadium and hearing them break all the plates in the kitchen after we finished eating. What a horrible sound. Even as a kid, the irony of it hit me: here we were in the capital in the land of freedom and equality, and they had to destroy the plates that had touched the forks that had been in the mouths of Black men. If dogs had eaten off those plates, they'd have washed them.\nThe Howe Sports Bureau credits Aaron with a .366 batting average in 26 official Negro league games, with five home runs, 33 runs batted in (RBIs), 41 hits, and nine stolen bases.\nThe Braves purchased Aaron's contract from the Clowns for $10,000, which GM John Quinn thought was a steal, as he stated that he felt that Aaron was a $100,000 property. On June 12, 1952, Aaron signed with Braves' scout Dewey Griggs. During this time, he picked up the nickname \"pork chops\" because it \"was the only thing I knew to order off the menu\". A teammate later said, \"the man ate pork chops three meals a day, two for breakfast\".\nThe Braves assigned Aaron to the Eau Claire Bears, the Braves' Northern League Class-C farm team. The 1952 season proved to be very beneficial for Aaron. Playing in the infield, Aaron continued to develop as a ballplayer and made the Northern League's All-Star team. He broke his habit of hitting cross-handed and adopted the standard hitting technique. By the end of the season, he had performed so well that the league made him the unanimous choice for Rookie of the Year. Although he appeared in just 87 games, he scored 89 runs, had 116 hits, nine home runs, and 61 RBI. In addition, Aaron hit for a .336 batting average. During his minor league experience, he was very homesick and faced constant racism, but his brother, Herbert Jr., told him not to give up the opportunity.\nIn 1953, the Braves promoted him to the Jacksonville Braves, their Class-A affiliate in the South Atlantic League. Helped by Aaron's performance, the Braves won the league championship that year. Aaron led the league in runs (115), hits (208), doubles (36), RBIs (125), total bases (338), and batting average (.362). He won the league's Most Valuable Player Award, and had such a dominant year that one sportswriter was prompted to say, \"Henry Aaron led the league in everything except hotel accommodations.\" Aaron's time with the Braves did not come without problems. He was one of the first Black Americans to play in the league. The 1950s were a period of racial segregation in parts of the United States, especially the southeastern portion of the country. When Aaron traveled around Jacksonville, Florida, and the surrounding areas, he was often separated from his team because of Jim Crow laws. In most circumstances, the team was responsible for arranging housing and meals for its players, but Aaron often had to make his own arrangements. The Braves' manager, Ben Geraghty, tried his best to help Aaron on and off the field. Former Braves minor league player and sportswriter Pat Jordan said, \"Aaron gave [Geraghty] much of the credit for his own swift rise to stardom.\"\nThat same year, Aaron met his future wife, Barbara Lucas. The night they met, Lucas decided to attend the Braves' game. Aaron singled, doubled, and hit a home run in the game. On October 6, Aaron and Lucas married. In 1958, Aaron's wife noted that during the off-season he liked \"to sit and watch those shooting westerns\". He also enjoyed cooking and fishing.\nAaron spent the winter of 1953 playing in Puerto Rico. Mickey Owen, the team's manager, helped Aaron with his batting stance. Until then, Aaron had hit most pitches to left field or center field, but after working with Owen, Aaron was able to hit the ball more effectively all over the field. During his stay in Puerto Rico, Owen also helped Aaron transition from second base to the outfield. Aaron had not played well at second base, but Owen noted that Aaron could catch fly balls and throw them well from the outfield to the infield.\nThe stint in Puerto Rico also allowed Aaron to avoid being drafted into military service. Though the Korean War was over, people were still being drafted. The Braves were able to speak to the draft board, making the case that Aaron could be the player to integrate the Southern Association the following season with the Atlanta Crackers. The board appears to have been convinced, as Aaron was not drafted.\nMilwaukee / Atlanta Braves (1954\u20131974).\nIn 1954, Aaron attended spring training with the major league club. Although he was on the roster of its farm club, Milwaukee manager Charley Grimm later stated, \"From the start, he did so well I knew we were going to have to carry him.\" On March 13, 1954, Milwaukee Braves left fielder Bobby Thomson fractured his ankle while sliding into second base during a spring training game. The next day, Aaron made his first spring training start for the Braves major league team, playing in left field and hitting a home run. This led Aaron to a major league contract, signed on the final day of spring training, and a Braves uniform with the number five. On April 13, he made his major league debut and was hitless in five at-bats against the Cincinnati Redlegs. In the same game, Eddie Mathews hit two home runs, the first of a record 863 home runs the pair would hit as teammates. On April 15, Aaron collected his first major league hit, a double off St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Vic Raschi. Aaron hit his first major league home run on April 23, also off Raschi. In 122 games, Aaron batted .280 with 13 home runs before he suffered a fractured ankle on September 5. He then changed his number to 44, which would turn out to look like a \"lucky number\" for the slugger. Aaron would hit 44 home runs in four different seasons, and he hit his record-breaking 715th career home run off Dodgers pitcher Al Downing, who coincidentally also wore number 44.\nAt this point, Aaron was known to family and friends primarily as \"Henry\". Braves' public relations director Don Davidson, observing Aaron's quiet, reserved nature, began referring to him publicly as \"Hank\" in order to suggest more accessibility. The nickname quickly gained currency, but \"Henry\" continued to be cited frequently in the media, both sometimes appearing in the same article, and Aaron would answer to either one. During his rookie year, his other well-known nicknames, \"Hammerin' Hank\" (by teammates) and \"Bad Henry\" (by opposing pitchers) are reported to have arisen.\nWhile living in Milwaukee, Aaron resided in the Prinz House in Historic Brewers Hill.\nConsiderably later in his career, Aaron coined \"Stone-fingers\", which would prove a popular handle for one of baseball's more colorful characters, the famously distance-hitting but defensively challenged first baseman Dick Stuart, reportedly \"delight[ing]\" even its recipient.\nSal Maglie recommended throwing low curveballs to Aaron. \"He's going to swing and he'll go after almost anything,\" Maglie said of the Braves' slugger. \"And he'll hit almost anything, so you have to be careful.\"\nPrime of his career.\nAaron hit .314 with 27 home runs and 106 RBI in 153 games in 1955. He was named to the NL All-Star roster for the first time; it was the first of a record 21 All-Star selections and first of a record 25 All-Star Game appearances. In 1956, Aaron hit .328 and captured the first of two NL batting titles. He was also named \"The Sporting News\" NL Player of the Year. In 1957, Aaron won his only NL MVP Award, as he had his first brush with the triple crown. He batted .322, placing third, and led the league in home runs and runs batted in. On September 23, 1957, in Milwaukee, Aaron hit a two-run walk-off home run against the St. Louis Cardinals, clinching the pennant for the Braves. After touching home plate he was carried off the field by his teammates. It is as of yet the only pennant-clinching walk-off home run in major league history in a non-playoff regular-season game. Milwaukee went on to win the World Series against the New York Yankees, the defending champions, four games to three. Aaron did his part by hitting .393 with three homers and seven RBIs. On December 15, 1957, his wife Barbara gave birth to twins. Two days later, one of the children died. In 1958, Aaron hit .326 with 30 home runs and 95 RBI in 153 games. He led the Braves to another pennant, but this time they lost a seven-game World Series to the Yankees. Aaron finished third in the MVP race and he received his first of three Gold Glove Awards. During the next several years, Aaron had some of his best games and best seasons as a major league player. On June 21, 1959, against the San Francisco Giants, he hit three two-run home runs. It was the only time in his career that he hit three home runs in a game.\nIn 1963, Aaron nearly won the triple crown. He led the league with 44 home runs and 130 RBI and finished third in batting average (.319). In that season, Aaron became the third player to hit 30 home runs and steal 30 bases in a single season, and the first player to record 40 home runs and 30 steals in a season. He again finished third in National League MVP voting. The Braves moved from Milwaukee to Atlanta after the 1965 season. On May 10, 1967, he hit an inside-the-park home run against Jim Bunning in Philadelphia. It was the only inside-the-park home run of his career. In 1968, Aaron was the first Atlanta Braves player to hit his 500th career home run, and in 1970, he was the first Atlanta Brave to reach 3,000 career hits.\nHome run milestones and 3,000th hit.\nDuring his days in Atlanta, Aaron reached several milestones; he was only the eighth player ever to hit 500 career home runs, with his 500th coming against Mike McCormick of the San Francisco Giants on July 14, 1968\u2014exactly one year after former Milwaukee Braves teammate Eddie Mathews had hit his 500th. Aaron was, at the time, the second-youngest player to reach the milestone. On July 31, 1969, Aaron hit his 537th home run, passing Mickey Mantle's total; this moved Aaron into third place on the career home run list, after Willie Mays and Babe Ruth. At the end of the 1969 season, Aaron again finished third in the MVP voting.\nIn 1970, Aaron reached two more career milestones. On May 17, Aaron collected his 3,000th hit, in a game against the Cincinnati Reds, the team against which he played in his first major-league game. Aaron established the record for most seasons with thirty or more home runs in the National League. On April 27, 1971, Aaron hit his 600th career home run, the third major league player ever to do so. On July 13, Aaron hit a home run in the All-Star Game (played at Detroit's Tiger Stadium) for the first time. He hit his 40th home run of the season against the Giants' Jerry Johnson on September 10, which established a National League record for most seasons with 40 or more home runs (seven). At age 37, he hit a career-high 47 home runs during the season (along with a career-high .669 slugging percentage) and finished third in MVP voting for the sixth time. During the strike-shortened season of 1972, Aaron tied and then surpassed Willie Mays for second place on the career home run list. Aaron also drove in the 2,000th run of his career and hit a home run in the first All-Star game played in Atlanta. As the year came to a close, Aaron broke Stan Musial's major-league record for total bases (6,134). He finished the season with 673 career home runs.\nBreaking Ruth's career home run record.\nAaron himself downplayed the \"chase\" to surpass Babe Ruth, while baseball enthusiasts and the national media grew increasingly excited as he closed in on the 714 career home runs record. Aaron received thousands of letters every week during the summer of 1973, including hate mail; he ended up asking a secretary working for the Braves, Carla Koplin, to help him sort through it.\nAaron (then age 39) hit 40 home runs in 392 at-bats, ending the 1973 season one home run short of the record. He hit home run number 713 on September 29, 1973, and with one day remaining in the season, many expected him to tie the record. But in his final game that year, playing against the Houston Astros (managed by Leo Durocher, who had once roomed with Babe Ruth), he was unable to achieve this. After the game, Aaron said his only fear was that he might not live to see the 1974 season.\nHe was the recipient of death threats and a large assortment of hate mail during the 1973\u20131974 offseason from people who did not want to see Aaron break Ruth's nearly sacrosanct home run record. The threats extended to those providing positive press coverage of Aaron. Lewis Grizzard, then-executive sports editor of \"The Atlanta Journal\", reported receiving numerous phone calls calling journalists \"nigger lovers\" for covering Aaron's chase. While preparing the massive coverage of the home run record, Grizzard quietly had an obituary written, afraid that Aaron might be murdered.\n\"Sports Illustrated\" pointedly summarized the racist vitriol that Aaron was forced to endure:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Is this to be the year in which Aaron, at the age of thirty-nine, takes a moon walk above one of the most hallowed individual records in American sport...? Or will it be remembered as the season in which Aaron, the most dignified of athletes, was besieged with hate mail and trapped by the cobwebs and goblins that lurk in baseball's attic?\nAt the end of the 1973 season, Aaron received a plaque from the U.S. Postal Service for receiving more mail (930,000 pieces) than any person excluding politicians. Aaron received an outpouring of public support in response to the bigotry. In August 1973, \"Peanuts\" cartoonist Charles Schulz drew a series of strips in which Snoopy attempts to break Babe Ruth's record, only to be besieged with hate mail. In the strip published August 11, Lucy remarked to Snoopy: \"Hank Aaron is a great player... but you! If you break Babe Ruth's record, it'll be a disgrace!\" Coincidentally, Snoopy was only one home run short of tying the record (and finished the season as such when Charlie Brown got picked off second base during Snoopy's last at-bat), and as it turned out, Aaron finished the 1973 season one home run short of Ruth. Babe Ruth's widow, Claire, denounced the racism and declared that her husband would have enthusiastically cheered Aaron's attempt at the record. As the 1974 season began, Aaron's pursuit of the record caused a small controversy. The Braves opened the season on the road in Cincinnati with a three-game series against the Cincinnati Reds. Braves management wanted him to break the record in Atlanta and was therefore going to have Aaron sit out the first three games of the season. But Baseball Commissioner Bowie Kuhn ruled that he had to play two games in the first series. He played two out of three and tied Babe Ruth's record on April 4, 1974, in his first at-bat on his first swing of the season\u2014off Reds pitcher Jack Billingham, but did not hit another home run in the series.\nThe Braves returned to Atlanta, and on April 8, 1974, a crowd of 53,775 people showed up for the game\u2014a Braves attendance record. The game was also broadcast nationally on NBC. In the fourth inning, Aaron hit home run number 715 off Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Al Downing. Although Dodgers outfielder Bill Buckner nearly went over the outfield fence trying to catch it, the ball flew into the Braves' bullpen and the First National Bank advertisement sign in left-center field, where relief pitcher Tom House caught it. While cannons were fired in celebration, two college students sprinted onto the field and jogged alongside Aaron for part of his circuit around the bases, temporarily startling him. As the fans cheered wildly, Aaron's parents ran onto the field as well. Afterwards, Aaron remarked how \"I never knew my mother could hug so tight,\" though he later learned that Aaron's mother kept hugging him because she was worried someone could try to shoot Aaron, and she thought nobody would try to shoot him if she was hugging him. Braves announcer Milo Hamilton, calling the game on WSB radio, described the scene as Aaron broke the record:\nHenry Aaron, in the second inning, walked and scored. He's sittin' on 714. Here's the pitch by Downing. Swinging. There's a drive into left-center field. That ball is gonna be-eee... Outta here! It's gone! It's 715! There's a new home run champion of all time, and it's Henry Aaron! The fireworks are going. Henry Aaron is coming around third. His teammates are at home plate. And listen to this crowd!\nMeanwhile, Dodgers broadcaster Vin Scully addressed the racial tension\u2014or apparent lack thereof\u2014in his call of the home run:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMilwaukee Brewers (1975\u20131976).\nOn October 2, 1974, Aaron hit his 733rd home run in his last at-bat as a Braves player. Aaron commented after the game that it was his last time as a player in Atlanta as his contract had expired. While he considered retirement, he said that he was willing to return to baseball for another year. He had also said that he would be interested in serving as a team's general manager, someone who would make decisions and not a \"house boy\". The Braves offered Aaron a position with the team when he retired, but the role would be more in public relations, rather than one where he could evaluate talent.\nAt the end of the season, Aaron, who had a prior relationship with Brewers owner Bud Selig, requested a trade to Milwaukee. He was acquired by the Milwaukee Brewers for Dave May thirty-one days later on November 2. Minor league right-handed pitcher Roger Alexander was sent to the Braves to complete the transaction at the Winter Meetings one month later on December 2. The trade re-united Aaron with former teammate Del Crandall, who was now managing the Brewers. He signed a two-year contract with the Brewers for $240,000 per year. Playing in the American League allowed Aaron to serve as a designated hitter rather than play in the field.\nOn May 1, 1975, Aaron broke baseball's all-time RBI record, previously held by Ruth with 2,213. That year, he also played in his last and 24th All-Star Game (25th All-Star Game selection); he lined out to Dave Concepci\u00f3n as a pinch-hitter in the second inning. This All-Star Game, like the first one he played in 1955, was before a home crowd at Milwaukee County Stadium.\nAaron hit his 755th and final home run on July 20, 1976, at Milwaukee County Stadium off Dick Drago of the California Angels, which stood as the MLB career home run record for 31 years until it was broken in 2007 by Barry Bonds. Over the course of his record-breaking 23-year career, Aaron had a batting average of .305 and 164 hits a season, while averaging nearly 33 home runs and 100 RBIs a year. He had 100+ RBIs in a season 11 times, including 5 years in a row between 1959 and 1963.\nCareer overall.\nFor his career, Aaron batted .305 with 3771 hits, including 624 doubles, 98 triples, and 755 home runs. In 17 postseason games, including two World Series (1957, '58) and the 1969 NLCS, Aaron batted .362 (25-for-69) with 11 runs scored, 4 doubles, 1 triple, 6 home runs, 16 RBI, 5 walks, on-base percentage of .405, slugging percentage of .710, and on-base plus slugging percentage of 1.116.\nPost-playing career.\nAfter the 1976 season, Aaron rejoined the Braves as an executive. On August 1, 1982, he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, having received votes on 97.8 percent of the ballots, second only to Ty Cobb, who had received votes on 98.2% of the ballot in the inaugural 1936 Hall of Fame election. Aaron was then named the Braves' vice president and director of player development. This made him one of the first minorities in Major League Baseball upper-level management.\nIn December 1980, Aaron became senior vice president and assistant to the Braves' president. He was the corporate vice president of community relations for Turner Broadcasting System, a member of the company's board of directors, and the vice president of business development for The Airport Network. On January 21, 2007, Major League Baseball announced the sale of the Atlanta Braves. In that announcement, Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig also announced that Aaron would be playing a major role in the management of the Braves, forming programs through major league baseball that will encourage the influx of minorities into baseball. Aaron founded the Hank Aaron Rookie League program.\nShortly before the start of the 2002 baseball season, Aaron joined San Francisco Giants slugger Barry Bonds\u2014on the heels of his record-shattering performance the season before\u2014to make a television commercial that aired during Super Bowl XXXVI, in which Aaron jokingly tried to persuade Bonds to retire before breaking the record.\nAs Bonds began to close in on the record during the 2007 season, Aaron let it be known that, although he recognized Bonds' achievements, he would not be present when Bonds broke the record. There was considerable speculation that this was a snubbing of Bonds based on the widespread belief that Bonds had used performance-enhancing drugs and steroids to aid his achievement. However, some observers looked back on Aaron's personal history, pointing out that he had downplayed his own breaking of Babe Ruth's all-time record and suggesting Aaron was simply treating Bonds in a similar fashion. In a later interview with Atlanta sportscasting personality Chris Dimino, Aaron made it clear his reluctance to attend any celebration of a new home run record was based upon his personal conviction that baseball is not about breaking records, but simply playing to the best of one's potential. After Bonds hit his record-breaking 756th home run on August 7, 2007, Aaron made a surprise appearance on the JumboTron video screen at AT&amp;T Park in San Francisco to congratulate Bonds on his accomplishment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would like to offer my congratulations to Barry Bonds on becoming baseball's career home run leader. It is a great accomplishment that required skill, longevity, and determination. Throughout the past century, the home run has held a special place in baseball and I have been privileged to hold this record for 33 of those years. I move over now and offer my best wishes to Barry and his family on this historical achievement. My hope today, as it was on that April evening in 1974, is that the achievement of this record will inspire others to chase their own dreams.\nAaron's autobiography, \"I Had A Hammer\", co-written with the help of writer Lonnie Wheeler, was published in 1990 and was a finalist for the Casey Award. The book's title is a play on his nickname, \"The Hammer\" or \"Hammerin' Hank\", and the title of the folk song \"If I Had a Hammer\". Aaron owned Hank Aaron BMW of south Atlanta in Union City, Georgia, where he included an autographed baseball with every car sold. Aaron also owned Mini, Land Rover, Toyota, Hyundai, and Honda dealerships throughout Georgia, as part of the Hank Aaron Automotive Group. Aaron sold all but the Toyota dealership in McDonough in 2007. Additionally, Aaron owned a chain of 30 restaurants around the country.\nPersonal life.\nAaron's first marriage was to Barbara Lucas in 1953. They had five children: Gary, Lary, Dorinda, Gaile, and Hank Jr. He divorced Barbara in 1971 and married Billye Suber Williams on November 13, 1973. Aaron adopted Billye's daughter, Ceci, from her first marriage to civil rights activist Samuel Woodrow Williams.\nDespite being publicly and professionally known as \"Hank,\" Aaron preferred to go by his given name, \"Henry.\" The former name came around when Don Davidson, the public relations director for the Milwaukee Braves, began to refer to him as such in an effort to make the quiet, soft-spoken player seem more accessible to the fans and the press.\nAaron's great-nephew, Kimani Vidal, was selected by the Los Angeles Chargers in the 2024 NFL draft.\nReligion.\nBorn and raised a Baptist, Aaron converted to Catholicism in 1959 at age 25, together with his family. He and his wife first became interested in the faith after the birth of their first child, whom they baptized immediately. A friendship with a priest later helped lead to Hank and his wife's conversion. Aaron was known to frequently read Thomas \u00e0 Kempis' 15th-century book \"The Imitation of Christ\", which he kept in his locker.\nIn an interview in 1991, Aaron credited the priest, Fr. Michael Sablica, with helping him grow as a person in the 1950s. \"He taught me what life was all about. But he was more than just a religious friend of mine, he was a friend because he talked as if he was not a priest sometimes.\" Active in the civil rights movement, the priest encouraged Aaron to be more publicly vocal about causes he believed in.\nSablica also encouraged him to \"attend Mass every Sunday\" during Spring Training, to which he responded with the racist realities of the day: \"[In Bradenton], they won't let me go to Mass.\" Sablica said in an interview that he wouldn't have blamed Aaron if he stopped practicing. Aaron indeed attended Friendship Baptist Church toward the end of his life, noting in his autobiography that he didn't remain a practicing Catholic for very long after converting.\nHobbies and health.\nAaron was a long-time fan of the Cleveland Browns, having attended many games in disguise in their \"Dawg Pound\" seating section.\nIn 1980, Aaron made a guest appearance on \"Happy Days\" episode \"The Hucksters\". In 1986, he made a guest appearance in \"Just Another Fox in the Crowd\", episode 30 of \"Crazy Like a Fox\".\nIn 1994, Aaron and his wife established the Chasing the Dream Foundation which awarded the Hank Aaron Chasing The Dream Scholarship to members of the Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America.\nAaron lived in the Atlanta area. In July 2013, media reported that his home was burglarized with jewelry and two BMW vehicles having been stolen. The cars were later recovered.\nAaron suffered from arthritis and had a partial hip replacement after a fall in 2014.\nOn January 5, 2021, Aaron publicly received a COVID-19 vaccination with the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine at the Morehouse School of Medicine at Atlanta, Georgia. He and several other Black American public figures, including activist Joe Beasley, Andrew Young, and Louis Sullivan, did so to demonstrate the safety of the vaccine and encourage other Black Americans to do the same.\nDeath.\nAaron died in his sleep in his Atlanta residence on January 22, 2021, at the age of 86. The manner of death was listed as natural causes.\nHis funeral was held on January 27 at the Friendship Baptist Church. Amongst the attendees were former President Bill Clinton, former baseball commissioner Bud Selig, and former Atlanta mayor Andrew Young. After the funeral, Aaron's body was interred at South-View Cemetery in Atlanta.\nTributes.\nUpon Aaron's death, the sports world expressed their condolences to him. Many current or former athletes and team owners such as MLB Commissioner Rob Manfred, Magic Johnson, David Ortiz, Dusty Baker, Eduardo P\u00e9rez, Mike Trout, and Baseball Hall of Fame chairman Jane Forbes Clark paid tribute to him. Fans paid tribute to Aaron by placing flowers in front of the home run wall where he hit his 715th home run at the former site of Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium and in front of his statue at Truist Park.\nPoliticians also paid tribute to him. The Mayor of Atlanta, Keisha Lance Bottoms released the following statement on his death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Derek, our family and I join the nation in sending heartfelt condolences to Mrs. Billye Aaron, the beautiful wife of Henry \"Hank\" Aaron for nearly 50 years, and the entire family. This is a considerable loss for the entire city of Atlanta. While the world knew him as \u2018Hammering Hank Aaron\u2019 because of his incredible, record-setting baseball career, he was a cornerstone of our village, graciously and freely joining Mrs. Aaron in giving their presence and resources toward making our city a better place. As an adopted son of Atlanta, Mr. Aaron was part of the fabric that helped place Atlanta on the world stage. Our gratitude, thoughts and prayers are with the Aaron family.\"\nGeorgia governor Brian Kemp ordered flags in the state of Georgia to be lowered half-staff in honor of him.\nU.S. President Joe Biden paid tribute to Aaron by releasing a statement calling him \"an American hero\". He also received tributes from former presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama.\nThe Atlanta Braves honored Hank Aaron during the 2021 season by including his jersey number 44 on the back of the team caps along with Phil Niekro's jersey number, 35 (who died one month earlier in December 2020). They also painted 44 in the midfield at Truist Park.\nAt Game 3 of the 2021 World Series in Truist Park, a pregame ceremony was held honoring Aaron where his son Hank Aaron Jr. threw out a ceremonial first pitch. After the Braves won the 2021 World Series, Aaron was honored in the design of the team's World Series championship ring, which includes 755 total diamonds to commemorate Aaron's career home runs, and 44 emerald-cut diamonds to represent Aaron's jersey number with the Braves.\nAt the 2025 Major League Baseball All-Star Game, right after the sixth inning, a special tribute to Aaron's 715th home run was played, featuring special effects and a projector screening clips from the original NBC broadcast of the milestone on the field, featuring audio from both Vin Scully of that network, and Milo Hamilton from radio station WSB. A firework was shot through out of the ballpark at left field, with Hamilton calling out the milestone calls, while one of the mini scoreboards projects a recreation of the number \"715\" that was used at the old Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium. A spotlight was used as a special tribute afterward. This tribute was originally scheduled in 2021.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1982, Aaron was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame during his first year of eligibility.\nAaron was awarded the Spingarn Medal in 1976, from the NAACP. In 1977, Aaron received the American Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award. In 1988, Aaron was inducted into the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame for his time spent on the Eau Claire Bears, Milwaukee Braves, and Milwaukee Brewers.\nIn 1999, Major League Baseball created the Hank Aaron Award, to commemorate the 25th anniversary of Aaron's surpassing of Babe Ruth's career home run mark of 714 home runs and to honor Aaron's contributions to baseball. The award is given annually to the baseball hitters voted the most effective in each respective league. In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Aaron on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.\nWhen the city of Atlanta was converting Centennial Olympic Stadium into a new baseball stadium, many local residents hoped the stadium would be named for Aaron. When the stadium was instead named Turner Field (after Atlanta Braves owner Ted Turner), a section of Capitol Avenue running past the stadium was renamed Hank Aaron Drive. The stadium's street number is 755, after Aaron's total number of home runs; the 755 street number was retained for Turner Field's replacement, Truist Park. In April 1997, a new baseball facility for the AA Mobile Bay Bears constructed in Aaron's hometown of Mobile, Alabama was named Hank Aaron Stadium. Georgia State University acquired Turner Field and has since rebuilt it as Center Parc Stadium, in 2017, and university officials plan to build a new baseball park on the former Atlanta\u2013Fulton County Stadium site, incorporating the left field wall where Aaron hit his record-breaking home run.\nOn February 5, 1999, at his 65th birthday celebration, Major League Baseball announced the introduction of the Hank Aaron Award. The award honors the best overall offensive performer in the American and National League. It was the first major award to be introduced in more than thirty years and had the distinction of being the first award named after a player who was still alive. Later that year, he ranked fifth on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team.\nIn June 2000, Tufts University awarded Aaron an honorary Doctor of Public Service. In July 2000 and again in July 2002, Aaron threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the Major League Baseball All-Star Game, played at Turner Field and Miller Park now named American Family Field, respectively.\nOn January 8, 2001, Aaron was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton. He received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, from President George W. Bush in June 2002. In 2001, a recreational trail in Milwaukee connecting American Family Field with Lake Michigan along the Menomonee River was dedicated as the Hank Aaron State Trail. Aaron attended the dedication. Aaron was on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.\nIn 2002, Aaron was honored with the \"Lombardi Award of Excellence\" from the Vince Lombardi Cancer Foundation. The award was created to honor Vince Lombardi's legacy and is awarded annually to an individual who exemplifies the spirit of the coach.\n Aaron dedicated the new exhibit \"Hank Aaron: Chasing the Dream\" at the Baseball Hall of Fame on April 25, 2009. Statues of Aaron stand outside the front entrance of both Turner Field and American Family Field. There is also a statue of him as an 18-year-old shortstop outside Carson Park in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, where he played his first season in the Braves' minor league system.\nHe was named a 2010 Georgia Trustee by the Georgia Historical Society, in conjunction with the Governor of Georgia, to recognize accomplishments and community service that reflect the ideals of the founding body of Trustees, which governed the Georgia colony from 1732 to 1752.\nIn 2011, the President of Princeton University Shirley M. Tilghman awarded an honorary Doctor of Humanities degree to Aaron.\nIn November 2015, Aaron was one of the five inaugural recipients of the Portrait of a Nation Prize, an award granted by the National Portrait Gallery in recognition of \"exemplary achievements in the fields of civil rights, business, entertainment, science, and sports.\"\nIn January 2016, Aaron received the Order of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Rosette from Akihito, the Emperor of Japan.\nThe Elite Development Invitational, a youth baseball tournament organized by the Major League Baseball and the MLB Players Association to increase diversity in the sport, was renamed the Hank Aaron Invitational for the 2019 season.\nAfter Aaron's death, the Atlanta Falcons of the NFL and Atlanta United of MLS retired his No. 44 for the 2021 season (the Atlanta Hawks of the NBA had already retired No. 44 for Pete Maravich). Additionally, Gwinnett County minor league baseball teams, the Triple-A Gwinnett Stripers (2021 season) and Double-A Atlanta Gladiators (2021\u201322 season), also temporarily retired No. 44 in Aaron's honor, as did the Braves' other minor league affiliates.\nIn April 2021, the Forrest Hill Academy was renamed the Hank Aaron New Beginnings Academy. The alternative high school had been named after Nathan Bedford Forrest, a general in the Confederate Army and the Ku Klux Klan's first Grand Wizard.\nIn 2022, a recording of the WSB broadcast of the April 8, 1974, Braves\u2013Dodgers game in which Aaron hit his 715th home run was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Recording Registry. In May of the same year, Tulane University gave Aaron a posthumous honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters, the first posthumous honorary degree ever awarded by the university. It was presented during the university's unified commencement ceremony and was accepted on his behalf by his widow Billye.\nOn July 31, 2024 USPS released a stamp honoring Aaron.\nIn 2024, several Hank Aaron memorabilia items were sold at Heritage Auctions including his game-used bats, jerseys and baseball cards.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14322", "revid": "50855137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14322", "title": "Holy Grail", "text": "Treasure motif in Arthurian literature\nThe Holy Grail (, , , ) is a treasure that serves as an important motif in Arthurian literature. Various traditions describe the Holy Grail as a cup, dish, or stone with miraculous healing powers, sometimes providing eternal youth or sustenance in infinite abundance, often guarded in the custody of the Fisher King and located in the hidden Grail castle. By analogy, any elusive object or goal of great significance may be perceived as a \"holy grail\" by those seeking such.\nA mysterious \"grail\" (Old French: \"graal\" or \"greal\"), wondrous but not unequivocally holy, first appears in \"Perceval, the Story of the Grail\", an unfinished chivalric romance written by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes around 1190. Chr\u00e9tien's story inspired many continuations, translators and interpreters in the later-12th and early-13th centuries, including Wolfram von Eschenbach, who portrayed the Grail as a stone in \"Parzival\". The Christian, Celtic or possibly other origins of the Arthurian grail trope are uncertain and have been debated among literary scholars and historians.\nWriting soon after Chr\u00e9tien, Robert de Boron in \"Joseph d'Arimathie\" portrayed the Grail as Jesus's vessel from the Last Supper, which Joseph of Arimathea used to catch Christ's blood at the crucifixion. Thereafter, the Holy Grail became interwoven with the legend of the Holy Chalice, the Last Supper cup, an idea continued in works such as the \"Lancelot-Grail\" cycle, and subsequently the 15th-century \"Le Morte d'Arthur\". In this form, it is now a popular theme in modern culture, and has become the subject of folklore studies, pseudohistorical writings, works of fiction, and conspiracy theories.\nEtymology.\nThe word , as it is spelled in its earliest appearances, comes from Old French common noun or , cognate with Old Occitan and Old Catalan , meaning \"a cup or bowl of earth, wood, or metal\" (or other various types of vessels in different Occitan dialects). Its origin is uncertain. One unlikely is the Old Welsh word \"griol\". The most commonly accepted etymology derives it from Latin or via an earlier form, , a derivative of or , which was, in turn, borrowed from Ancient Greek (, a large wine-mixing vessel). Alternative suggestions include a derivative of , a name for a type of woven basket that came to refer to a dish, or a derivative of Latin meaning \"'by degree', 'by stages', applied to a dish brought to the table in different stages or services during a meal\".\nIn the 15th century, English writer John Hardyng invented a fanciful new etymology for Old French (or ), meaning \"Holy Grail\", by parsing it as , meaning \"royal blood\". This etymology was used by some later medieval British writers such as Thomas Malory, and became prominent in the conspiracy theory developed in the book \"The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail\", in which refers to the Jesus bloodline.\nMedieval literature.\nOverview.\nThe literature surrounding the Grail can be divided into two branches. The first concerns King Arthur's knights visiting the Grail castle or questing after the object:\nThe other branch tells the Grail's earlier history since the time of Joseph of Arimathea:\nChr\u00e9tien de Troyes and continuators.\nThe subject is first featured in \"Perceval, le Conte du Graal\" (\"The Story of the Grail\") by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes, who claims he was working from a source book given to him by his patron, Count Philip of Flanders. In this incomplete poem, dated sometime between 1180 and 1191, the object has not yet acquired the implications it would have in later works.\nWhile dining in the magical castle of the Fisher King, Perceval witnesses a wondrous procession in which youths carry magnificent objects from one chamber to another, passing before him at each course of the meal. First comes a young man carrying a bleeding lance, then two boys carrying candelabras. Finally, a beautiful young girl emerges bearing an elaborately decorated \"graal\", or \"grail\". Perceval, who had been warned against talking too much, remains silent through all of this and wakes up the next morning alone. Later, a hermit informs Perceval that the latter is a \"very holy thing\" in which a host is served that miraculously keeps the crippled Fisher King alive. If Perceval had asked the appropriate questions about the meaning of the lance and the grail, he would have healed his maimed host.\nChr\u00e9tien refers to this object not as \"the Grail\" but as \"a grail\" (\"un graal\"), showing the word was used, in its earliest literary context, as a common noun. For Chr\u00e9tien, a grail was a wide, somewhat deep, dish or bowl, interesting because it contained not a pike, salmon, or lamprey, as the audience may have expected for such a container, but a single Communion wafer. The story of the Wounded King's mystical fasting is not unique; several saints were said to have lived without food besides communion, for instance Saint Catherine of Genoa. This may imply that Chr\u00e9tien intended the Communion wafer to be the significant part of the ritual, and the Grail to be a mere prop. H\u00e9linand of Froidmont's \"Chronicon\" described it as a \"wide and deep saucer\" (\"scutella lata et aliquantulum profunda\"). It is also mentioned by others such as Rigaut de Barbezieux.\nChr\u00e9tien's Perceval does not achieve the quest, but four different authors attempted to completed his unfinished story in their own poems known as \"Perceval Continuations\" that include two successive follow up tales and then two alternative endings. In these works, the mysteries left unsolved by Chr\u00e9tien (the bleeding lance, the broken sword, the wounded king) develop an explicitly Christian character, transforming a chivalric adventure into a mystical religious quest, undertaken by not only Perceval but also Gawain.\nThe \"First Continuation\" (\"Gawain Continuation\") seemingly features two grails: a floating dish and a carved head of Jesus. The \"Third Continuation\" has it again as carried by a girl. Here, the Fisher King dies and is replaced by Perceval, after whose death the Grail is taken to Heaven.\nGerman stories.\nIn \"Parzival\", the author Wolfram von Eschenbach, citing the authority of a certain (probably fictional) Kyot the Proven\u00e7al, claimed the Grail was a gemstone, the sanctuary of the neutral angels who took neither side during Lucifer's rebellion. It is called \"lapis exillis\" (other forms \"lapsis\", \"lapsit\", \"exilis\"), which in alchemy is the name of the philosopher's stone. In Wolfram's telling, the Grail was kept safe at the castle of Munsalvaesche (\"mons salvationis\"), entrusted to Titurel, the first Grail King. The stone grants eternal life to its guardian. First, Gawain fails his quest, given to him by the elven king Vergulaht. In the end, Perceval (Parzival) replaces the maimed and long suffering Anfortas as the new Grail King, having finally released him by correctly answering his question. \nIn \"Diu Cr\u00f4ne\", a secularised and subversive of version of the Grail Quest, has Gawain as the main Grail Knight. The work also notably features the figure of the crowned Grail Goddess (where the German word \"gotinne\" may be understood as synonymous with fairy) in a much larger role than an usual Grail Maiden. Uniquely across the Grail legend, it is Gawain who solves the mystery and releases the Grail King from his state of living death, after which the entire cursed court of the Grail Kingdom vanishes.\nRobert de Boron and continuators.\nThough Chr\u00e9tien's account is the earliest and most influential of all Grail texts, it was in the work of Robert de Boron that the Grail truly became the \"Holy Grail\" and assumed the form most familiar to modern readers in its Christian context. In his \"Joseph d'Arimathie\", composed between 1191 and 1202, Robert tells the story of Joseph of Arimathea acquiring the chalice of the Last Supper to collect Christ's blood upon his removal from the cross. Joseph is thrown in prison, where Christ visits him and explains the mysteries of the blessed cup. Upon his release, Joseph gathers his in-laws and other followers and travels west to Britain, where he founds a dynasty of Grail keepers that eventually includes Perceval.\nRobert returned to the subject of the Grail as a major theme in \"Merlin\" where he linked it to the figure of Merlin, turned by him into a Grail prophet who orders the construction of the Round Table as a successor item to the previous Grail tables of Jesus and Joseph. Perceval himself is the subject of the \"Prose Perceval\" (\"Perceval en prose\"), a rare work sometimes attributed to Robert that presents a revised and completed version of Chr\u00e9tien's story while simultaneously also serving as a continuation to \"Joseph\" and \"Merlin\".\nIn the anonymous prose \"Perlesvaus\", another but markedly different continuation of Chr\u00e9tien's \"Perceval\", the Grail is a holy blood relic creating mystical visions and appearing in the form of a hovering chalice, apparently as inspired by the works of de Boron. It a religious militant work where its hero Perlesvaus (i.e. Perceval) punishes infidels and conquers the Grail castle in an allegory for establishing the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nThe vast prose \"Vulgate Cycle\" (\"Lancelot-Grail\") finished the story set up by Robert de Boron in \"Joseph\" and \"Merlin\", the works themselves incorporated into the cycle in an expanded form as the Vulgate \"Estoire dou Graal\" (\"History of the Grail\") and the Vulgate \"Merlin\", in the continuation known as the Vulgate \"Queste del Saint Graal\" (\"Quest for the Holy Grail\"). Here, the main Grail hero is Galahad, son of the world's hitherto greatest knight, Lancelot, and the Fisher King's daughter and the Grail Bearer at the castle of Corbenic, Elaine. Both of his parents come from Biblical lineages and he is destined to achieve the Grail, a symbol of divine grace, as the virgin Galahad's spiritual purity makes him superior to even his illustrious father.\nIn the \"Estoire\", the definition and characterization of the Grail change over the course of the story. It is initially only mentioned as the holy \"bowl\", then is referred to as a \"vase\", before definitively becoming a cup and the \"grail\". It is also kept in a marvelous ark and forbidden to ordinary mortals, reminiscent of the Ark of the Covenant. The Grail again appears in the Vulgate \"Lancelot\", featured in a story loosely based on Chr\u00e9tien (the procession here is witnessed by Lancelot and later by Bors), as well as in a new original episode of Elaine using it to cure Lancelot's madness (having also physically healed Hector and Bors in previous chapter). In the \"Queste\", the corruption of the inhabitants of Britain resulted in the loss of the Grail and its return to the Middle Eastern city of Sarras.\nThe \"Queste\" tells of the adventures of various Knights of the Round Table in their eponymous great quest in search of the Grail, who embark on it against the worried Arthur's reservations and wander throughout Britain and the broader world alone or in small groups. Perceval and Bors the Younger eventually join Galahad, who had been earlier proved uniquely worthy and predestined for it by surviving the Siege Perilous. They are present as his companions at the successful end of the Grail Quest, when they witness his ascension to Heaven. The mystery of the Grail is finally unveiled as containing an incarnation of Christ. Perceval himself dies after a year in a hermitage in Sarras. A total of 72 knights perish and the Round Table never fully recovers, setting the stage for the collapse of the Arthurian world in the cycle's final part, the \"Mort Artu\".\nVariants of the Grail Quest based on that from the \"Vulgate Cycle\" are featured in the long version of the \"Prose Tristan\" and in the \"Post-Vulgate Cycle\". The Galahad-centered tradition was later picked by Thomas Malory for his \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" and remains popular today. Based on the Vulgate \"Queste\" in an abridged form, Malory's telling accordingly elevates Galahad above Perceval (\"Percivale\"), the latter reduced to a secondary role in the Quest. Uniquely, Malory described the Grail as invisible, apparently confused by his French source text's mention of an invisible Grail bearer.\nLater traditions.\nRelics.\nIn the wake of the Arthurian romances, several artifacts came to be identified as the Holy Grail in medieval relic veneration. These artifacts are said to have been the vessel used at the Last Supper, but other details vary. Despite the prominence of the Grail literature, traditions about a Last Supper relic remained rare in contrast to other items associated with Jesus' last days, such as the True Cross and Holy Lance.\nOne tradition predates the Grail romances: in the 7th century, the pilgrim Arculf reported that the Last Supper chalice was displayed near Jerusalem. In the wake of Robert de Boron's Grail works, several other items came to be claimed as the true Last Supper vessel. In the late 12th century, one was said to be in Byzantium; Albrecht von Scharfenberg's Grail romance \"Der J\u00fcngere Titurel\" associated it explicitly with the Arthurian Grail, but claimed it was only a copy. This item was said to have been looted in the Fourth Crusade and brought to Troyes in France, but it was lost during the French Revolution.\nTwo relics associated with the Grail survive today. The \"Sacro Catino\" (Sacred Basin, also known as the Genoa Chalice) is a green glass dish held at the Genoa Cathedral said to have been used at the Last Supper. Its provenance is unknown, and there are two divergent accounts of how it was brought to Genoa by Crusaders in the 12th century. It was not associated with the Last Supper until later, in the wake of the Grail romances; the first known association is in Jacobus de Voragine's chronicle of Genoa in the late 13th century, which draws on the Grail literary tradition. The Catino was moved and broken during Napoleon's conquest in the early 19th century, revealing that it is glass rather than emerald.\nThe Holy Chalice of Valencia is an agate dish with a mounting for use as a chalice. The bowl may date to Greco-Roman times, but its dating is unclear, and its provenance is unknown before 1399, when it was gifted to Martin I of Aragon. By the 14th century, an elaborate tradition had developed that this object was the Last Supper chalice. This tradition mirrors aspects of the Grail material, with several major differences, suggesting a separate tradition entirely. It is not associated with Joseph of Arimathea or Jesus' blood; it is said to have been taken to Rome by Saint Peter and later entrusted to Saint Lawrence. Early references do not call the object the \"Grail\". The first evidence connecting it to the Grail tradition is from the 15th century, when the monarchy sold the cup to Valencia Cathedral. It remains a significant local icon.\nSeveral objects were identified with the Holy Grail in the 17th century. In the 20th century, a series of new items became associated with it. These include the Nanteos Cup, a medieval wooden bowl found near Rhydyfelin, Wales; a glass dish found near Glastonbury, England; the Antioch chalice, a 6th-century silver-gilt object that became attached to the Grail legend in the 1930s; and the Chalice of Do\u00f1a Urraca, a cup made between 200 BC and 100 AD, kept in Le\u00f3n\u2019s Basilica of Saint Isidore.\nLocations associated with the Holy Grail.\nIn the modern era, a number of places have become associated with the Holy Grail. One of the most prominent is Glastonbury in Somerset, England. Glastonbury was associated with King Arthur and his resting place of Avalon by the 12th century. In the 13th century, a legend arose that Joseph of Arimathea was the founder of Glastonbury Abbey. Early accounts of Joseph at Glastonbury focus on his role as the evangelist of Britain rather than as the custodian of the Holy Grail, but from the 15th century, the Grail became a more prominent part of the legends surrounding Glastonbury. Interest in Glastonbury resurged in the late 19th century, inspired by renewed interest in the Arthurian legend and contemporary spiritual movements centered on ancient sacred sites. In the late 19th century, John Goodchild hid a glass bowl near Glastonbury; a group of his friends, including Wellesley Tudor Pole, retrieved the cup in 1906 and promoted it as the original Holy Grail. Glastonbury and its Holy Grail legend have since become a point of focus for various New Age and Neopagan groups.\nSome, not least the Benedictine monks, have identified the castle from \"Parzival\" with their real sanctuary of Montserrat in Catalonia. In the early 20th century, esoteric writers identified Monts\u00e9gur, a stronghold of the heretical Cathar sect in the 13th century, as the Grail castle. Similarly, the 14th-century Rosslyn Chapel in Midlothian, Scotland, became attached to the Grail legend in the mid-20th century when a succession of conspiracy books identified it as a secret hiding place of the Grail.\nModern interpretations.\nScholarly hypotheses.\nScholars have long speculated on the origins of the Holy Grail before Chr\u00e9tien, suggesting that it may contain elements of the trope of magical cauldrons from Celtic mythology and later Welsh mythology (notably including the Arthurian tale of \"Preiddeu Annwfn\"), combined with Christian legend surrounding the Eucharist, the latter found in Eastern Christian sources, conceivably in that of the Byzantine Mass, or even Persian sources. The view that the \"origin\" of the Grail legend should be seen as deriving from Celtic mythology was championed by Roger Sherman Loomis (\"The Grail: From Celtic Myth to Christian Symbol\"), Alfred Nutt (\"Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail\", available at Wikisource), and Jessie Weston (\"From Ritual to Romance\" and \"The Quest of the Holy Grail\"). Loomis et al (e.g. John Matthews in \"The Grail Tradition\") traced a number of parallels between medieval Welsh literature and Irish material, and the Grail romances, including similarities between the \"Mabinogion\"'s Bran the Blessed and the Arthurian Fisher King, and between Bran's life-restoring cauldron and the Grail.\nThe opposing view dismissed the \"Celtic\" connections as spurious, and interpreted the legend as essentially Christian in origin. Joseph Goering identified sources for Grail imagery in 12th-century wall paintings from churches in the Catalan Pyrenees (now mostly moved to the Museu Nacional d'Art de Catalunya), which present unique iconic images of the Virgin Mary holding a bowl that radiates tongues of fire, images that predate the first literary account by Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes. Goering argues that they were the original inspiration for the Grail legend.\nPsychologists Emma Jung and Marie-Louise von Franz used analytical psychology to interpret the Grail as a series of symbols in their book \"The Grail Legend\". They directly expanded on interpretations by Carl Jung, which were later invoked by Joseph Campbell. Philosopher Henry Corbin, a member of the Eranos circle founded by Jung, also commented on the esoteric significance of the grail, relating it to the Iranian Islamic symbols that he studied.\nDaniel Scavone (1999, 2003) argued that the \"Grail\" originally referred to the Image of Edessa. According to Richard Barber (2004), the Grail legend is connected to the introduction of \"more ceremony and mysticism\" surrounding the sacrament of the Eucharist in the high medieval period, proposing that the first Grail stories may have been connected to the \"renewal in this traditional sacrament\". Goulven Peron (2016) suggested that the Holy Grail may reflect the horn of the river-god Achelous, as described by Ovid in the \"Metamorphoses\".\nPseudohistory and conspiracy theories.\nSince the 19th century, the Holy Grail has been linked to various conspiracy theories. In 1818, Austrian pseudohistorical writer Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall connected the Grail to contemporary myths surrounding the Knights Templar that cast the order as a secret society dedicated to mystical knowledge and relics. In Hammer-Purgstall's work, the Grail is not a physical relic, but a symbol of the secret knowledge that the Templars sought. There is no historical evidence linking the Templars to a search for the Grail, but subsequent writers have elaborated on the Templar theories.\nStarting in the early 20th century, writers, particularly in France, further connected the Templars and Grail to the Cathars. In 1906, French esoteric writer Jos\u00e9phin P\u00e9ladan identified the Cathar castle of Monts\u00e9gur with Munsalv\u00e4sche or Montsalvat, the Grail castle in Wolfram's \"Parzival\". This identification has inspired a wider legend asserting that the Cathars possessed the Holy Grail. According to these stories, the Cathars guarded the Grail at Monts\u00e9gur, and smuggled it out when the castle fell in 1244.\nBeginning in 1933, German writer Otto Rahn published a series of books tying the Grail, Templars, and Cathars to modern German nationalist mythology. According to Rahn, the Grail was a symbol of a pure Germanic religion repressed by Christianity. Rahn's books inspired interest in the Grail within Nazi occultist circles, and led to the SS chief Heinrich Himmler's abortive sponsorship of Rahn's search for the Grail, as well as many subsequent conspiracy theories and fictional works about the Nazis searching for the Grail.\nIn the late 20th century, writers Michael Baigent, Richard Leigh, and Henry Lincoln created one of the most widely known conspiracy theories about the Holy Grail. The theory first appeared on the BBC documentary series \"Chronicle\" in the 1970s, and was elaborated upon in the bestselling 1982 book \"Holy Blood, Holy Grail\". The theory combines myths about the Templars and Cathars with various other legends, and a prominent hoax about a secret order called the Priory of Sion. According to this theory, the Holy Grail is not a physical object, but a symbol of the bloodline of Jesus. The blood connection is based on the etymological reading of \"san greal\" (holy grail) as \"sang real\" (royal blood), which dates to the 15th century. The narrative developed is that Jesus was not divine, and had children with Mary Magdalene, who took the family to France where their descendants became the Merovingian dynasty. Supposedly, while the Catholic Church worked to destroy the dynasty, they were protected by the Priory of Sion and their associates, including the Templars, Cathars, and other secret societies. The book, its arguments, and its evidence have been widely dismissed by scholars as pseudohistorical, but it has had a vast influence on conspiracy and alternate history books. It has also inspired fiction, most notably Dan Brown's 2003 novel \"The Da Vinci Code\" and its 2006 film adaptation.\nMusic and painting.\nThe combination of hushed reverence, chromatic harmonies and sexualized imagery in Richard Wagner's final music drama \"Parsifal\", premiered in 1882, developed this theme, associating the Grail \u2013 now periodically producing blood \u2013 directly with female fertility. The high seriousness of the subject was also epitomized in Dante Gabriel Rossetti's painting in which a woman modeled by Alexa Wilding holds the Grail with one hand, while adopting a gesture of blessing with the other.\nA major mural series depicting the Quest for the Holy Grail was done by the artist Edwin Austin Abbey during the first decade of the 20th century for the Boston Public Library. Other artists, including George Frederic Watts and William Dyce, also portrayed grail subjects.\nLiterature.\nThe story of the Grail and of the quest to find it became increasingly popular in the 19th century, referred to in literature such as Alfred, Lord Tennyson's Arthurian cycle \"Idylls of the King\". A sexualised interpretation of the grail, now identified with female genitalia, appeared in 1870 in Hargrave Jennings' book \"The Rosicrucians, Their Rites and Mysteries\".\nFilm and other media.\nIn the cinema, the Holy Grail debuted in the 1904 silent film \"Parsifal\", an adaptation of Wagner's opera by Edwin S. Porter. More recent cinematic adaptations include Costain's \"The Silver Chalice\" made into a 1954 film by Victor Saville and Brown's \"The Da Vinci Code\" turned into a 2006 film by Ron Howard.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14323", "revid": "10274643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14323", "title": "Hunt the Wumpus", "text": "1973 video game\nHunt the Wumpus is a text-based adventure game developed by Gregory Yob in 1973. In the game, the player moves through a series of connected caves, arranged as the vertices of a dodecahedron, as they hunt a monster named the Wumpus. The turn-based game has the player trying to avoid fatal bottomless pits and \"super bats\" that will move them around the cave system; the goal is to fire one of their \"crooked arrows\" through the caves to kill the Wumpus. Yob created the game in early 1973 due to his annoyance at the multiple hide-and-seek games set in caves in a grid pattern, and multiple variations of the game were sold via mail order by Yob and the People's Computer Company. The source code to the game was published in \"Creative Computing\" in 1975 and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing\" the following year.\nThe game sparked multiple variations and expanded versions and was ported to several systems, including the TI-99/4A home computer. It has been cited as an early example of the survival horror genre, and was listed in 2012 on \"Time\"'s All-Time 100 greatest video games list. The Wumpus monster has appeared in several forms in media since 1973, including other video games, a novella, and \"\" cards.\nGameplay.\n\"Hunt the Wumpus\" is a text-based adventure game set in a series of caves connected by tunnels. In one of the twenty caves is a \"Wumpus\", which the player is attempting to kill. Additionally, two of the caves contain bottomless pits, while two others contain \"super bats\" which will pick up the player and move them to a random cave. The game is turn-based; each cave is given a number by the game, and each turn begins with the player being told which cave they are in and which caves are connected to it by tunnels. The player then elects to either move to one of those connected caves or shoot one of their five \"crooked arrows\", named for their ability to change direction while in flight. Each cave is connected to three others, and the system as a whole is equivalent to a dodecahedron.\nThe caves are in complete darkness, so the player cannot see into adjacent caves; instead, upon moving to a new empty cave, the game describes if they can smell a Wumpus, hear a bat, or feel a draft from a pit in one of the connected caves. Entering a cave with a pit ends the game due to the player falling in, while entering the cave with the Wumpus startles it; the Wumpus will either move to another cave or remain and kill the player. If the player chooses to fire an arrow, they first select how many caves, up to five, that the arrow will travel through, and then enters each cave that the arrow moves through. If the player enters a cave number that is not connected to where the arrow is, the game picks a valid option at random. If the arrow hits the player while it is travelling, the player loses; if it hits the Wumpus, they win. If the arrow does not hit anything, then the Wumpus is startled and may move to a new cave; unlike the player, the Wumpus is not affected by super bats or pits. If the Wumpus moves to the player's location, they lose.\nDevelopment.\nIn early 1973, Gregory Yob was looking through some of the games published by the People's Computer Company (PCC), and grew annoyed that there were multiple games, including \"Hurkle\" and \"Mugwump\", that had the player \"hide and seek\" in a 10 by 10 grid. Yob was inspired to make a game that used a non-grid pattern, where the player would move through points connected through some other type of topology. Yob came up with the name \"Hunt the Wumpus\" that afternoon, and decided from there that the player would traverse through rooms arranged in a non-grid pattern, with a monster called a Wumpus somewhere in them.\nYob chose a dodecahedron because it was his favorite Platonic solid, and because he had once made a kite shaped like one. From there, Yob added the arrows to shoot between rooms, terming it the \"crooked arrow\" as it would need to change directions to go through multiple caves, and decided that the player could only sense nearby caves by smell, as a light would wake the Wumpus up. He then added the bottomless pits, and a couple days later the super bats. Finally, feeling that players would want to create a map, he made the cave map fixed and gave each cave a number. Yob later claimed that, to his knowledge, most players did not create maps of the cave system, nor follow his expected strategy of carefully moving around the system to determine exactly where the Wumpus was before firing an arrow. While playtesting the game, Yob found it unexciting that the Wumpus always stayed in one place, and so changed it to be able to move. He then delivered a copy of the game, written in BASIC, to the PCC.\nIn May 1973, one month after he had finished coding the game, Yob went to a conference at Stanford University and discovered that in the section of the conference where the PCC had set up computer terminals, multiple players were engrossed in playing \"Wumpus\", making it, in his opinion, a hit game. The PCC first mentioned the game in its newsletter in September as a \"cave game\" that would be available to order through them soon, and gave it a full two-page description in its next issue in November of the same year. Tapes containing \"Wumpus\" were sold via mail order by both the PCC and Yob himself. The PCC description was republished along with source code in its book \"What to Do After You Hit Return\" in 1977, while a description of the game and its source code was published in \"Creative Computing\" in its October 1975 issue, and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing\" the following year. It also appeared in other books of BASIC games, such as \"Computer Programs in BASIC\" in 1981.\nLegacy.\nMultiple versions of \"Hunt the Wumpus\" were created and distributed after the game's release. Yob made \"Wumpus 2\" and \"Wumpus 3\", beginning immediately after finishing the original game, with \"Wumpus 2\" adding different cave arrangements and \"Wumpus 3\" adding more hazards. The source code for \"Wumpus 2\" was published in \"Creative Computing\" and republished in \"The Best of Creative Computing 2\" (1977), along with a description of \"Wumpus 3\". The PCC announced in the same November 1973 newsletter issue as it discussed the original game that a version from them titled \"Super Wumpus\" would be available soon, and listed it in its order catalog in its January 1974 issue under both that name and \"Wumpus 3\". In 1978, a book titled \"Superwumpus\", by Jack Emmerichs, was published containing source code for both BASIC and assembly language versions of his unrelated version of \"Hunt the Wumpus\".\nIn addition to the original BASIC games, versions of \"Hunt the Wumpus\" have been created for numerous other systems. Yob had seen or heard of versions in several languages, such as IBM RPG and Fortran, by 1975. A version in C, written in November 1973 by Ken Thompson, creator of the Unix operating system, was released in 1974; a later C version can still be found in the bsdgames package on modern BSD and Linux operating systems. In 1978, Danny Hillis, working as a summer intern on the TMS9918 graphics chip, wrote a graphical version of the game as a demonstration with the pattern of caves displayed as a torus instead of a dodecahedron, which was later published as a commercial game for the TI-99/4A. In 1981, a version was released for the HP-41C calculator. \n\"Hunt the Wumpus\" has been cited as an early example of a survival horror game; the book \"Vampires and Zombies\" claims that it was an early example of the genre, while the paper \"Restless dreams in Silent Hill\" states that \"from a historical perspective the genre's roots lie in \"Hunt the Wumpus\"\". Other sources, however, such as the book \"The World of Scary Video Games\", claim that the game lacks elements needed for a \"horror\" game, as the player hunts rather than is hunted by the Wumpus, and nothing in the game is explicitly intended to frighten the player, making it more of an early adventure or puzzle game. Kevin Cogger of 1Up.com claimed that \"Wumpus\", whether or not it is an adventure game, \"introduced a number of concepts that would come to define the adventure genre\", such as presenting the game from the perspective of the player-character, and non-grid-based map design. In 2012, \"Hunt the Wumpus\" was listed on \"Time\"'s All-Time 100 greatest video games list.\nThe Wumpus monster has appeared in several different forms of media, such as several \"Wumpus\" creature cards in ' including a \"Hunted Wumpus\", video games such as \"M.U.L.E.\" (1983), and Cory Doctorow's 2011 novella \"The Great Big Beautiful Tomorrow\". The textbook ', with editions published since 1995, uses a version of this game as one of the examples. An interactive audio-only version of the game was displayed by Jared Bendis as \"Treasure of the Wumpus in the Azimuth Cave\" at festivals in Ohio from 2011 to 2018, and an interactive touch screen version of the game, \"Return to Wumpus Cave\", was presented in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14324", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14324", "title": "Hash", "text": "Hash, hashes, hash mark, or hashing may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14325", "revid": "47714068", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14325", "title": "Hearst Communications", "text": "American multinational mass media conglomerate group\nHearst Corporation, Hearst Holdings Inc. and Hearst Communications Inc. comprise an American multinational mass media and business information conglomerate owned by the Hearst family and based in Hearst Tower in Midtown Manhattan in New York City.\nHearst owns newspapers, magazines, television channels, and television stations, including the \"Albany Times-Union\", \"Houston Chronicle\", \"San Francisco Chronicle\", \"Cosmopolitan\" and \"Esquire\". It owns 50 percent of the A&amp;E Global Media cable network group and 20 percent of the Walt Disney Company's sports division ESPN Inc.. The conglomerate also owns Fitch Group and First Databank. \nThe company was founded by William Randolph Hearst, a newspaper owner most well known for use of yellow journalism. The Hearst family remains involved in its ownership and management.\nHistory.\nFormative years.\nIn 1880, George Hearst, mining entrepreneur and U.S. senator, bought the \"San Francisco Daily Examiner.\" In 1887, he turned the \"Examiner\" over to his son, William Randolph Hearst, who that year founded the Hearst Corporation. The younger Hearst eventually built readership for Hearst-owned newspapers and magazines from 15,000 to over 20 million. Hearst began to purchase and launch other newspapers, including the \"New York Journal\" in 1895 and the \"Los Angeles Examiner\" in 1903.\nIn 1903, Hearst created \"Motor\" magazine, the first title in his company's magazine division. He acquired \"Cosmopolitan\" in 1905, and \"Good Housekeeping\" in 1911. The company entered the book publishing business in 1913 with the formation of Hearst's International Library. Hearst began producing film features in the mid-1910s, creating one of the earliest animation studios: the International Film Service, turning characters from Hearst newspaper strips into film characters.\nHearst bought the \"Atlanta Georgian\" in 1912, the \"San Francisco Call\" and the \"San Francisco Post\" in 1913, the \"Boston Advertiser\" and the \"Washington Times\" (unrelated to the present-day paper) in 1917, and the \"Chicago Herald\" in 1918 (resulting in the \"Herald-Examiner\").\nIn 1919, Hearst's book publishing division was renamed Cosmopolitan Book.\nPeak era.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, Hearst owned the biggest media conglomerate in the world, which included a number of magazines and newspapers in major cities. Hearst also began acquiring radio stations to complement his papers. Hearst saw financial challenges in the early 1920s, when he was using company funds to build Hearst Castle in San Simeon and support movie production at Cosmopolitan Productions. This eventually led to the merger of the magazine \"Hearst International\" with \"Cosmopolitan\" in 1925.\nDespite some financial troubles, Hearst began extending its reach in 1921, purchasing the \"Detroit Times\", \"The Boston Record,\" and the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer.\" Hearst then added the \"Los Angeles Herald\" and \"Washington Herald,\" as well as the \"Oakland Post-Enquirer\", the \"Syracuse Telegram\" and the \"Rochester Journal-American\" in 1922. He continued his buying spree into the mid-1920s, purchasing the \"Baltimore News\" (1923), the \"San Antonio Light\" (1924), the \"Albany Times Union\" (1924), and \"The Milwaukee Sentinel\" (1924). In 1924, Hearst entered the tabloid market in New York City with \"New York Daily Mirror\", meant to compete with the \"New York Daily News\".\nIn addition to print and radio, Hearst established Cosmopolitan Pictures in the early 1920s, distributing his films under the newly created Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. In 1929, Hearst and MGM created the Hearst Metrotone newsreels.\nRetrenching after the Great Depression.\nThe Great Depression hurt Hearst and his publications. Cosmopolitan Book was sold to Farrar &amp; Rinehart in 1931. After two years of leasing them to Eleanor \"Cissy\" Patterson (of the McCormick-Patterson family that owned the \"Chicago Tribune\"), Hearst sold her \"The Washington Times\" and \"Herald\" in 1939; she merged them to form the \"Washington Times-Herald\". That year he also bought the \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" from Paul Block (who bought it from the Pfisters in 1929), absorbing his afternoon \"Wisconsin News\" into the morning publication. Also in 1939, he sold the \"Atlanta Georgian\" to Cox Newspapers, which merged it with the \"Atlanta Journal\".\nFollowing Adolf Hitler's rise to power in Germany, William Randolph Hearst personally instructed his reporters in Germany to only give positive coverage to Hitler and the Nazis, and fired journalists who refused to write stories favourable of German fascism. During this time, high ranking Nazis were given space to write articles in Hearst press newspapers, including Hermann G\u00f6ring and Alfred Rosenberg.\nHearst, with his chain now owned by his creditors after a 1937 liquidation, also had to merge some of his morning papers into his afternoon papers. In Chicago, he combined the morning \"Herald-Examiner\" and the afternoon \"American\" into the \"Herald-American\" in 1939. This followed the 1937 combination of the New York \"Evening Journal\" and the morning \"American\" into the \"New York Journal-American\", the sale of the \"Omaha Daily Bee\" to the \"World-Herald\".\nAfternoon papers were a profitable business in pre-television days, often outselling their morning counterparts featuring stock market information in early editions, while later editions were heavy on sporting news with results of baseball games and horse races. Afternoon papers also benefited from continuous reports from the battlefront during World War II. After the war, however, both television news and suburbs experienced explosive growth; thus, evening papers were more affected than those published in the morning, whose circulation remained stable while their afternoon counterparts' sales plummeted.\nIn 1947, Hearst produced an early television newscast for the DuMont Television Network: \"I.N.S. Telenews\", and in 1948 he became the owner of WBAL-TV in Baltimore.\nThe earnings of Hearst's three morning papers, the \"San Francisco Examiner\", the \"Los Angeles Examiner\", and \"The Milwaukee Sentinel\", supported the company's money-losing afternoon publications such as the \"Los Angeles Herald-Express\", the \"New York Journal-American\", and the \"Chicago American\". The company sold the latter paper in 1956 to the \"Chicago Tribune\"'s owners, who changed it to the tabloid-size \"Chicago Today\" in 1969 and ceased publication in 1974. In 1960, Hearst also sold the \"Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph\" to the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" and the \"Detroit Times\" to \"The Detroit News\". After a lengthy strike it sold the \"Milwaukee Sentinel\" to the afternoon \"Milwaukee Journal\" in 1962. The same year Hearst's Los Angeles papers \u2013 the morning \"Examiner\" and the afternoon \"Herald-Express\" \u2013 merged to become the evening \"Los Angeles Herald-Examiner\". The 1962\u201363 New York City newspaper strike left the city with no papers for over three months, with the \"Journal-American\" one of the earliest strike targets of the Typographical Union. The \"Boston Record\" and the \"Evening American\" merged in 1961 as the \"Record-American\" and in 1964, the \"Baltimore News-Post\" became the \"Baltimore News-American\".\nIn 1953, Hearst Magazines bought \"Sports Afield\" magazine, which it published until 1999 when it sold the journal to Robert E. Petersen. In 1958, Hearst's International News Service merged with E.W. Scripps' United Press, forming United Press International as a response to the growth of the Associated Press and Reuters. The following year Scripps-Howard's \"San Francisco News\" merged with Hearst's afternoon \"San Francisco Call-Bulletin\". Also in 1959, Hearst acquired the paperback book publisher Avon Books.\nIn 1965, the Hearst Corporation began pursuing joint operating agreements (JOAs). It reached the first agreement with the DeYoung family, proprietors of the afternoon \"San Francisco Chronicle\", which began to produce a joint Sunday edition with the \"Examiner\". In turn, the \"Examiner\" became an evening publication, absorbing the \"News-Call-Bulletin\". The following year, the \"Journal-American\" reached another JOA with another two landmark New York City papers: the \"New York Herald Tribune\" and Scripps-Howard's \"World-Telegram and Sun\" to form the \"New York World Journal Tribune\" (recalling the names of the city's mid-market dailies), which collapsed after only a few months.\nThe 1962 merger of the \"Herald-Express\" and \"Examiner\" in Los Angeles led to the termination of many journalists who began to stage a 10-year strike in 1967. The effects of the strike accelerated the pace of the company's demise, with the \"Herald Examiner\" ceasing publication November 2, 1989.\nNewspaper shifts.\nHearst moved into hardcover publishing by acquiring Arbor House in 1978 and William Morrow and Company in 1981.\nIn 1982, the company sold the \"Boston Herald American\" \u2014 the result of the 1972 merger of Hearst's \"Record-American &amp; Advertiser\" with the \"Herald-Traveler\" \u2014 to Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which renamed the paper as \"The Boston Herald\", competing to this day with \"The Boston Globe\".\nIn 1986, Hearst bought the \"Houston Chronicle\" and that same year closed the 213-year-old \"Baltimore News-American\" after a failed attempt to reach a JOA with A.S. Abell Company, the family who published \"The Baltimore Sun\" since its founding in 1837. Abell sold the paper several days later to the Times-Mirror syndicate of the Chandlers' \"Los Angeles Times\", also competitor to the \"Los Angeles Herald-Examiner\", which folded in 1989. In 1990, both King Features Entertainment and King Phoenix Entertainment were rebranded under the collective Hearst Entertainment umbrella. King Features Entertainment was renamed to Hearst Entertainment Distribution, while King Phoenix Entertainment was renamed to Hearst Entertainment Productions.\nIn 1993, Hearst closed the \"San Antonio Light\" after it purchased the rival \"San Antonio Express-News\" from Murdoch.\nOn November 8, 1990, Hearst Corporation acquired 20% stake of ESPN, Inc. from RJR Nabisco (now a subsidiary of Mondelez International) for a price estimated between $165 million and $175 million. The other 80% has been owned by The Walt Disney Company since 1996. Over the last 25 years, the ESPN investment is said to have accounted for at least 50% of total Hearst Corp profits and is worth at least $13 billion.\nIn April 1995, Netscape Communications Corporation announced Hearst was part of a group of private investors who purchased stake in the company.\nOn July 31, 1996, Hearst and the Cisneros Group of Companies of Venezuela announced its plans to launch Locomotion, a Latin American animation cable television channel.\nOn March 27, 1997, Hearst Broadcasting announced that it would merge with Argyle Television Holdings II for $525 million, the merger was completed in August to form Hearst-Argyle Television (later renamed as Hearst Television in 2009).\nIn 1999, Hearst sold its Avon and Morrow book publishing activities to HarperCollins.\nIn 2000, the Hearst Corp. sold its flagship and \"Monarch of the Dailies\", the afternoon \"San Francisco Examiner\", and acquiring the long-time competing, but now larger morning paper, \"San Francisco Chronicle\" from the Charles de Young family. The \"San Francisco Examiner\" is now published as a daily freesheet.\nIn December 2003, Marvel Entertainment acquired \"Cover Concepts\" from Hearst, to extend Marvel's demographic reach among public school children.\nIn 2006, Hearst acquired an interest in Fitch Group, a global financial services company. Hearst increased its ownership of Fitch Group to 80% in 2015, and to 100% in 2018.\nIn 2009, A&amp;E Networks acquired Lifetime Entertainment Services, with Hearst ownership increasing to 42%.\nIn 2010, Hearst acquired digital marketing agency iCrossing.\nIn 2011, Hearst absorbed more than 100 magazine titles from the Lagard\u00e8re Group for more than $700 million and became a challenger of Time Inc ahead of Cond\u00e9 Nast. In December 2012, Hearst Corporation partnered again with NBCUniversal to launch Esquire Network.\nOn February 20, 2014, Hearst Magazines International appointed Gary Ellis to the new position, Chief Digital Officer. That December, DreamWorks Animation sold a 25% stake in AwesomenessTV for $81.25\u00a0million to Hearst.\nIn January 2017, Hearst announced that it had acquired a majority stake in Litton Entertainment; Litton entertainment was rebranded as Hearst Media Production Group in 2022. Its CEO, Dave Morgan, was a former employee of Hearst.\nOn January 23, 2017, Hearst announced that it had acquired the business operations of The Pioneer Group from fourth-generation family owners Jack and John Batdorff. The Pioneer Group was a Michigan-based communications network that circulates print and digital news to local communities across the state. In addition to daily newspapers, \"The Pioneer\" and \"Manistee News Advocate\", Pioneer published three weekly papers and four local shopper publications, and operated a digital marketing services business. The acquisition brought Hearst Newspapers to publishing 19 daily and 61 weekly papers.\nOther 2017 acquisitions include the \"New Haven Register\" and associated papers from Digital First Media, and the Alton, Illinois, \"Telegraph\" and Jacksonville, Illinois, \"Journal-Courier\" from Civitas Media.\nIn October 2017, Hearst announced it would acquire the magazine and book businesses of Rodale in Emmaus, Pennsylvania with some sources reporting the purchase price as about $225 million. The transaction was expected to close in January following government approvals.\nIn 2018, Hearst acquired the global health and wellness magazine brands owned by Rodale, Inc.\nIn June 2020, Hearst Autos announced the acquisition of Bring a Trailer, a digital auction platform and auto enthusiast community.\nIn April 2023, Hearst bought WBBH-TV, an NBC-affiliated television station in Fort Myers, Florida, from Waterman Broadcasting Corporation. In June 2023, Hearst acquired the \"Journal Inquirer\" and later in October 2023 bought \"San Antonio Magazine.\" The company paid $150,000 in cash plus an amount equal to 90% of the magazine's accounts receivable\nIn November 2023, Hearst acquired all print and digital operations owned by RJ Media Group, including the \"Record-Journal\", seven weekly newspapers and a digital advertising agency. In December 2023, Hearst bought Puzzmo, a puzzle games website.\nIn April 2024, Hearst acquired the Texas magazines \"Austin Monthly\" and \"Austin Home\" from Open Sky Media. A new organization called was created Hearst Texas Austin Media to manage the titles along with the \"Austin Daily\" newsletter which was created early that year. Hearst bought a majority of the Motor Trend Group, including Motor Trend and its TV network counterpart, Hot Rod, Roadkill, and Automobile, in December 2024.\nIn August 2024, Hearst announced it would acquire QGenda, a provider of healthcare workforce management software solutions, from investment firms Francisco Partners and ICONIQ Growth. QGenda became the sixth business in the Hearst Health division following the acquisition of MCG (formerly Milliman Care Guidelines) in 2012, majority stakes in Homecare Homebase in 2013 and MHK (formerly MedHOK) in 2016.\nIn July 2025, Hearst announced its purchase of the \"Dallas Morning News.\"\nAssets.\nA non-exhaustive list of its current properties and investments includes:\nMagazines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrustees of William Randolph Hearst's will.\nUnder William Randolph Hearst's will, a common board of thirteen trustees (its composition fixed at five family members and eight outsiders) administers the Hearst Foundation, the William Randolph Hearst Foundation, and the trust that owns (and selects the 26-member board of) the Hearst Corporation (parent of Hearst Communications which shares the same officers). The foundations shared ownership until tax law changed to prevent this.\nIn 2009, it was estimated to be the largest private company managed by trustees in this way. As of 2017, the trustees are:\nNon-family members.\nThe trust dissolves when all family members alive at the time of Hearst's death in August 1951 have died.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14326", "revid": "26830857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14326", "title": "HMS Hercules", "text": "Five ships of the Royal Navy have borne the name HMS \"Hercules, or HMS \"Hercule, after the Greek and Roman hero Hercules. Another was launched, but never served in the Navy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "14327", "revid": "49468060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14327", "title": "HMAS Sydney", "text": "Five ships of the Royal Australian Navy have been named HMAS \"Sydney\", after Sydney, the capital city of New South Wales.\nBattle honours.\nBetween them, vessels named HMAS \"Sydney\" have been awarded fourteen battle honours by the Royal Australian Navy. These include two of the only three battle honours awarded in the 20th century for an action involving a single opposing ship:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "14328", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14328", "title": "Hunter S. Thompson", "text": "American journalist and author (1937\u20132005)\nHunter Stockton Thompson (July 18, 1937\u00a0\u2013 February 20, 2005) was an American journalist and author, regarded as a pioneer of New Journalism along with Gay Talese, Truman Capote, Norman Mailer, Joan Didion, and Tom Wolfe. He rose to prominence with the book \"\" (1967), for which he lived a year among the Hells Angels motorcycle club to write a first-hand account of their lives and experiences. In 1970, he wrote an unconventional article titled \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\" for \"Scanlan's Monthly\", which further raised his profile as a countercultural figure. It also set him on the path to establish the subgenre of New Journalism that he called \"Gonzo\", a style in which the writer becomes central to, and participant in the narrative.\nThompson is best known for \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1972), a book first serialized in \"Rolling Stone\" in which he grapples with the implications of what he considered the failure of the 1960s counterculture. It was adapted for film twice, loosely in 1980 in \"Where the Buffalo Roam\" and explicitly in 1998 in \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\".\nThompson ran unsuccessfully for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado, in 1970 on the Freak Power ticket. He became known for his intense dislike of Richard Nixon, who he claimed represented \"that dark, venal, and incurably violent side of the American character\". He covered George McGovern's 1972 presidential campaign for \"Rolling Stone\" and later collected the stories in book form as \"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\" (1973).\nStarting in the mid-1970s, Thompson's output declined, as he struggled with the consequences of fame and substance abuse, and failed to complete several high-profile assignments for \"Rolling Stone\". For much of the late 1980s and early 1990s, he worked as a columnist for the \"San Francisco Examiner\". Most of his work from 1979 to 1994 was collected in \"The Gonzo Papers\". He continued to write sporadically for outlets including \"Rolling Stone,\" \"Playboy\", \"Esquire,\" and ESPN.com until the end of his life.\nThompson had a lifelong use of alcohol and illegal drugs, a love of firearms, and an iconoclastic contempt for authority. He often remarked: \"I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence, or insanity to anyone, but they've always worked for me.\" On February 20, 2005, Thompson fatally shot himself at the age of 67, following a series of health problems. Hari Kunzru wrote, \"The true voice of Thompson is revealed to be that of American moralist\u00a0... one who often makes himself ugly to expose the ugliness he sees around him.\"\nEarly life.\nThompson was born into a middle-class family in Louisville, Kentucky, the first of three sons of Virginia Davison Ray (1908, Springfield, Kentucky \u2013 March 20, 1998, Louisville), who worked as head librarian at the Louisville Free Public Library and Jack Robert Thompson (September 4, 1893, Horse Cave, Kentucky \u2013 July 3, 1952, Louisville), a public insurance adjuster and World War I veteran. His parents were introduced by a friend from Jack's fraternity at the University of Kentucky in September 1934, and married on November 2, 1935. Journalist Nicholas Lezard of \"The Guardian\" stated that Thompson's first name, Hunter, came from an ancestor on his mother's side, Scottish surgeon John Hunter. A more direct attribution is that Thompson's first and middle name, Hunter Stockton, came from his maternal grandparents, Prestly Stockton Ray and Lucille Hunter.\nIn December 1943, when Thompson was six years old, the family settled in the affluent Cherokee Triangle neighborhood of The Highlands. On July 3, 1952, when Thompson was 14, his father died of myasthenia gravis at age 58. Hunter and his brothers were raised by their mother. Virginia worked as a librarian to support her children and was described as a \"heavy drinker\" following her husband's death.\nEducation.\nInterested in sports and athletically inclined from a young age, Thompson co-founded the Hawks Athletic Club while attending I.N. Bloom Elementary School, which led to an invitation to join Louisville's Castlewood Athletic Club for adolescents that prepared them for high-school sports. Ultimately, he never joined a sports team in high school. He grew up in the same neighborhood as mystery novelist Sue Grafton, who was a few years behind him in school.\nThompson attended I.N. Bloom Elementary School, Highland Middle School, and Atherton High School, before transferring to Louisville Male High School in fall 1952. Also in 1952, he was accepted as a member of the Athenaeum Literary Association, a school-sponsored literary and social club that dated to 1862. Its members at the time came from Louisville's upper-class families, and included Porter Bibb, who later became the first publisher of \"Rolling Stone\" at Thompson's behest. During this time, Thompson read and admired J.\u00a0P. Donleavy's \"The Ginger Man\".\nAs an Athenaeum member, Thompson contributed articles to and helped produce the club's yearbook \"The Spectator\", until the group ejected Thompson in 1955 for criminal activity. Charged as an accessory to robbery after being in a car with the perpetrator, Thompson was sentenced to 60 days in Kentucky's Jefferson County Jail. He served 31 days and, during his incarceration, was refused permission to take final exams, preventing his graduation. He enlisted in the United States Air Force upon release.\nMilitary service.\nThompson completed basic training at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas and transferred to Scott Air Force Base in Belleville, Illinois to study electronics. He applied to become an aviator, but the Air Force's aviation-cadet program rejected his application. In 1956, he transferred to Eglin Air Force Base near Fort Walton Beach, Florida. While serving at Eglin, he took evening classes at Florida State University. At Eglin, he landed his first professional writing job as sports editor of the \"Command Courier\" by lying about his job experience. As sports editor, Thompson traveled around the United States with the Eglin Eagles football team, covering its games. In early 1957, he wrote a sports column for \"The Playground News\", a local newspaper in Fort Walton Beach, Florida. His name did not appear on the column because Air Force regulations forbade outside employment.\nIn 1958, while he was an airman first class, his commanding officer recommended him for an early honorable discharge. \"In summary, this airman, although talented, will not be guided by policy,\" chief of information services Colonel William S. Evans wrote to the Eglin personnel office. \"Sometimes his rebel and superior attitude seems to rub off on other airmen staff members.\"\nEarly journalism career.\nAfter leaving the Air Force, Thompson worked as sports editor for a newspaper in Jersey Shore, Pennsylvania, before relocating to New York City. There, he audited several courses at the Columbia University School of General Studies. During this time, he worked briefly for \"Time\" as a copy boy for $51 a week. At work, he typed out parts of F. Scott Fitzgerald's \"The Great Gatsby\" and Ernest Hemingway's \"A Farewell to Arms\" to learn the authors' rhythms and writing styles. In 1959, \"Time\" fired him for insubordination. Later that year, he worked as a reporter for \"The Middletown Daily Record\" in Middletown, New York. He was fired from this job after damaging an office candy machine and arguing with the owner of a local restaurant, who happened to be an advertiser with the paper.\nIn 1960, Thompson moved to San Juan, Puerto Rico, to take a job with the sporting magazine \"El Sportivo\", which ceased operations soon after his arrival. Thompson applied for a job with the Puerto Rican English-language daily \"The San Juan Star\", but its managing editor, future novelist William J. Kennedy, turned him down. Nonetheless, the two became friends. After the demise of \"El Sportivo\", Thompson worked as a stringer for the \"New York Herald Tribune\" and a few other stateside papers on Caribbean issues, with Kennedy working as his editor.\nAfter returning to mainland United States in 1961, Thompson visited San Francisco and eventually lived in Big Sur, where he spent eight months as security guard and caretaker at Slates Hot Springs, just before it became the Esalen Institute. At the time, Big Sur was a Beat outpost and home of Henry Miller and the screenwriter Dennis Murphy, both of whom Thompson admired. During this period, he published his first magazine feature in \"Rogue\" about the artisan and bohemian culture of Big Sur and worked on \"The Rum Diary\". He managed to publish one short story, \"Burial at Sea\", which also appeared in \"Rogue\". It was his first piece of published fiction. \"The Rum Diary\", based on Thompson's experiences in Puerto Rico, was finally published in 1998 and in 2011 was adapted as a motion picture. Paul Perry notes that Thompson exhibited extreme homophobia while at Big Sur, making violent threats to expel gay bathers from local hot springs.\nIn May 1962, Thompson traveled to South America for a year as a correspondent for the Dow Jones-owned weekly paper, the \"National Observer\". In Brazil, he spent several months as a reporter for the Rio de Janeiro-based \"Brazil Herald\", the country's only English-language daily. His longtime girlfriend, Sandra Dawn Conklin (subsequently Sondi Wright), joined him in Rio. They married on May 19, 1963, shortly after returning to the United States, and lived briefly in Aspen, Colorado. Sandy was eight-months-pregnant when they relocated to Glen Ellen, California. Their son, Juan Fitzgerald Thompson, was born in March 1964. During the summer of that same year, Hunter began taking dextroamphetamine, which is what he would predominantly use for writing until around 1974, when he began to write mostly under the influence of cocaine.\nThompson continued to write for the \"National Observer\" on an array of domestic subjects during the early '60s. One story told of his 1964 visit to Ketchum, Idaho, to investigate the reasons for Ernest Hemingway's suicide. While there, he stole a pair of elk antlers hanging above the front door of Hemingway's cabin. Later that year, Thompson moved to San Francisco, where he attended the 1964 GOP Convention at the Cow Palace. Thompson severed his ties with the \"Observer\" after his editor refused to print his review of Tom Wolfe's 1965 essay collection \"The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby\". He later immersed himself in the drug and hippie culture taking root in the area, and soon began writing for the Berkeley underground paper \"Spider\".\n\"Hell's Angels\".\nIn 1965, Carey McWilliams, editor of \"The Nation\", hired Thompson to write a story about the Hells Angels motorcycle club in California. At the time, Thompson was living in a house near San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood, where the Hells Angels lived across from the Grateful Dead. His article appeared on May 17, 1965, after which he received several book offers and spent the next year living and riding with the club. The relationship broke down when the bikers perceived that Thompson was exploiting them for personal gain and demanded a share of his profits. An argument at a party resulted in Thompson suffering a savage beating (or \"stomping\", as the Angels referred to it) when Thompson intervened to protect a dog and a woman from physical abuse by a punk. Random House published the hard cover \"\" in 1966, and the fight between Thompson and the Angels was well-marketed. CBC Television even broadcast an encounter between Thompson and Hells Angel Skip Workman before a live studio audience.\nA \"New York Times\" review praised the work as an \"angry, knowledgeable, fascinating, and excitedly written book\", that shows the Hells Angels \"not so much as dropouts from society, but as total misfits, or unfits\u2014emotionally, intellectually, and educationally unfit to achieve the rewards, such as they are, that the contemporary social order offers\". The reviewer also praised Thompson as a \"spirited, witty, observant, and original writer; his prose crackles like motorcycle exhaust\".\nThompson also aided Danny Lyon in his role as photographer with the Outlaws Motorcycle Club, telling Lyon that he should not join the club unless \"it was absolutely necessary for photo action\".\nLate 1960s.\nFollowing the success of \"Hell's Angels\", Thompson sold stories to several national magazines, including \"The New York Times Magazine\", \"Esquire\", \"Pageant\", and \"Harper's\".\nIn 1967, shortly before the Summer of Love, Thompson wrote \"The 'Hashbury' is the Capital of the Hippies\" for \"The New York Times Magazine\". He criticized San Francisco's hippies as devoid of both the political convictions of the New Left and the artistic core of the Beats, resulting in a culture overrun with young people who spent their time in the pursuit of drugs. \"The thrust is no longer for 'change' or 'progress' or 'revolution', but merely to escape, to live on the far perimeter of a world that might have been \u2013 perhaps should have been \u2013 and strike a bargain for survival on purely personal terms,\" he wrote.\nLater that year, Thompson and his family moved back to Colorado and rented a house in Woody Creek, a small mountain hamlet outside Aspen. In early 1969, Thompson received a $15,000 royalty check for the paperback sales of \"Hell's Angels\", and used a portion of the proceeds on a down payment on a home and property where he would live for the rest of his life. It was a 110-acre piece of land that cost him $75,000. He named the house Owl Farm and often described it as his \"fortified compound\".\nIn early 1968, Thompson signed the \"Writers and Editors War Tax Protest\" pledge, vowing to refuse tax payments in protest against the Vietnam War. According to Thompson's letters from the period, he planned to write a book called \"The Joint Chiefs\" about \"the death of the American Dream.\" He used a $6,000 advance from Random House to travel the country covering the 1968 United States presidential election and attend the Democratic National Convention in Chicago for research. He watched the clashes between police and antiwar protesters from his hotel, and later claimed that events had a significant effect on his political views, saying, \"I went to the Democratic convention as a journalist and returned a raving beast.\" While Thompson never completed the book, he carried its theme into later work. He also signed a deal with Ballantine Books in 1968 to write a satirical book called \"The Johnson File\" about President Lyndon B. Johnson. A few weeks later, the deal fell through after Johnson withdrew from the election.\nThompson was impressed by \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's coverage of the disastrous Altamont Free Concert in December 1969. After writing to \"Rolling Stone\"'s editor, Jann Wenner, Thompson accepted an invitation to submit his work to the magazine, which soon became his primary outlet.\nMiddle years.\nAspen sheriff campaign.\nIn 1970, Thompson ran for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado, as part of a group of citizens running for local offices on the \"Freak Power\" ticket. The platform included promoting the decriminalization of drugs (for personal use only, not trafficking, as he disapproved of profiteering), tearing up the streets and turning them into grassy pedestrian malls, banning any building so tall as to obscure the view of the mountains, disarming all police forces, and renaming Aspen \"Fat City\" to deter investors. Thompson, having shaved his head, referred to the crew cut-wearing Republican candidate as \"my long-haired opponent\".\nWith polls showing him with a slight lead in a three-way race, Thompson appeared at \"Rolling Stone\" magazine headquarters in San Francisco with a six-pack of beer in hand, and declared to editor Jann Wenner that he was about to be elected sheriff of Aspen, Colorado, and wished to write about the \"Freak Power\" movement. \"The Battle of Aspen\" was Thompson's first feature for the magazine carrying the byline \"By: Dr. Hunter S. Thompson (Candidate for Sheriff)\". (Thompson's \"Dr\" certification was obtained from a mail-order church while he was in San Francisco in the '60s.) Despite the publicity, Thompson lost the election. While carrying the city of Aspen, he garnered only 44% of the county-wide vote in what had become, after the withdrawal of the Republican candidate, a two-way race. Thompson later said that the \"Rolling Stone\" article mobilized more opposition to the Freak Power ticket than supporters. The episode was the subject of the 2020 documentary film \".\" Writing of the episode more than 50 years later, Wenner wrote, \"Aspen didn't get a new sheriff, but I realized that, in Hunter, I had a fellow traveler.\"\nBirth of Gonzo.\nAlso in 1970, Thompson wrote an article entitled \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved\" for the short-lived New Journalism magazine \"Scanlan's Monthly\". For that article, editor Warren Hinckle paired Thompson with illustrator Ralph Steadman, who drew expressionist illustrations with lipstick and eyeliner. Thompson's story virtually ignored the race and focused, instead, on the drunken revelry surrounding the annual event in his hometown. Writing in the first person, he sets the debauchery against the backdrop of the American political scene of the moment: President Richard Nixon had ordered bombing of Cambodia and four students had been killed by Ohio National Guard troops at Kent State University, in a massacre, which occurred only two days later.\nThompson and Steadman collaborated regularly after that. Although it was not widely read, the article was the first to use the techniques of Gonzo journalism, a style Thompson later employed in almost every literary endeavor. The manic first-person subjectivity of the story was reportedly the result of sheer desperation; he was facing a looming deadline and started sending the magazine pages ripped out of his notebook.\nThe first use of the word \"Gonzo\" to describe Thompson's work is credited to journalist Bill Cardoso, who first met Thompson on a bus full of journalists covering the 1968 New Hampshire primary. In 1970, Cardoso (who was then the editor of \"The Boston Globe Sunday Magazine\") wrote to Thompson praising the \"Kentucky Derby\" piece as a breakthrough: \"This is it, this is pure Gonzo. If this is a start, keep rolling.\" According to Steadman, Thompson took to the word right away and said, \"Okay, that's what I do. Gonzo.\" Thompson's first published use of the word appears in \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\": \"Free Enterprise. The American Dream. Horatio Alger gone mad on drugs in Las Vegas. Do it \"now\": pure Gonzo journalism.\"\n\"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\".\nThe book for which Thompson gained most of his fame began during the research for \"Strange Rumblings in Aztlan,\" an expos\u00e9 for \"Rolling Stone\" on the 1970 killing of the Mexican-American television journalist Rub\u00e9n Salazar. Salazar had been shot in the head at close range with a tear-gas canister fired by officers of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department during the National Chicano Moratorium March against the Vietnam War. One of Thompson's sources for the story was Oscar Zeta Acosta, a prominent Mexican-American activist and attorney. Finding it difficult to talk in the racially tense atmosphere of Los Angeles, Thompson and Acosta decided to travel to Las Vegas, and take advantage of an assignment by \"Sports Illustrated\" to write a 250-word photograph caption on the Mint 400 motorcycle race held there.\nWhat was to be a short caption quickly grew into something else entirely. Thompson first submitted to \"Sports Illustrated\" a manuscript of 2,500 words, which was, as he later wrote, \"aggressively rejected\". \"Rolling Stone\" publisher Jann Wenner liked \"the first 20 or so jangled pages enough to take it seriously on its own terms and tentatively scheduled it for publication\u00a0\u2014 which gave me the push I needed to keep working on it\", Thompson wrote. Wenner, describing his first impression of it years later, called it \"Sharp and insane\".\nTo develop the story, Thompson and Acosta returned to Las Vegas to attend a drug-enforcement conference. The two trips became the basis for \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", which \"Rolling Stone\" serialized in two parts in November 1971. Random House published a book version the following year. It is written as a first-person account by a journalist named Raoul Duke with Dr. Gonzo, his \"300-pound Samoan attorney\", During the trip, Duke and his companion (always referred to as \"my attorney\") become sidetracked by a search for the American Dream, with \"two bags of grass, 75 pellets of mescaline, five sheets of high-powered blotter acid, a salt shaker half full of cocaine, and a whole galaxy of multicolored uppers, downers, screamers, laughers\u00a0... and also a quart of tequila, a quart of rum, a case of Budweiser, a pint of raw ether, and two dozen amyls.\"\nComing to terms with the failure of the 1960s countercultural movement is a major theme of the novel, and the book was greeted with considerable critical acclaim. \"The New York Times\" praised it as \"the best book yet written on the decade of dope\". \"The Vegas Book\", as Thompson referred to it, was a mainstream success and introduced his Gonzo journalism techniques to a wide public.\n\"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\".\nIn 1971, Wenner agreed to assign Thompson to cover the 1972 United States presidential election for \"Rolling Stone.\" Thompson was paid a retainer of $1,000 per month () and rented a house near Rock Creek Park in Washington, DC, at the magazine's expense. He was also given a deal to publish a book on the campaign after its conclusion, which subsequently appeared as \"Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail '72\" in early 1973. Insider books on presidential politics had become popular during the prior decade starting with Theodore H. White's \"Making of the President\" series, the first of which appeared in 1961, with additional volumes in 1965 and 1969. Their success raised the overall profile of journalists assigned to cover the quadrennial presidential election in the U.S., and it became a common phrase among them to say they were \"...Doing a Teddy White,\" meaning they planned to write their own insider book on the campaign.\nWenner had decided that \"Rolling Stone\" would cover the presidential election in part because of the passage in 1971 of the 26th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States which lowered the legal voting age from 21 to 18, making a large part of its mostly young readership suddenly eligible to vote. \"We intended to politicize our generation and wrest this stirring force away from the fake politics of the revolutionary,\" Wenner wrote in his memoirs of the plan to collaborate with Thompson.\nThompson's first campaign piece for \"Rolling Stone\" appeared as \"Fear and Loathing in Washington: Is This Trip Really Necessary?\" in the January 6, 1972, issue. The 14th and final installment appeared in the November 9 issue under the headline \"Ask Not For Whom The Bell Tolls...\"\nThroughout the year, Thompson traveled with candidates running in the 1972 Democratic Party presidential primaries for the right to challenge the incumbent president, Republican Richard Nixon, in the general election. Thompson's coverage focused mainly on Sen. George McGovern of South Dakota, Sen. Edmund Muskie of Maine, the early leader, and former Vice President Hubert Humphrey. Thompson supported McGovern and wrote critical coverage of the rival campaigns.\nIn the April 13 installment entitled \"Fear and Loathing: The Banshee Screams in Florida,\" Thompson relates how someone having apparently lifted his press credential, and terrorized Muskie and his staff on a campaign train. The incident was later revealed to be an elaborate prank. In another installment, Thompson relates rumors \u2014 which he later admitted he had originated \u2014 that Muskie had become addicted to the psychoactive drug ibogaine. The story damaged Muskie's reputation and played a role in his loss of the nomination to McGovern. In another, he tracked down McGovern in a restroom to get a reaction quote after a senator from Iowa had switched his endorsement from McGovern to Muskie.\nThe series, and later, the book were both praised for breaking boundaries with a new approach to political journalism. Literary critic Morris Dickstein wrote that Thompson had learned to \"approximate the effect of mind-blasting drugs in his prose style,\" and that he \"recorded the nuts and bolts of a presidential campaign with all the contempt and incredulity that other reporters must feel, but censor out.\"\nFrank Mankiewicz, McGovern's campaign director, often described it as the \"most accurate and least factual\" account of the 1972 campaign. In one vivid, yet invented anecdote, Thompson describes how Mankiewicz had leapt out from behind a bush to attack him with a hammer. To an uninitiated reader, at first, whether the action Thompson described was fanciful or factual might have been unclear, and that seemed to be part of the point. As biographer William McKeen wrote, \"He wrote for his own amusement, and if others came along for the ride, that was all right.\"\nFame and its consequences.\nThompson's journalistic work began to seriously suffer after his 1974 trip to Kinshasa, Zaire to cover the Rumble in the Jungle\u2014the world heavyweight boxing match between George Foreman and Muhammad Ali. He missed the match while intoxicated at his hotel and did not submit a story to the magazine. As Wenner put it to film critic Roger Ebert in the 2008 documentary \"Gonzo: The Life and Work of Dr. Hunter S. Thompson\", \"After Africa, he just couldn't write. He couldn't piece it together\". In 1973, Thompson tried cocaine for the first time and various friends, family members, and editors remarked that its impact upon his productivity and creativity was devastating.\nIn 1975, Wenner assigned Thompson to travel to Vietnam to cover what appeared to be the end of the Vietnam War. Thompson arrived in Saigon just as South Vietnam was collapsing and as other journalists were leaving the country. Wenner allegedly canceled Thompson's medical insurance, which strained Thompson's relationship with \"Rolling Stone.\" He soon fled the country and refused to file his dispatch. Wenner, writing in 2022, denied the claims that he canceled Thompson's insurance, saying that Thompson spent most of his time in Saigon obsessing over evacuation plans. Thompson filed an unfinished dispatch that Wenner described as \"strong and promising, but nothing substantial.\" He then took a commercial flight to Bangkok, where he met his wife for what Wenner described as a few weeks of \"totally undeserved rest and recreation.\" While in Thailand, Thompson had a custom brass door plaque made that read \"Rolling Stone: Global Affairs Suite. Dr. Hunter S. Thompson\" marked with a map of the world and two lightning bolts. \"That was it,\" Wenner wrote. \"No story. Just that plaque.\" Thompson later finished the story in time for the 10-year anniversary of the fall of Saigon.\nPlans for Thompson to cover the 1976 presidential campaign for \"Rolling Stone\" and later publish a book fell through as Wenner dissolved Straight Arrow Press's book-publishing division. Thompson claimed Wenner canceled the project without informing him. In his memoirs, Wenner told a different story: \"The issue wasn't money ... The real issue was whether he had the discipline to spend so much time on the campaign trail and whether he had that much to say about the same subject again.\" Thompson went on to spend a day with Jimmy Carter at the Georgia Governor's Mansion and write a 10,000-word cover story endorsing Carter for president. \"After that, we were virtually an official part of the Carter campaign, and they treated us as such,\" Wenner wrote of the episode.\nFrom the late 1970s on, most of Thompson's literary output appeared as a four-volume series of books entitled \"The Gonzo Papers\". Beginning with \"The Great Shark Hunt\" in 1979 and ending with \"Better Than Sex\" in 1994, the series is largely a collection of rare newspaper and magazine pieces from the pre-Gonzo period, along with almost all of his \"Rolling Stone\" pieces.\nStarting around 1980, Thompson became less active by his standards. Aside from paid appearances, he largely retreated to his compound in Woody Creek, rejecting projects and assignments or failing to complete them. Despite a lack of new material, Wenner kept Thompson on the \"Rolling Stone\" masthead as chief of the \"National Affairs Desk\", a position he held until his death.\nIn 1980, Thompson divorced his wife, Sandra Conklin. The same year marked the release of \"Where the Buffalo Roam\", a loose film adaptation based on Thompson's early 1970s work, starring Bill Murray as the writer. Murray eventually became one of Thompson's trusted friends. Later that year, Thompson relocated to Hawaii to research and write \"The Curse of Lono\", a Gonzo-style account of the 1980 Honolulu Marathon. Extensively illustrated by Ralph Steadman, an iteration of the work first appeared in \"Running\" in 1981 as \"The Charge of the Weird Brigade\" and was later excerpted in \"Playboy\" in 1983. The book was a disappointment, with its editor calling it \"disorganized and incoherent.\" It was poorly reviewed, and sales were disappointing.\nIn 1983, he covered the U.S. invasion of Grenada, but did not write or discuss the experiences until the publication of \"Kingdom of Fear\" in 2003. Also in 1983, at the behest of Terry McDonell, he wrote \"A Dog Took My Place\", an expos\u00e9 for \"Rolling Stone\" of the scandalous Roxanne Pulitzer divorce case and what he called the \"Palm Beach lifestyle\". The story included dubious insinuations of bestiality. Wenner described it as one of Thompson's \"least-known but best pieces.\" In 1985, Thompson accepted an advance to write about \"feminist pornography\" for \"Playboy\". As part of his research, he spent evenings at the Mitchell Brothers O'Farrell Theatre striptease club in San Francisco. The experience evolved into an as-yet-unpublished novel tentatively entitled \"The Night Manager\".\nThompson next accepted a role as weekly media columnist and critic for \"The San Francisco Examiner.\" The position was arranged by former editor and fellow \"Examiner\" columnist Warren Hinckle. As his editor at \"The Examiner\", David McCumber described, \"One week it would be acid-soaked gibberish with a charm of its own. The next week it would be incisive political analysis of the highest order.\"\nMany of these columns were collected in ' (1988) and ' (1990), a collection of autobiographical reminiscences, articles, and previously unpublished material.\nLater years.\nThompson faced a sexual assault charge in March 1990 when former pornographic film director Gail Palmer claimed that after she denied his sexual advances while at his home, Thompson threw a drink at her and twisted her left breast. He was tried for five felonies and three misdemeanors owing to the assault charge and allegations of drug abuse after the police raided his home. The charges were dropped two months later.\nThroughout the early 1990s, Thompson claimed to be at work on a novel entitled \"Polo Is My Life\". It was briefly excerpted in \"Rolling Stone\" in 1994. Wenner described it as \"Hunter's last big piece of feature writing\", and described Thompson as abusive toward two editorial assistants assigned to him. Thompson himself described it in 1996 as \"a sex book\u2014you know, sex, drugs, and rock and roll. It's about the manager of a sex theater who's forced to leave and flee to the mountains. He falls in love and gets in even more trouble than he was in the sex theater in San Francisco.\" The novel was slated to be released by Random House in 1999, and was even assigned , but was never published.\nThompson continued to publish irregularly in \"Rolling Stone\", ultimately contributing 17 pieces to the magazine between 1984 and 2004. \"Fear and Loathing in Elko,\" published in 1992, was a well-received fictional rallying cry against the nomination of Clarence Thomas to a seat on the Supreme Court of the United States. \"Trapped in Mr. Bill's Neighborhood\" was a largely factual account of an interview with Bill Clinton at a Little Rock, Arkansas, steakhouse. Rather than traveling the campaign trail as he had done in previous presidential elections, Thompson monitored the proceedings on cable television; \"Better Than Sex: Confessions of a Political Junkie\", his account of the 1992 presidential campaign, is composed of reactive faxes to \"Rolling Stone\". In 1994, the magazine published \"He Was a Crook\", a \"scathing\" obituary of Richard Nixon.\nIn November 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" published Thompson's final magazine feature, \"The Fun-Hogs in the Passing Lane: Fear and Loathing, Campaign 2004\", a brief account of the 2004 presidential election in which he compared the outcome of the \"Bush v. Gore\" court case to the Reichstag fire and formally endorsed Senator John Kerry, a longtime friend, for president.\n\"Fear and Loathing\" redux.\nIn 1996, Modern Library reissued \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" along with \"Strange Rumblings in Aztlan\", \"The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and Depraved, and \"Jacket Copy for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\". Two years later, the film \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" generated new interest in Thompson and his work, and a paperback edition was published as a tie-in. The same year, an early novel, \"The Rum Diary\", was published. Two volumes of collected letters also appeared during this time. \nThompson's next, and penultimate, collection, \"\", was widely publicized as Thompson's first memoir. Published in 2003, it combined new material (including reminiscences of the O'Farrell Theater), selected newspaper and digital clippings, and other older works.\nThompson finished his journalism career in the same way it had begun, writing about sports. From 2000 until his death in 2005, he wrote a weekly column for ESPN.com's Page 2 entitled \"Hey, Rube\". In 2004, Simon &amp; Schuster collected some of the columns from the first few years and released them in mid-2004 as \"\".\nThompson married assistant Anita Bejmuk on April 23, 2003.\nDeath.\nAt 5:42\u00a0pm on February 20, 2005, Thompson died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head at Owl Farm, his \"fortified compound\" in Woody Creek, Colorado. His son Juan, daughter-in-law Jennifer, and grandson were visiting for the weekend. His wife Anita, who was at the Aspen Club, was on the phone with him as he cocked the gun. According to the \"Aspen Daily News\", Thompson asked her to come home to help him write his ESPN column, then set the receiver on the counter. Anita said she mistook the cocking of the gun for the sound of his typewriter keys and hung up as he fired. Will, his grandson, and Jennifer were in the next room when they heard the gunshot, but mistook the sound for a book falling and did not check on Thompson immediately. Juan Thompson found his father's body. According to the police report and Anita's cell phone records, he called the sheriff's office half an hour later, then walked outside and fired three shotgun blasts into the air to \"mark the passing of his father.\" The police report stated that in Thompson's typewriter was a piece of paper with the date \"Feb. 22 '05\" and a single word, \"counselor\".\nYears of alcohol and cocaine abuse contributed to his problem with depression. Thompson's inner circle told the press that he had been depressed and always found February a \"gloomy\" month, with football season over and the harsh Colorado winter weather. He was also upset over his advancing age and chronic medical problems, including a hip replacement; he would frequently mutter, \"This kid is getting old.\"\n\"Rolling Stone\" published what Douglas Brinkley described as a suicide note written by Thompson to his wife, titled \"Football Season Is Over.\" It read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No More Games. No More Bombs. No More Walking. No More Fun. No More Swimming. 67. That is 17 years past 50. 17 more than I needed or wanted. Boring. I am always bitchy. No Fun\u2014for anybody. 67. You are getting Greedy. Act your old age. Relax\u00a0\u2014 This won't hurt.\nThompson's collaborator and friend Ralph Steadman wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0He told me 25 years ago that he would feel real trapped if he didn't know that he could commit suicide at any moment. I don't know if that is brave or stupid or what, but it was inevitable. I think that the truth of what rings through all his writing is that he meant what he said. If that is entertainment to you, well, that's OK. If you think that it enlightened you, well, that's even better. If you wonder if he's gone to Heaven or Hell, rest assured he will check out them both, find out which one Richard Milhous Nixon went to\u2014and go there. He could never stand being bored. But there must be Football too\u2014and Peacocks\u00a0...\nFuneral.\nOn August 20, 2005, in a private funeral at Owl Farm, Thompson's ashes were fired from a cannon. This was accompanied by red, white, blue, and green fireworks\u2014all to the tune of Norman Greenbaum's \"Spirit in the Sky\" and Bob Dylan's \"Mr. Tambourine Man\". The cannon was placed atop a tower that had the shape of a , a symbol originally used in his 1970 campaign for sheriff of Pitkin County, Colorado. The plans for the monument were initially drawn by Thompson and Steadman, and were shown as part of an \"Omnibus\" program on the BBC titled \"Fear and Loathing in Gonzovision\" (1978). It is included as a special feature on the second disc of the 2004 Criterion Collection DVD release of \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\", and labeled as \"Fear and Loathing on the Road to Hollywood\".\nAccording to his widow, Anita, the $3\u00a0million funeral was funded by actor Johnny Depp, who was a close friend of Thompson's. Depp told the Associated Press, \"All I'm doing is trying to make sure his last wish comes true. I just want to send my pal out the way he wants to go out.\" An estimated 280 people attended, including Steadman, U.S. Senators John Kerry and George McGovern, \"60 Minutes\" correspondents Ed Bradley and Charlie Rose, actors Jack Nicholson, John Cusack, Bill Murray, Benicio del\u00a0Toro, Sean Penn, and Josh Hartnett, and musicians Lyle Lovett, John Oates, Jimmy Buffett and David Amram.\nLegacy.\nWriting style.\nThompson is often credited as the creator of Gonzo journalism, a style of writing that blurs distinctions between fiction and nonfiction. His work and style are considered to be a major part of the New Journalism literary movement of the 1960s and 1970s, which attempted to break free from the purely objective style of mainstream reporting of the time. Thompson almost always wrote in the first person, while extensively using his own experiences and emotions to color \"the story\" he was trying to follow.\nDespite him having personally described his work as \"Gonzo\", it fell to later observers to articulate what the phrase actually meant. While Thompson's approach clearly involved injecting himself as a participant in the events of the narrative, it also involved adding invented, metaphoric elements, thus creating, for the uninitiated reader, a seemingly confusing amalgam of facts and fiction notable for the deliberately blurred lines between one and the other. Thompson, in a 1974 interview in \"Playboy\", addressed the issue himself, saying, \"Unlike Tom Wolfe or Gay Talese, I almost never try to reconstruct a story. They're both much better reporters than I am, but then, I don't think of myself as a reporter.\" Tom Wolfe later described Thompson's style as \"...\u00a0part journalism and part personal memoir admixed with powers of wild invention and wilder rhetoric.\" Or as one description of the differences between Thompson and Wolfe's styles would elaborate, \"While Tom Wolfe mastered the technique of being a fly on the wall, Thompson mastered the art of being a fly in the ointment.\"\nThe majority of Thompson's most popular and acclaimed work appeared within the pages of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. Publisher Jann Wenner said Thompson was \"in the DNA of \"Rolling Stone\"\". Along with Joe Eszterhas and David Felton, Thompson was instrumental in expanding the focus of the magazine past music criticism; indeed, Thompson was the only staff writer of the epoch never to contribute a music feature to the magazine. Nevertheless, his articles were always peppered with a wide array of pop-music references ranging from Howlin' Wolf to Lou Reed. Armed with early fax machines wherever he went, he became notorious for haphazardly sending sometimes illegible material to the magazine's San Francisco offices as an issue was about to go to press.\nWenner said Thompson tended to work \"in long bursts of energy, awake until dawn, or too often, two dawns.\" He said keeping Thompson on track when finishing a piece required \"...companionship, or what editors call hand-holding, but in Hunter's case it was more like being a junior officer in his war. He required his creature comforts, which meant the right kind of typewriter and a certain color paper, Wild Turkey, the right drugs, and the proper music.\"\nRobert Love, Thompson's editor of 23\u00a0years at \"Rolling Stone\", wrote in the \"Columbia Journalism Review\" that \"the dividing line between fact and fancy rarely blurred, and we didn't always use italics or some other typographical device to indicate the lurch into the fabulous. But if there were living, identifiable humans in a scene, we took certain steps\u00a0... Hunter was a close friend of many prominent Democrats, veterans of the 10 or more presidential campaigns he covered, so when in doubt, we'd call the press secretary. 'People will believe almost any twisted kind of story about politicians or Washington,' he once said, and he was right.\"\nDiscerning the line between the fact and fiction of Thompson's work presented a practical problem for editors and fact-checkers. Love called fact-checking Thompson's work \"one of the sketchiest occupations ever created in the publishing world\", and \"for the first-timer\u00a0... a trip through a journalistic fun house, where you didn't know what was real and what wasn't. You knew you had better learn enough about the subject at hand to know when the riff began and reality ended. Hunter was a stickler for numbers, for details like gross weight and model numbers, for lyrics and caliber, and there was no faking it.\"\nPersona.\nThompson often used a blend of fiction and fact when portraying himself in his writing, too, sometimes using the name Raoul Duke as an author surrogate, whom he generally described as a callous, erratic, self-destructive journalist, constantly drinking and taking hallucinogens. In the early 1980s, Wenner spoke with Thompson about his alcoholism and addiction to cocaine, and offered to pay for drug treatment. \"Hunter was polite and firm;\" Wenner wrote in 2022. \"He had thought about it and didn't feel he could or would change. He felt that [his drug abuse] was a key to his talent. He said that if he didn't do drugs, he would have the mind of an accountant. The abuse was already taking a toll on his gifts... It was just too late, and he knew it.\"\nIn the late 1960s, Thompson acquired the title of \"Doctor\" from the Church of the New Truth.\nA number of critics have commented that as he grew older, the line that distinguished Thompson from his literary self became increasingly blurred. Thompson admitted during a 1978 BBC interview that he sometimes felt pressured to live up to the fictional self that he had created, adding, \"I'm never sure which one people expect me to be. Very often, they conflict\u2014most often, as a matter of fact.\u00a0... I'm leading a normal life and right alongside me there is this myth, and it is growing and mushrooming and getting more and more warped. When I get invited to, say, speak at universities, I'm not sure if they are inviting Duke or Thompson. I'm not sure who to be.\"\nThompson's writing style and eccentric persona gave him a cult following in both literary and drug circles, and his cult status expanded into broader areas after being portrayed three times in major motion pictures. Hence, both his writing style and persona have been widely imitated, and his likeness has even become a popular costume choice for Halloween.\nPolitical beliefs.\nThompson was a firearms and explosives enthusiast (in his writing and in life) and owned a large collection of handguns, rifles, shotguns, and various automatic and semiautomatic weapons, along with numerous forms of gaseous crowd-control and many homemade devices. He was a proponent of the right to bear arms and privacy rights. A member of the National Rifle Association of America, Thompson was also co-creator of the Fourth Amendment Foundation, an organization to assist victims in defending themselves against unwarranted search and seizure.\nPart of his work with the Fourth Amendment Foundation centered around support of Lisl Auman, a Colorado woman who was sentenced for life in 1997 under felony murder charges for the death of police officer Bruce VanderJagt, despite contradictory statements and dubious evidence. Thompson organized rallies, provided legal support, and co-wrote an article in the June 2004 issue of \"Vanity Fair\" outlining the case. The Colorado Supreme Court eventually overturned Auman's sentence in March 2005, shortly after Thompson's death, and Auman is now free. Auman's supporters claim Thompson's support and publicity resulted in the successful appeal.\nThompson was also an ardent supporter of drug legalization and became known for his detailed accounts of his own drug use. He was an early supporter of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws and served on the group's advisory board for over 30 years, until his death. He told an interviewer in 1997 that drugs should be legalized \"[a]cross the board. It might be a little rough on some people for a while, but I think it's the only way to deal with drugs. Look at Prohibition; all it did was make a lot of criminals rich.\"\nIn a 1965 letter to his friend Paul Semonin, Thompson explained an affection for the Industrial Workers of the World, \"I have in recent months come to have a certain feeling for Joe Hill and the Wobbly crowd who, if nothing else, had the right idea. But not the right mechanics. I believe the IWW was probably the last human concept in American politics.\" In another letter to Semonin, Thompson wrote that he agreed with Karl Marx, and compared him to Thomas Jefferson. In a letter to William Kennedy, Thompson confided that he was \"coming to view the free enterprise system as the single greatest evil in the history of human savagery.\" In the documentary \"Breakfast with Hunter\", Thompson is seen in several scenes wearing different Che Guevara T-shirts. Additionally, actor and friend Benicio del Toro has stated that Thompson kept a \"big\" picture of Che in his kitchen. Thompson wrote on behalf of African-American rights and the civil rights movement. He strongly criticized the dominance in American society of what he called \"white power structures\".\nAfter the September 11 attacks, Thompson voiced skepticism regarding the official story on who was responsible for the attacks. He speculated to several interviewers that it had been conducted by the U.S. government or with the government's assistance, though readily admitting he had no way to prove his theory.\nIn 2004, Thompson wrote: \"[Richard] Nixon was a professional politician, and I despised everything he stood for\u2014but if he were running for president this year against the evil Bush\u2013Cheney gang, I would happily vote for him.\"\nScholarships.\nThompson's widow established two scholarship funds at Columbia University School of General Studies for U.S. military veterans and the University of Kentucky for journalism students.\nColorado NORML created the Hunter S. Thompson Scholarship to pay all expenses for a lawyer or law student to attend the NORML Legal Committee Conference in Aspen, generally the first few days of June each year. The funding from a silent auction has paid for two winners for some years. Many winners have gone on to become important cannabis lawyers on state and national levels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14329", "revid": "48364973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14329", "title": "Historicism", "text": "Approach to explaining social and cultural phenomena by studying their history\nHistoricism is an approach in the study of phenomena, particularly social and cultural practices, including ideas and beliefs, which emphasizes understanding these phenomena through the historical processes by which they developed. The concept is widely applied in fields such as philosophy, anthropology, and sociology.\nThis historical approach to explanation differs from and complements the approach known as functionalism, which seeks to explain a phenomenon, such as for example a social form, by providing reasoned arguments about how that social form fulfills some function in the structure of a society. In contrast, rather than taking the phenomenon as a given and then seeking to provide a justification for it from reasoned principles, the historical approach asks \"Where did this come from?\" and \"What factors led up to its creation?\"; that is, historical explanations often place a greater emphasis on the role of process and contingency.\nIn philosophy, historicism is defined as the view that an object can be fully understood only in terms of its historical development, that its values can be explained by tracing their origins, and that its nature is comprehensively revealed through its evolutionary course. This perspective does not address critiques related to the historical fallacy.\nThe term historism is an English translation of the German \"Historismus\", but its usage has declined over time in favor of \"historicism.\" For example, James Mark Baldwin\u2019s 1918 \"Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology\" includes the entry \"historism\" but omits \"historicism,\" whereas Dagobert D. Runes\u2019 1942 \"Dictionary of Philosophy\" emphasizes \"historicism.\" In contemporary usage, historicism is employed to describe approaches that integrate both German and Italian (\"storicismo\") traditions and that focus on the explanation of historical processes.\nMundane historicism refers to the view that examining an idea or individual within its historical context yields more accurate and comprehensive results, combining empirical observations with conceptual considerations. Methodological historicism argues that the social sciences and the natural sciences require different methods due to the distinct nature of their subject matters, and it evaluates the non-experimental character of history within this framework. Popperian historicism grounds the search for general laws of history in both the examination of historical records and abstract theoretical arguments; Hegel\u2019s philosophy of history, based on a dialectical process, is often cited as a classical example of this approach. Epistemic historicism draws on historical and anthropological research to suggest that modes of reasoning and conceptions of rationality change over time; Ian Hacking adopts this historical perspective, while Hilary Putnam argues that attempts to formalize reasoning\u2014such as Carnap\u2019s project of inductive logic\u2014have been unsuccessful and maintains that rationality is closely tied to value judgments .\nHistoricism is often used to help contextualize theories and narratives, and may be a useful tool to help understand how social and cultural phenomena came to be.\nThe historicist approach differs from individualist theories of knowledge such as strict empiricism and rationalism, which does not take into account traditions. Historicism can be reductionist, often tends to be, and is usually contrasted with theories that posit that historical changes occur entirely at random.\nDavid Summers, building on the work of E. H. Gombrich, defines historicism negatively, writing that it posits \"that laws of history are formulatable and that in general the outcome of history is predictable,\" adding \"the idea that history is a universal matrix prior to events, which are simply placed in order within that matrix by the historian.\" This approach, he writes, \"seems to make the ends of history visible, thus to justify the liquidation of groups seen not to have a place in the scheme of history\" and that it has led to the \"fabrication of some of the most murderous myths of modern times.\"\nHistory of the term.\nThe term \"historicism\" (\"Historismus\") was coined by German philosopher Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel. Over time, what historicism is and how it is practiced have developed different and divergent meanings.According to Schlegel, Winckelmann\u2019s approach to historicism marked the beginning of a new era in philosophy by recognizing the unique character and distinctiveness of antiquity. In contrast, other eighteenth-century philosophers distorted the true nature of the ancient world by reinterpreting it through philosophical concepts. Schlegel particularly warned against theoretical views that were not linked to specific individuals and lacked a historical foundation. The following year, Novalis, while outlining different methods, employed the term \"Historismus\", although he did not assign a precise meaning to it in this context. Elements of historicism appear in the writings of French essayist Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) and Italian philosopher G.\u00a0B. Vico (1668\u20131744), and became more fully developed with the dialectic of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770\u20131831), influential in 19th-century Europe. The writings of Karl Marx, influenced by Hegel, also occasionally include historicism. The term is also associated with the empirical social sciences and with the work of Franz Boas. Historicism tends to be hermeneutic because it values cautious, rigorous, and contextualized interpretation of information; or relativist, because it rejects notions of universal, fundamental and immutable interpretations. In the twentieth century, the Italian philosopher Benedetto Croce, the English thinker R. G. Collingwood, and the Spanish philosopher Jose Ortega y Gasset adopted historicism as an approach aimed at enhancing the understanding of human thought and experience. Karl Popper, in his work \"The Poverty of Historicism\", addressed historicism in relation to Hegel and Marx\u2019s attempts to justify authority through laws of historical development. The Soviet Encyclopedia presented the term from a Marxist-Leninist perspective, emphasizing the notion of \u201clegitimate development.\u201d In American literary studies, \"New Historicism\" emerged as a postmodern interpretive approach that foregrounds the specificity of historical and cultural contexts, while making limited reference to earlier European debates.\nVariants.\nHegelian.\nHegel viewed the realization of human freedom as the ultimate purpose of history, which could be achieved only through the creation of the perfect state. Historical progress toward this state would occur through a dialectical process: the tension between the purpose of humankind (freedom) and humankind's current condition would produce the attempt by humankind to change its condition to one more in accord with its nature. However, because humans are often not aware of the goal of humanity and history, the process of achieving freedom is necessarily one of self-discovery.\nHegel saw progress toward freedom as conducted by the \"spirit\" (Geist), a seemingly supernatural force that directs all human actions and interactions. Yet Hegel makes clear that the spirit is a mere abstraction that comes into existence \"through the activity of finite agents\". Thus, Hegel's determining forces of history may not have a metaphysical nature, though many of his opponents and interpreters have understood him as holding metaphysical and determinist views.\nHegel's historicism also suggests that any human society and all human activities such as science, art, or philosophy, are defined by their history. Consequently, their essence can be sought only by understanding said history. The history of any such human endeavor, moreover, not only continues but also reacts against what has gone before; this is the source of Hegel's famous dialectic teaching usually summarized by the slogan \"thesis, antithesis, and synthesis\". (Hegel did not use these terms, although Johann Fichte did.) Hegel's famous aphorism, \"Philosophy is the history of philosophy\", describes it bluntly.\nHegel's position is perhaps best illuminated when contrasted against the atomistic and reductionist opinion of human societies and social activities self-defining on an \"ad hoc\" basis through the sum of dozens of interactions. Yet another contrasting model is the persistent metaphor of a social contract. Hegel considers the relationship between individuals and societies as organic, not atomic: even their social discourse is mediated by language, and language is based on etymology and unique character. It thus preserves the culture of the past in thousands of half-forgotten metaphors. To understand why a person is the way he is, you must examine that person in his society: and to understand that society, you must understand its history, and the forces that influenced it. The \"Zeitgeist\", the \"Spirit of the Age\", is the concrete embodiment of the most important factors that are acting in human history at any given time. This contrasts with teleological theories of activity, which suppose that the end is the determining factor of activity, as well as those who believe in a tabula rasa, or blank slate, opinion, such that individuals are defined by their interactions.\nThese ideas can be interpreted variously. The Right Hegelians, working from Hegel's opinions about the organicism and historically determined nature of human societies, interpreted Hegel's historicism as a justification of the unique destiny of national groups and the importance of stability and institutions. Hegel's conception of human societies as entities greater than the individuals who constitute them influenced nineteenth-century romantic nationalism and its twentieth-century excesses. The Young Hegelians, by contrast, interpreted Hegel's thoughts on societies influenced by social conflict for a doctrine of social progress, and attempted to manipulate these forces to cause various results. Karl Marx's doctrine of \"historical inevitabilities\" and historical materialism is one of the more influential reactions to this part of Hegel's thought. Significantly, Karl Marx's theory of alienation argues that capitalism disrupts traditional relationships between workers and their work.\nHegelian historicism is related to his ideas on the means by which human societies progress, specifically the dialectic and his conception of logic as representing the inner essential nature of reality. Hegel attributes the change to the \"modern\" need to interact with the world, whereas ancient philosophers were self-contained, and medieval philosophers were monks. In his History of Philosophy Hegel writes:\nIn modern times things are very different; now we no longer see philosophic individuals who constitute a class by themselves. With the present day all difference has disappeared; philosophers are not monks, for we find them generally in connection with the world, participating with others in some common work or calling. They live, not independently, but in the relation of citizens, or they occupy public offices and take part in the life of the state. Certainly they may be private persons, but if so, their position as such does not in any way isolate them from their other relationship. They are involved in present conditions, in the world and its work and progress. Thus their philosophy is only by the way, a sort of luxury and superfluity. This difference is really to be found in the manner in which outward conditions have taken shape after the building up of the inward world of religion. In modern times, namely, on account of the reconciliation of the worldly principle with itself, the external world is at rest, is brought into order \u2014 worldly relationships, conditions, modes of life, have become constituted and organized in a manner which is conformable to nature and rational. We see a universal, comprehensible connection, and with that individuality likewise attains another character and nature, for it is no longer the plastic individuality of the ancients. This connection is of such power that every individuality is under its dominion, and yet at the same time can construct for itself an inward world.\nThis opinion that entanglement in society creates an indissoluble bond with expression, would become an influential question in philosophy, namely, the requirements for individuality. It would be considered by Nietzsche, John Dewey and Michel Foucault directly, as well as in the work of numerous artists and authors. There have been various responses to Hegel's challenge. The Romantic period emphasized the ability of individual genius to transcend time and place, and use the materials from their heritage to fashion works which were beyond determination. The modern would advance versions of John Locke's infinite malleability of the human animal. Post-structuralism would argue that since history is not present, but only the image of history, that while an individual era or power structure might emphasize a particular history, that the contradictions within the story would hinder the very purposes that the history was constructed to advance.\nAnthropological.\nIn the context of anthropology and other sciences which study the past, historicism has a different meaning. Historical Particularism is associated with the work of Franz Boas. His theory used the diffusionist concept that there were a few \"cradles of civilization\" which grew outwards, and merged it with the idea that societies would adapt to their circumstances. The school of historicism grew in response to unilinear theories that social development represented adaptive fitness, and therefore existed on a continuum. While these theories were espoused by Charles Darwin and many of his students, their application as applied in social Darwinism and general evolution characterized in the theories of Herbert Spencer and Leslie White, historicism was neither anti-selection, nor anti-evolution, as Darwin never attempted nor offered an explanation for cultural evolution. However, it attacked the notion that there was one normative spectrum of development, instead emphasizing how local conditions would create adaptations to the local environment. Julian Steward refuted the viability of globally and universally applicable adaptive standards proposing that culture was honed adaptively in response to the idiosyncrasies of the local environment, the cultural ecology, by specific evolution. What was adaptive for one region might not be so for another. This conclusion has likewise been adopted by modern forms of biological evolutionary theory.\nThe primary method of historicism was empirical, namely that there were so many requisite inputs into a society or event, that only by emphasizing the data available could a theory of the source be determined. In this opinion, grand theories are unprovable, and instead intensive field work would determine the most likely explanation and history of a culture, and hence it is named \"historicism\".\nThis opinion would produce a wide range of definition of what, exactly, constituted culture and history, but in each case the only means of explaining it was in terms of the historical particulars of the culture itself.\nNew Historicism.\nSince the 1950s, when Jacques Lacan and Michel Foucault argued that each epoch has its own knowledge system, within which individuals are inexorably entangled, many post-structuralists have used \"historicism\" to describe the opinion that all questions must be settled within the cultural and social context in which they are raised. Answers cannot be found by appeal to an external truth, but only within the confines of the norms and forms that phrase the question. This version of historicism holds that there are only the raw texts, markings and artifacts that exist in the present, and the conventions used to decode them. This school of thought is sometimes given the name of \"New Historicism\". The same term, \"new historicism\" is also used for a school of literary scholarship which interprets a poem, drama, etc. as an expression of or reaction to the power-structures of its society. Stephen Greenblatt is an example of this school.\nModern Historicism.\nWithin the context of 20th-century philosophy, debates continue as to whether ahistorical and immanent methods were sufficient to understand the meaning (that is to say, \"what you see is what you get\" positivism) or whether context, background and culture are important beyond the mere need to decode words, phrases and references. While post-structural historicism is relativist in its orientation\u2014that is, it sees each culture as its own frame of reference\u2014a large number of thinkers have embraced the need for historical context, not because culture is self-referential, but because there is no more compressed means of conveying all of the relevant information except through history. This opinion is often seen as deriving from the work of Benedetto Croce. Recent historians using this tradition include Thomas Kuhn.\nTalcott Parsons criticized historicism as a case of idealistic fallacy in \"The Structure of Social Action\" (1937). Post-structuralism uses the term \"new historicism\", which has some associations with both anthropology and Hegelianism.\nChristian Historicism.\nEschatological.\nIn Christianity, the term \"historicism\" refers to the confessional Protestant form of prophetical interpretation which holds that the fulfillment of biblical prophecy has occurred throughout history and continues to occur; as opposed to other methods which limit the time-frame of prophecy-fulfillment to the past or to the future.\nDogmatic and ecclesiastic.\nThere is also a particular opinion in ecclesiastical history and in the history of dogmas which has been described as historicist by Pope Pius XII in the encyclical \"Humani generis\". \"They add that the history of dogmas consists in the reporting of the various forms in which revealed truth has been clothed, forms that have succeeded one another in accordance with the different teachings and opinions that have arisen over the course of the centuries.\" \"There is also a certain historicism, which attributing value only to the events of man's life, overthrows the foundation of all truth and absolute law, both on the level of philosophical speculations and especially to Christian dogmas.\"\nCritics.\nMarxism.\nWestern Marxists such as Karl Korsch, Antonio Gramsci and the early Georg Lukacs emphasise the roots of Marx's thought in Hegel. They interpret Marxism as a historically relativist philosophy, which views ideas (including Marxist theory) as products of the historical epochs that create them. In this view, Marxism is not an objective social science, but rather a theoretical expression of the class consciousness of the working class within a historical process. This understanding of Marxism is strongly criticised by the structural Marxist Louis Althusser, who affirms that Marxism is an objective science, autonomous from interests of society and class. Marxism is, therefore, often associated with deterministic claims of future historical development, but these are not structural parts of Marxism as a style of critique which requires distinction between various critical registers, which at once develops an understanding of broad historical-geographical tensions without prophesying a specific outcome.\nKarl Popper.\nKarl Popper used the term \"historicism\" in his influential books \"The Poverty of Historicism\" and \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", to mean: \"an approach to the social sciences which assumes that \"historical prediction\" is their primary aim, and which assumes that this aim is attainable by discovering the 'rhythms' or the 'patterns', the 'laws' or the 'trends' that underlie the evolution of history\". Popper condemned historicism along with the determinism and holism which he argued formed its basis, claiming that historicism had the potential to inform dogmatic, ideological beliefs not predicated upon facts that were falsifiable. In \"The Poverty of Historicism\", he identified historicism with the opinion that there are \"inexorable laws of historical destiny\", an opinion he warned against. If this seems to contrast with what proponents of historicism argue for, in terms of contextually relative interpretation, this happens, according to Popper, only because such proponents are unaware of the type of causality they ascribe to history. Popper wrote with reference to Hegel's theory of history, which he criticized extensively.\nIn \"The Open Society and Its Enemies\", Popper attacks \"historicism\" and its proponents, among whom he identifies and singles out Hegel, Plato and Marx\u2014calling them all \"enemies of the open society\". The objection he makes is that historicist positions, by claiming that there is an inevitable and deterministic pattern to history, evade the responsibility of the individual to make free contributions to the evolution of society, hence leading to totalitarianism. Throughout this work, he defines his conception of historicism as: \"The central historicist doctrine\u2014the doctrine that history is controlled by specific historical or evolutionary laws whose discovery would enable us to prophesy the destiny of man.\" As mentioned above, such characterizations of Marx in particular are not entirely accurate to Marx in his own right, and have drawn criticism from philosophers such as Lakatos for mischaracterizing the defense of induction in historical materialism. Other philosophers such as Walter Kaufmann have also been critical of Popper, calling his reading of Hegel a \u201cmyth,\u201d \u201cknown largely through secondary sources\u2026\u201d\nAnother of his targets is what he terms \"moral historicism\", the attempt to infer moral values from the course of history; in Hegel's words, that \"history is the world's court of justice\". Popper says that he does not believe \"that success proves anything or that history is our judge\". Futurism must be distinguished from prophecies that the right will prevail: these attempt to infer history from ethics, rather than ethics from history, and are therefore historicism in the normal sense rather than moral historicism.\nHe also attacks what he calls \"Historism\", which he regards as distinct from historicism. By historism, he means the tendency to regard every argument or idea as completely accounted for by its historical context, as opposed to assessing it by its merits.\nLeo Strauss.\nLeo Strauss used the term \"historicism\" and reportedly termed it the single greatest threat to intellectual freedom insofar as it denies any attempt to address injustice-pure-and-simple (such is the significance of historicism's rejection of \"natural right\" or \"right by nature\"). Strauss argued that historicism \"rejects political philosophy\" (insofar as this stands or falls by questions of permanent, trans-historical significance) and is based on the belief that \"all human thought, including scientific thought, rests on premises which cannot be validated by human reason and which came from historical epoch to historical epoch.\" Strauss further identified R. G. Collingwood as the most coherent advocate of historicism in the English language. Countering Collingwood's arguments, Strauss warned against historicist social scientists' failure to address real-life problems\u2014most notably that of tyranny\u2014to the extent that they relativize (or \"subjectivize\") all ethical problems by placing their significance strictly in function of particular or ever-changing socio-material conditions devoid of inherent or \"objective\" \"value\". Similarly, Strauss criticized Eric Voegelin's abandonment of ancient political thought as guide or vehicle in interpreting modern political problems.\nIn his books, \"Natural Right and History\" and \"On Tyranny\", Strauss offers a complete critique of historicism as it emerges in the works of Hegel, Marx, and Heidegger. Many believe that Strauss also found historicism in Edmund Burke, Tocqueville, Augustine, and John Stuart Mill. Although it is largely disputed whether Strauss himself was a historicist, he often indicated that historicism grew out of and against Christianity and was a threat to civic participation, belief in human agency, religious pluralism, and, most controversially, an accurate understanding of the classical philosophers and religious prophets themselves. Throughout his work, he warns that historicism, and the understanding of progress that results from it, expose us to tyranny, totalitarianism, and democratic extremism. In a collection of his works by Kenneth Hart entitled \"Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity\", he argues that Islam, traditional Judaism, and ancient Greece, share a concern for sacred law that makes them especially susceptible to historicism, and therefore to tyranny.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14330", "revid": "50616823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14330", "title": "Hunter College", "text": "Public college in New York City, New York\nHunter College is a public university in New York City, United States. It is one of the constituent colleges of the City University of New York, and offers studies in more than one hundred undergraduate and postgraduate fields across five schools. It also administers Hunter College High School and Hunter College Elementary School.\nHunter was founded in 1870 as a women's college; it first admitted male freshmen in 1946. The main campus has been located on Park Avenue since 1873. In 1943, Eleanor Roosevelt dedicated Franklin Delano Roosevelt's and her former townhouse to the college; the building was reopened in 2010 as the Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College. The institution has a 57% undergraduate graduation rate within six years.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nHunter College originates from the 19th-century movement for normal school training for teachers which swept across the United States. Hunter descends from the Female Normal and High School, a women's college established in New York City in 1870. It was founded by Thomas Hunter from Ardglass in County Down, Ireland, who was an exile over his nationalist beliefs. The Normal School was one of several institutions occupying a site that the New York City government had reserved for \"institutions serving a public purpose\". Hunter was president of the school during the first 37 years. The school was housed in an armory and saddle store at Broadway and East Fourth Street in Manhattan, was open to all qualified women, irrespective of race, religion or ethnic background, an exception in its day.\nCreated by the New York State Legislature, Hunter was deemed the only approved institution for those seeking to teach in New York City. The school incorporated an elementary and high school for gifted children, where students practiced teaching. In 1887, a kindergarten was established as well. (Today, the elementary school and the high school still exist at a different location, and are now called the Hunter College Campus Schools.)\nDuring Thomas Hunter's tenure as president of the school, Hunter became known for its impartiality regarding race, religion, ethnicity, financial or political favoritism; its pursuit of higher education for women; its high entry requirements; and its rigorous academics. The first female professor at the school, Helen Gray Cone, was elected to the position in 1899. The college's student population quickly expanded, and the college subsequently moved uptown, in 1873, into a new red brick Gothic structure facing Park Avenue between 68th and 69th Streets. It was one of several public institutions built at the time on a Lenox Hill lot that had been set aside by the city for a park, before the creation of Central Park. After the park in Lenox Hill was canceled, the plots were leased to institutions like Hunter College.\nIn 1888, the school was incorporated as a college under the statutes of New York State, taking on the name Normal College of the City of New York, with the power to confer Bachelor of Arts degrees. This led to the separation of the school into two \"camps\": the \"Normals\", who pursued a four-year course of study to become licensed teachers, and the \"Academics\", who sought non-teaching professions and the Bachelor of Arts degree. After 1902 when the \"Normal\" course of study was abolished, the \"Academic\" course became standard across the student body.\nExpansion.\nIn 1913, the east end of the building, housing the elementary school, was replaced by Thomas Hunter Hall, a new limestone Tudor building facing Lexington Avenue and designed by C. B. J. Snyder. The following year the Normal College became Hunter College in honor of its first president. At the same time, the college was experiencing a period of great expansion as increasing student enrollments necessitated more space. The college reacted by establishing branches in the boroughs of Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. By 1920, Hunter College had the largest enrollment of women of any municipally financed college in the United States. In 1930, Hunter's Brooklyn campus merged with City College's Brooklyn campus, and the two were spun off to form Brooklyn College.\nIn February 1936, a fire destroyed the 1873 Gothic building facing Park Avenue. Plans for a new building were announced in 1937, and by 1940 the Public Works Administration replaced it with the Modernist north building, designed by Shreve, Lamb &amp; Harmon along with Harrison &amp; Fouilhoux.\nThe late 1930s saw the construction of Hunter College in the Bronx (later known as the Bronx Campus). During the Second World War, Hunter leased the Bronx Campus buildings to the United States Navy who used the facilities to train 95,000 women volunteers for military service as WAVES and SPARS. When the Navy vacated the campus, the site was briefly occupied by the nascent United Nations, which held its first Security Council sessions at the Bronx Campus in 1946, giving the school an international profile.\nIn 1943, Eleanor Roosevelt dedicated a town house at 47\u201349 East 65th Street in Manhattan to the college. The house had been a home for Eleanor and Franklin D. Roosevelt prior to the latter's presidency. The Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute at Hunter College opened at that location in fall 2010 as an academic center hosting prominent speakers.\nCUNY era.\nHunter became the women's college of the municipal system, and in the 1950s, when City College became coeducational, Hunter started admitting men to its Bronx campus. In 1964, the Manhattan campus began admitting men also. The Bronx campus subsequently became Lehman College in 1968.\nIn 1968\u20131969, Black and Puerto Rican students struggled to get a department that would teach about their history and experience. These and supportive students and faculty expressed this demand through building take-overs, rallies, etc. In Spring 1969, Hunter College established Black and Puerto Rican Studies (now called Africana/Puerto Rican and Latino Studies). An \"open admissions\" policy initiated in 1970 by the City University of New York opened the school's doors to historically underrepresented groups by guaranteeing a college education to any and all who graduated from NYC high schools. Many African Americans, Asian Americans, Latinos, Puerto Ricans, and students from the developing world made their presence felt at Hunter, and even after the end of \"open admissions\" still comprise a large part of the school's student body. As a result of this increase in enrollment, Hunter opened new buildings on Lexington Avenue during the early 1980s. In further advancing Puerto Rican studies, Hunter became home to the Centro de Estudios Puertorrique\u00f1os (\"Center for Puerto Rican Studies\" or simply \"Centro\") in 1982.\nIn 2006, Hunter became home to the Bella Abzug Leadership Institute, which has training programs for young women to build their leadership, public speaking, business and advocacy skills.\nCampuses.\nMain campus.\nHunter College is anchored by its main campus at East 68th Street and Lexington Avenue, a modern complex of three towers \u2013 the East, West, and North Buildings \u2013 and Thomas Hunter Hall, all interconnected by skywalks. The institution's official street address is 695 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10065. The address is based on the North Building, which stretches from 68th to 69th Streets along Park Avenue.\nThe main campus is situated two blocks east of Central Park, near many New York cultural institutions including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Asia Society Museum, and the Frick Collection. The New York City Subway's 68th Street\u2013Hunter College station ( 6 and &lt;6&gt;\u200btrains) on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line is directly underneath, and serves the entire campus. Adjacent to the staircase to the station, in front of the West Building, sat an iconic Hunter sculpture, \"Tau\", created by late Hunter professor and artist Tony Smith.\nThe main campus is home to the School of Arts and Sciences and the School of Education. It features numerous facilities that serve not only Hunter, but the surrounding community, and is well known as a center for the arts. The Assembly Hall, which seats more than 2,000, is a major performance site; the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse, a 675-seat proscenium theatre, has over 100,000 visitors annually and hosts over 200 performances each season; the Ida K. Lang Recital Hall is a fully equipped concert space with 148 seats; the Frederick Loewe Theatre, a 50 x black box performance space is the site of most department performances; and the Bertha and Karl Leubsdorf Art Gallery hosts professionally organized art exhibits.\nStudents have access to specialized learning facilities at the main campus, including the Dolciani Mathematics Learning Center, the Leona and Marcy Chanin Language Center, and the Physical Sciences Learning Center. Hunter has numerous research laboratories in the natural and biomedical sciences. These labs accommodate post-docs, PhD students from the CUNY Graduate School, and undergraduate researchers.\nCollege sports and recreational programs are served by the Hunter Sportsplex, located below the West Building.&lt;ref name=\"About Hunter: In Brief, 12/1/07\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nSatellite campuses.\nHunter has two satellite campuses. The Silberman School of Social Work Building, located on Third Avenue between East 118th and East 119th Streets, houses the School of Social Work, the School of Urban Public Health, and the Brookdale Center on Aging. The Brookdale Campus, located at East 25th Street and First Avenue, houses the Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, the Schools of the Health Professions, the Health Professions Library and several research centers and computer labs.\nThe Brookdale Campus is the site of the Hunter dormitory, which is home to over 600 undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a limited number of nurses employed at Bellevue Hospital. Prior to the opening of City College's new \"Towers,\" the Brookdale complex was the City University's only dormitory facility. In October 2022, New York Governor Kathy Hochul and New York City Mayor Eric Adams announced that the Brookdale Campus would be replaced by the CUNY Science Park and Research Campus (SPARC), with construction set to begin in 2026. The campus is planned to contain space for Hunter College, Borough of Manhattan Community College, and the CUNY Graduate School of Public Health &amp; Health Policy.\nOther facilities.\nThe institution owns and operates property outside of its main campuses, including the MFA Building at 205 Hudson, Roosevelt House, Baker Theatre Building, Silberman School of Social Work, and the Hunter College Campus Schools. The MFA Studio Art program was formerly run out of a building on West 41st Street between 9th and 10th Avenues. It was a industrial space that students converted to studio space for the college's BFA and MFA program. The current building in Tribeca now houses the Studio Art and Integrated Media Arts MFA program, and Art History MA program. Roosevelt House, located on East 65th Street, is the historic family home of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Hunter's Roosevelt House Public Policy Institute is now located there, honoring the public policy commitments of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Baker Theatre Building located on 149 East 67th Street, New York, NY 10065 is the home of Hunter's Department of Theatre thanks to the extraordinary generosity of Hunter trustee Patty Baker \u201982 and her husband, Jay. The Silberman School of Social Work is located between 118th and 119th streets on 3rd Avenue. The Hunter Campus Schools\u2014Hunter College High School and Hunter College Elementary School\u2014are publicly funded schools for the intellectually gifted. Located at East 94th Street, the Campus Schools are among the nation's oldest and largest elementary and secondary schools of their kind.\nLibraries.\nThe Leon &amp; Toby Cooperman Library entrance is located on the third-floor walkway level of the East Building. The Cooperman Library has individual and group study rooms, special facilities for students with disabilities, networked computer classrooms and labs for word processing and internet access.\nThe Social Work &amp; Urban Public Health Library, located on the main floor of the Silberman Building, (SWUPHL) serves the academic and research needs of the Silberman School of Social Work as well as Hunter\u2019s Urban Public Health, Community Health Education, and Nutrition programs.\nSilberman patrons have remote access to the Hunter Libraries electronic collections which include 250,000 full-text eBooks, 100,000 eJournals, and over 300 electronic databases.\u00a0 SWUPHL is a pick-up/drop-off site for the CUNY intra-library loan system (CLICS) that facilitates the sharing of books between all the CUNY libraries.\u00a0 In addition, SWUPHL participates in the national interlibrary loan program for academic libraries. These reciprocal agreements allow the patrons of SWUPHL extensive access to a multitude of collections.\nThe SWUPHL Faculty provide drop-in and by-appointment reference services, research consultations, classroom and individual instruction.\u00a0 The library has 6 group study rooms, group and silent study areas, desktop computers, a laptop computer loan program, photocopiers, printing stations, and a book scanner.\nThe Judith and Stanley Zabar Art Library, dedicated in December 2008, was made possible through the support of Judith Zabar, a member of the Hunter College Class of 1954, and her husband Stanley Zabar. \u00a0\nAcademics.\nHunter is organized into four schools: The School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Education, the School of the Health Professions, and the School of Social Work. The institution had an undergraduate admissions acceptance rate of 36% in Fall 2018. Hunter offers over 120 undergraduate programs. These include 5 undergraduate certificates, 73 BA degree programs, 10 BS degree programs, and 25 bachelor's-to-master's joint degree programs. The college also offers over 100 graduate programs.\nStudents at Hunter may study within the fields of fine arts, the humanities, the language arts, the sciences, the social sciences, and the applied arts and sciences, as well as in professional areas in accounting, education, health sciences, and nursing. Regardless of area of concentration, all undergraduate Hunter students are encouraged to have broad exposure to the liberal arts; Hunter was one of the first colleges in the nation to pass a 12-credit curriculum requirement for pluralism and diversity courses.\nHonors programs.\nHunter offers several honors programs, including the Macaulay Honors College and the Thomas Hunter Honors Program. The Macaulay Honors College, a CUNY-wide honors program, supports the undergraduate education of academically gifted students. University Scholars benefit from a full tuition scholarship (up to the value of in-state tuition only as of Fall 2013, effectively restricting it to NY state residents), personalized advising, early registration, access to internships, and study abroad opportunities. All scholars at Hunter are given the choice of either a free dormitory room at the Brookdale Campus for two years or a yearly stipend.\nThe Thomas Hunter Honors Program offers topical interdisciplinary seminars and academic concentrations designed to meet students\u2019 individual interests. The program is open to outstanding students pursuing a BA and is orchestrated under the supervision of an Honors Council. It can be combined with, or replace, a formal departmental major/minor.\nHunter offers other honors programs, including Honors Research Training Programs and Departmental Honors opportunities, The Freshmen Honors Scholar Programs inclusive of the Athena Scholar program, Daedalus Scholar program, Muse Scholar program, Nursing Scholar program, Roosevelt Scholar program, and the Yalow Scholar program.\nIn addition to these honors programs, several honors societies are based at Hunter, including Phi Beta Kappa (PBK). A small percentage of Hunter students are invited to join Hunter's Nu chapter of PBK, which has existed at the college since 1920.\nStudent life.\nStudent governance.\nThe Hunter College student body is governed by the Undergraduate Student Government and the Graduate Student Association (GSA).\nClubs.\nHunter offers approximately 150 clubs. These organizations range from the academic to the athletic, and from the religious/spiritual to the visual and performing arts. There are clubs based on specific interests, such as \"Russian Club\", which offers a look at Russian life and culture and \"InterVarsity Christian Fellowship\" an organization whose vision is to \"transform students and faculty, renew the campus, and develop world changers.\"\nFraternities and sororities.\nNational \u2013 Social\nNational \u2013 Service\nLocal \u2013 Social\nLocal \u2013 Service\nNon-Greek\nStudent media.\nHunter College has a campus radio station, WHCS, which once broadcast at 590AM but is now solely online. \"The Envoy\" is the main campus newspaper, published bi-weekly during the academic year. Its literary and art magazine \"The Olivetree Review\" offers opportunities for publishing student prose, poetry, drama, and art. Other publications include \"Culture Magazine\" (fashion and lifestyle), \"Hunted Hero Comics\" (comics and graphic stories), \"The Photographer's Collective\" (photography), \"Nursing Student Press\" (medical news and articles), Spoon University (culinary online publication), \"Psych News\" (psychology), \"The Wistarion\" (yearbook), \"SABOR\" (Spanish language and photography/now defunct), \"Revista De La Academia\" (Spanish language/now defunct), the \"Islamic Times\" (now defunct), \"Political Paradigm\" (political science/now defunct), \"Hakol\" (Jewish interest/now defunct), and \"Spoof\" (humor/now defunct).\nPast publications also include \"The WORD\" (news) and \"Hunter Anonymous\".\nAthletics.\nHunter is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) and competes at the Division III level.&lt;ref name=\"All About Athletics, 12/1/07\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe mascot is the Hawks. Hunter plays in the City University of New York Athletic Conference.\nThe basketball, volleyball and wrestling teams play at the Hunter Sportsplex.\nManhattan/Hunter College Science High School.\nAs a partnership with the New York City Department of Education, the Manhattan/Hunter College High School for Sciences (not to be confused with Hunter College High School) was opened in 2003 on the campus of the former Martin Luther King, Jr. High School on the Upper West Side. Unlike Hunter's campus schools, Hunter Science does not require an entrance exam for admission.\nNotable alumni.\nArts.\nThis list covers alumni in visual, musical, and performing arts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14331", "revid": "233163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14331", "title": "Harry Shearer", "text": "American actor (born 1943)\nHarry Julius Shearer (born December 23, 1943) is an American actor, comedian, musician, radio host, writer, and producer. Born in Los Angeles, California, Shearer began his career as a child actor. From 1969 to 1976, Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap, a radio comedy group. Following the breakup of the group, Shearer co-wrote the film \"Real Life\" (1979) with Albert Brooks and worked as a writer on Martin Mull's television series \"Fernwood 2 Night\".\nShearer was a cast member on \"Saturday Night Live\" between 1979 and 1980, and 1984 and 1985. Shearer co-created, co-wrote and co-starred in the film \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984), a hit satirical rockumentary. In 1989, he joined the cast of the animated sitcom \"The Simpsons\"; providing voices for characters including Mr. Burns, Waylon Smithers, Ned Flanders, Reverend Lovejoy, Lenny Leonard, Kang, Principal Skinner, Kent Brockman, Otto Mann, and formerly Dr. Hibbert. Shearer has appeared in films including \"The Truman Show\" (1998) and \"A Mighty Wind\" (2003), and has directed two, \"Teddy Bears' Picnic\" (2002) and \"The Big Uneasy\" (2010). Since 1983, Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy/music program \"Le Show\", incorporating satire, music, and sketch comedy. He has written three books.\nShearer has won a Primetime Emmy Award and has received several other Emmy and Grammy Award nominations. He has been married to singer-songwriter Judith Owen since 1993. He became an artist in residence at Loyola University, New Orleans in 2013.\nEarly life and career.\nShearer was born December 23, 1943, in Los Angeles, California, the son of Dora, a bookkeeper, and Mack Shearer, a trained opera singer who ran a gas station. His parents were Jewish immigrants from Poland and Austria respectively. His parents escaped Nazi-occupied Europe and met in Havana, Cuba. As a child, Shearer and his family often listened to radio programs such as Bob and Ray and the weekly show for the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. His father died when he was 12 and he had his Bar Mitzvah the following year. Shearer grew up in the neighborhood of West Adams. Starting when Shearer was four years old, he had a piano teacher whose daughter worked as a child actress. The piano teacher later decided to make a career change and become a children's agent, since she knew people in the business through her daughter's work. The teacher asked Shearer's parents for permission to take him to an audition. Several months later, she called Shearer's parents and told them that she had gotten Shearer an audition for the radio show \"The Jack Benny Program\". Shearer received the role when he was seven years old. He described Jack Benny as \"very warm and approachable ... He was a guy who dug the idea of other people on the show getting laughs, which sort of spoiled me for other people in comedy.\" Shearer has stated that one person who took him \"under his wing\" and was his mentor during his early days in show business was voice actor Mel Blanc, who voiced many animated characters, including Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck and Barney Rubble; Blanc was a regular on \"The Jack Benny Show\". He also befriended Blanc's son Noel. Shearer made his film debut in the film \"Abbott and Costello Go to Mars\" (1953), in which he had a small part, and appeared in \"The Robe\" (also 1953). Throughout his childhood and teenage years, he worked in television, film, and radio.\nIn 1957, Shearer played the precursor to the Eddie Haskell character in the pilot episode of the television series \"Leave It to Beaver\". After the filming, Shearer's parents said they did not want him to be a regular in a series. Instead they wanted him to just do occasional work so that he could have a normal childhood. Shearer and his parents made the decision not to accept the role in the series if it was picked up by a television network.\nIn the summer of 1960, Shearer volunteered as a driver for the Democratic National Convention during the 1960 U.S. presidential election where he was regularly assigned trips to Disneyland.\nShearer graduated from Los Angeles High School and attended UCLA as a political science major in the early 1960s. He decided to quit show business to become a \"serious person\". However, he says this lasted approximately a month, and he joined the staff of the \"Daily Bruin\", UCLA's school newspaper, during his first year. He was editor of the college humor magazine (\"Satyr\"), including the June 1964 parody \"Preyboy\". He also worked as a newscaster at KRLA, a top 40 radio station in Pasadena, during this period. According to Shearer, after graduating, he had \"a very serious agenda going on, and it was 'Stay Out of the Draft'.\" He attended graduate school at Harvard University for one year and worked at the state legislature in Sacramento. From 1967 to 1968, he was a high school teacher, teaching English and social studies. He left teaching following \"disagreements with the administration\".\nFrom 1969 to 1976, Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap, a radio comedy group that included David Lander, Richard Beebe, and Michael McKean. The group consisted of \"a bunch of newsmen\" at KRLA 1110, \"the number two station\" in Los Angeles. They wanted to do more than just straight news, so they hired comedians who were talented vocalists. Shearer heard about the group from a friend, so he brought over a tape to the station and nervously gave it to the receptionist. He found out he was hired that same day. The group's radio show was canceled in 1970 by KRLA and in 1971 by KPPC-FM, so they started performing in various clubs and concert venues. While at KRLA, Shearer also interviewed Creedence Clearwater Revival for the \"Pop Chronicles\" music documentary.\nIn 1973, Shearer appeared as Jim Houseafire on \"How Time Flys\", an album by The Firesign Theatre's David Ossman. The Credibility Gap broke up in 1976 when Lander and McKean left to perform in the sitcom \"Laverne &amp; Shirley\". Shearer started working with Albert Brooks, producing one of Brooks' albums and co-writing the film \"Real Life\" (1979). Shearer also started writing for Martin Mull's television series \"Fernwood 2 Night\". In the mid-1970s, he started working with Rob Reiner on a pilot for ABC. The show, which starred Christopher Guest, Tom Leopold and McKean, was not picked up.\nCareer.\n\"Saturday Night Live\".\nInitial run under Lorne Michaels.\nIn August 1979, Shearer was hired as a writer and cast member on \"Saturday Night Live\", one of the first additions to the show's original 1975 cast. Recommended by Al Franken to \"Saturday Night Live\" creator Lorne Michaels, the acquisition of Shearer was seen as an unofficial replacement for John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd, who were both leaving the show.\nShearer describes his experience on the show as a \"living hell\" and \"not a real pleasant place to work.\" He did not get along well with the other writers and cast members and states that he was not included with the cast in the opening montage (although he was added to the montage for later episodes of the 1979\u201380 season) and that Michaels had told the rest of the cast that he was \"just a writer\".\nMichaels left \"Saturday Night Live\" at the end of the fifth season, taking the entire cast with him. Shearer told new executive producer Jean Doumanian that he was \"not a fan of Lorne's\" and offered to stay with the show if he was given the chance to overhaul the program and bring in experienced comedians, like Christopher Guest. However, Doumanian turned him down, so he decided to leave with the rest of the cast.\nReturn in 1984 under Dick Ebersol.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen I left, Dick [Ebersol] issued a press release, saying \"creative differences.\" And the first person who called me for a comment on it read me that and I blurted out, \"Yeah, I was creative and they were different.\"\n\u2014Harry Shearer\nIn 1984, while promoting the film \"This Is Spinal Tap\", Shearer, Christopher Guest and Michael McKean performed on \"Saturday Night Live\". All three members were offered the chance to join the show in the 1984\u20131985 season. Shearer accepted because he was treated well by the producers and he thought the backstage environment had improved but later stated that he \"didn't realize that guests are treated better than the regulars.\" Guest also accepted the offer while McKean rejected it, although he would join the cast in 1994.\nDick Ebersol, who replaced Lorne Michaels as the show's producer, said that Shearer was \"a gifted performer but a pain in the butt. He's just so demanding on the preciseness of things and he's very, very hard on the working people. He's just a nightmare-to-deal-with person.\" In January 1985, Shearer left the show for good, partially because he felt he was not being used enough. Martin Short said Shearer \"wanted to be creative and Dick [Ebersol] wanted something else. ... I think he felt his voice wasn't getting represented on the show. When he wouldn't get that chance, it made him very upset.\"\nSpinal Tap.\nShearer co-created, co-wrote and co-starred in Rob Reiner's film \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984). Shearer, Reiner, Michael McKean and Christopher Guest received a deal to write a first draft of a screenplay for a company called Marble Arch. They decided that the film could not be written and instead filmed a 20-minute demo of what they wanted to do. It was eventually greenlighted by Norman Lear and Jerry Perenchio at Embassy Pictures. The film satirizes the wild personal behavior and musical pretensions of hard rock and heavy metal bands, as well as the hagiographic tendencies of rockumentaries of the time. The three core members of the band Spinal Tap\u2014David St. Hubbins, Derek Smalls and Nigel Tufnel\u2014were portrayed by McKean, Shearer and Guest respectively. The three actors play their musical instruments and speak with mock English accents throughout the film. There was no script, although there was a written breakdown of most of the scenes, so it was mostly improvised except for the songs. It was filmed in 25 days.\nShearer said in an interview that \"The animating impulse was to do rock 'n' roll right. The four of us had been around rock 'n' roll and we were just amazed by how relentlessly the movies got it wrong. Because we were funny people it was going to be a funny film, but we wanted to get it right.\" When they tried to sell it to various Hollywood studios, they were told that the film would not work. The group kept saying, \"No, this is a story that's pretty familiar to people. We're not introducing them to anything they don't really know,\" so Shearer thought it would at least have some resonance with the public. The film was only a modest success upon its initial release but found greater success, and developed a cult following, after its video release. In 2000, the film was ranked 29th on the American Film Institute's list of the top 100 comedy movies in American cinema and it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nShearer, Guest and McKean have since worked on several projects as their Spinal Tap characters. They released three albums: \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984), \"Break Like the Wind\" (1992) and \"Back from the Dead\" (2009). In 1992, Spinal Tap appeared in an episode of \"The Simpsons\" called \"The Otto Show\". The band has played several concerts, including at Live Earth in London on July 7, 2007. In anticipation of the show, Rob Reiner directed a short film entitled \"Spinal Tap\". In 2009, the band released \"Back from the Dead\" to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the release of the film. The album features re-recorded versions of songs featured in \"This Is Spinal Tap\" and its soundtrack, and five new songs. The band performed a one-date \"world tour\" at London's Wembley Arena on June 30, 2009. The Folksmen, a mock band featured in the film \"A Mighty Wind\" that is also made up of characters played by Shearer, McKean and Guest, was the opening act for the show.\n\"The Simpsons\".\nShearer is known for his work as a voice actor on \"The Simpsons\". Matt Groening, the creator of the show, was a fan of Shearer's work, while Shearer was a fan of a column Groening used to write. When approached by Groening to be in the series, Shearer was initially reluctant because he thought the recording sessions would be too much trouble. He felt that voice acting was \"not a lot of fun\" as, traditionally, voice actors record their parts separately. He was told that the actors would record their lines together, and after three phone calls for executive producer James L. Brooks, Shearer was convinced to join the cast of \"The Simpsons\". Shearer's first impression of \"The Simpsons\" was that it was funny. He thought it was a \"pretty cool\" way to work but found it peculiar that his fellow cast members were adamant about not being known to the public as the people behind the voices.\nShearer provides voices for Principal Skinner, Kent Brockman, Mr. Burns, Waylon Smithers, Ned Flanders, Reverend Lovejoy, formerly Dr. Hibbert until 2021, Lenny Leonard, Otto Mann, Rainier Wolfcastle, Scratchy, Kang, Dr. Marvin Monroe, and Judge Snyder, among others. He has described all of his regular characters' voices as \"easy to slip into. ... I wouldn't do them if they weren't easy.\" Shearer modeled Mr. Burns's voice on the two actors Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan. Shearer says that Burns is the most difficult character for him to voice because it is rough on his vocal cords and he often needs to drink tea and honey to soothe his voice. He describes Burns as his favorite character, saying he \"like[s] Mr. Burns because he is pure evil. A lot of evil people make the mistake of diluting it. Never adulterate your evil.\" Shearer is also the voice of Burns' assistant Smithers, and is able to perform dialogue between the two characters in one take. In the episode \"Bart's Inner Child\", Shearer said \"wow\" in the voice of Otto, which was then used when Otto was seen jumping on a trampoline. Ned Flanders had been meant to be just a neighbor that Homer Simpson was jealous of, but because Shearer used \"such a sweet voice\" for him, Flanders was broadened to become a Christian and a sweet guy that someone would prefer to live next to over Homer. Dr. Marvin Monroe's voice was based on psychiatrist David Viscott. Monroe has been largely retired since the seventh season barring a few cameo appearances because voicing the character strained Shearer's throat.\nIn 2004, Shearer criticized what he perceived as the show's declining quality: \"I rate the last three seasons as among the worst, so season four looks very good to me now.\" Shearer has also been vocal about \"The Principal and the Pauper\" (season nine, episode two, 1997), one of the most controversial episodes of \"The Simpsons\". Many fans and critics reacted negatively to the revelation that Principal Seymour Skinner, a recurring character since the first season, was an impostor. The episode has been criticized by both Shearer and Groening. In a 2001 interview, Shearer recalled that after reading the script, he told the writers, \"That's \"so\" wrong. You're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason, for a story we've done before with other characters. It's so arbitrary and gratuitous, and it's disrespectful to the audience.\" In a December 2006 interview, Shearer added, \"Now, [the writers] refuse to talk about it. They realize it was a horrible mistake. They never mention it. It's like they're punishing [the audience] for paying attention.\"\nDue to scheduling and availability conflicts, Shearer decided not to participate in \"The Simpsons Ride\", which opened in 2008, so none of his characters have vocal parts and many do not appear in the ride at all. In a 2010 interview on \"The Howard Stern Show\", Shearer alluded that the reason he was not part of the ride was because he would not be getting paid for it. Similarly, Shearer was unable to appear in the \"Family Guy\" crossover episode \"The Simpsons Guy\" due to further scheduling conflicts. Therefore, his characters are again mute. When asked about how he felt about the crossover, Shearer replied, \"Matter and anti-matter.\"\nUntil 1998, Shearer was paid $30,000 per episode. During a pay dispute in 1998, Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors, going as far as preparing for casting of new voices. The dispute, however, was resolved and Shearer received $125,000 per episode until 2004, when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $360,000 an episode. The dispute was resolved a month later, and Shearer's pay rose to $250,000 per episode. After salary re-negotiations in 2008, the voice actors received $400,000 per episode. Three years later, with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut, Shearer and the other cast members accepted a 30% pay cut, down to just over $300,000 per episode. On May 14, 2015, Shearer announced he was leaving the show. After the other voice actors signed a contract for the same pay, Shearer refused, stating it was not enough. Al Jean made a statement from the producers saying \"the show must go on,\" but did not elaborate on what might happen to the characters Shearer voiced. On July 7, 2015, Shearer agreed to continue with the show, on the same terms as the other voice actors.\n\"Le Show\" and radio work.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBecause I don't do stand-up, radio has always been my equivalent, a place to stay in connection with the public and force myself to write every week and come up with new characters. Plus it's a medium that \u2013 having grown up with it and putting myself to sleep with a radio under my pillow [as a kid] \u2013 I love. No matter what picture you want to create in the listener's mind, a few minutes of work gets it done.\n\u2014Harry Shearer\nSince 1983, Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy/music program \"Le Show\". The program is a sequence of themed satirical news commentary segments, interspersed with music and sketch comedy, that takes aim at the \"mega morons of the mighty media\". It is carried on many National Public Radio and other public and community radio stations throughout the United States. Since the merger of the Sirius and XM satellite radio services the program became unavailable on the service of the merged company, SiriusXM. The show has also been made available as a podcast on iTunes and by WWNO. On the weekly program Shearer alternates between DJing, reading and commenting on the news of the day after the manner of Mort Sahl, and performing original (mostly political) comedy sketches and songs. In 2008, Shearer released a music CD called \"Songs of the Bushmen\", consisting of his satirical numbers about former President George W. Bush on \"Le Show\". Shearer says he criticizes both Republicans and Democrats equally, and also says that \"the iron law of doing comedy about politics is you make fun of whoever is running the place\" and that \"everyone else is just running around talking. They are the ones who are actually doing something, changing people's lives for better or for worse. Other people the media calls 'satirists' don't work that way.\"\nSince encountering satellite news feeds when he worked on \"Saturday Night Live\", Shearer has been fascinated with the contents of the video that does not air. Shearer refers to these clips as found objects. \"I thought, wow, there is just an unending supply of this material, and it's wonderful and fascinating and funny and sometimes haunting \u2013 but it's always good,\" said Shearer. He collects this material and uses it on \"Le Show\" and on his website. In 2008, he assembled video clips of newsmakers from this collection into an art installation titled \"The Silent Echo Chamber\"&lt;ref name=\"youtube/X_5zf0K4zk0\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which was exhibited at The Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum in Ridgefield, Connecticut. The exhibit was also displayed in 2009 at Institut Valenci\u00e0 d'Art Modern (IVAM) in Valencia, Spain and in 2010 at the New Orleans Contemporary Arts Center.\nIn 2006 Shearer appeared with Brian Hayes in four episodes of the BBC Radio 4 sitcom \"Not Today, Thank You\", playing Nostrils, a man so ugly he cannot stand to be in his own presence. He was originally scheduled to appear in all six episodes but had to withdraw from recording two due to a problem with his work permit. On June 19, 2008, it was announced that Shearer would receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the radio category.\nFurther career.\nShearer's first feature film as director, \"Teddy Bears' Picnic\", which he also wrote, was released in 2002. The plot is based on Bohemian Grove, which hosts a three-week encampment of some of the most powerful men in the world. The film was not well received by critics. It garnered a 0% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with all 19 reviews being determined as negative and received a rating of 32 out of 100 (signifying \"generally negative reviews\") on Metacritic from 10 reviews. In 2003, he co-wrote \"J. Edgar! The Musical\" with Tom Leopold, which spoofed J. Edgar Hoover's relationship with Clyde Tolson. It premiered at the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen, Colorado and starred Kelsey Grammer and John Goodman.\nShearer, Guest and McKean starred in the folk music mockumentary \"A Mighty Wind\" (2003), portraying a band called The Folksmen. The film was written by Guest and Eugene Levy, and directed by Guest. Shearer had a major role in the Guest-directed parody of Oscar politicking \"For Your Consideration\" released in 2006. He played Victor Allan Miller, a veteran actor who is convinced that he is going to be nominated for an Academy Award. He also appeared as a news anchor in \"Godzilla\" (1998) with fellow \"The Simpsons\" cast members Hank Azaria and Nancy Cartwright. His other film appearances include \"The Right Stuff\" (1983), \"The Fisher King\" (1991), \"The Truman Show\" (1998), \"Small Soldiers\" (also 1998), and \"EDtv\" (1999). He also directed and appeared in the television program \"Portrait of a White Marriage\" (1988), a sequel to \"The History of White People in America\".\nShearer has also worked as a columnist for the \"Los Angeles Times Magazine\", but decided that it \"became such a waste of time to bother with it.\" His columns have also been published in \"Slate\" and \"Newsweek\". Since May 2005 he has been a contributing blogger at \"The Huffington Post\". Shearer has written three books. \"Man Bites Town\", published in 1993, is a collection of columns that he wrote for \"The Los Angeles Times\" between 1989 and 1992. Published in 1999, \"It's the Stupidity, Stupid\" analyzed the hatred some people had for then-President Bill Clinton. Shearer believes that Clinton became disliked because he had an affair with \"the least powerful, least credentialed woman cleared into his official compound.\" His most recent book is \"Not Enough Indians\", his first novel. Published in 2006, it is a comic novel about Native Americans and gambling. Without the \"pleasures of collaboration\" and \"spontaneity and improvisation which characterize his other projects\", \"Not Enough Indians\" was a \"struggle\" for Shearer to write. He said that \"the only fun thing about it was having written it. It was lonely, I had no deal for it and it took six years to do. It was a profoundly disturbing act of self-discipline.\"\nShearer has released five solo comedy albums: \"It Must Have Been Something I Said\" (1994), \"Dropping Anchors\" (2006), \"Songs Pointed and Pointless\" (2007), \"Songs of the Bushmen\" (2008) and \"Greed and Fear\" (2010). His most recent CD, \"Greed and Fear\" is mainly about Wall Street economic issues, rather than politics like his previous albums. Shearer decided to make the album when he\"started getting amused by the language of the economic meltdown \u2013 when 'toxic assets' suddenly became 'troubled assets,' going from something poisoning the system to just a bunch of delinquent youth with dirty faces that needed not removal from the system but just ... understanding.\" In May 2006, Shearer received an honorary doctorate from Goucher College.\n\"The Big Uneasy\".\nShearer is the director of \"The Big Uneasy\" (2010), a documentary film about the impacts of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans. Narrated by actor John Goodman, the film describes levee failures and catastrophic flooding in the New Orleans metropolitan area, and includes extended interviews with former LSU professor Ivor Van Heerden, Robert Bea, an engineering professor at the University of California at Berkeley, and Maria Garzino, an engineer and contract specialist for the Los Angeles district of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The film is critical of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and its management of flood protection projects in Southern Louisiana. Shearer draws on numerous technical experts to maintain that Hurricane Katrina's \"... tragic floods creating widespread damage were caused by manmade errors in engineering and judgment.\" On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 71% based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 6.85/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"\"The Big Uneasy\" offers an admittedly uneven \u2013 yet still worthy and well-intentioned \u2013 look at a horrific disaster's aftermath.\"\nPersonal life.\nShearer married folk singer Penelope Nichols in 1974. They divorced in 1977. He has been married to Welsh singer-songwriter Judith Owen since 1993. In 2005, the couple launched their own record label called Courgette Records. Shearer primarily resides in the French Quarter of New Orleans, Louisiana, but has homes in Santa Monica, California and Notting Hill, London. He first went to New Orleans in 1988 and has attended every New Orleans Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival since.\nShearer often speaks and writes about the failure of the Federal levee system which flooded New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina, blasting the coverage of it in the mainstream media and criticizing the role of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. Prior to the DVD release of his film, \"The Big Uneasy\", Shearer would hold screenings of the film at different venues and take questions from audience members.\nAwards.\nShearer was the last of the six regular voice actors from \"The Simpsons\" to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Character Voice-Over Performance. His win came for the season 25 episode \"Four Regrettings and a Funeral\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14332", "revid": "246742", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14332", "title": "Haenir", "text": ""}
{"id": "14334", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14334", "title": "Hunter S Thompson", "text": ""}
{"id": "14335", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14335", "title": "History of Painting", "text": ""}
{"id": "14336", "revid": "50456182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14336", "title": "High fantasy", "text": "Subgenre of fiction\nHigh fantasy, or epic fantasy, is a subgenre of fantasy defined by the epic nature of its setting or by the epic stature of its characters, themes, or plot. High fantasy is usually set in an alternative, fictional (\"secondary\") world, rather than the \"real\" or \"primary\" world. This secondary world is usually internally consistent, but its rules differ from those of the primary world. By contrast, low fantasy is characterized by being set on Earth, the primary or real world, or a rational and familiar fictional world with the inclusion of magical elements.\nCharacteristics.\nThe term \"high fantasy\" was coined by Lloyd Alexander in a 1971 essay, \"High Fantasy and Heroic Romance\", which was originally given at the New England Round Table of Children's Librarians in October 1969. In this definition, Alexander was using the framework Northrop Frye set forth in his Anatomy of Criticism, particularly Frye's Theory of Modes; High Fantasy being fantasy in the High Mimetic Mode. Since then, \"high fantasy\" has come to serve as a broad term to include a number of different flavors of the fantasy genre, mythic fantasy, dark fantasy, and wuxia. It typically is not considered to include the sword and sorcery genre. High fantasy is typically set in a quasi-medieval world, is frequently inspired by various mythological or legendary traditions, and often but not always features supernatural sorcery and imaginary beings such as dragons. \nMany high fantasy stories are told from the viewpoint of one main hero. Often, much of the plot revolves around their heritage or mysterious nature, along with a world-threatening problem. In many novels the hero is an orphan or unusual sibling, and frequently portrayed with an extraordinary talent for magic or combat. They begin the story young, if not as an actual child, or are portrayed as being very weak and/or useless. \nThe hero often begins as a na\u00efve or childlike figure but is forced by circumstances to mature rapidly, experiencing a considerable gain in fighting or problem-solving abilities along the way. The progress of the story leads to the character's learning the nature of the unknown forces against them, that they constitute a force with great power and malevolence. The villains in such stories are usually completely evil and unrelatable. \nThe romances of William Morris, such as \"The Well at the World's End\", set in an imaginary medieval world, are sometimes regarded as the first examples of high fantasy. Other early examples of the genre are some works of American novelist James Branch Cabell which were set in a fictional world inspired by medieval France and published starting in 1919, known collectively as \"Biography of the Life of Manuel\". E.R. Eddison's novels The Worm Ouroboros (1922) and the Zimiamvian Trilogy (1935\u20131958) are also important in epic fantasy.\nThe works of English J. R. R. Tolkien, especially \"The Lord of the Rings\" (1954\u201355), are regarded as archetypal works of high fantasy. \nThemes.\nHigh fantasy has often been defined by its themes and messages. \"Good versus evil\" is a common one in high fantasy, and defining the character of evil is often an important theme in a work of high fantasy, such as \"The Lord of the Rings\". The importance of the concept of good and evil can be regarded as the distinguishing mark between high fantasy and sword and sorcery. In many works of high fantasy, this conflict marks a deep concern with moral issues; in other works, the conflict is a power struggle, with, for instance, wizards behaving irresponsibly whether they are \"good\" or \"evil\".\nGame settings.\nRole-playing games such as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" with campaign settings like \"Dragonlance\" by Tracy Hickman and Margaret Weis and \"Forgotten Realms\" by Ed Greenwood are a common basis for many fantasy books and many other authors continue to contribute to the settings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14337", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14337", "title": "Human sexual activity", "text": "Manner in which humans engage sexually\nHuman sexual activity, human sexual practice or human sexual behaviour is the manner in which humans experience and express their sexuality. People engage in a variety of sexual acts, ranging from activities done alone (e.g., masturbation) to acts with another person (e.g., sexual intercourse, non-penetrative sex, oral sex, etc.) or persons (e.g., orgy) in varying patterns of frequency, for a wide variety of reasons. Sexual activity usually results in sexual arousal and physiological changes in the aroused person, some of which are pronounced while others are more subtle. Sexual activity may also include conduct and activities which are intended to arouse the sexual interest of another or enhance the sex life of another, such as strategies to find or attract partners (courtship and display behaviour), or personal interactions between individuals (for instance, foreplay or BDSM). Sexual activity may follow sexual arousal.\nHuman sexual activity has sociological, cognitive, emotional, behavioural and biological aspects. It involves personal bonding, sharing emotions, the physiology of the reproductive system, sex drive, sexual intercourse, and sexual behaviour in all its forms.\nIn some cultures, sexual activity is considered acceptable only within marriage, while premarital and extramarital sex are taboo. Some sexual activities are illegal either universally or in some countries or subnational jurisdictions, while some are considered contrary to the norms of certain societies or cultures. Two examples that are criminal offences in most jurisdictions are sexual assault and sexual activity with a person below the local age of consent.\nTypes.\nSexual activity can be classified in a number of ways. The practices may be preceded by or consist solely of foreplay. Acts involving one person (autoeroticism) may include sexual fantasy or masturbation. If two people are involved, they may engage in vaginal sex, anal sex, oral sex or manual sex. Penetrative sex between two people may be described as sexual intercourse, but definitions vary. If there are more than two participants in a sex act, it may be referred to as group sex. Autoerotic sexual activity can involve use of dildos, vibrators, butt plugs, and other sex toys, though these devices can also be used with a partner.\nSexual activity can be classified into the gender and sexual orientation of the participants, as well as by the relationship of the participants. The relationships can be ones of marriage, intimate partners, casual sex partners or anonymous. Sexual activity can be regarded as conventional or as alternative, involving, for example, fetishism or BDSM activities.\nFetishism can take many forms, including the desire for certain body parts (partialism) such as breasts, navels, or feet. The object of desire can be shoes, boots, lingerie, clothing, leather or rubber items. Some non-conventional autoerotic practices can be dangerous. These include autoerotic asphyxiation and self-bondage. The potential for injury or even death that exists while engaging in the partnered versions of these fetishes (choking and bondage, respectively) becomes drastically increased in the autoerotic case due to the isolation and lack of assistance in the event of a problem.\nSexual activity that is consensual is sexual activity in which both or all participants agree to take part and are of the age that they can consent. If sexual activity takes place under force or duress, it is considered rape or another form of sexual assault. In different cultures and countries, various sexual activities may be lawful or illegal in regards to the age, gender, marital status or other factors of the participants, or otherwise contrary to social norms or generally accepted sexual morals.\nMating strategies.\nIn evolutionary psychology and behavioral ecology, human mating strategies are a set of behaviors used by individuals to attract, select, and retain mates. Mating strategies overlap with reproductive strategies, which encompass a broader set of behaviors involving the timing of reproduction and the trade-off between quantity and quality of offspring (see life history theory).\nRelative to other animals, human mating strategies are unique in their relationship with cultural variables such as the institution of marriage. Humans may seek out individuals with the intention of forming a long-term intimate relationship, marriage, casual relationship, or friendship. The human desire for companionship is one of the strongest human drives. It is an innate feature of human nature, and may be related to the sex drive. The human mating process encompasses the social and cultural processes whereby one person may meet another to assess suitability, the courtship process and the process of forming an interpersonal relationship. Commonalities, however, can be found between humans and nonhuman animals in mating behavior.\nStages of physiological arousal during sexual stimulation.\nThe physiological responses during sexual stimulation are fairly similar for both men and women and there are four phases.\nSexual dysfunction is the inability to react emotionally or physically to sexual stimulation in a way projected of the average healthy person; it can affect different stages in the sexual response cycles, which are desire, excitement and orgasm. In the media, sexual dysfunction is often associated with men, but in actuality, it is more commonly observed in females (43 percent) than males (31 percent).\nPsychological aspects.\nSexual activity can lower blood pressure and overall stress levels. It serves to release tension, elevate mood, and possibly create a profound sense of relaxation, especially in the postcoital period. From a biochemical perspective, sex causes the release of oxytocin and endorphins and boosts the immune system.\nMotivations.\nPeople engage in sexual activity for any of a multitude of possible reasons. Although the primary evolutionary purpose of sexual activity is reproduction, research on college students suggested that people have sex for four general reasons: \"physical attraction\", as a \"means to an end\", to increase \"emotional connection\", and to \"alleviate insecurity\".\nMost people engage in sexual activity because of pleasure they derive from the arousal of their sexuality, especially if they can achieve orgasm. Sexual arousal can also be experienced from foreplay and flirting, and from fetish or BDSM activities, or other erotic activities. Most commonly, people engage in sexual activity because of the sexual desire generated by a person to whom they feel sexual attraction; but they may engage in sexual activity for the physical satisfaction they achieve in the absence of attraction for another, as in the case of casual or social sex. At times, a person may engage in a sexual activity solely for the sexual pleasure of their partner, such as because of an obligation they may have to the partner or because of love, sympathy or pity they may feel for the partner.\nA person may engage in sexual activity for purely monetary considerations, or to obtain some advantage from either the partner or the activity. A man and woman may engage in sexual intercourse with the objective of conception. Some people engage in hate sex which occurs between two people who strongly dislike or annoy each other. It is related to the idea that opposition between two people can heighten sexual tension, attraction and interest.\nSelf-determination theory.\nResearch has found that people also engage in sexual activity for reasons associated with self-determination theory. The self-determination theory can be applied to a sexual relationship when the participants have positive feelings associated with the relationship, not from the social pressures of their partner, but \"intrinsically motivated\" to engage in intercourse on their own accord. These participants do not feel guilty or coerced into the partnership. Researchers have proposed the model of self-determined sexual motivation. The purpose of this model is to connect self-determination and sexual motivation. This model has helped to explain how people are sexually motivated when involved in self-determined dating relationships. This model also links the positive outcomes, (satisfying the need for autonomy, competence, and relatedness) gained from sexual motivations.\nAccording to the completed research associated with this model, it was found that people of both sexes who engaged in sexual activity for self-determined motivation had more positive psychological well-being. While engaging in sexual activity for self-determined reasons, the participants also had a higher need for fulfillment. When this need was satisfied, they felt better about themselves. This was correlated with greater closeness to their partner and higher overall satisfaction in their relationship. Though both sexes engaged in sexual activity for self-determined reasons, there were some differences found between males and females. It was concluded that females had more motivation than males to engage in sexual activity for self-determined reasons. Females also had higher satisfaction and relationship quality than males did from the sexual activity. Overall, research concluded that psychological well-being, sexual motivation, and sexual satisfaction were all positively correlated when dating couples partook in sexual activity for self-determined reasons.\nFrequency.\nThe frequency of sexual activity might range from zero to 15 or 20 times a week. Frequency of intercourse tends to decline with age. Some post-menopausal women experience decline in frequency of sexual intercourse, while others do not. According to the Kinsey Institute, the average frequency of sexual intercourse in the US for individuals with partners is 112 times per year (age 18\u201329), 86 times per year (age 30\u201339), and 69 times per year (age 40\u201349). The rate of sexual activity has been declining in the 21st century, a phenomenon that has been described as a sex recession.\nAdolescents.\nThe age at which adolescents become sexually active varies considerably between different cultures and times. (See Prevalence of virginity.) The first sexual act of a child or adolescent is sometimes referred to as the sexualization of the child, and may be considered a milestone or a change of status, as the loss of virginity or innocence. Youth are legally free to have intercourse after they reach the age of consent.\nA 1999 survey of students indicated that approximately 40% of ninth graders across the United States report having had sexual intercourse. This figure rises with each grade. Males are more sexually active than females at each of the grade levels surveyed. Sexual activity of young adolescents differs in ethnicity as well. A higher percentage of African American and Hispanic adolescents are more sexually active than white adolescents.\nResearch on sexual frequency has also been conducted solely on female adolescents who engage in sexual activity. Female adolescents tended to engage in more sexual activity due to positive mood. In female teenagers, engaging in sexual activity was directly positively correlated with being older, greater sexual activity in the previous week or prior day, and more positive mood the previous day or the same day as the sexual activity occurred. Decreased sexual activity was associated with prior or same-day negative mood or menstruation.\nAlthough opinions differ, researchers suggest that sexual activity is an essential part of humans, and that teenagers need to experience sex. According to a study, sexual experiences help teenagers understand pleasure and satisfaction. In relation to hedonic and eudaimonic well-being, it stated that teenagers can positively benefit from sexual activity. The cross-sectional study was conducted in 2008 and 2009 at a rural upstate New York community. Teenagers who had their first sexual experience at age 16 revealed a higher well-being than those who were sexually inexperienced or who became sexually active at age 17. Furthermore, teenagers who had their first sexual experience at age 15 or younger, or who had many sexual partners were not negatively affected and did not have associated lower well-being.\nHealth and safety.\nSexual activity is an innately physiological function, but like other physical activity, it comes with risks. There are four main types of risks that may arise from sexual activity: unwanted pregnancy, contracting a sexually transmitted infection (STI), physical injury, and psychological injury.\nUnwanted pregnancy.\nAny sexual activity that involves the introduction of semen into a woman's vagina, such as during sexual intercourse, or contact of semen with her vulva, may result in a pregnancy. To reduce the risk of unintended pregnancies, some people who engage in penile\u2013vaginal sex may use contraception, such as birth control pills, a condom, diaphragms, spermicides, hormonal contraception or sterilization. The effectiveness of the various contraceptive methods in avoiding pregnancy varies considerably, and depends on the method rather than the user.\nSexually transmitted infections.\nSexual activity that involves skin-to-skin contact, exposure to an infected person's bodily fluids or mucous membranes carries the risk of contracting a sexually transmitted infection. People may not be able to detect that their sexual partner has one or more STIs, for example if they are asymptomatic (show no symptoms). The risk of STIs can be reduced by safe sex practices, such as using condoms. Both partners may opt to be tested for STIs before engaging in sex. The exchange of body fluids is not necessary to contract an infestation of crab lice. Crab lice typically are found attached to hair in the pubic area but sometimes are found on coarse hair elsewhere on the body (for example, eyebrows, eyelashes, beard, mustache, chest, armpits, etc.). Pubic lice infestations (pthiriasis) are spread through direct contact with someone who is infested with the louse.\nSome STIs like HIV/AIDS can also be contracted by using IV drug needles after their use by an infected person, as well as through childbirth or breastfeeding.\nAging.\nFactors such as biological and psychological factors, diseases, mental conditions, boredom with the relationship, and widowhood have been found to contribute to a decrease in sexual interest and activity in old age, but older age does not eliminate the ability to enjoy sexual activity.\nOrientations and society.\nHeterosexuality.\nHeterosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the opposite sex. Heterosexual practices are institutionally privileged in most countries. In some countries, mostly those where religion has a strong influence on social policy, marriage laws serve the purpose of encouraging people to have sex only within marriage. Sodomy laws have been used to discourage same-sex sexual practices, but they may also affect opposite-sex sexual practices. Laws also ban adults from committing sexual abuse, committing sexual acts with anyone under an age of consent, performing sexual activities in public, and engaging in sexual activities for money (prostitution). Though these laws cover both same-sex and opposite-sex sexual activities, they may differ in regard to punishment, and may be more frequently (or exclusively) enforced on those who engage in same-sex sexual activities.\nDifferent-sex sexual practices may be monogamous, serially monogamous, or polyamorous, and, depending on the definition of sexual practice, abstinent or autoerotic (including masturbation). Additionally, different religious and political movements have tried to influence or control changes in sexual practices including courting and marriage, though in most countries changes occur at a slow rate.\nHomosexuality.\nHomosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the same sex. People with a homosexual orientation can express their sexuality in a variety of ways, and may or may not express it in their behaviors. Research indicates that many gay men and lesbians want, and succeed in having, committed and durable relationships. For example, survey data indicate that between 40% and 60% of gay men and between 45% and 80% of lesbians are currently involved in a romantic relationship.\nIt is possible for a person whose sexual identity is mainly heterosexual to engage in sexual acts with people of the same sex. Gay and lesbian people who pretend to be heterosexual are often referred to as being closeted (hiding their sexuality in \"the closet\"). \"Closet case\" is a derogatory term used to refer to people who hide their sexuality. Making that orientation public can be called \"coming out of the closet\" in the case of voluntary disclosure or \"outing\" in the case of disclosure by others against the subject's wishes (or without their knowledge). Among some communities (called \"men on the DL\" or \"down-low\"), same-sex sexual behavior is sometimes viewed as solely for physical pleasure. Men who have sex with men, as well as women who have sex with women, or men on the \"down-low\" may engage in sex acts with members of the same sex while continuing sexual and romantic relationships with the opposite sex.\nPeople who engage exclusively in same-sex sexual practices may not identify themselves as gay or lesbian. In sex-segregated environments, individuals may seek relationships with others of their own gender (known as situational homosexuality). In other cases, some people may experiment or explore their sexuality with same (or different) sex sexual activity before defining their sexual identity. Despite stereotypes and common misconceptions, there are no forms of sexual acts exclusive to same-sex sexual behavior that cannot also be found in opposite-sex sexual behavior, except those involving the meeting of the genitalia between same-sex partners\u00a0\u2013 tribadism (generally vulva-to-vulva rubbing) and frot (generally penis-to-penis rubbing).\nBisexuality and pansexuality.\nPeople who have a romantic or sexual attraction to both sexes are referred to as bisexual. People who have a distinct but not exclusive preference for one sex/gender over the other may also identify themselves as bisexual. Like gay and lesbian individuals, bisexual people who pretend to be heterosexual are often referred to as being closeted.\nPansexuality (also referred to as omnisexuality) may or may not be subsumed under bisexuality, with some sources stating that bisexuality encompasses sexual or romantic attraction to all gender identities. Pansexuality is characterized by the potential for aesthetic attraction, romantic love, or sexual desire towards people without regard for their gender identity or biological sex. Some pansexuals suggest that they are gender-blind; that gender and sex are insignificant or irrelevant in determining whether they will be sexually attracted to others. As defined in the \"Oxford English Dictionary,\" pansexuality \"encompasses all kinds of sexuality; not limited or inhibited in sexual choice with regards to gender or practice\".\nAvoidance of inbreeding.\nAlthough the main adaptive function of human sexual activity is reproduction, human sexual activity also includes the adaptive constraint of avoiding close inbreeding, since inbreeding can have deleterious effects on progeny. Charles Darwin, who was married to his first cousin Emma Wedgwood, considered that the ill health that plagued his family was a consequence of inbreeding. In general, inbreeding between individuals who are closely genetically related leads to the expression of deleterious recessive mutations. The avoidance of inbreeding as a constraint on human sexual activity is apparent in the near universal cultural inhibitions in human societies of sexual activity between closely related individuals. Human outcrossing sexual activity provides the adaptive benefit of the masking of expression of deleterious recessive mutations.\nOther social aspects.\nGeneral attitudes.\nAlex Comfort and others propose three potential social aspects of sexual intercourse in humans, which are not mutually exclusive: reproductive, relational, and recreational. The development of the contraceptive pill and other highly effective forms of contraception in the mid- and late 20th century has increased people's ability to segregate these three functions, which still overlap a great deal and in complex patterns. For example: A fertile couple may have intercourse while using contraception to experience sexual pleasure (recreational) and also as a means of emotional intimacy (relational), thus deepening their bonding, making their relationship more stable and more capable of sustaining children in the future (deferred reproductive). This same couple may emphasize different aspects of intercourse on different occasions, being playful during one episode of intercourse (recreational), experiencing deep emotional connection on another occasion (relational), and later, after discontinuing contraception, seeking to achieve pregnancy (reproductive, or more likely reproductive and relational).\nReligious and ethical.\nHuman sexual activity is generally influenced by social rules that are culturally specific and vary widely.\nSexual ethics, morals, and norms relate to issues including deception/honesty, legality, fidelity and consent. Some activities, known as sex crimes in some locations, are illegal in some jurisdictions, including those conducted between (or among) consenting and competent adults (examples include sodomy law and adult\u2013adult incest).\nSome people who are in a relationship but want to hide polygamous activity (possibly of opposite sexual orientation) from their partner, may solicit consensual sexual activity with others through personal contacts, online chat rooms, or, advertising in select media.\nSwinging involves singles or partners in a committed relationship engaging in sexual activities with others as a recreational or social activity. The increasing popularity of swinging is regarded by some as arising from the upsurge in sexual activity during the sexual revolution of the 1960s.\nSome people engage in various sexual activities as a business transaction. When this involves having sex with, or performing certain actual sexual acts for another person in exchange for money or something of value, it is called prostitution. Other aspects of the adult industry include phone sex operators, strip clubs, and pornography.\nGender roles and the expression of sexuality.\nSocial gender roles can influence sexual behavior as well as the reaction of individuals and communities to certain incidents; the World Health Organization states that, \"Sexual violence is also more likely to occur where beliefs in male sexual entitlement are strong, where gender roles are more rigid, and in countries experiencing high rates of other types of violence.\" Some societies, such as those where the concepts of family honor and female chastity are very strong, may practice violent control of female sexuality, through practices such as honor killings and female genital mutilation.\nInitiation of sexual activities by women was found to increase sexual satisfaction. The promotion of equality between men and women is considered crucial for attaining sexual and reproductive health according to the UN International Conference on Population and Development Program of Action:\n\"Human sexuality and gender relations are closely interrelated and together affect the ability of men and women to achieve and maintain sexual health and manage their reproductive lives. Equal relationships between men and women in matters of sexual relations and reproduction, including full respect for the physical integrity of the human body, require mutual respect and willingness to accept responsibility for the consequences of sexual behaviour. Responsible sexual behaviour, sensitivity and equity in gender relations, particularly when instilled during the formative years, enhance and promote respectful and harmonious partnerships between men and women.\"\nBDSM.\nBDSM is a variety of erotic practices or roleplaying involving bondage, dominance and submission, sadomasochism, and other interpersonal dynamics. Given the wide range of practices, some of which may be engaged in by people who do not consider themselves as practicing BDSM, inclusion in the BDSM community or subculture usually being dependent on self-identification and shared experience. BDSM communities generally welcome anyone with a non-normative streak who identifies with the community; this may include cross-dressers, extreme body modification enthusiasts, animal players, latex or rubber aficionados, and others.\nB/D (bondage and discipline) is a part of BDSM. Bondage includes the restraint of the body or mind. D/s means \"Dominant and submissive\". A Dominant is one who takes control of a person who wishes to surrender control and a submissive is one who surrenders control to a person who wishes to take control. S/M (sadism and masochism) is the other part of BDSM. A sadist is an individual who takes pleasure in the pain or humiliation of others and a masochist is an individual who takes pleasure from their own pain or humiliation.\nUnlike the usual \"power neutral\" relationships and play styles commonly followed by couples, activities and relationships within a BDSM context are often characterized by the participants' taking on complementary, but unequal roles; thus, the idea of informed consent of both the partners becomes essential. Participants who exert dominance (sexual or otherwise) over their partners are known as Dominants or Tops, while participants who take the passive, receiving, or obedient role are known as submissives or bottoms.\nThese terms are sometimes shortened so that a dominant person may be referred to as a \"Dom\" (a woman may choose to use the feminine \"Domme\") and a submissive may be referred to as a \"sub\". Individuals who can change between Top/Dominant and bottom/submissive roles \u2013 whether from relationship to relationship or within a given relationship \u2013 are known as \"switches\". The precise definition of roles and self-identification is a common subject of debate within the community.\nIn a 2013 study, researchers stated that BDSM is a sexual act where participants play role games, use restraint, use power exchange,\nuse suppression and pain is sometimes involved depending on individual(s). The study serves to challenge the widespread notion that BDSM could be in some way linked to psychopathology. According to the findings, one who participates in BDSM may have greater strength socially and mentally as well as greater independence than those who do not practice BDSM. It suggests that people who participate in BDSM play have higher subjective well-being, and that this might be because BDSM play requires extensive communication. Before any act occurs, the partners must discuss their agreement of their relationship. They discuss how long the play will last, the intensity, their actions, what each participant needs or desires, and what, if any, sexual activities may be included. All acts must be consensual and pleasurable to both parties.\nIn a 2015 study, interviewed BDSM participants have mentioned that the activities have helped to create higher levels of connection, intimacy, trust and communication between partners. The study suggests that Dominants and submissives exchange control for each other's pleasure and to satisfy a need. The participants have remarked that they enjoy pleasing their partner in any way they can and many surveyed have felt that this is one of the best things about BDSM. It gives a submissive pleasure to do things in general for their Dominant while a Dominant enjoys making their encounters all about their submissive and enjoy doing things that makes their submissive happy. The findings indicate that the surveyed submissives and Dominants found BDSM makes play more pleasurable and fun. The participants have also mentioned improvements in their personal growth, romantic relationships, sense of community and self, the dominant's confidence, and their coping with everyday things by giving them a psychological release.\nLegal issues.\nThere are many laws and social customs which prohibit, or in some way affect sexual activities. These laws and customs vary from country to country, and have varied over time. They cover, for example, a prohibition to non-consensual sex, to sex outside marriage, to sexual activity in public, besides many others. Many of these restrictions are non-controversial, but some have been the subject of public debate.\nMost societies consider it a serious crime to force someone to engage in sexual acts or to engage in sexual activity with someone who does not consent. This is called sexual assault, and if sexual penetration occurs it is called rape, the most serious kind of sexual assault. The details of this distinction may vary among different legal jurisdictions. Also, what constitutes effective consent in sexual matters varies from culture to culture and is frequently debated. Laws regulating the minimum age at which a person can consent to have sex (age of consent) are frequently the subject of debate, as is adolescent sexual behavior in general. Some societies have forced marriage, where consent may not be required.\nSame-sex laws.\nMany locales have laws that limit or prohibit same-sex sexual activity.\nSex outside marriage.\nIn the West, sex before marriage is not illegal. There are social taboos and many religions condemn pre-marital sex. In many Muslim countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Sudan, and Yemen, any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal. Those found guilty, especially women, may be forced to wed the sexual partner, may be publicly beaten, or may be stoned to death. In many African and native tribes, sexual activity is not viewed as a privilege or right of a married couple, but rather as the unification of bodies and is thus not frowned upon.\nOther studies have analyzed the changing attitudes about sex that American adolescents have outside marriage. Adolescents were asked how they felt about oral and vaginal sex in relation to their health, social, and emotional well-being. Overall, teenagers felt that oral sex was viewed as more socially positive amongst their demographic. Results stated that teenagers believed that oral sex for dating and non-dating adolescents was less threatening to their overall values and beliefs than vaginal sex was. When asked, teenagers who participated in the research viewed oral sex as more acceptable to their peers, and their personal values than vaginal sex.\nMinimum age of sexual activity (age of consent).\nThe laws of each jurisdiction set the minimum age at which a young person is allowed to engage in sexual activity. This age of consent is typically between 14 and 18 years, but laws vary. In many jurisdictions, age of consent is a person's mental or functional age. As a result, those above the set age of consent may still be considered unable to legally consent due to mental immaturity. Many jurisdictions regard any sexual activity by an adult involving a child as child sexual abuse.\nAge of consent may vary by the type of sexual act, the sex of the actors, or other restrictions such as abuse of a position of trust. Some jurisdictions also make allowances for young people engaged in sexual acts with each other.\nIncestuous relationships.\nMost jurisdictions prohibit sexual activity between certain close relatives. These laws vary to some extent; such acts are called incestuous.\nIncest laws may involve restrictions on marriage rights, which also vary between jurisdictions. When incest involves an adult and a child, it is considered to be a form of child sexual abuse.\nSexual abuse.\nNon-consensual sexual activity or subjecting an unwilling person to witnessing a sexual activity are forms of sexual abuse, as well as (in many countries) certain non-consensual paraphilias such as frotteurism, telephone scatophilia (indecent phonecalls), and non-consensual exhibitionism and voyeurism (known as \"indecent exposure\" and \"peeping tom\" respectively).\nProstitution and survival sex.\nPeople sometimes exchange sex for money or access to other resources. Work takes place under many varied circumstances. The person who receives payment for sexual services is known as a prostitute and the person who receives such services is referred to by a multitude of terms, such as being a client. Prostitution is one of the branches of the sex industry. The legal status of prostitution varies from country to country, from being a punishable crime to a regulated profession. Estimates place the annual revenue generated from the global prostitution industry to be over $100\u00a0billion. Prostitution is sometimes referred to as \"the world's oldest profession\". Prostitution may be a voluntary individual activity or facilitated or forced by pimps.\nSurvival sex is a form of prostitution engaged in by people in need, usually when homeless or otherwise disadvantaged people trade sex for food, a place to sleep, or other basic needs, or for drugs. The term is used by sex trade and poverty researchers and aid workers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14338", "revid": "29350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14338", "title": "Historical-comparative linguistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "14340", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14340", "title": "Hydraulic ram", "text": "Cyclic water pump powered by hydropower\nA hydraulic ram pump, ram pump, or hydram is a cyclic water pump powered by hydropower. It takes in water at one \"hydraulic head\" (pressure) and flow rate, and outputs water at a higher hydraulic head and lower flow rate. The device uses the water hammer effect to develop pressure that allows a portion of the input water that powers the pump to be lifted to a point higher than where the water originally started. The hydraulic ram is sometimes used in remote areas, where there is both a source of low-head hydropower and a need for pumping water to a destination higher in elevation than the source. In this situation, the ram is often useful, since it requires no outside source of power other than the kinetic energy of flowing water.\nHistory.\nIn 1772, John Whitehurst of Cheshire, England, invented a manually controlled precursor of the hydraulic ram called the \"pulsation engine\" and installed the first one at Oulton, Cheshire to raise water to a height of . In 1783, he installed another in Ireland. He did not patent it, and details are obscure, but it is known to have had an air vessel.\nThe first self-acting ram pump was invented by the Frenchman Joseph Michel Montgolfier (best known as a co-inventor of the hot air balloon) in 1796 for raising water in his paper mill at Voiron. His friend Matthew Boulton took out a British patent on his behalf in 1797. The sons of Montgolfier obtained a British patent for an improved version in 1816, and this was acquired, together with Whitehurst's design, in 1820 by Josiah Easton, a Somerset-born engineer who had just moved to London.\nEaston's firm, inherited by his son James (1796\u20131871), grew during the nineteenth century to become one of the more important engineering manufacturers in England, with a large works at Erith, Kent. They specialised in water supply and sewerage systems worldwide, as well as land drainage projects. Eastons had a good business supplying rams for water supply purposes to large country houses, farms, and village communities. Some of their installations still survived as of 2004, one such example being at the hamlet of Toller Whelme, in Dorset. Until about 1958 when the mains water arrived, the hamlet of East Dundry just south of Bristol had three working rams \u2013 their noisy \"thump\" every minute or so resonated through the valley night and day: these rams served farms that needed much water for their dairy herds.\nThe firm closed in 1909, but the ram business was continued by James R. Easton. In 1929, it was acquired by Green &amp; Carter of Winchester, Hampshire, who were engaged in the manufacturing and installation of Vulcan and Vacher Rams.\nThe first US patent was issued to Joseph Cerneau (or Curneau) and Stephen (\u00c9tienne) S. Hallet (1755-1825) in 1809. US interest in hydraulic rams picked up around 1840, as further patents were issued and domestic companies started offering rams for sale. Toward the end of the 19th century, interest waned as electricity and electric pumps became widely available.\nPriestly's Hydraulic Ram, built in 1890 in Idaho, was a \"marvelous\" invention, apparently independent, which lifted water to provide irrigation. The ram survives and is listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.\nBy the end of the twentieth century, interest in hydraulic rams has revived, due to the needs of sustainable technology in developing countries, and energy conservation in developed ones. An example is Aid Foundation International in the Philippines, who won an Ashden Award for their work developing ram pumps that could be easily maintained for use in remote villages. The hydraulic ram principle has been used in some proposals for exploiting wave power, one of which was discussed as long ago as 1931 by Hanns G\u00fcnther in his book \"In hundert Jahren\".\nSome later ram designs in the UK called compound rams were designed to pump treated water using an untreated drive water source, which overcomes some of the problems of having drinking water sourced from an open stream.\nIn 1996 English engineer Frederick Philip Selwyn patented a more compact hydraulic ram pump where the waste valve used the venturi effect and was arranged concentrically around the input pipe. Initially patented as a fluid pressure amplifier due to its different design, it is currently sold as the \"Papa Pump\".\nAdditionally to this a large scale version named the \"Venturo Pump\" is also being manufactured.\nConstruction and principle of operation.\nA traditional hydraulic ram has only two moving parts, a spring or weight loaded \"waste\" valve sometimes known as the \"clack\" valve and a \"delivery\" check valve, making it cheap to build, easy to maintain, and very reliable.\nPriestly's Hydraulic Ram, described in detail in the 1947 Encyclopedia Britannica, has no moving parts.\nSequence of operation.\nA simplified hydraulic ram is shown in Figure\u00a02. Initially, the waste valve [4] is open (i.e. lowered) because of its own weight, and the delivery valve [5] is closed under the static pressure of the water column in the outlet [3]. The water in the inlet pipe [1] starts to flow under the force of gravity and picks up speed and kinetic energy until the increasing drag force lifts the waste valve's weight and closes it. The momentum of the water flow in the inlet pipe against the now closed waste valve causes a water hammer that raises the pressure in the pump beyond the static pressure caused by the water column in the outlet. This pressure differential now opens the delivery valve [5], and forces some water to flow into the delivery pipe [3]. Because this water is being forced uphill through the delivery pipe farther than it is falling downhill from the source, the flow slows; when the flow reverses, the delivery check valve [5] closes. Meanwhile, the water hammer from the closing of the waste valve also produces a pressure pulse which propagates back up the inlet pipe to the source where it converts to a suction pulse that propagates back down the inlet pipe. This suction pulse, with the weight or spring on the valve, pulls the waste valve back open and allows the process to begin again.\nA pressure vessel [6] containing air cushions the hydraulic pressure shock when the waste valve closes, and it also improves the pumping efficiency by allowing a more constant flow through the delivery pipe. Although the pump could in theory work without it, the efficiency would drop drastically and the pump would be subject to extraordinary stresses that could shorten its life considerably. One problem is that the pressurized air will gradually dissolve into the water until none remains. One solution to this problem is to have the air separated from the water by an elastic diaphragm (similar to an expansion tank); however, this solution can be problematic in developing countries where replacements are difficult to procure. Another solution is a snifting valve installed close to the drive side of the delivery valve. This automatically inhales a small amount of air each time the delivery valve shuts and the partial vacuum develops. Another solution is to insert an inner tube of a car or bicycle tire into the pressure vessel with some air in it and the valve closed. This tube is in effect the same as the diaphragm, but it is implemented with more widely available materials. The air in the tube cushions the shock of the water the same as the air in other configurations does.\nEfficiency.\nA typical energy efficiency is 60%, but up to 80% is possible. This should not be confused with the volumetric efficiency, which relates the volume of water delivered to total water taken from the source. The portion of water available at the delivery pipe will be reduced by the ratio of the delivery head to the supply head. Thus if the source is above the ram and the water is lifted to above the ram, only 20% of the supplied water can be available, the other 80% being spilled via the waste valve. These ratios assume 100% energy efficiency. Actual water delivered will be further reduced by the energy efficiency factor. In the above example, if the energy efficiency is 70%, the water delivered will be 70% of 20%, i.e. 14%. Assuming a 2-to-1 supply-head-to-delivery-head ratio and 70% efficiency, the delivered water would be 70% of 50%, i.e. 35%. Very high ratios of delivery to supply head usually result in lowered energy efficiency. Suppliers of rams often provide tables giving expected volume ratios based on actual tests.\nDrive and delivery pipe design.\nSince both efficiency and reliable cycling depend on water hammer effects, the drive pipe design is important. It should be between 3 and 7 times longer than the vertical distance between the source and the ram. Commercial rams may have an input fitting designed to accommodate this optimum slope. The diameter of the supply pipe would normally match the diameter of the input fitting on the ram, which in turn is based on its pumping capacity. The drive pipe should be of constant diameter and material, and should be as straight as possible. Where bends are necessary, they should be smooth, large diameter curves. Even a large spiral is allowed, but elbows are to be avoided. PVC will work in some installations, but steel pipe is preferred, although much more expensive. If valves are used they should be a free flow type such as a ball valve or gate valve.\nThe delivery pipe is much less critical since the pressure vessel prevents water hammer effects from traveling up it. Its overall design would be determined by the allowable pressure drop based on the expected flow. Typically the pipe size will be about half that of the supply pipe, but for very long runs a larger size may be indicated. PVC pipe and any necessary valves are not a problem.\nStarting operation.\nA ram newly placed into operation or which has stopped cycling should start automatically if the waste valve weight or spring pressure is adjusted correctly, but it can be restarted as follows: If the waste valve is in the raised (closed) position, it must be pushed down manually into the open position and released. If the flow is sufficient, it will then cycle at least once. If it does not continue to cycle, it must be pushed down repeatedly until it cycles continuously on its own, usually after three or four manual cycles. If the ram stops with the waste valve in the down (open) position it must be lifted manually and kept up for as long as necessary for the supply pipe to fill with water and for any air bubbles to travel up the pipe to the source. This may take some time, depending on supply pipe length and diameter. Then it can be started manually by pushing it down a few times as described above. Having a valve on the delivery pipe at the ram makes starting easier. Closing the valve until the ram starts cycling, then gradually opening it to fill the delivery pipe. If opened too quickly it will stop the cycle. Once the delivery pipe is full the valve can be left open.\nCommon operational problems.\nFailure to deliver sufficient water may be due to improper adjustment of the waste valve, having too little air in the pressure vessel, or simply attempting to raise the water higher than the level of which the ram is capable.\nThe ram may be damaged by freezing in winter, or loss of air in the pressure vessel leading to excess stress on the ram parts. These failures will require welding or other repair methods and perhaps parts replacement.\nIt is not uncommon for an operating ram to require occasional restarts. The cycling may stop due to poor adjustment of the waste valve, or insufficient water flow at the source. Air can enter if the supply water level is not at least a few inches above the input end of the supply pipe. Other problems are blockage of the valves with debris, or improper installation, such as using a supply pipe of non-uniform diameter or material, having sharp bends or a rough interior, or one that is too long or short for the drop, or is made of an insufficiently rigid material. A PVC supply pipe will work in some installations but a steel pipe is better.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14345", "revid": "6917124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14345", "title": "Human being", "text": ""}
{"id": "14346", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14346", "title": "Huey helicopter", "text": ""}
{"id": "14347", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14347", "title": "Homininae", "text": "Subfamily of mammals\nThe Homininae (; hominines) is a subfamily of the family Hominidae (hominids). The Homininae encompass humans, and are also called \"African hominids\" or \"African apes\". This subfamily includes two tribes, Hominini and Gorillini, both having extant (or living) species as well as extinct species.\nTribe Hominini includes: the extant genus \"Homo\", which comprises only one extant species \u2014 modern human (\"Homo sapiens\"), and numerous extinct human species; and the extant genus \"Pan\", which includes two extant species, chimpanzees and bonobos. Tribe Gorillini (gorillas) contains one extant genus, \"Gorilla\", with two extant species, with variants, and one known extinct genus. Alternatively, the genus \"Pan\" is considered by some to belong, instead of to a subtribe Panina, to its own separate tribe, (\"so-called\") \"Panini,\" which would be a third tribe for Homininae.\nSome classification schemes provide a more comprehensive account of extinct groups (see section \"Taxonomic Classification\" below). For example, tribe Hominini shows two subtribes: subtribe Hominina, which contains at least two extinct genera; and subtribe Panina, which presents only the extant genus, \"Pan\" (chimpanzees/bonobos), as fossils of extinct chimpanzees/bonobos are very rarely found.\nThe Homininae comprise all hominids that arose after the subfamily Ponginae (orangutans) split from the line of the great apes. The Homininae cladogram has three main branches leading to gorillas (via the tribe Gorillini), to humans, and to chimpanzees (via the tribe Hominini and subtribes Hominina and Panina, see graphic \"Evolutionary tree\" below). There are two living species each of Panina, chimpanzees and bonobos, and two living and one extinct species of gorillas. Traces of extinct \"Homo\" species, including \"Homo floresiensis\", have been found with dates as recent as 40,000 years ago. Individual members of this subfamily are called hominine or hominines \u2014 not to be confused with the terms hominins or Hominini.\nHistory of discoveries and classification.\nUntil 1970, the family (and term) Hominidae meant humans only; the non-human great apes were assigned to the then-family Pongidae. Later discoveries led to revised classifications, with the great apes then united with humans (now in subfamily Homininae) as members of family Hominidae \nBy 1990, it was recognized that gorillas and chimpanzees are more closely related to humans than they are to orangutans, leading to their (gorillas' and chimpanzees') placement in subfamily Homininae as well.\nThe subfamily Homininae can be further subdivided into three branches, the tribe Gorillini (gorillas), the tribe Hominini with subtribes Panina (chimpanzees/bonobos) and Hominina (humans and their extinct relatives), and the extinct tribe Dryopithecini. The Late Miocene fossil \"Nakalipithecus nakayamai\", described in 2007, is a basal member of this clade, as is, perhaps, its contemporary \"Ouranopithecus\"; that is, they are not assignable to any of the three extant branches. Their existence suggests that the Homininae tribes diverged not earlier than about 8 million years ago (see Human evolutionary genetics).\nToday, chimpanzees and gorillas live in tropical forests with acid soils that rarely preserve fossils. Although no fossil gorillas have been reported, four chimpanzee teeth about 500,000 years old have been discovered in the East-African rift valley (Kapthurin Formation, Kenya), where many fossils from the human lineage (hominins) have been found. This shows that some chimpanzees lived close to \"Homo\" (\"H. erectus\" or \"H. rhodesiensis\") at the time; the same is likely true for gorillas.\nTaxonomic classification.\nHomininae\nEvolution.\nThe age of the subfamily Homininae (of the Homininae\u2013Ponginae last common ancestor) is estimated at some 14 to 12.5 million years (\"Sivapithecus\"). \nIts separation into Gorillini and Hominini (the \"gorilla\u2013human last common ancestor\", GHLCA) is estimated to have occurred at about https:// 10 (TGHLCA) during the late Miocene, close to the age of \"Nakalipithecus nakayamai\".\nThere is evidence there was interbreeding of Gorillas and the Pan\u2013Homo ancestors until right up to the Pan\u2013Homo split.\nEvolution of bipedalism.\nRecent studies of \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" (4.4 million years old) and \"Orrorin tugenensis\" (6 million years old) suggest some degree of bipedalism. \"Australopithecus\" and early \"Paranthropus\" may have been bipedal. Very early hominins such as \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" may have possessed an arboreal type of bipedalism.\nThe evolution of bipedalism encouraged multiple changes among hominins especially when it came to bipedalism in humans as they were now able to do many other things as they began to walk with their feet. These changes included the ability to now use their hands to create tools or carry things with their hands, the ability to travel longer distances at a faster speed, and the ability to hunt for food. According to researchers, humans were able to be bipedalists due to Darwin's Principle of natural selection. Darwin himself believed that larger brains in humans made an upright gait necessary, but had no hypothesis for how the mechanism evolved.\nThe first major theory attempting to directly explanation the origins of bipedalism was the Savannah hypothesis (Dart 1925.) This theory hypothesized that hominins became bipedalists due to the environment of the Savanna such as the tall grass and dry climate. This was later proven to be incorrect due to fossil records that showed that hominins were still climbing trees during this era.\nAnthropologist Owen Lovejoy has suggested that bipedalism was a result of sexual dimorphism in efforts to help with the collecting of food. In his Male Provisioning Hypothesis introduced in 1981, lowered birth rates in early hominids increased pressure on males to provide for females and offspring. While females groomed and cared for their children with the family group, males ranged to seek food and returned bipadally with full arms. Males who could better provide for females in this model were more likely to mate and produce offspring.\nAnthropologist Yohannes Haile-Selassie, an expert on \"Australopithecus anamensis\", discusses the evidence that Australopithecus were one of the first hominins to evolve into obligate bipedalists. The remains of this subfamily are very important in the field of research as it presents possible information regarding how these primates adapted from tree life to terrestrial life. This was a huge adaptation as it encouraged many evolutionary changes within hominins including the ability to use their hand to make tools and gather food, as well as a larger brain development due to their change in diet.\nBrain size evolution.\nThere has been a gradual increase in brain volume (brain size) as the ancestors of modern humans progressed along the timeline of human evolution, starting from about 600\u00a0cm3 in \"Homo habilis\" up to 1500\u00a0cm3 in \"Homo neanderthalensis\". However, modern \"Homo sapiens\" have a brain volume slightly smaller (1250\u00a0cm3) than Neanderthals, women have a brain slightly smaller than men and the Flores hominids (\"Homo floresiensis\"), nicknamed hobbits, had a cranial capacity of about 380\u00a0cm3 (considered small for a chimpanzee), about a third of the \"Homo erectus\" average. It is proposed that they evolved from \"H. erectus\" as a case of insular dwarfism. In spite of their smaller brain, there is evidence that \"H. floresiensis\" used fire and made stone tools at least as sophisticated as those of their proposed ancestors \"H. erectus\". In this case, it seems that for intelligence, the structure of the brain is more important than its size.\nThe current size of the human brain is a big distinguishing factor that separates humans from other primates. Recent examination of the human brain shows that the brain of a human is about more than four times the size of great apes and 20 times larger than the brain size of old world monkeys. A study was conducted to help determine the evolution of the brain size within the sub family Homininae that tested the genes ASPM (abnormal spindle-like microcephaly associated) and MCHP1 (microcephalin-1) and their association with the human brain. In this study researchers discovered that the increase in brain size is correlated to the increase of both ASP and MCPH1. MCPH1 is very polymorphic in humans compared to gibbons, Old World monkeys. This gene helps encouragegrowth of the brain. Further research indicated that the MCPH1 gene in humans could have also been an encouraging factor of population expansion. Other researchers have included that the diet was an encouraging factor to brain size as protein intake increased this helped brain development.\nEvolution of family structure and sexuality.\nSexuality is related to family structure and partly shapes it. The involvement of fathers in education is quite unique to humans, at least when compared to other Homininae. Concealed ovulation and menopause in females also occur in a few other primates, but are uncommon in other species. Testis and penis size seem to be related to family structure: monogamy or promiscuity, or harem, in humans, chimpanzees or gorillas, respectively. The levels of sexual dimorphism are generally seen as a marker of sexual selection. Studies have suggested that the earliest hominins were dimorphic and that this lessened over the course of the evolution of the genus \"Homo\", correlating with humans becoming more monogamous, whereas gorillas, who live in harems, show a large degree of sexual dimorphism. Concealed (or \"hidden\") ovulation means that the phase of fertility is not detectable in women, whereas chimpanzees advertise ovulation via an obvious swelling of the genitals. Females can be partly aware of their ovulation along with their menstrual phases, but men are essentially unable to detect ovulation in women. Most primates have semi-concealed ovulation. Thus, one can think that the common ancestor had semi-concealed ovulation, which was inherited by gorillas, and that later evolved in concealed ovulation in humans and advertised ovulation in chimpanzees. Menopause also occurs in rhesus monkeys, and possibly in chimpanzees, but does not in gorillas and is quite uncommon in other primates (and other mammal groups).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14348", "revid": "48691047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14348", "title": "Homo habilis", "text": "Archaic human species from 2.4 to 1.65 mya\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHomo habilis (lit. 'handy man') is an extinct species of archaic human from the Early Pleistocene of East and South Africa about 2.4 million years ago to 1.65 million years ago (mya). It is among the oldest species of archaic humans. Suggestions for pushing back the age to 2.8 Mya were made in 2015 based on the discovery of a jawbone. Upon species description in 1964, \"H. habilis\" was highly contested, with many researchers recommending it be synonymised with \"Australopithecus africanus\", the only other early hominin known at the time, but \"H. habilis\" received more recognition as time went on and more relevant discoveries were made. By the 1980s, \"H. habilis\" was proposed to have been a human ancestor, directly evolving into \"Homo erectus\", which directly led to modern humans. This viewpoint is now debated. Several specimens with insecure species identification were assigned to \"H. habilis\", leading to arguments for splitting, namely into \"\"H. rudolfensis\" and \"H. gautengensis\" of which only the former has received wide support.\n\"H. habilis\" brain size generally varied from . The body proportions of \"H. habilis\" are only known from two highly fragmentary skeletons, and is based largely on assuming a similar anatomy to the earlier australopithecines. Because of this, it has also been proposed \"H. habilis\" be moved to the genus \"Australopithecus\" as Australopithecus habilis. However, the interpretation of \"H. habilis\" as a small-statured human with inefficient long-distance travel capabilities has been challenged. The presumed female specimen OH 62 is traditionally interpreted as having been in height and in weight assuming australopithecine-like proportions, but assuming humanlike proportions she would have been about and . Nonetheless, \"Homo habilis\" may have been at least partially arboreal like what is postulated for australopithecines. Early hominins are typically reconstructed as having thick hair and marked sexual dimorphism with males much larger than females, though relative male and female size is not definitively known.\n\"H. habilis\" manufactured the Oldowan stone tool industry and mainly used tools in butchering. Early \"Homo\", compared to australopithecines, are generally thought to have consumed high quantities of meat and, in the case of \"H. habilis\", scavenged meat. Typically, early hominins are interpreted as having lived in polygynous societies, though this is highly speculative. Assuming \"H. habilis\" society was similar to that of modern savanna chimpanzees and baboons, groups may have numbered 70\u201385 members. This configuration would be advantageous with multiple males to defend against open savanna predators, such as big cats, hyenas and crocodiles. \"H. habilis\" coexisted with \"H. rudolfensis\", \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\" and \"Paranthropus boisei\".\nTaxonomy.\nResearch history.\nThe first recognised remains\u2014OH 7, partial juvenile skull, hand, and foot bones dating to 1.75 million years ago (mya)\u2014were discovered in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania, in 1960 by Jonathan Leakey, with other native Africans who dug into Olduvai Gorge, and who worked for Jonathan Leakey. However, the actual first remains\u2014OH 4, a molar\u2014were discovered by the senior assistant of Louis and Mary Leakey (Jonathan's parents), Heselon Mukiri, other native Africans, in 1959, but this was not realised at the time. By this time, the Leakeys had spent 29 years excavating in Olduvai Gorge for early hominin remains, but had instead recovered mainly other animal remains as well as the Oldowan stone-tool industry. The industry had been ascribed to \"Paranthropus boisei\" (at the time \"Zinjanthropus\"\") in 1959 as it was the first and only hominin recovered in the area, but this was revised upon OH 7's discovery. In 1964, Louis, South African palaeoanthropologist Phillip V. Tobias, and British primatologist John R. Napier officially assigned the remains into the genus \"Homo\", and, on recommendation by Australian anthropologist Raymond Dart, the specific name \"H. habilis\", meaning \"able, handy, mentally skillful, vigorous\" in Latin. The specimen's association with the Oldowan (then considered evidence of advanced cognitive ability) was also used as justification for classifying it into \"Homo\". OH 7 was designated the holotype specimen.\nAfter description, it was hotly debated if \"H. habilis\" should be reclassified into \"Australopithecus africanus\" (the only other early hominin known at the time), in part because the remains were so old and at the time \"Homo\" was presumed to have evolved in Asia (with the australopithecines having no living descendants). Also, the brain size was smaller than what Wilfrid Le Gros Clark proposed in 1955 when considering \"Homo\". The classification \"H. habilis\" began to receive wider acceptance as more fossil elements and species were unearthed. In 1983, Tobias proposed that \"A. africanus\" was a direct ancestor of \"Paranthropus\" and \"Homo\" (the two were sister taxa), and that \"A. africanus\" evolved into \"H. habilis\" which evolved into \"H. erectus\" which evolved into modern humans (by a process of cladogenesis). He further said that there was a major evolutionary leap between \"A. africanus\" and \"H. habilis\", and thereupon human evolution progressed gradually because \"H. habilis\" brain size had nearly doubled compared to australopithecine predecessors.\nMany had accepted Tobias' model and assigned Late Pliocene to Early Pleistocene hominin remains outside the range of \"Paranthropus\" and \"H. erectus\" into \"H. habilis\". For non-skull elements, this was done on the basis of size as there was a lack of clear diagnostic characteristics. Because of these practices, the range of variation for the species became quite wide, and the terms \"H. habilis\" sensu stricto (i.e. strictly) and \"H. habilis\" sensu lato (i.e. broadly) were in use to exclude and include, respectively, more discrepant morphs. To address this controversy, English palaeoanthropologist Bernard Wood proposed in 1985, that the comparatively massive skull KNM-ER 1470 from Lake Turkana, Kenya, discovered in 1972 and assigned to \"H. habilis\", actually represented a different species, now referred to as \"Homo rudolfensis\". It is also argued that instead it represents a male specimen whereas other \"H. habilis\" specimens are female. Early \"Homo\" from South Africa have variously been assigned to \"H. habilis\" or \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\", but species designation has largely been unclear. In 2010, Australian archaeologist Darren Curoe proposed splitting off South African early \"Homo\" into a new species, \"Homo gautengensis\".\nIn 1986, OH 62, a fragmentary skeleton was discovered by American anthropologist Tim D. White in association with \"H. habilis\" skull fragments, definitively establishing aspects of \"H. habilis\" skeletal anatomy for the first time, and revealing more \"Australopithecus\"-like than \"Homo\"-like features. Because of this, as well as similarities in dental adaptations, Wood and biological anthropologist Mark Collard suggested moving the species to \"Australopithecus\" in 1999. However, reevaluation of OH 62 to a more humanlike physiology, if correct, would cast doubt on this. The discovery of the 1.8 Ma Georgian Dmanisi skulls in the early 2000s, which exhibit several similarities with early \"Homo\", has led to suggestions that all contemporary groups of early \"Homo\" in Africa, including \"H. habilis\" and \"H. rudolfensis\", are the same species and should be assigned to \"H. erectus\".\nClassification.\nThere is still no wide consensus as to whether or not \"H. habilis\" is ancestral to \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\" or is an offshoot of the human line, and whether or not all specimens assigned to \"H. habilis\" are correctly assigned or the species is an assemblage of different \"Australopithecus\" and \"Homo\" species. Studies of the dental morphology of \"H. habilis\" have suggested that it shares greater similarity with \"Australopithecus\" than with later \"Homo\" species. Nonetheless, \"H. habilis\" and \"H. rudolfensis\" generally are recognised members of the genus at the base of the family tree, with arguments for synonymisation or removal from the genus not widely adopted.\nThough it is now largely agreed upon that \"Homo\" evolved from \"Australopithecus\", the timing and placement of this split has been much debated, with many \"Australopithecus\" species having been proposed as the ancestor. The discovery of LD 350-1, the oldest \"Homo\" specimen, dating to 2.8 mya, in the Afar Region of Ethiopia may indicate that the genus evolved from \"A. afarensis\" around this time. This specimen was initially classified as \"Homo\" sp., though subsequent studies have suggested that it also shares characteristics with \"Australopithecus\" and that it is clearly distinct from \"H. habilis\". The oldest \"H. habilis\" specimen, A.L. 666-1, dates to 2.3 mya, but is anatomically more derived (has less ancestral, or basal, traits) than the younger OH 7, suggesting derived and basal morphs lived concurrently, and that the \"H. habilis\" lineage began before 2.3 mya. Based on 2.1-million-year-old stone tools from Shangchen, China, \"H. habilis\" or an ancestral species may have dispersed across Asia. The youngest \"H. habilis\" specimen, OH 13, dates to about 1.65 mya.\nAnatomy.\nSkull.\nIt has generally been thought that brain size increased along the human line especially rapidly at the transition between species, with \"H. habilis\" brain size smaller than that of \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\", jumping from about in \"H. habilis\" to about in \"H. ergaster\" and \"H. erectus\". However, a 2015 study showed that the brain sizes of \"H. habilis\", \"H. rudolfensis\", and \"H. ergaster\" generally ranged between after reappraising the brain volume of OH 7 from to . This does, nonetheless, indicate a jump from australopithecine brain size which generally ranged from .\nThe brain anatomy of all \"Homo\" features an expanded cerebrum in comparison to australopithecines. The pattern of striations on the teeth of OH 65 slant right, which may have been accidentally self-inflicted when the individual was pulling a piece of meat with its teeth and the left hand while trying to cut it with a stone tool using the right hand. If correct, this could indicate right handedness, and handedness is associated with major reorganisation of the brain and the lateralisation of brain function between the left and right hemispheres. This scenario has also been hypothesised for some Neanderthal specimens. Lateralisation could be implicated in tool use. In modern humans, lateralisation is weakly associated with language.\nThe tooth rows of \"H. habilis\" were V-shaped as opposed to U-shaped in later \"Homo\", and the mouth jutted outwards (was prognathic), though the face was flat from the nose up.\nBuild.\nBased on the fragmentary skeletons OH 62 (presumed female) and KNM-ER 3735 (presumed male), \"H. habilis\" body anatomy has generally been considered to have been more apelike than even that of the earlier \"A. afarensis\"; this is consistent with an at least partially arboreal lifestyle in the trees as is assumed in australopithecines. Based on OH 62 and assuming comparable body dimensions to australopithecines, \"H. habilis\" has generally been interpreted as having been small-bodied like australopithecines, with OH 62 generally estimated at in height and in weight. However, assuming longer, modern humanlike legs, OH 62 would have been about and , and KNM-ER 3735 about the same size. For comparison, modern human men and women in the year 1900 averaged and , respectively. It is generally assumed that pre-\"H. ergaster\" hominins, including \"H. habilis\", exhibited notable sexual dimorphism with males markedly bigger than females. However, relative female body mass is unknown in this species.\nEarly hominins, including \"H. habilis\", are thought to have had thick body hair coverage like modern non-human apes because they appear to have inhabited colder regions and are thought to have had a less active lifestyle than (presumed hairless) post-\"ergaster\" species. Consequently, they probably required thick body hair to stay warm. Based on dental development rates, \"H. habilis\" is assumed to have had an accelerated growth rate compared to modern humans, more like that of modern non-human apes.\nLimbs.\nThe arms of \"H. habilis\" and australopithecines have generally been considered to have been proportionally long and so adapted for climbing and swinging. In 2004, anthropologists Martin Haeusler and Henry McHenry argued that, because the humerus to femur ratio of OH 62 is within the range of variation for modern humans, and KNM-ER 3735 is close to the modern human average, it is unsafe to assume apelike proportions. Nonetheless, the humerus of OH 62 measured long and the ulna (forearm) , which is closer to the proportion seen in chimpanzees. The hand bones of OH 7 suggest precision gripping, important in dexterity, as well as adaptations for climbing. In regard to the femur, traditionally comparisons with the \"A. afarensis\" specimen AL 288-1 have been used to reconstruct stout legs for \"H. habilis\", but Haeusler and McHenry suggested the more gracile OH 24 femur (either belonging to \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\" or \"P. boisei\") may be a more apt comparison. In this instance, \"H. habilis\" would have had longer, humanlike legs and have been effective long-distance travellers as is assumed to have been the case in \"H. ergaster\". However, estimating the unpreserved length of a fossil is highly problematic. The thickness of the limb bones in OH 62 is more similar to chimpanzees than \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\" and modern humans, which may indicate different load bearing capabilities more suitable for arboreality in \"H. habilis\". The strong fibula of OH 35 (though this may belong to \"P. boisei\") is more like that of non-human apes, and consistent with arboreality and vertical climbing.\nOH 8, a foot, is better suited for terrestrial movement than the foot of \"A. afarensis\", though it still retains many apelike features consistent with climbing. However, the foot has projected toe bone and compacted mid-foot joint structures, which restrict rotation between the foot and ankle as well as at the front foot. Foot stability enhances the efficiency of force transfer between the leg and the foot and vice versa, and is implicated in the plantar arch elastic spring mechanism which generates energy while running (but not walking). This could possibly indicate \"H. habilis\" was capable of some degree of endurance running, which is typically thought to have evolved later in \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\".\nCulture.\nSociety.\nTypically, \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\" is considered to have been the first human to have lived in a monogamous society, and all preceding hominins were polygynous. However, it is highly difficult to speculate with any confidence the group dynamics of early hominins. The degree of sexual dimorphism and the size disparity between males and females is often used to correlate between polygyny with high disparity and monogamy with low disparity based on general trends (though not without exceptions) seen in modern primates. Rates of sexual dimorphism are difficult to determine as early hominin anatomy is poorly represented in the fossil record. In some cases, sex is arbitrarily determined in large part based on perceived size and apparent robustness in the absence of more reliable elements in sex identification (namely the pelvis). Mating systems are also based on dental anatomy, but early hominins possess a mosaic anatomy of different traits not seen together in modern primates; the enlarged cheek teeth would suggest marked size-related dimorphism and thus intense male\u2013male conflict over mates and a polygynous society, but the small canines should indicate the opposite. Other selective pressures, including diet, can also dramatically impact dental anatomy. The spatial distribution of tools and processed animal bones at the FLK Zinj and PTK sites in Olduvai Gorge indicate the inhabitants used this area as a communal butchering and eating grounds, as opposed to the nuclear family system of modern hunter gatherers where the group is subdivided into smaller units each with their own butchering and eating grounds.\nThe behaviour of early \"Homo\", including \"H. habilis\", is sometimes modelled on that of savanna chimps and baboons. These communities consist of several males (as opposed to a harem society) in order to defend the group on the dangerous and exposed habitat, sometimes engaging in a group display of throwing sticks and stones against enemies and predators. The left foot OH 8 seems to have been bitten off by a crocodile, possibly \"Crocodylus anthropophagus\", and the leg OH 35, which either belongs to \"P. boisei\" or \"H. habilis\", shows evidence of leopard predation. \"H. habilis\" and contemporary hominins were likely predated upon by other large carnivores of the time, such as (in Olduvai Gorge) the hunting hyena \"Chasmaporthetes nitidula\", and the saber-toothed cats \"Dinofelis\" and \"Megantereon\". In 1993, American palaeoanthropologist Leslie C. Aiello and British evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar estimated that \"H. habilis\" group size ranged from 70\u201385 members\u2014on the upper end of chimp and baboon group size\u2014based on trends seen in neocortex size and group size in modern non-human primates.\n\"H. habilis\" coexisted with \"H. rudolfensis\", \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\", and \"P. boisei\". It is unclear how all of these species interacted. To explain why \"P. boisei\" was associated with Olduwan tools despite not being the knapper (the one who made the tools), Leakey and colleagues, when describing \"H. habilis\", suggested that one possibility was \"P. boisei\" was killed by \"H. habilis\", perhaps as food. However, when describing \"P. boisei\" five years earlier, Louis Leakey said, \"There is no reason whatever, in this case, to believe that the skull represents the victim of a cannibalistic feast by some hypothetical more advanced type of man.\"\nDiet.\nIt is thought \"H. habilis\" derived meat from scavenging rather than hunting (scavenger hypothesis), acting as a confrontational scavenger and stealing kills from smaller predators such as jackals or cheetahs. Fruit was likely also an important dietary component, indicated by dental erosion consistent with repetitive exposure to acidity. Based on dental microwear-texture analysis, \"H. habilis\" (like other early \"Homo\") likely did not regularly consume tough foods. Microwear-texture complexity is, on average, somewhere between that of tough-food eaters and leaf eaters (folivores), and points to an increasingly generalised and omnivorous diet. Freshwater fish likely were also consumed, evidenced by the findings of fish remains at archaeological sites most likely associated with \"H. habilis\".\nIt is typically thought that the diets of \"H. habilis\" and other early \"Homo\" had a greater proportion of meat than \"Australopithecus\", and that this led to brain growth. The main hypotheses regarding this are: meat is energy- and nutrient-rich and put evolutionary pressure on developing enhanced cognitive skills to facilitate strategic scavenging and monopolise fresh carcasses, or meat allowed the large and calorie-expensive ape gut to decrease in size allowing this energy to be diverted to brain growth. Alternatively, it is also suggested that early \"Homo\", in a drying climate with scarcer food options, relied primarily on underground storage organs (such as tubers) and food sharing, which facilitated social bonding among both male and female group members. However, unlike what is presumed for \"H. ergaster\" and later \"Homo\", short-statured early \"Homo\" are generally considered to have been incapable of endurance running and hunting, and the long and \"Australopithecus\"-like forearm of \"H. habilis\" could indicate early \"Homo\" were still arboreal to a degree. Also, organised hunting and gathering is thought to have emerged in \"H. ergaster\". Nonetheless, the proposed food-gathering models to explain large brain growth necessitate increased daily travel distance. It has also been argued that \"H. habilis\" instead had long, modern humanlike legs and was fully capable of effective long distance travel, while still remaining at least partially arboreal.\nLarge incisor size in \"H. habilis\" compared to \"Australopithecus\" predecessors implies this species relied on incisors more. The bodies of the mandibles of \"H. habilis\" and other early \"Homo\" are thicker than those of modern humans and all living apes, more comparable to \"Australopithecus\". The mandibular body resists torsion from the bite force or chewing, meaning their jaws could produce unusually powerful stresses while eating. The greater molar cusp relief in \"H. habilis\" compared to \"Australopithecus\" suggests the former used tools to fracture tough foods (such as pliable plant parts or meat), otherwise the cusps would have been more worn down. Nonetheless, the jaw adaptations for processing mechanically challenging food indicates technological advancement did not greatly affect diet.\nTechnology.\n\"H. habilis\" is associated with the Early Stone Age Oldowan stone tool industry. Individuals likely used these tools primarily to butcher and skin animals and crush bones, but also sometimes to saw and scrape wood and cut soft plants. Knappers \u2013 individuals shaping stones \u2013 appear to have carefully selected lithic cores and knew that certain rocks would break in a specific way when struck hard enough and on the right spot, and they produced several different types, including choppers, polyhedrons, and discoids. Nonetheless, specific shapes were likely not thought of in advance, and probably stem from a lack of standardisation in producing such tools as well as the types of raw materials at the knappers' disposal. For example, spheroids are common at Olduvai, which features an abundance of large and soft quartz and quartzite pieces, whereas Koobi Fora lacks spheroids and provides predominantly hard basalt lava rocks. Unlike the later Acheulean culture invented by \"H. ergaster\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"H. erectus\", Oldowan technology does not require planning and foresight to manufacture, and thus does not indicate high cognition in Oldowan knappers, though it does require a degree of coordination and some knowledge of mechanics. Oldowan tools infrequently exhibit retouching and were probably discarded immediately after use most of the time.\nThe Oldowan was first reported in 1934, but it was not until the 1960s that it become widely accepted as the earliest culture, dating to 1.8\u00a0mya, and as having been manufactured by \"H. habilis\". Since then, more discoveries have placed the origins of material culture substantially backwards in time, with the Oldowan being discovered in Ledi-Geraru and Gona in Ethiopia dating to 2.6\u00a0mya, perhaps associated with the evolution of the genus. Australopithecines are also known to have manufactured tools, such as the 3.3\u00a0Ma Lomekwi stone tool industry, and some evidence of butchering from about 3.4\u00a0mya. Nonetheless, the comparatively sharp-edged Oldowan culture was a major innovation from australopithecine technology, and it would have allowed different feeding strategies and the ability to process a wider range of foods, which would have been advantageous in the changing climate of the time. It is unclear if the Oldowan was independently invented or if it was the result of hominin experimentation with rocks over hundreds of thousands of years across multiple species.\nIn 1962, a circle made with volcanic rocks was discovered in Olduvai Gorge. At intervals, rocks were piled up to high. Mary Leakey suggested the rock piles were used to support poles stuck into the ground, possibly to support a windbreak or a rough hut. Some modern-day nomadic tribes build similar low-lying rock walls to build temporary shelters upon, bending upright branches as poles and using grasses or animal hide as a screen. Dating to 1.75\u00a0mya, it is attributed to some early \"Homo\", and is the oldest-claimed evidence of architecture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14349", "revid": "698799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14349", "title": "Harmonica", "text": "Free reed wind musical instrument\nThe harmonica, also known as a French harp or mouth organ, is a free reed wind instrument used worldwide in many musical genres, notably in blues, American folk music, classical music, jazz, country, and rock. The many types of harmonica include diatonic, chromatic, tremolo, octave, orchestral, and bass versions. The harmonica is played by using the lips and tongue to direct air into or out of one (or more) holes along a mouthpiece (which covers one edge of the harmonica for most of its length). Behind each hole is a chamber containing at least one reed. The most common type of harmonica is a diatonic Richter-tuned instrument with ten air passages and twenty reeds, often called a blues harp. The harmonica reed is a flat, elongated spring typically made of brass, stainless steel, or bronze, which is secured at one end over a slot that serves as an airway. When the free end is made to vibrate by the player's air, the reed alternately blocks and unblocks the airway to produce sound.\nReeds are tuned to individual pitches. Tuning may involve changing a reed's length, how heavy it is near its free end, or how stiff it is near its fixed end. Reeds that are longer, heavier, or more flexible produce lower pitches; shorter, lighter, or stiffer reeds produce higher pitches. If, as on most modern harmonicas, a reed is affixed above or below its slot rather than in the plane of the slot, it responds more easily to air flowing in the direction that initially would push it into the slot, i.e., as a closing reed. This difference in response to air direction makes it possible to include both a blow reed and a draw reed in the same air chamber, and to play them separately without relying on flaps of plastic or leather (valves, wind-savers) to block the nonplaying reed.\nAn important technique in performance is bending, causing a drop in pitch by making embouchure adjustments. Bending the pitch of an isolated reed is possible on chromatic models (or any others that have wind-savers), but it is also possible to lower or raise (overbend, overblow, overdraw) the pitch produced by pairs of reeds in the same chamber, as on a diatonic or other unvalved harmonica. Such two-reed pitch changes actually involve sound production by the normally silent reed, the opening reed (for instance, the blow reed while the player is drawing).\nParts.\n The basic parts of the harmonica are the comb, reed plates, and cover plates.\nComb.\nThe comb is the main body of the instrument, which, when assembled with the reed plates, forms air chambers for the reeds. The term \"comb\" may originate from the similarity between this part of a harmonica and a hair comb. Harmonica combs were traditionally made from wood, but now are also made from plastic (ABS) or metal (including titanium for high-end instruments). Some modern and experimental comb designs are complex in the way that they direct the air.\nDispute exists among players about whether comb material affects the tone of a harmonica. Those saying no argue that unlike the soundboard of a piano or the top piece of a violin or guitar, a harmonica's comb is neither large enough nor able to vibrate freely enough to substantially augment or change the sound. Among those saying yes are those who are convinced by their ears. Few dispute that comb surface smoothness and air tightness when mated with the reed plates can greatly affect tone and playability. The main advantage of a particular comb material over another one is its durability. In particular, a wooden comb can absorb moisture from the player's breath and contact with the tongue. This can cause the comb to expand slightly, making the instrument uncomfortable to play, and to then contract, potentially compromising air tightness. Various types of wood and treatments have been devised to reduce the degree of this problem.\nAn even more serious problem with wooden combs, especially in chromatic harmonicas (with their thin dividers between chambers), is that, as the combs expand and shrink over time, cracks can form in the combs, because the comb is held immobile by nails, resulting in disabling leakage. Serious players devote significant effort to restoring wood combs and sealing leaks. Some players used to soak wooden-combed harmonicas (diatonics, without wind-savers) in water to cause a slight expansion, which they intended to make the seal between the comb, reed plates, and covers more airtight. Modern wooden-combed harmonicas are less prone to swelling and contracting, but modern players still dip their harmonicas in water for the way it affects tone and ease of bending notes.\nReed plate.\nThe reed plate is a grouping of several reeds in a single housing. The reeds are usually made of brass, but steel, aluminium, and plastic are occasionally used. Individual reeds are usually riveted to the reed plate, but they may also be welded or screwed in place. Reeds fixed on the inner side of the reed plate (within the comb's air chamber) respond to blowing, while those fixed on the outer side respond to suction.\nMost harmonicas are constructed with the reed plates screwed or bolted to the comb or each other. A few brands still use the traditional method of nailing the reed plates to the comb. Some experimental and rare harmonicas also have had the reed plates held in place by tension, such as the WWII-era all-American models. If the plates are bolted to the comb, the reed plates can be replaced individually. This is useful because the reeds eventually go out of tune through normal use, and certain notes of the scale can fail more quickly than others.\nA notable exception to the traditional reed plate design is the all-plastic harmonicas designed by Finn Magnus in the 1950s, in which the reed and reed plate were molded out of a single piece of plastic. The Magnus design had the reeds, reed plates, and comb made of plastic and either molded or permanently glued together.\nCover plates.\nCover plates cover the reed plates and are usually made of metal, though wood and plastic have also been used. The choice of these is personal; because they project sound, they determine the tonal quality of the harmonica. Two types of cover plates are used: traditional open designs of stamped metal or plastic, which are simply there to be held; and enclosed designs (such as the Hohner Meisterklasse and Super 64, Suzuki Promaster and SCX), which offer a louder tonal quality. From these two basic types, a few modern designs have been created, such as the Hohner CBH-2016 chromatic and the Suzuki Overdrive diatonic, which have complex covers that allow for specific functions not usually available in the traditional design. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, harmonicas not uncommonly had special features on the covers, such as bells, which could be rung by pushing a button.\nWind-savers.\nWind-savers are one-way valves made from thin strips of plastic, knit paper, leather, or Teflon glued to the reed plate. They are typically found in chromatic harmonicas, chord harmonicas, and many octave-tuned harmonicas. Wind-savers are used when two reeds share a cell and leakage through the nonplaying reed would be significant. For example, when a draw note is played, the valve on the blow reed-slot is sucked shut, preventing air from leaking through the inactive blow reed. An exception to this is the now-discontinued Hohner XB-40, on which valves are placed not to isolate single reeds, but rather to isolate entire chambers from being active, a design that made playing traditional blues bends possible on all reeds.\nMouthpiece.\nThe mouthpiece is placed between the air chambers of the instrument and the player's mouth. This can be integral with the comb (the diatonic harmonicas; the Hohner Chrometta); part of the cover (as in Hohner's CX-12); or may be a separate unit, secured by screws, which is typical of chromatics. In many harmonicas, the mouthpiece is purely an ergonomic aid designed to make playing more comfortable. In the traditional slider-based chromatic harmonica, it is essential to the functioning of the instrument because it provides a groove for the slide.\nAccessories.\nAmplification devices.\nSince the 1950s, many blues harmonica players have amplified their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers. One of the early innovators of this approach was Marion \"Little Walter\" Jacobs, who played the harmonica near a \"Bullet\" microphone marketed for use by radio taxi dispatchers. This gave his harmonica tone a \"punchy\" midrange sound that could be heard above an electric guitar. Also, tube amplifiers produce a natural growling overdrive when cranked at higher volumes, which adds body, fullness, and \"grit\" to the sound. Little Walter also cupped his hands around the instrument to create a kind of flexible chamber, giving it a powerful, distorted sound somewhat reminiscent of a saxophone, hence the term \"Mississippi saxophone\". Some harmonica players in folk use a regular vocal microphone, such as a Shure SM 58, for their harmonica, which gives a clean, natural sound.\nAs technology in amplification has progressed, harmonica players have introduced other effects units to their rigs, as well, such as reverb, tremolo, delay, octave, additional overdrive pedals, and chorus effect. John Popper of Blues Traveler uses a customized microphone that encapsulates several of these effects into one handheld unit, as opposed to several units in sequence. Many harmonica players still prefer tube amplifiers to solid-state ones, owing to the perceived difference in tone generated by the vacuum tubes. Players perceive tubes as having a \"warmer\" tone and a more \"natural\" overdrive sound. Many amplifiers designed for electric guitar are also used by harmonica players, such as the Kalamazoo Model Two, Fender Bassman, and the Danelectro Commando. Some expensive handmade boutique amplifiers are built from the ground up with characteristics that are optimal for amplified harmonica.\nRack or holder.\nHarmonica players who play the instrument while performing on another instrument with their hands (e.g., an acoustic guitar) often use an accessory called a neck rack or harmonica holder to position the instrument in front of their mouth. A harmonica holder clamps the harmonica between two metal brackets, which are attached to a curved loop of metal that rests on the shoulders. The original harmonica racks were made from wire or coat hangers. Models of harmonica racks vary widely by quality and ease of use, and experimenting with more than one model of harmonica rack is often needed to find one that feels suitable for each individual player. This device is used by folk musicians, one-man bands, and singer-songwriters such as Bob Dylan, Edoardo Bennato, Tom Harmon, Neil Young, Eddie Vedder, Billy Joel, Bruce Springsteen, and blues singers Jimmy Reed and John Hammond Jr.\nTypes.\nChromatic.\nThe chromatic harmonica is designed to make all notes of the chromatic scale available (i.e. it can play all the flats and sharps, unlike a diatonic harmonica). It uses a button-activated sliding bar to redirect air from the hole in the mouthpiece to the selected reed-plate, though one design\u2014the \"Machino-Tone\"\u2014controlled airflow by means of a lever-operated flap on the rear of the instrument. A \"hands-free\" modification to the Hohner 270 (12-hole) lets the player shift the tones by moving the mouthpiece up and down with the lips, leaving the hands free to play another instrument. While the Richter-tuned 10-hole chromatic is intended to play in only one key, the 12-, 14-, and 16-hole models (which are tuned to equal temperament) allow the musician to play in any key desired with only one harmonica. This harp can be used for any style, including Celtic, classical, jazz, or blues (commonly in third position).\nDiatonic.\nStrictly speaking, diatonic denotes any harmonica designed to play in a single key\u2014though the standard Richter-tuned diatonic harmonica can play other keys by forcing its reeds to play tones that are not part of its basic scale. Depending on the country, \"diatonic harmonica\" may mean either the tremolo harmonica (in East Asia) or blues harp (in Europe and North America). Other diatonic harmonicas include octave harmonicas.\nHere is the note layout for a standard diatonic in the key of G major:\nEach hole is the same interval (here, a perfect fifth) from its key of C counterpart; on the diatonic scale, a G is a perfect fifth from C. The interval between keys can be used to find the note layout of any standard diatonic.\nTremolo-tuned.\nThe distinguishing feature of the tremolo-tuned harmonica is that it has two reeds per note, with one slightly sharp and the other slightly flat. This provides a unique wavering or warbling sound created by the two reeds being slightly out of tune with each other and the difference in their subsequent waveforms interacting with each other (its beat). The East Asian version, which can produce all 12 semitones, is used often in East Asian rock and pop music.\nOrchestral.\nOrchestral harmonicas are primarily designed for use in ensemble playing.\nMelody.\nThere are eight kinds of orchestral melody harmonica; the most common are the horn harmonicas often found in East Asia. These consist of a single large comb with blow-only reed-plates on the top and bottom. Each reed sits inside a single cell in the comb. One version mimics the layout of a piano or mallet instrument, with the natural notes of a C diatonic scale in the lower reed plate and the sharps and flats in the upper reed plate in groups of two and three holes with gaps in between like the black keys of a piano. Another version has one \"sharp\" reed directly above its \"natural\" on the lower plate, with the same number of reeds on both plates (therefore including E\u266f and B\u266f).\nHorn harmonicas are available in several pitch ranges, with the lowest pitched starting two octaves below middle C and the highest beginning on middle C itself; they usually cover a two- or three-octave range. They are chromatic instruments and are usually played in an East Asian harmonica orchestra instead of the \"push-button\" chromatic harmonica that is more common in the European and American tradition. Their reeds are often larger, and the enclosing \"horn\" gives them a different timbre, so that they often function in place of a brass section. In the past, they were referred to as horn harmonicas.\nThe other type of orchestral melodic harmonica is the polyphonia, (though some are marked \"chromatica\"). These have all twelve chromatic notes laid out on the same row. In most cases, they have both blow and draw of the same tone, though the No. 7 is blow only, and the No. 261, also blow only, has two reeds per hole, tuned an octave apart (all these designations refer to products of M. Hohner).\nChord.\nThe chord harmonica has up to 48 chords: major, seventh, minor, augmented and diminished for ensemble playing. It is laid out in four-note clusters, each sounding a different chord on inhaling or exhaling. Typically each hole has two reeds for each note, tuned to one octave of each other. Less expensive models often have only one reed per note. Quite a few orchestra harmonicas are also designed to serve as both bass and chord harmonica, with bass notes next to chord groupings. There are also other chord harmonicas, such as the Chordomonica (which operates similar to a chromatic harmonica), and the junior chord harmonicas (which typically provide six chords).\nThe Suzuki SSCH-56 Compact Chord harmonica is a 48-chord harmonica built in a 14-hole chromatic harmonica enclosure. The first three holes play a major chord on blow and draw, with and without the slide. Holes 2, 3, and 4 play a diminished chord; holes 3, 4, and 5 play a minor chord; and holes 4, 5, and 6 play an augmented, for a total of sixteen chords. This pattern is repeated starting on hole 5, a whole step higher; and again starting on hole 9, for a total of 48 chords.\nChengGong.\nThe ChengGong harmonica has a main body, and a sliding mouthpiece. The body is a 24-hole diatonic harmonica that ranges from B2 to D6 (covering 3 octaves). Its 11-hole mouthpiece can slide along the front of the harmonica, which gives numerous chord choices and voicings (seven triads, three 6th chords, seven 7th chords, and seven 9th chords, for a total of 24 chords). As well, it is capable of playing single-note melodies and double stops over a range of three diatonic octaves. Unlike conventional harmonicas, blowing and drawing produce the same notes because its tuning is closer to the note layout of a typical East Asian tremolo harmonica or the Polyphonias.\nPitch pipe.\nThe pitch pipe is a simple specialty harmonica that provides a reference pitch to singers and other instruments. The only difference between some early pitch-pipes and harmonicas is the name of the instrument, which reflected the maker's target audience. Chromatic pitch pipes, which are used by singers and choirs, give a full chromatic (12-note) octave. Pitch pipes are also sold for string players, such as violinists and guitarists; these pitch pipes usually provide the notes corresponding to the open strings.\nTechniques.\nVibrato is a technique commonly used while playing the harmonica and many other instruments, to give the note a 'shaking' sound. This technique can be accomplished in a number of ways. The most common way is to change how the harmonica is held. For example, the vibrato effect can be achieved by opening and closing the hands around the harmonica very rapidly. The vibrato might also be achieved via rapid glottal (vocal fold) opening and closing, especially on draws (inhalation) simultaneous to bending, or without bending. This obviates the need for cupping and waving the hands around the instrument during play. An effect similar to vibrato is that of the 'trill' (or 'roll', or 'warble, or 'shake'); this technique has the player move their lips between two holes very quickly, either by shaking the head in a rapid motion or moving the harmonica from side to side within the embouchure. This gives a quick pitch-alternating technique that is slightly more than vibrato and achieves the same aural effect on sustained notes, albeit by using two different tones instead of varying the amplitude of one.\nIn addition to the 19 notes readily available on the diatonic harmonica, players can play other notes by adjusting their embouchure and forcing the reed to resonate at a different pitch. This technique is called bending, a term possibly borrowed from guitarists, who literally bend a string to subtly change the pitch. Bending also creates the glissandos characteristic of much blues harp and country harmonica playing. Bends are essential for most blues and rock harmonica due to the soulful sounds the instrument can bring out. The \"wail\" of the blues harp typically requires bending. In the 1970s, Howard Levy developed the over bending technique (also known as \"overblowing\" and \"overdrawing\".) Over Bending, combined with bending, allowed players to play the entire chromatic scale.\nIn addition to playing the diatonic harmonica in its original key, it is also possible to play it in other keys by playing in other \"positions\" using different keynotes. Using just the basic notes on the instrument would mean playing in a specific mode for each position. For example the Mixolydian mode (root note is the second draw or third blow), produces a major dominant seventh key that is frequently used by blues players because it contains the harmonically rich dominant seventh note, while the Dorian mode (root note is four draw) produces a minor dominant seventh key. Harmonica players (especially blues players) have developed terminology around different \"positions\", which can be confusing to other musicians, for example the slang terminology for the most common positions (1st being 'straight', 2nd being 'cross', 3rd being 'slant', etc.).\nAnother technique, seldom used to its full potential, is altering the size of the mouth cavity to emphasize certain natural overtones. When this technique is employed while playing chords, care must be taken in overtone selection as the overtones stemming from the non-root pitch can cause extreme dissonance.\nHarmonica players who amplify their instrument with microphones and tube amplifiers, such as blues harp players, also have a range of techniques that exploit properties of the microphone and the amplifier, such as changing the way the hands are cupped around the instrument and the microphone or rhythmically breathing or chanting into the microphone while playing.\nHistory.\nThe harmonica was developed in Europe in the early part of the 19th century. Free-reed instruments like the Chinese sheng had been fairly common in East Asia since ancient times. They became relatively well known in Europe after being introduced by the French Jesuit Jean Joseph Marie Amiot (1718\u20131793), who lived in Qing-era China. Around 1820, free-reed designs began being created in Europe. Christian Friedrich Ludwig Buschmann is often cited as the inventor of the harmonica in 1821, but other inventors developed similar instruments at the same time. In 1829, Charles Wheatstone developed a mouth-organ under the name \"Aeolina\" (inspired by the Aeolian harp). Mouth-blown free-reed instruments appeared in the United States, South America, the United Kingdom and Europe at roughly the same time. These instruments were made for playing classical music.\nEarly instruments.\nThe harmonica first appeared in Vienna, where harmonicas with chambers were sold before 1824 (see also Anton Reinlein and Anton Haeckl). Richter tuning, invented by Joseph Richter (who also is credited with inventing the blow and draw mechanism), was created in 1826 and was eventually adopted nearly universally. In Germany, violin manufacturer Johann Georg Meisel from Klingenthal bought a harmonica with chambers (Kanzellen) at an exhibition in Braunschweig in 1824. He and the ironworker Langhammer copied the instruments in Graslitz three miles away; by 1827 they had produced hundreds of harmonicas. Many others followed in Germany and also nearby Bohemia that would later become Czechoslovakia. In 1829, Johann Wilhelm Rudolph Glier also began making harmonicas.\nIn 1830, Christian Messner, a cloth maker and weaver from Trossingen, copied a harmonica his neighbour had brought from Vienna. He had such success that eventually his brother and some relatives also started to make harmonicas. From 1840, his nephew Christian Weiss was also involved in the business. By 1855, there were at least three harmonica-making businesses: C. A. Seydel S\u00f6hne, Christian Messner &amp; Co., and W\u00fcrtt. Harmonikafabrik Ch. Weiss. (Currently, only C.A. Seydel is still in business.) Owing to competition between the harmonica factories in Trossingen and Klingenthal, machines were invented to punch the covers for the reeds.\nIn 1857, Matthias Hohner, a clockmaker from Trossingen, started producing harmonicas. Eventually he became the first to mass-produce them. He used a mass-produced wooden comb that he had made by machine-cutting firms. By 1868, he began supplying the United States. By the 1920s, the diatonic harmonica had largely reached its modern form. Other types followed soon thereafter, including the various tremolo and octave harmonicas.\nBy the late 19th century, harmonica production was a big business, having evolved into mass production. New designs were still developed in the 20th century, including the chromatic harmonica, first made by Hohner in 1924, the bass harmonica, and the chord harmonica. In the 21st century, radical new designs have been developed and are still being introduced into the market, such as the Suzuki Overdrive, Hohner XB-40, and the ill-fated Harrison B-Radical.\nDiatonic harmonicas were designed primarily for playing German and other European folk music and have succeeded well in those styles. Over time, the basic design and tuning proved adaptable to other types of music such as the blues, country, old-time and more. The harmonica was a success almost from the very start of production, and while the center of the harmonica business has shifted from Germany, the output of the various harmonica manufacturers is still very high. Major companies are now found in Germany ( and Hohner \u2013 the dominant manufacturer in the world), South Korea (Miwha, Dabell), Japan (Suzuki, Tombo \u2013 the manufacturer of the popular Lee Oskar harmonica, and Yamaha also made harmonicas until the 1970s), China (Huang, Easttop, Johnson, Leo Shi, Swan, AXL), and Brazil (Hering, Bends). The United States had two significant harmonica manufacturers, and both were based in Union, New Jersey. One was Magnus Harmonica Corporation, whose founder Finn Magnus is credited with the development of plastic harmonica reeds. The other was Wm. Kratt Company, which, founded by German-American William Jacob \"Bill\" Kratt Sr., originally made pitch pipes and later, in 1952, secured a patent for combs made of plastic. Both companies ceased harmonica production. The only recent American contender in the harmonica market was Harrison Harmonicas, which folded in July 2011. It was announced soon thereafter that the rights to the Harrison design had been sold to another company to finish production of orders already placed. In October 2012, it was revealed that a Beloit, Wisconsin, investment corporation, R&amp;R Opportunities, had bought the assets of Harrison Harmonicas and that a feasibility study was under way to assess the possibilities of continued production of the Harrison B-Radical harmonica. Recently, responding to increasingly demanding performance techniques, the market for high-quality instruments has grown.\nEurope and North America.\nSome time before Hohner began manufacturing harmonicas in 1857, he shipped some to relatives who had emigrated to the United States. Its music rapidly became popular, and the country became an enormous market for Hohner's goods. US president Abraham Lincoln carried a harmonica in his pocket, and harmonicas provided solace to soldiers on both the Union and Confederate sides of the American Civil War. Frontiersmen Wyatt Earp and Billy the Kid played the instrument, and it became a fixture of the American musical landscape.\nHarmonicas were heard on a handful of recordings in the early 1900s, generally labeled as a \"mouth organ\". The first jazz or traditional music recordings of harmonicas were made in the U.S. in the mid-1920s. Recordings known at the time as \"race records\", intended for the black market of the southern states, included solo recordings by DeFord Bailey and duo recordings with a guitarist (Hammie Nixon, Walter Horton, or Sonny Terry). Hillbilly styles were also recorded, intended for white audiences, by Frank Hutchison, Gwen Foster and several other musicians. There are also recordings featuring the harmonica in jug bands, of which the Memphis Jug Band is the most famous. But the harmonica still represented a toy instrument in those years and was associated with the poor. It is also during those years that musicians started experimenting with new techniques such as tongue-blocking, hand effects and the most important innovation of all, the second position, or cross-harp.\nA significant contributor to the expanding popularity of the harmonica was a New York-based radio program called the \"Hohner Harmony Hour\", which taught listeners how to play. Listeners could play along with the program to increase their proficiency. The radio program gained wide popularity after the unveiling of the 1925 White House Christmas tree, which was adorned with fifty harmonicas.\nThe harmonica's versatility brought it to the attention of classical musicians during the 1930s. American Larry Adler was one of the first harmonica players to perform major works written for the instrument by the composers Ralph Vaughan Williams, Malcolm Arnold, Darius Milhaud, and Arthur Benjamin.\nHarmonicas were scarce in the United States during World War II. Wood and metal materials for harmonicas were in short supply because of military demand. Furthermore, the primary harmonica manufacturers were based in Germany and Japan, the enemies of the United States and the Allied forces in the war. During this time, Finn Haakon Magnus, a Danish-American factory worker and entrepreneur, developed and perfected the molded plastic harmonica. The plastic harmonica used molded plastic combs and far fewer pieces than traditional metal or wood harmonicas, which made the harmonica more economical to mass-produce and more sanitary. Though the plastic reeds in these harmonicas produced a less distinctive (and, to many ears, inferior) sound than their metallic counterparts, Magnus harmonicas and several imitators soon became commonplace, particularly among children. The patent for the plastic comb was awarded to William Kratt of Wm. Kratt Company in 1952. During World War II, the War Department allotted a rationed supply of brass to Kratt's factory so they could continue to produce harmonicas that the Red Cross distributed to American troops overseas to boost morale.\nEast Asia.\nIn 1898, the harmonica was brought to Japan, where the Tremolo harmonica was the most popular instrument. After about 30 years, the Japanese developed scale tuning and semitone harmonicas that could play Japanese folk songs.\nJapanese tremolo tuning.\nIn Europe and the United States, tremolo harmonica uses the Richter tuning, developed in Germany. In 1913, Sh\u014dgo Kawaguchi (), known in Japan as the \"Father of the harmonica\", devised an alternate tuning, which is more suited to playing Japanese folk tunes. This tuning is also suited to local music throughout East Asia, and harmonicas using the tuning became popular in the region.\nMinor key tuning.\nInitial diatonic harmonica tunings were major key only. In 1931, Hider\u014d Sat\u014d () announced the development of a minor key harmonica. There are two types of minor key tunings, \"natural minor\" suitable for folk and contemporary music, and Latin American music, and the \"harmonic minor\" suitable for some famous Japanese pieces.\nHong Kong and Taiwan.\nThe harmonica started to gain popularity in Hong Kong in the 1930s. Individual tremolo harmonica players from China moved to Hong Kong and established numerous harmonica organizations such as The Chinese Y.M.C.A. Harmonica Orchestra, the China Harmonica Society, and the Heart String Harmonica Society. During the 1950s, chromatic harmonica became popular in Hong Kong, and players such as Larry Adler and John Sebastian Sr. were invited to perform.\nLocal players such as Lau Mok () and Fung On () promoted the chromatic harmonica. The chromatic harmonica gradually became the main instrument used by the Chinese Y.M.C.A. Harmonica Orchestra. The Chinese YMCA Harmonica Orchestra started in the 1960s, with 100 members, most of whom played harmonicas. Non-harmonica instruments were also used, such as double bass, accordion, piano, and percussion such as timpani and xylophone.\nIn the 1970s, the Haletone Harmonica Orchestra () was set up at Wong Tai Sin Community Centre. Fung On and others continued to teach harmonica and also set up harmonica orchestras. In the 1980s, numbers of harmonica students steadily decreased. In the 1990s, harmonica players from Hong Kong began to participate in international harmonica competitions, including the World Harmonica Festival in Germany and the Asia Pacific Harmonica Festival. In the 2000s, the Hong Kong Harmonica Association (H.K.H.A.) () was established.\nThe history of the harmonica in Taiwan began around 1945. By the 1980s, though, as living standards improved, many instruments once beyond the budgets of most Taiwanese started to become more accessible and popular in preference to the harmonica.\nMedical use.\nPlaying the harmonica requires inhaling and exhaling strongly against resistance. This action helps develop a strong diaphragm and deep breathing using the entire lung volume. Pulmonary specialists have noted that playing the harmonica resembles the kind of exercise used to rehabilitate COPD patients such as using a PFLEX inspiratory muscle trainer or the inspiratory spirometer. Learning to play a musical instrument also offers motivation in addition to the exercise component. Many pulmonary rehabilitation programs therefore have begun to incorporate the harmonica.\nWhen President Ronald Reagan suffered a punctured lung in the 1981 attempt on his life, his breathing therapist was Howard McDonald, of the Cambridge Harmonica Orchestra. Orchestra director Pierre Beauregard had hoped that Reagan's therapeutic harmonica experience would help them get a chance to play at the White House, but this never occurred.\nRelated instruments.\nThe concertina, diatonic and chromatic accordions and the melodica are all free-reed instruments that developed alongside the harmonica. Indeed, the similarities between harmonicas and so-called \"diatonic\" accordions or melodeons is such that in German the name for the former is \"Mundharmonika\" and the latter \"Handharmonika\", which translate as \"mouth harmonica\" and \"hand harmonica\". In Scandinavian languages, an accordion is called variants of \"trekkspill\" (pull play) or \"trekkharmonika\" whereas a harmonica is called \"munnspill\" (mouth play) or \"mundharmonika\" (mouth harmonica). The names for the two instruments in the Slavic languages are also either similar or identical. The harmonica shares similarities to all other free-reed instruments by virtue of the method of sound production.\nThe glass harmonica, invented by Benjamin Franklin in 1761, has the word \"harmonica\" in its name, but it is not related to free-reed instruments. The glass harmonica is a musical instrument formed from a nested set of graduated glass cups mounted sideways on an axle. Each of the glass cups is tuned to a different note, and they are arranged in a scalar order. It is played by touching the rotating cups with wetted fingers, causing them to vibrate and produce a sustained \"singing\" tone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14352", "revid": "408561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14352", "title": "Hops", "text": "Flower used to flavour beer and other beverages\nHops are the flowers (also called seed cones or strobiles) of the hop plant \"Humulus lupulus\", a member of the Cannabaceae family of flowering plants. They are used primarily as a bittering, flavouring, and stability agent in beer, to which, in addition to bitterness, they impart floral, fruity, or citrus flavours and aromas. Hops are also used for various purposes in other beverages and herbal medicine. The hops plants have separate female and male plants, and only female plants are used for commercial production. The hop plant is a vigorous climbing herbaceous perennial, usually trained to grow up strings in a field called a hopfield, hop garden (in the South of England), or hop yard (in the West Country and United States) when grown commercially. Many different varieties of hops are grown by farmers around the world, with different types used for particular styles of beer.\nThe first documented use of hops in beer is from the 9th century, though Hildegard of Bingen, 300 years later, is often cited as the earliest documented source. Before this period, brewers used a \"gruit\", composed of a wide variety of bitter herbs and flowers, including dandelion, burdock root, marigold, horehound (the old German name for horehound, , means \"mountain hops\"), ground ivy, and heather. Early documents include mention of a hop garden in the will of Charlemagne's father, Pepin the Short.\nHops are also used in brewing for their antibacterial effect over less desirable microorganisms and for purported benefits including balancing the sweetness of the malt with bitterness and a variety of flavours and aromas. It is believed that traditional herb combinations for beers were abandoned after it was noticed that beers made with hops were less prone to spoilage.\nHistory.\nThe first documented hop cultivation was in 736, in the Hallertau region of present-day Germany. In 768, hop gardens were left to the Cloister of Saint-Denis in a will of Pepin the Short, the father of Charlemagne. The first mention of hops being used in German brewing was in 1079.\nNot until the 13th century did hops begin to start threatening the use of gruit for flavouring. Gruit was used when the nobility levied taxes on hops. Whichever was taxed made the brewer then quickly switch to the other.\nIn Britain, hopped beer was first imported from Holland around 1400, yet hops were condemned as late as 1519 as a \"wicked and pernicious weed\".\nIn Germany, using hops was also a religious and political choice in the early 16th century. There was no tax on hops to be paid to the Catholic church, unlike on gruit. For this reason the Protestants preferred hopped beer.\nHops used in England were imported from France, Holland and Germany and were subject to import duty; it was not until 1524 that hops were first grown in the southeast of England (Kent), when they were introduced as an agricultural crop by Dutch farmers. Consequently, many words used in the hop industry derive from the Dutch language. Hops were then grown as far north as Aberdeen, near breweries for convenience of infrastructure.\nAccording to Thomas Tusser's 1557 \"Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry\":\n&lt;poem&gt;The hop for his profit I thus do exalt,\nIt strengtheneth drink and it flavored malt;\nAnd being well-brewed long kept it will last,\nAnd drawing abide, if ye draw not too fast.&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn England there were many complaints over the quality of imported hops, the sacks of which were often contaminated by stalks, sand or straw to increase their weight. As a result, in 1603, King James I approved an Act of Parliament banning the practice by which \"the Subjects of this Realm have been of late years abused &amp;c. to the Value of \u00a320,000 yearly, besides the Danger of their Healths\".\nHop cultivation was begun in the present-day United States in 1629 by English and Dutch farmers. Before prohibition, cultivation was mainly centred around New York, California, Oregon, and Washington state. Problems with powdery mildew and downy mildew devastated New York's production by the 1920s, and California only produces hops on a small scale.\nWorld production.\nHops production is concentrated in moist temperate climates, with much of the world's production occurring near the 48th parallel north. Hop plants prefer the same soils as potatoes and the leading potato-growing states in the United States are also major hops-producing areas. Not all potato-growing areas can produce good hops naturally, however: for example, soils in the Maritime Provinces of Canada lack the boron that hops prefer. Historically, hops were not grown in Ireland, but were imported from England. In 1752 more than 500 tons of English hops were imported through Dublin alone.\nImportant production centres today are the Hallertau in Germany, the \u017datec (Saaz) in the Czech Republic, the Yakima (Washington) and Willamette (Oregon) valleys, and western Canyon County, Idaho (including the communities of Parma, Wilder, Greenleaf, and Notus). The principal production centres in the UK are in Kent (which produces Kent Goldings hops), Herefordshire, and Worcestershire. Essentially all of the harvested hops are used in beer making.\nCultivation and harvest.\nAlthough hops are grown in most of the continental United States and Canada, cultivation of hops for commercial production requires a particular environment. As hops are a climbing plant, they are trained to grow up trellises made from strings or wires that support the plants and allow them significantly greater growth with the same sunlight profile. In this way, energy that would have been required to build structural cells is also freed for crop growth.\nThe hop plant's reproduction method is that male and female flowers develop on separate plants, although occasionally a fertile individual will develop which contains both male and female flowers. Because pollinated seeds are undesirable for brewing beer, only female plants are grown in hop fields, thus preventing pollination. Female plants are propagated vegetatively, and male plants are culled if plants are grown from seeds.\nHop plants are planted in rows about apart. Each spring, the roots send forth new bines that are started up strings from the ground to an overhead trellis. The cones grow high on the bine, and in the past, these cones were picked by hand. Harvesting of hops became much more efficient with the invention of the mechanical hops separator, patented by Emil Clemens Horst in 1909.\nHops are harvested at the end of summer. The bines are cut down, separated, and then dried in an oast house to reduce moisture content. To be dried, the hops are spread out on the upper floor of the oast house and heated by heating units on the lower floor. The dried hops are then compressed into bales by a baler.\nHop cones contain different oils, such as lupulin, a yellowish, waxy substance, an oleoresin, that imparts flavour and aroma to beer. Lupulin contains lupulone and humulone, which possess antibiotic properties, suppressing bacterial growth favoring brewer's yeast to grow. After lupulin has been extracted in the brewing process the papery cones are discarded.\nMigrant labor and social impact.\nThe need for massed labor at harvest time meant hop-growing had a big social impact. Around the world, the labor-intensive harvesting work involved large numbers of migrant workers who would travel for the annual hop harvest. Whole families would participate and live in hoppers' huts, with even the smallest children helping in the fields. The final chapters of W. Somerset Maugham's \"Of Human Bondage\" and a large part of George Orwell's \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" contain a vivid description of London families participating in this annual hops harvest. In England, many of those picking hops in Kent were from eastern areas of London. This provided a break from urban conditions that was spent in the countryside. People also came from Birmingham and other Midlands cities to pick hops in the Malvern area of Worcestershire. Some photographs have been preserved.\nThe often-appalling living conditions endured by hop pickers during the harvest became a matter of scandal across Kent and other hop-growing counties. Eventually, the Rev. John Young Stratton, Rector of Ditton, Kent, began to gather support for reform, resulting in 1866 in the formation of the Society for the Employment and Improved Lodging of Hop Pickers. The hop-pickers were given very basic accommodation, with very poor sanitation. This led to the spread of infectious diseases and led to contaminated water. The 1897 Maidstone typhoid epidemic was partly as a result of hop-pickers camping near the Farleigh Springs which supplied Maidstone with water.\nParticularly in Kent, because of a shortage of small-denomination coin of the realm, many growers issued their own currency to those doing the labor. In some cases, the coins issued were adorned with fanciful hops images, making them quite beautiful.\nIn the United States, Prohibition had a serious adverse effect on hops production, but remnants of this significant industry in the western states are still noticeable in the form of old hop kilns that survive throughout Sonoma County, California, among others. Florian Dauenhauer, of Santa Rosa in Sonoma County, became a manufacturer of hop-harvesting machines in 1940, in part because of the hop industry's importance to the county. This mechanization helped destroy the local industry by enabling large-scale mechanized production, which moved to larger farms in other areas. Dauenhauer Manufacturing Company remains a current producer of hop harvesting machines.\nChemical composition.\nIn addition to water, cellulose, and various proteins, the chemical composition of hops consists of compounds important for imparting character to beer.\nAlpha acids.\nProbably the most important chemical compound within hops are the alpha acids or humulones. During wort boiling, the humulones are thermally isomerized into iso-alpha acids or \"isohumulones\", which are responsible for the bitter taste of beer.\nBeta acids.\nHops contain beta acids or lupulones. These are desirable for their aroma contributions to beer.\nEssential oils.\nThe main components of hops essential oils are terpene hydrocarbons consisting of myrcene, humulene and caryophyllene. Myrcene is responsible for the pungent smell of fresh hops. Humulene and its oxidative reaction products may give beer its prominent hop aroma. Together, myrcene, humulene, and caryophyllene represent 80 to 90% of the total hops essential oil. \nFlavonoids.\nXanthohumol is the principal flavonoid in hops. The other well-studied prenylflavonoids are 8-Prenylnaringenin and isoxanthohumol. Xanthohumol is under basic research for its potential properties, while 8-prenylnaringenin is a potent phytoestrogen.\nBrewing.\nHops are usually dried in an oast house before they are used in the brewing process. Undried or \"wet\" hops are sometimes (since c. 1990) used.\nThe wort (sugar-rich liquid produced from malt) is boiled with hops before it is cooled down and yeast is added, to start fermentation.\nThe effect of hops on the finished beer varies by type and use, though there are two main hop types: bittering and aroma.\nBittering hops have higher concentrations of alpha acids, and are responsible for the large majority of the bitter flavour of a beer. European (so-called \"noble\") hops typically average 5\u20139% alpha acids by weight (AABW), and the newer American cultivars typically range from 8\u201319% AABW.\nAroma hops usually have a lower concentration of alpha acids (~5%) and are the primary contributors of hop aroma and (nonbitter) flavour.\nBittering hops are boiled for a longer period of time, typically 60\u201390 minutes, and often have inferior aromatic properties, as the aromatic compounds evaporate during the boil. The degree of bitterness imparted by hops depends on the degree to which alpha acids are isomerized during the boil, and the impact of a given amount of hops is specified in International Bitterness Units. On the other hand, unboiled hops are only mildly bitter.\nAroma hops are typically added to the wort later to prevent the evaporation of the essential oils, to impart \"hop taste\" (if during the final 30 minutes of boil) or \"hop aroma\" (if during the final 10 minutes, or less, of boil). Aroma hops are often added after the wort has cooled and while the beer ferments, a technique known as \"dry hopping\", which contributes to the hop aroma. Farnesene is a major component in some hops. The composition of hop essential oils can differ between varieties and between years in the same variety, having a significant influence on flavour and aroma.\nToday, a substantial amount of \"dual-use\" hops are used, as well. These have high concentrations of alpha acids and good aromatic properties. These can be added to the boil at any time, depending on the desired effect. Hop acids also contribute to and stabilize the foam qualities of beer.\nFlavours and aromas are described appreciatively using terms which include \"grassy\", \"floral\", \"citrus\", \"spicy\", \"piney\", \"lemony\", \"grapefruit\", and \"earthy\".\nMany pale lagers have fairly low hop influence, while lagers marketed as Pilsener or brewed in the Czech Republic may have noticeable noble hop aroma. Certain ales (particularly the highly hopped style known as India Pale Ale, or IPA) can have high levels of hop bitterness.\nBrewers may use software tools to control the bittering levels in the boil and adjust recipes to account for a change in the hop bill or seasonal variations in the crop that may lead to the need to compensate for a difference in alpha acid contribution. Data may be shared with other brewers via BeerXML allowing the reproduction of a recipe allowing for differences in hop availability.\nLately the dried pucks, extracts and pellets replace whole hops in brewing processes because of efficiency and cost.\nVarieties.\nBreeding programmes.\nThere are many different varieties of hops used in brewing today. Historically, hops varieties were identified by geography, i.e., from the towns of Hallertau, Spalt, and Tettnang in Germany, or the region writ large like the Neomexicanus hops of New Mexico. Others were named for the farmer who is recognized as first cultivating them, including Goldings or Fuggles from England, or by their growing habit like the Oregon Cluster.\nAround 1900, a number of institutions began to experiment with breeding specific hop varieties. The breeding program at Wye College in Wye, Kent, was started in 1904 and rose to prominence through the work of Prof. E. S. Salmon. Salmon released Brewer's Gold and Brewer's Favorite for commercial cultivation in 1934, and went on to release more than two dozen new cultivars before his death in 1959. Brewer's Gold has become the ancestor of the bulk of new hop releases around the world since its release.\nWye College continued its breeding program and again received attention in the 1970s, when Dr. Ray A. Neve released Wye Target, Wye Challenger, Wye Northdown, Wye Saxon and Wye Yeoman. More recently, Wye College and its successor institution Wye Hops Ltd., have focused on breeding the first dwarf hop varieties, which are easier to pick by machine and far more economical to grow. Wye College have also been responsible for breeding hop varieties that will grow with only 12 hours of daily light for the South African hop farmers. Wye College was closed in 2009 but the legacy of their hop breeding programs, particularly that of the dwarf varieties, is continuing as already the US private and public breeding programs are using their stock material.\nParticular hop varieties are associated with beer regions and styles, for example pale lagers are usually brewed with European (often German, Polish or Czech) noble hop varieties such as Saaz, Hallertau and Strissel Spalt. British ales use hop varieties such as Fuggles, Goldings and W.G.V. North American beers often use Cascade hops, Columbus hops, Centennial hops, Willamette, Amarillo hops and about forty more varieties as the US have lately been the more significant breeders of new hop varieties, including dwarf hop varieties.\nHops from New Zealand, such as Pacific Gem, Motueka and Nelson Sauvin, are used in a \"Pacific Pale Ale\" style of beer with increasing production in 2014.\nNoble hops.\nThe term \"noble hops\" is a marketing term that traditionally refers to certain varieties of hops that became known for being low in bitterness and high in aroma. They are the European cultivars or races Hallertau, Tettnanger, Spalt, and Saaz. Some proponents assert that the English varieties Fuggle, East Kent Goldings and Goldings might qualify as \"noble hops\" due to the similar composition, but such terms are not applied to English varieties. Their low relative bitterness, but strong aroma, are often distinguishing characteristics of European-style lagers, such as Pilsener, Dunkel, and Oktoberfest/M\u00e4rzen. In beer, they are considered aroma hops (as opposed to bittering hops); see Pilsner Urquell as a classic example of the Bohemian Pilsener style, which showcases noble hops.\nAs with grapes, the location where hops are grown affects the hops' characteristics. Much as Dortmunder beer may within the EU be labelled \"Dortmunder\" only if it has been brewed in Dortmund, noble hops may officially be considered \"noble\" only if they were grown in the areas for which the hop varieties (races) were named.\nNoble hops are characterized through analysis as having an aroma quality resulting from numerous factors in the essential oil, such as an alpha:beta ratio of 1:1, low alpha-acid levels (2\u20135%) with a low cohumulone content, low myrcene in the hop oil, high humulene in the oil, a ratio of humulene:caryophyllene above three, and poor storability resulting in them being more prone to oxidation. In reality, this means they have a relatively consistent bittering potential as they age, due to beta-acid oxidation, and a flavor that improves as they age during periods of poor storage.\nOther uses.\nHops are used in herbal teas, as well as soft drinks including julmust (a\u00a0carbonated beverage similar to soda that is popular in Sweden during December), Malta (a\u00a0Latin American soft drink), kvass and hop water. A dietary supplement extracted from hops, amarasate is marketed to suppress appetite. Additionally, both the young shoots and young flowers are edible and can be cooked like asparagus.\nHops may be used in herbal medicine in a way similar to valerian, as a treatment for anxiety, restlessness, and insomnia. A pillow filled with hops is a popular folk remedy for sleeplessness, and animal research has shown a sedative effect. The relaxing effect of hops may be due, in part, to the specific degradation product from alpha acids, 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, as demonstrated from nighttime consumption of non-alcoholic beer. 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol is structurally similar to tert-amyl alcohol which was historically used as an anesthetic. Hops tend to be unstable when exposed to light or air and lose their potency after a few months' storage.\nHops are of interest for hormone replacement therapy and are under basic research for potential relief of menstruation-related problems.\nToxicity.\nDermatitis sometimes results from harvesting hops. Although few cases require medical treatment, an estimated 3% of the workers suffer some type of skin lesions on the face, hands, and legs. Hops are toxic to dogs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14355", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14355", "title": "Hack", "text": " \nHack may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14356", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14356", "title": "Huey, Dewey, and Louie", "text": "Disney cartoon characters\nHuey, Dewey, and Louie Duck are triplet cartoon characters created by storyboard artist and screenwriter Carl Barks for The Walt Disney Company from an idea proposed by cartoonist Al Taliaferro. They are the nephews of Donald Duck and the grand-nephews of Scrooge McDuck. Like their maternal uncles, the brothers are domestic anthropomorphic white ducks with yellow-orange bills and feet. The boys are sometimes distinguished by the color of their shirts and baseball caps (with Huey wearing red clothing, Dewey wearing blue clothing, and Louie wearing green clothing). They appeared in many \"Donald Duck\" animated shorts, as well as in the television show \"DuckTales\" and its reboot, but the comics remain their primary medium.\nWhile the boys were originally created as troublemakers to provoke Donald's famous easily triggered temper, in later appearances, beginning especially in the comic books stories by Carl Barks, they are shown growing to be heroes in their own right and valuable assets to him and Uncle Scrooge on their adventures. All three of the triplets are members of a fictional scouting organization called the Junior Woodchucks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigins.\nAl Taliaferro, the artist for the \"Silly Symphony\" comic strip, proposed the idea for the film \"Donald's Nephews\", so that the studio would have duck counterparts to Morty and Ferdie Fieldmouse, the nephews of Mickey Mouse. The Walt Disney Productions Story Dept. on February 5, 1937, sent Taliaferro a memo recognizing him as the source of the idea for the planned short.\nThe memo indicated, \u201cwe have decided to actually put a story crew to work on \"Donald\u2019s Nephews\".\u201d With the short already in production more than eight months before the boys' \"Silly Symphonies\" comic strip debut (on October 17, 1937), the animation studio's model sheet and storyline would have been Taliaferro and writer Ted Osborne's frame of reference for the comic strip. Because the strip was an adaptation of the animated shorts, it could utilize ideas from films still in production (\"DuckTales\" reversed this, being a TV adaptation of the comics). Similarly, Barks' Junior Woodchuck prototype, \"Good Scouts\", was released three months after identical scouting uniforms were introduced by Taliaferro and Bob Karp in the comic strip.\nThe nephews being triplets who finished each other's sentences was developed by Carl Barks, the screenwriter of \"Donald's Nephews\", for whom \"Happy Hooligan\", a comic strip that featured such triplets, was a childhood influence. This characteristic appeared for the first time at the end of the film, as the boys parted with Donald. In the comic strip, it was first implemented a week after the film's release.\nThe nephews' names were devised by Disney gag man Dana Coty, who took them from Huey Long, Thomas Dewey, and Louis Schmitt, a Disney Studio animator. In translation, the nephews' names often follow the repetition (parachesis) of their names in English, for example: Tupu, Hupu and Lupu (Finnish) and Hyzio, Dyzio and Zyzio (Polish).\nCharacter background.\nHuey, Dewey, and Louie are the sons of Donald's sister Della Duck; in \"Donald's Nephews\", their mother is instead named Dumbella. In the original theatrical shorts, they were originally sent to visit Donald for only one day; in the comics, the three were sent to stay with Donald on a temporary basis, until their father came back from the hospital (the boys ended up sending him there after an attempted practical joke of putting firecrackers under his chair). In both the comics and animated shorts, the boys' parents were never heard from or mentioned again after these instances, with the boys ending up permanently living with Donald. All four of them live in the fictional city of Duckburg, in the fictional state of Calisota.\nIn the theatrical shorts, Huey, Dewey, and Louie often behave in a rambunctious and mischievous manner, and they sometimes commit retaliation or revenge on Donald. In the early Barks comics, the ducklings were still wild and unruly, but their character improved considerably due to their membership in the Junior Woodchucks and the good influence of Grandma Duck. As the boys mature, they prefer to assist Donald and Scrooge in the adventure at hand. They occasionally interact with Daisy Duck\u2019s nieces, April, May, and June.\nFeatures.\nColors of Huey, Dewey, and Louie's outfits.\nIn early comic books and shorts, the caps of Huey, Dewey, and Louie were colored randomly, depending on the whim of the colorist. On a few occasions until 1945 and most cartoons shortly afterward, all three nephews wore identical outfits (most commonly red).\nIt was not until the 1980s when it became established that Huey is dressed in pink then in 1982 changed to red, Dewey in black then in 1982 changed to blue, and Louie in brown then in 1982 changed to green. Disney's archivist Dave Smith, in \"Disney A to Z\", said, \"Note that the brightest hue of the three is red (Huey), the color of water, dew, is blue (Dewey), and that leaves Louie, and leaves are green (Louie).\"\nA few random combinations appear in early Disney merchandise and books, such as orange and yellow. Another combination that shows up from time to time is Huey in blue, Dewey in green, and Louie in red. In-story, this inconsistency is explained away as a result of the ducklings borrowing each other's clothes. The trio have often been depicted wearing indistinguishable black shirts (or the same dark color).\nThe Don Rosa story \"An Eye for Detail\" (1997) was based around Donald spending so much time trying to tell his three nephews apart that he developed a heightened sense of sight.\nVoices.\nClarence Nash, Donald's voice actor, voiced the nephews in the cartoon shorts, making their voices just as duck-like (and thereby difficult to understand) as Donald's. Huey, Dewey, and Louie were all voiced by Russi Taylor in \"DuckTales\". In \"Quack Pack\", they were voiced by Jeannie Elias, Pamela Segall, and Elizabeth Daily, respectively. Tony Anselmo voiced the characters in \"Donald Duck, The Star-Struck\" (1986), \"Down and Out with Donald Duck\" (1987), \"Mickey Mouse Works\", \"House of Mouse\", and the \"Have a Laugh!\" shorts, while Taylor continued voicing the trio in other projects, such as the video games, ' and \"Mickey's Speedway USA\", and the direct-to-video films \"Mickey's Once\" and \"Twice Upon a Christmas\". Taylor also reprised her role as the nephews in the ' video game and the post-2013 \"Mickey Mouse\" shorts until her death in 2019. Danny Pudi, Ben Schwartz, and Bobby Moynihan voiced the trio in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" reboot. In the \"Mickey Mouse Funhouse\" episode segment Sitting Ducks, Melissa Hutchison voiced Huey, Dewey &amp; Louie.\nPhooey Duck.\nOn a few occasions, an artist by error drew four nephews and the error was published. This fourth nephew has been named Phooey Duck by Disney comic editor Bob Foster.\nThe six-page Danish Egmont-licensed Disney comic \"Much Ado About Phooey\" (1999), plotted by Lars Jensen, written by Jack Sutter and drawn by Tino Santanach Hernandez, used Phooey as a character and explained Phooey's sporadic appearances as a freak incident of nature. (The text in the two speech balloons says \"It is a fourth nephew! An exact copy of the others! / Yes, it's probably best that I explain\".) Phooey also made a cameo appearance in the 2017 \"DuckTales\" animated series episode, \"A Nightmare on Killmotor Hill!\", during a dream sequence.\nComics.\nIn the comics, Huey, Dewey, and Louie often play a major role in most stories involving either their \"Unca Donald\" or great-uncle Scrooge McDuck, accompanying them on most of their adventures. Originating in the comics is the boys' membership in the Boy Scouts of America-like organization, the Junior Woodchucks, including their use of the Junior Woodchucks Guidebook, a fantastically exhaustive field guide containing information on science, history and survival skills. This youth organization, which has twin goals of preserving knowledge and protecting the environment, was instrumental in transforming the three brothers from \"little hellions\" to upstanding young ducks.\nIn Disney comic writer Don Rosa's continuity, Huey, Dewey, and Louie Duck were born around 1940 in Duckburg. In his award-winning epic series, \"Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck\", Rosa reveals the domestic pain felt by the boys' loss of their parents. When Scrooge first meets Donald and his nephews, he says: \"I'm not used to relatives, either! The few I had seem to have... disappeared!\" Huey, Dewey, and Louie respond: \"We know how \"that\" feels, Unca Scrooge!\"\nIn \"Some Heir Over the Rainbow\" by Carl Barks, Huey, Dewey, and Louie, along with Donald Duck and Gladstone Gander, are tested by Scrooge McDuck, who wants to pick an heir to his fortune. Using the legend of a pot of gold at the end of a rainbow, Scrooge secretly gives the nephews, Donald and their cousin each $1,000 to invest. Donald uses his money for a down payment of a new car, now being $1,000 in debt. Gladstone, considering himself too lucky to need the money this soon, hides the money for when and if he needs it, causing Scrooge to consider him a better option than Donald. Huey, Dewey, and Louie lend their money to a man who claims to need the money to search for a treasure. Initially thinking they were tricked out of the money, Scrooge actually considers leaving his fortune to Gladstone, even though he sees that as \"an awful injustice to the world\", but the man actually finds the treasure and pays the kids back. Scrooge makes Huey, Dewey, and Louie his heirs. It seems to be the most solidly canonical indication of Scrooge's plans.\nIn a 1994 interview, Erik Svane asked Barks who would inherit Scrooge's money. Barks' response was \"Probably Donald's nephews.\" Svane further queried, \"Why would Huey, Dewey and Louie receive it?\" Barks: \"Oh, well, because they are so much more practical than Donald. In the later stories, as I developed those duck people and the whole community of Duckburg and all of its problems, I began giving those kids much more intelligence than anybody else in Duckburg. And so, I guess that when Uncle Scrooge passes on, he will leave all of his money to his three nephews. And I'm sure they will do a lot of good in the world, their Junior Woodchucks organization. They will save all the birds and all the whales.\"\nTelevision.\nHuey, Dewey, and Louie starred in the 1987 animated television series \"DuckTales\", in which they went on adventures with their great-uncle, Scrooge McDuck, after their \"Unca Donald\" left them with him to enlist in the U.S. Navy. The boys' personalities in this series were mainly based on their comic book appearances versus the theatrical shorts. In the 1996 series \"Quack Pack\", the three were portrayed as teenagers and given distinct personalities, with Huey serving as the group's leader, Dewey as a computer whiz, and Louie as a sports enthusiast. After \"Quack Pack\", the boys were reverted to their original ages for most appearances, including the 1999 series \"Mickey Mouse Works\". An exception was the 2001 series \"House of Mouse\", in which they served as the house band in a variety of different styles (most commonly as \"The Quackstreet Boys\").\nIn the 2017 \"DuckTales\" series, the brothers are once again given distinct designs, voices, and personalities: Huey is intelligent and logical, Dewey is adventurous and excitable, and Louie is laid-back and cunning. The boys move to Scrooge's mansion with Donald after Dewey accidentally destroys their houseboat and travel the world on adventures with their uncles. They also have different roles: Huey is a Junior Woodchuck, Dewey likes to go on adventures, and Louie wants to be wealthy like Scrooge, except that he likes to do everything the easy way. This iteration also changed Dewey's real name to Dewford, while making Dingus his middle name, and Louie's real name to Llewellyn. In the second season, the boys are reunited with their long-lost mother Della, who reveals she intended to name them \"Jet (Huey), Turbo (Dewey), and Rebel (Louie)\" before she disappeared, after which Donald named them instead.\nVideo games.\nHuey, Dewey and Louie have been given many appearances in video games over the years, starting with \"DuckTales\" (1989), a popular NES game based on the show, wherein they aid their Uncle Scrooge in finding treasure. The game also got in 2013.\nIn \"The Lucky Dime Caper\" (1991) for Sega's Game Gear and Master System, the nephews are kidnapped by Magica De Spell. Donald must find Scrooge's lucky dime and barter for their safety. The trio also appear in the Sega Genesis and Sega Saturn game, \"Quackshot\" (1991), piloting Donald's plane as he travels the world in search of a lost treasure. The object of \"Disney's Magical Quest 3 Starring Mickey &amp; Donald\" (1995), for Super Famicom (Japan) and Game Boy Advance, is to rescue the nephews from the clutches of the villainous King Pete.\n' (2000) was released for many gaming systems. The boys aid Donald to bat Gladstone in rescuing Daisy Duck, while he also rescues their hexed play toys. The nephews appear as unlockable playable characters in \"Mickey's Speedway USA\" (2000) for Nintendo 64. In ' (2000), that premiered as an arcade game in Japan and afterward on PlayStation and as a Plug-and-Play handheld TV game, they appear as DJ's for certain music tracks. They are playable characters in \"Disney Magic Kingdoms\" (2016), a Disney Parks themed game for iOS, Android and Windows.\n\"Kingdom Hearts\".\nHuey, Dewey, and Louie have recurring roles as shopkeepers in the \"Kingdom Hearts\" video game series. In the first entry (2002), the trio work in the item shop in the First District of Traverse Town. In \"Kingdom Hearts II\" (2005), they individually run an item shop (Huey), an accessory shop (Dewey), and a weapon shop (Louie) in Hollow Bastion/Radiant Garden. In both games' endings, they are seen returning to Disney Castle.\n\"\" (2010) features the nephews in Disney Town, recreating Ice Cream flavors, this time with a speaking role. \"Kingdom Hearts Coded\" (2008) also has Huey, Dewey, and Louie in Traverse Town, much like the first game. The three nephews were investigating the strange block phenomena occurring in their world which also resided inside Jiminy's journal. In \"Kingdom Hearts \u03c7\" (2013), they are displayed on special Support medals that grant the player's other medals a set number of experience points based on the medal's star value. They appear in the Tram Common area of Twilight Town in \"Kingdom Hearts III\" (2019), where they each take turns running the gummi shop. In all of their \"Kingdom Hearts\" appearances, the nephews look similar to their appearance in the original \"DuckTales\".\nParks and attractions.\nHuey, Dewey and Louie have made numerous appearances at Disney theme parks.\nTokyo Disney.\nThe nephews appeared in seasonal parades during Easter, Halloween and Christmas 2011 after a long absence. They also appeared in the Countdown Party Parade 2011.\nDisneyland Paris.\nHuey, Dewey and Louie appear regularly in Paris. They appeared during the Christmas season 2010 in their daytime and nighttime Parades at \"Disneyland Paris's Magic Kingdom\", Disney's Once Upon a Dream Parade and in the Disney's Fantillusion Parade in glittery outfits. They made another appearance at Disneyland Paris for meet-and-greet at the Disneyland Hotel on April 2, 2011, the day of the Press Event for the launch of the \"Magical Moments Festival\". They also appeared at Disney's Once Upon a Dream Parade at the Disneyland Park in special outfits for the parade and at the Disney's Stars 'n' Cars Parade at the Walt Disney Studios Park in directors outfits.\nThe nephews appeared at Disneyland Paris's Halloween season 2011. They have their own show during \"Mickey's Not-So-Scary Halloween Parties\" at the Disneyland Park in Disneyland Paris, titled \"Huey, Dewey and Louie's Trick or Treat Party\". They also made an appearance for meet-and-greet at Disneyland Paris's \"Disney's Halloween Party\" on October 31, 2011. They were also part of the Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve 2011\u20132012 celebrations at the Disneyland Hotel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14357", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14357", "title": "Hortense McDuck", "text": ""}
