{"id": "17524", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17524", "title": "Language", "text": "Structured system of communication\nLanguage is a structured system of communication that consists of grammar and vocabulary. It is the primary means by which humans convey meaning, both in spoken and signed forms, and may also be conveyed through writing. Human language is characterized by its cultural and historical diversity, with significant variations observed between cultures and across time. Human languages possess the properties of productivity and displacement, which enable the creation of an infinite number of sentences, and the ability to refer to objects, events, and ideas that are not immediately present in the discourse. The use of human language relies on social convention and is acquired through learning.\nEstimates of the number of human languages in the world vary between and . Precise estimates depend on an arbitrary distinction (dichotomy) established between languages and dialects. Natural languages are spoken, signed, or both; however, any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli\u00a0\u2013 for example, writing, whistling, signing, or braille. In other words, human language is modality-independent, but written or signed language is the way to inscribe or encode the natural human speech or gestures.\nDepending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, \"language\" may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules. All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs to particular meanings. Oral, manual and tactile languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances.\nThe scientific study of language is called linguistics. Critical examinations of languages, such as philosophy of language, the relationships between language and thought, how words represent experience, etc., have been debated at least since Gorgias and Plato in ancient Greek civilization. Thinkers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712\u20131778) have argued that language originated from emotions, while others like Immanuel Kant (1724\u20131804) have argued that languages originated from rational and logical thought. Twentieth century philosophers such as Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889\u20131951) argued that philosophy is really the study of language itself. Major figures in contemporary linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky.\nLanguage is thought to have gradually diverged from earlier primate communication systems when early hominins acquired the ability to form a theory of mind and shared intentionality. This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions. Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in Broca's and Wernicke's areas. Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently by approximately three years old. Language and culture are codependent. Therefore, in addition to its strictly communicative uses, language has social uses such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as use for social grooming and entertainment.\nLanguages evolve and diversify over time, and the history of their evolution can be reconstructed by comparing modern languages to determine which traits their ancestral languages must have had in order for the later developmental stages to occur. A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family; in contrast, a language that has been demonstrated not to have any living or non-living relationship with another language is called a language isolate. There are also many unclassified languages whose relationships have not been established, and spurious languages may have not existed at all. Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.\nDefinitions.\nThe English word \"language\" derives ultimately from Proto-Indo-European \"tongue, speech, language\" through Latin , \"language; tongue\", and Old French . The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming. Unlike conventional human languages, a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information. This article specifically concerns the properties of natural human language as it is studied in the discipline of linguistics.\nAs an object of linguistic study, \"language\" has two primary meanings: an abstract concept, and a specific linguistic system, e.g. \"French\". The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, who defined the modern discipline of linguistics, first explicitly formulated the distinction using the French word ' for language as a concept, ' as a specific instance of a language system, and \"\" for the concrete use of speech in a particular language.\nWhen speaking of language as a general concept, definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon. These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language, and they also inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory. Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world. Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words, concepts and reality. Gorgias argued that language could represent neither the objective experience nor human experience, and that communication and truth were therefore impossible. Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of, and prior to, language.\nDuring the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language. Thinkers such as Rousseau and Johann Gottfried Herder argued that language had originated in the instinctive expression of emotions, and that it was originally closer to music and poetry than to the logical expression of rational thought. Rationalist philosophers such as Kant and Ren\u00e9 Descartes held the opposite view. Around the turn of the 20th century, thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world\u00a0\u2013 asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world, or whether it creates concepts that in turn impose structure on our experience of the objective world. This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems. The resurgence of the view that language plays a significant role in the creation and circulation of concepts, and that the study of philosophy is essentially the study of language, is associated with what has been called the linguistic turn and philosophers such as Wittgenstein in 20th-century philosophy. These debates about language in relation to meaning and reference, cognition and consciousness remain active today.\nMental faculty, organ or instinct.\nOne definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour: to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances. This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain. Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction. Languages may even develop spontaneously in environments where people live or grow up together without a common language; for example, creole languages and spontaneously developed sign languages such as Nicaraguan Sign Language. This view, which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes, understands language to be largely innate, for example, in Chomsky's theory of universal grammar, or American philosopher Jerry Fodor's extreme innatist theory. These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.\nFormal symbolic system.\nAnother definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning. This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings. This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure, and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language.\nSome proponents of Saussure's view of language have advocated a formal approach that studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences. The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky, the originator of the generative theory of grammar, who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars. Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is. By way of contrast, such transformational grammars are also commonly used in formal logic, in formal linguistics, and in applied computational linguistics. In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.\nTool for communication.\nYet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances. This definition stresses the social functions of language and the fact that humans use it to express themselves and to manipulate objects in their environment. Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions, and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was \"tailored\" to serve the communicative needs of its users.\nThis view of language is associated with the study of language in pragmatic, cognitive, and interactive frameworks, as well as in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers. This view places importance on the study of linguistic typology, or the classification of languages according to structural features, as processes of grammaticalization tend to follow trajectories that are partly dependent on typology. In the philosophy of language, the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein's later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J. L. Austin, Paul Grice, John Searle, and W.O. Quine.\nHuman versus animal language.\nA number of features, many of which were described by Charles Hockett and called design features set human language apart from communication used by non-human animals.\nCommunication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed. In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences. This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.g. sounds, letters or gestures) can be combined to form an infinite number of larger units of meaning (words and sentences). However, one study has demonstrated that an Australian bird, the chestnut-crowned babbler, is capable of using the same acoustic elements in different arrangements to create two functionally distinct vocalizations. Additionally, pied babblers have demonstrated the ability to generate two functionally distinct vocalisations composed of the same sound type, which can only be distinguished by the number of repeated elements.\nSeveral species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning: for instance a bonobo named Kanzi learned to express itself using a set of symbolic lexigrams. Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species. However, while some animals may acquire large numbers of words and symbols, none have been able to learn as many different signs as are generally known by an average 4 year old human, nor have any acquired anything resembling the complex grammar of human language.\nHuman languages differ from animal communication systems in that they employ grammatical and semantic categories, such as noun and verb, present and past, which may be used to express exceedingly complex meanings. It is distinguished by the property of recursivity: for example, a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase (as in \"the chimpanzee]'s lips]\") or a clause can contain another clause (as in \"[I see [the dog is running\"). Human language is the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as \"modality independent\". This means that it can be used not only for communication through one channel or medium, but through several. For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.\nHuman language is unusual in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future. This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called \"displacement\", and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.\nOrigin.\nTheories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is. Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors. These theories can be called continuity-based theories. The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man. These theories can be defined as discontinuity-based. Similarly, theories based on the generative view of language pioneered by Noam Chomsky see language mostly as an innate faculty that is largely genetically encoded, whereas functionalist theories see it as a system that is largely cultural, learned through social interaction.\nContinuity-based theories are held by a majority of scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development. Those who see language as being mostly innate, such as psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation. Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin. A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen. Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60,000 to 100,000 years and that: Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once, and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related, even if that relation can no longer be recovered\u00a0... because of limitations on the methods available for reconstruction.\nBecause language emerged in the early prehistory of man, before the existence of any written records, its early development has left no historical traces, and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today. Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like. Early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour. Among the signs in human fossils that may suggest linguistic abilities are: the size of the brain relative to body mass, the presence of a larynx capable of advanced sound production and the nature of tools and other manufactured artifacts.\nIt was mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general. However, a 2017 study on \"Ardipithecus ramidus\" challenges this belief. Scholarly opinions vary as to the developments since the appearance of the genus \"Homo\" some 2.5 million years ago. Some scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems (proto-language) as early as \"Homo habilis\" (2.3 million years ago) while others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only with \"Homo erectus\" (1.8 million years ago) or \"Homo heidelbergensis\" (0.6 million years ago), and the development of language proper with anatomically modern \"Homo sapiens\" with the Upper Paleolithic revolution less than 100,000 years ago.\nChomsky is one prominent proponent of a discontinuity-based theory of human language origins. He suggests that for scholars interested in the nature of language, \"talk about the evolution of the language capacity is beside the point.\" Chomsky proposes that perhaps \"some random mutation took place [...] and it reorganized the brain, implanting a language organ in an otherwise primate brain.\" Though cautioning against taking this story literally, Chomsky insists that \"it may be closer to reality than many other fairy tales that are told about evolutionary processes, including language.\"\nIn March 2024, researchers reported that the beginnings of human language began about 1.6 million years ago.\nStudy.\nThe study of language, linguistics, has been developing into a science since the first grammatical descriptions of particular languages in India more than 2000 years ago, after the development of the Brahmi script. Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language, examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above.\nSubdisciplines.\nThe academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics. For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.\nEarly history.\nThe formal study of language is often considered to have started in India with P\u0101\u1e47ini, the 5th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology. However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC. Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing.\nIn the 17th century AD, the French Port-Royal Grammarians developed the idea that the grammars of all languages were a reflection of the universal basics of thought, and therefore that grammar was universal. In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by British philologist and expert on ancient India William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics. The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt. Early in the 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units, defined through the oppositions between them.\nBy introducing a distinction between diachronic and synchronic analyses of language, he laid the foundation of the modern discipline of linguistics. Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and paradigm, and the Langue-parole distinction, distinguishing language as an abstract system (\"langue\"), from language as a concrete manifestation of this system (\"parole\").\nModern linguistics.\nIn the 1960s, Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language. According to this theory, the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages. This set of rules is called Universal Grammar; for Chomsky, describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics. Thus, he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.\nIn opposition to the formal theories of the generative school, functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, its structures are best analyzed and understood by reference to their functions. Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out. The framework of cognitive linguistics interprets language in terms of the concepts (which are sometimes universal, and sometimes specific to a particular language) which underlie its forms. Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language.\nPhysiological and neural architecture of language and speech.\nSpeaking is the default modality for language in all cultures. The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips, tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus, the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds, and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language. The study of the genetic bases for human language is at an early stage: the only gene that has definitely been implicated in language production is FOXP2, which may cause a kind of congenital language disorder if affected by mutations.\nThe brain.\nThe brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production. Nonetheless, our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited, though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques. The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics.\nEarly work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech. In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing. The first area is Wernicke's area, which is in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere. People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia, a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension, while speech retains a natural-sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure. The second area is Broca's area, in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere. People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out. They are typically able to understand what is being said to them, but unable to speak fluently. Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with word repetition. The condition affects both spoken and written language. Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences. Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language, in analogous ways to how they affect speech, with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar, whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently, but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others' signs. This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language, not to the physiology used for speech production.\nWith technological advances in the late 20th century, neurolinguists have also incorporated non-invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments.\nAnatomy of speech.\nSpoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound, which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum. This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs. These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract\u00a0\u2013 the throat, the mouth, and the nose. By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.\nThe sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements. The segmental elements are those that follow each other in sequences, which are usually represented by distinct letters in alphabetic scripts, such as the Roman script. In free flowing speech, there are no clear boundaries between one segment and the next, nor usually are there any audible pauses between them. Segments therefore are distinguished by their distinct sounds which are a result of their different articulations, and can be either vowels or consonants. Suprasegmental phenomena encompass such elements as stress, phonation type, voice timbre, and prosody or intonation, all of which may have effects across multiple segments.\nConsonants and vowel segments combine to form syllables, which in turn combine to form utterances; these can be distinguished phonetically as the space between two inhalations. Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave. Formants are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound.\nVowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract. They vary in quality according to the degree of lip aperture and the placement of the tongue within the oral cavity. Vowels are called \"close\" when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel (English \"ee\"), or \"open\" when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel (English \"ah\"). If the tongue is located towards the back of the mouth, the quality changes, creating vowels such as (English \"oo\"). The quality also changes depending on whether the lips are rounded as opposed to unrounded, creating distinctions such as that between (unrounded front vowel such as English \"ee\") and (rounded front vowel such as German \"\u00fc\").\nConsonants are those sounds that have audible friction or closure at some point within the upper vocal tract. Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.e. the place in the vocal tract where the airflow is obstructed, commonly at the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, palate, velum, uvula, or glottis. Each place of articulation produces a different set of consonant sounds, which are further distinguished by manner of articulation, or the kind of friction, whether full closure, in which case the consonant is called \"occlusive\" or \"stop\", or different degrees of aperture creating \"fricatives\" and \"approximants\". Consonants can also be either \"voiced or unvoiced\", depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound. Voicing is what separates English in \"bus\" (unvoiced sibilant) from in \"buzz\" (voiced sibilant).\nSome speech sounds, both vowels and consonants, involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity, and these are called \"nasals\" or \"nasalized\" sounds. Other sounds are defined by the way the tongue moves within the mouth such as the l-sounds (called \"laterals\", because the air flows along both sides of the tongue), and the r-sounds (called \"rhotics\").\nBy using these speech organs, humans can produce hundreds of distinct sounds: some appear very often in the world's languages, whereas others are much more common in certain language families, language areas, or even specific to a single language.\nModality.\nHuman languages display considerable plasticity in their deployment of two fundamental modes: oral (speech and mouthing) and manual (sign and gesture). For example, it is common for oral language to be accompanied by gesture, and for sign language to be accompanied by mouthing. In addition, some language communities use both modes to convey lexical or grammatical meaning, each mode complementing the other. Such bimodal use of language is especially common in genres such as story-telling (with Plains Indian Sign Language and Australian Aboriginal sign languages used alongside oral language, for example), but also occurs in mundane conversation. For instance, many Australian languages have a rich set of case suffixes that provide details about the instrument used to perform an action. Others lack such grammatical precision in the oral mode, but supplement it with gesture to convey that information in the sign mode. In Iwaidja, for example, 'he went out for fish using a torch' is spoken as simply \"he-hunted fish torch\", but the word for 'torch' is accompanied by a gesture indicating that it was held. In another example, the ritual language Damin had a heavily reduced oral vocabulary of only a few hundred words, each of which was very general in meaning, but which were supplemented by gesture for greater precision (e.g., the single word for fish, \"l*i\", was accompanied by a gesture to indicate the kind of fish).\nSecondary modes of language, by which a fundamental mode is conveyed in a different medium, include writing (including braille), sign (in manually coded language), whistling and drumming. Tertiary modes \u2013 such as semaphore, Morse code and spelling alphabets \u2013 convey the secondary mode of writing in a different medium. For some extinct languages that are maintained for ritual or liturgical purposes, writing may be the primary mode, with speech secondary.\nStructure.\nWhen described as a system of symbolic communication, language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts: signs, meanings, and a code connecting signs with their meanings. The study of the process of semiosis, how signs and meanings are combined, used, and interpreted is called semiotics. Signs can be composed of sounds, gestures, letters, or symbols, depending on whether the language is spoken, signed, or written, and they can be combined into complex signs, such as words and phrases. When used in communication, a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it.\nSome of the properties that define human language as opposed to other communication systems are: the arbitrariness of the linguistic sign, meaning that there is no predictable connection between a linguistic sign and its meaning; the duality of the linguistic system, meaning that linguistic structures are built by combining elements into larger structures that can be seen as layered, e.g. how sounds build words and words build phrases; the discreteness of the elements of language, meaning that the elements out of which linguistic signs are constructed are discrete units, e.g. sounds and words, that can be distinguished from each other and rearranged in different patterns; and the productivity of the linguistic system, meaning that the finite number of linguistic elements can be combined into a theoretically infinite number of combinations.\nThe rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar. The meaning that is connected to individual signs, morphemes, words, phrases, and texts is called semantics. The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics.\nSemantics.\nLanguages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning, or its content. Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention. Because the basic relation of meaning for most linguistic signs is based on social convention, linguistic signs can be considered arbitrary, in the sense that the convention is established socially and historically, rather than by means of a natural relation between a specific sign form and its meaning.\nThus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning. The English sign \"dog\" denotes, for example, a member of the species \"Canis familiaris\". In a language, the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon, and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a lexeme. Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words. Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.\nAll languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action. Traditionally, semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements, so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity, e.g. \"[x [is y]]\" or \"[x [does y]]\". Recently, this model of semantics has been complemented with more dynamic models of meaning that incorporate shared knowledge about the context in which a sign is interpreted into the production of meaning. Such models of meaning are explored in the field of pragmatics.\nSounds and symbols.\nDepending on modality, language structure can be based on systems of sounds (speech), gestures (sign languages), or graphic or tactile symbols (writing). The ways in which languages use sounds or signs to construct meaning are studied in phonology.\nSounds as part of a linguistic system are called phonemes. Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair. In English, for example, the words \"bat\" and \"pat\" form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between and differentiates the two words, which have different meanings. However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways. For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds and (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning. Similarly, the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non-aspirated pronunciations of consonants, as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do: the unaspirated in \"spin\" and the aspirated in \"pin\" are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme (such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones), whereas in Mandarin Chinese, the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words 'crouch' and 'eight' (the accent above the \u00e1 means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone).\nAll spoken languages have phonemes of at least two different categories, vowels and consonants, that can be combined to form syllables. As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning. Many languages, for example, use stress, pitch, duration, and tone to distinguish meaning. Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments, they are called suprasegmental. Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirah\u00e3 language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes. In sign languages, the equivalent to phonemes (formerly called cheremes) are defined by the basic elements of gestures, such as hand shape, orientation, location, and motion, which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language.\nWriting systems represent language using visual symbols, which may or may not correspond to the sounds of spoken language. The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word. In syllabic scripts, such as the Inuktitut syllabary, each sign represents a whole syllable. In logographic scripts, each sign represents an entire word, and will generally bear no relation to the sound of that word in spoken language.\nBecause all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist. Written language represents the way spoken sounds and words follow one after another by arranging symbols according to a pattern that follows a certain direction. The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention. Some writing systems use the horizontal axis (left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script), while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension (from top to bottom). A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.\nIn order to represent the sounds of the world's languages in writing, linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet, designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages.\nGrammar.\nGrammar is the study of how meaningful elements called \"morphemes\" within a language can be combined into utterances. Morphemes can either be \"free\" or \"bound\". If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called \"words\", and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes. The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules. The study of the rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology. The rules of the internal structure of phrases and sentences are called \"syntax\".\nGrammatical categories.\nGrammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning. Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units. However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal. Such universal categories include the encoding of the grammatical relations of participants and predicates by grammatically distinguishing between their relations to a predicate, the encoding of temporal and spatial relations on predicates, and a system of grammatical person governing reference to and distinction between speakers and addressees and those about whom they are speaking.\nWord classes.\nLanguages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts. All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events. The first group, which includes English words such as \"dog\" and \"song\", are usually called nouns. The second, which includes \"think\" and \"sing\", are called verbs. Another common category is the adjective: words that describe properties or qualities of nouns, such as \"red\" or \"big\". Word classes can be \"open\" if new words can continuously be added to the class, or relatively \"closed\" if there is a fixed number of words in a class. In English, the class of pronouns is closed, whereas the class of adjectives is open, since an infinite number of adjectives can be constructed from verbs (e.g. \"saddened\") or nouns (e.g. with the -like suffix, as in \"noun-like\"). In other languages such as Korean, the situation is the opposite, and new pronouns can be constructed, whereas the number of adjectives is fixed.\nWord classes also carry out differing functions in grammar. Prototypically, verbs are used to construct predicates, while nouns are used as arguments of predicates. In a sentence such as \"Sally runs\", the predicate is \"runs\", because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument \"Sally\". Some verbs such as \"curse\" can take two arguments, e.g. \"Sally cursed John\". A predicate that can only take a single argument is called \"intransitive\", while a predicate that can take two arguments is called \"transitive\".\nMany other word classes exist in different languages, such as conjunctions like \"and\" that serve to join two sentences, articles that introduce a noun, interjections such as \"wow!\", or ideophones like \"splash\" that mimic the sound of some event. Some languages have positionals that describe the spatial position of an event or entity. Many languages have classifiers that identify countable nouns as belonging to a particular type or having a particular shape. For instance, in Japanese, the general noun classifier for humans is \"nin\" (\u4eba), and it is used for counting humans, whatever they are called:\n\"san-nin no gakusei\" (\u4e09\u4eba\u306e\u5b66\u751f) lit. \"3 human-classifier of student\"\u00a0\u2013 three students\nFor trees, it would be:\n\"san-bon no ki\" (\u4e09\u672c\u306e\u6728) lit. \"3 classifier-for-long-objects of tree\"\u00a0\u2013 three trees\nMorphology.\nIn linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology. In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes. For instance, the English word \"unexpected\" can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes \"un-\", \"expect\" and \"-ed\".\nMorphemes can be classified according to whether they are independent morphemes, so-called roots, or whether they can only co-occur attached to other morphemes. These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: \"prefixes\" precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root. Affixes serve to modify or elaborate the meaning of the root. Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word \"run\", which in the past tense is \"ran\". This process is called \"ablaut\". Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one. In English, the verb \"sing\" has the inflectional forms \"singing\" and \"sung\", which are both verbs, and the derivational form \"singer\", which is a noun derived from the verb with the agentive suffix \"-er\".\nLanguages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation. In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words. This type of morpho-syntax is often called isolating, or analytic, because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning. Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes, but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units. In many languages, notably in most Indo-European languages, single morphemes may have several distinct meanings that cannot be analyzed into smaller segments. For example, in Latin, the word , or \"good\", consists of the root , meaning \"good\", and the suffix -, which indicates masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. These languages are called \"fusional languages\", because several meanings may be fused into a single morpheme. The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit. An example of such a language is Turkish, where for example, the word , or \"from your houses\", consists of the morphemes, with the meanings \"house-plural-your-from\". The languages that rely on morphology to the greatest extent are traditionally called polysynthetic languages. They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word. For example, in Persian the single word means \"I didn't understand it\" consisting of morphemes with the meanings, \"negation.understand.past.I.it\". As another example with more complexity, in the Yupik word , which means \"He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer\", the word consists of the morphemes with the meanings, \"reindeer-hunt-future-say-negation-again-third.person.singular.indicative\", and except for the morpheme (\"reindeer\") none of the other morphemes can appear in isolation.\nMany languages use morphology to cross-reference words within a sentence. This is sometimes called \"agreement\". For example, in many Indo-European languages, adjectives must cross-reference the noun they modify in terms of number, case, and gender, so that the Latin adjective , or \"good\", is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case. In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects. In these types of languages, a single verb may include information that would require an entire sentence in English. For example, in the Basque phrase , or \"you saw me\", the past tense auxiliary verb (similar to English \"do\") agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the - prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the \u2013 suffix. The sentence could be directly transliterated as \"see you-did-me\"\nSyntax.\nAnother way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence. The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax. The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as \"I love you\" is meaningful, but \"*love you I\" is not. Syntactical rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained, and how those constraints contribute to meaning. For example, in English, the two sentences \"the slaves were cursing the master\" and \"the master was cursing the slaves\" mean different things, because the role of the grammatical subject is encoded by the noun being in front of the verb, and the role of object is encoded by the noun appearing after the verb. Conversely, in Latin, both \"Dominus servos vituperabat\" and \"Servos vituperabat dominus\" mean \"the master was reprimanding the slaves\", because \"servos\", or \"slaves\", is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and \"dominus\", or \"master\", is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.\nLatin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object, whereas English uses word order. Another example of how syntactic rules contribute to meaning is the rule of inverse word order in questions, which exists in many languages. This rule explains why when in English, the phrase \"John is talking to Lucy\" is turned into a question, it becomes \"Who is John talking to?\", and not \"John is talking to who?\". The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on \"who\", thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question. Syntax also includes the rules for how complex sentences are structured by grouping words together in units, called phrases, that can occupy different places in a larger syntactic structure. Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure, connecting the phrases to each other at different levels. To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence \"the cat sat on the mat\". The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase, a verb, and a prepositional phrase; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase, and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun.\nThe reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out. For example, \"the cat\" is one phrase, and \"on the mat\" is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: \"[And] on the mat, the cat sat\". There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described. Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner.\nTypology and universals.\nLanguages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types. Languages that belong to different families nonetheless often have features in common, and these shared features tend to correlate. For example, languages can be classified on the basis of their basic word order, the relative order of the verb, and its constituents in a normal indicative sentence. In English, the basic order is SVO (subject\u2013verb\u2013object): \"The snake(S) bit(V) the man(O)\", whereas for example, the corresponding sentence in the Australian language Gamilaraay would be \"d\u032auyugu n\u032aama d\u032aayn yi\u02d0y\" (snake man bit), SOV. Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter, because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters, such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives, or of the use of prepositions or postpositions. Such correlations are called implicational universals. For example, most (but not all) languages that are of the SOV type have postpositions rather than prepositions, and have adjectives before nouns.\nAll languages structure sentences into Subject, Verb, and Object, but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions. English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences (\"I run\") and transitive sentences (\"I love you\") are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun \"I\". Some languages, called ergative, Gamilaraay among them, distinguish instead between Agents and Patients. In ergative languages, the single participant in an intransitive sentence, such as \"I run\", is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence, giving the equivalent of \"me run\". Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun \"I\" be used. In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.\nThe shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently. Their co-occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages, \"language universals\", or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve.\nSocial contexts of use and transmission.\nWhile humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others. Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children. Languages are used by those who speak them to communicate and to solve a plethora of social tasks. Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes. Owing to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact. The process is similar to the process of evolution, where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree.\nHowever, languages differ from biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion, as speakers of different languages come into contact. Humans also frequently speak more than one language, acquiring their first language or languages as children, or learning new languages as they grow up. Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.\nUsage and meaning.\nWhen studying the way in which words and signs are used, it is often the case that words have different meanings, depending on the social context of use. An important example of this is the process called deixis, which describes the way in which certain words refer to entities through their relation between a specific point in time and space when the word is uttered. Such words are, for example, the word, \"I\" (which designates the person speaking), \"now\" (which designates the moment of speaking), and \"here\" (which designates the position of speaking). Signs also change their meanings over time, as the conventions governing their usage gradually change. The study of how the meaning of linguistic expressions changes depending on context is called pragmatics. Deixis is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world. Pragmatics is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning. For example, in all languages, linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information, but to perform actions. Certain actions are made only through language, but nonetheless have tangible effects, e.g. the act of \"naming\", which creates a new name for some entity, or the act of \"pronouncing someone man and wife\", which creates a social contract of marriage. These types of acts are called speech acts, although they can also be carried out through writing or hand signing.\nThe form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context. For example, if at a dinner table a person asks, \"Can you reach the salt?\", that is, in fact, not a question about the length of the arms of the one being addressed, but a request to pass the salt across the table. This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures. These social rules for which ways of using language are considered appropriate in certain situations and how utterances are to be understood in relation to their context vary between communities, and learning them is a large part of acquiring communicative competence in a language.\nAcquisition.\nAll healthy, normally developing human beings learn to use language. Children acquire the language or languages used around them: whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood. The development is essentially the same for children acquiring sign or oral languages. This learning process is referred to as first-language acquisition, since unlike many other kinds of learning, it requires no direct teaching or specialized study. In \"The Descent of Man\", naturalist Charles Darwin called this process \"an instinctive tendency to acquire an art\".\nFirst language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants. Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree. From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds. Around one month of age, babies appear to be able to distinguish between different speech sounds. Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them. Words appear around the age of 12 to 18 months; the average vocabulary of an eighteen-month-old child is around 50 words. A child's first utterances are holophrases (literally \"whole-sentences\"), utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea. Several months after a child begins producing words, the child will produce two-word utterances, and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech, or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech, but that do show regular syntactic structure. From roughly the age of three to five years, a child's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language.\nAcquisition of second and additional languages can come at any age, through exposure in daily life or courses. Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native-like fluency than adults, but in general, it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker. An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.\nCulture.\nLanguages, understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community, are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them. Languages differ not only in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, but also through having different \"cultures of speaking.\" Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others. Even among speakers of one language, several different ways of using the language exist, and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture. Linguists and anthropologists, particularly sociolinguists, ethnolinguists, and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities.\nLinguists use the term \"varieties\" to refer to the different ways of speaking a language. This term includes geographically or socioculturally defined dialects as well as the jargons or styles of subcultures. Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.\nBecause norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity. Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one's area of origin, or status as a second language speaker. These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system, but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups.\nHowever, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions. In many languages, there are stylistic or even grammatical differences between the ways men and women speak, between age groups, or between social classes, just as some languages employ different words depending on who is listening. For example, in the Australian language Dyirbal, a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother-in-law. Some cultures, for example, have elaborate systems of \"social deixis\", or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means. In English, social deixis is shown mostly through distinguishing between addressing some people by first name and others by surname, and in titles such as \"Mrs.\", \"boy\", \"Doctor\", or \"Your Honor\", but in other languages, such systems may be highly complex and codified in the entire grammar and vocabulary of the language. For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.\nWriting, literacy and technology.\nThroughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented. These are called writing systems.\nThe use of writing has made language even more useful to humans. It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again, and it allows communication across physical distances and timespans that would otherwise be impossible. Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken. There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.\nThe invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC. The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC. It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion. A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC. The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.\nChange.\nAll languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community. Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse. Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be \"decay\" or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.\nChanges may affect specific sounds or the entire phonological system. Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another, the complete loss of the affected sound, or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none. Sound changes can be \"conditioned\" in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds. Sound change is usually assumed to be \"regular\", which means that it is expected to apply mechanically whenever its structural conditions are met, irrespective of any non-phonological factors. On the other hand, sound changes can sometimes be \"sporadic\", affecting only one particular word or a few words, without any seeming regularity. Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected. This happened in the Germanic languages when the sound change known as Grimm's law affected all the stop consonants in the system. The original consonant became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous in turn became /p/, and the previous became /f/. The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have \"p\" in words like pater\" and pisces\", whereas Germanic languages, like English, have father\" and fish\".\nAnother example is the Great Vowel Shift in English, which is the reason that the spelling of English vowels do not correspond well to their current pronunciation. This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation. Another source of sound change is the erosion of words as pronunciation gradually becomes increasingly indistinct and shortens words, leaving out syllables or sounds. This kind of change caused Latin \"mea domina\" to eventually become the French \"madame\" and American English \"ma'am\".\nChange also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized. This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element. For example, in some varieties of Caribbean Spanish the final /s/ has eroded away. Since Standard Spanish uses final /s/ in the morpheme marking the second person subject \"you\" in verbs, the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun \"t\u00fa\". This means that the sentence \"what's your name\" is \"\u00bfcomo te llamas?\" in Standard Spanish, but in Caribbean Spanish. The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax. Another common cause of grammatical change is the gradual petrification of idioms into new grammatical forms, for example, the way the English \"going to\" construction lost its aspect of movement and in some varieties of English has almost become a full-fledged future tense (e.g. \"I'm gonna\").\nLanguage change may be motivated by \"language internal\" factors, such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce, or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types. Other causes of language change are social, such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups, such as social classes, or with ideologies, and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas. In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.\nContact.\nOne source of language change is contact and the resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages. Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis. Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual. Before the rise of the concept of the ethno-national state, monolingualism was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands. But with the ideology that made one people, one state, and one language the most desirable political arrangement, monolingualism started to spread throughout the world. There are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6,000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.\nWhen speakers of different languages interact closely, it is typical for their languages to influence each other. Through sustained language contact over long periods, linguistic traits diffuse between languages, and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar. In areas where many languages are in close contact, this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features. A number of such language areas have been documented, among them, the Balkan language area, the Mesoamerican language area, and the Ethiopian language area. Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas because of the widespread diffusion of specific areal features.\nLanguage contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena, including language convergence, borrowing, and relexification (the replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language). In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family. One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis, but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently. In such a case, they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages, and that has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure. The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages. Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language. But if the Pidgin language becomes the main language of a speech community, then eventually children will grow up learning the Pidgin language as their first language. As the generation of child learners grows up, the pidgin will often be seen to change its structure and acquire a greater degree of complexity. This type of language is generally called a creole language. An example of such mixed languages is Tok Pisin, the official language of Papua New Guinea, which originally arose as a Pidgin based on English and Austronesian languages; others are Krey\u00f2l ayisyen, the French-based creole language spoken in Haiti, and Michif, a mixed language of Canada, based on the Native American language Cree and French.\nLinguistic diversity.\n\"SIL Ethnologue\" defines a \"living language\" as \"one that has at least one speaker for whom it is their first language\". The exact number of known living languages varies from 6,000 to 7,000, depending on the precision of one's definition of \"language\", and in particular, on how one defines the distinction between a \"language\" and a \"dialect\". As of 2016, \"Ethnologue\" cataloged 7,097 living human languages. The \"Ethnologue\" establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility, and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications. For example, the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages (Danish and Jutish) by the \"Ethnologue\".\nAccording to the \"Ethnologue\", 389 languages (nearly 6%) have more than a million speakers. These languages together account for 94% of the world's population, whereas 94% of the world's languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population.\nLanguages and dialects.\nThere is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect, notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that \"a language is a dialect with an army and navy\". For example, national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects. Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as \"dialects\" of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian. Before the Yugoslav Wars, Serbo-Croatian was generally considered a single language with two normative variants, but due to sociopolitical reasons, Croatian and Serbian are now often treated as separate languages and employ different writing systems. In other words, the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences as on distinctive writing systems or the degree of mutual intelligibility. The latter is, in fact, a rather unreliable criterion to discriminate languages and dialects. Pluricentric languages, which are languages with more than one standard variety, are a case in point. Standard American English and Standard RP (English) English, for instance, may in some areas be more different than languages with names, e.g. Swedish and Norwegian. A complex social process of \"language making\" underlies these assignments of status and in some cases even linguistic experts may not agree (e.g. the One Standard German Axiom). The language making process is dynamic and subject to change over time.\nLanguage families of the world.\nThe world's languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry. Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families, although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in-depth studies are carried out. At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world. Among them are Basque, spoken in Europe, Zuni of New Mexico, Pur\u00e9pecha of Mexico, Ainu of Japan, Burushaski of Pakistan, and many others.\nThe language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world's population. This family includes major world languages like English, Spanish, French, German, Russian, and Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu). The Indo-European family spread first through hypothesized Indo-European migrations that would have taken place some time in the period c.\u20098000\u20131500 BCE, and subsequently through much later European colonial expansion, which brought the Indo-European languages to a politically and often numerically dominant position in the Americas and much of Africa. The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world's population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.\nAfrica is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba. Speakers of the Niger-Congo languages account for 6.9% of the world's population. A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.\nThe Austronesian languages are spoken by 5.5% of the world's population and stretch from Madagascar to maritime Southeast Asia all the way to Oceania. It includes such languages as Malagasy, M\u0101ori, Samoan, and many of the indigenous languages of Indonesia and Taiwan. The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology. Other populous language families are the Dravidian languages of South Asia (among them Kannada, Tamil, and Telugu), the Turkic languages of Central Asia (such as Turkish), the Austroasiatic (among them Khmer), and Tai\u2013Kadai languages of Southeast Asia (including Thai).\nThe areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity, such as the Americas, Papua New Guinea, West Africa, and South-Asia, contain hundreds of small language families. These areas together account for the majority of the world's languages, though not the majority of speakers. In the Americas, some of the largest language families include the Quechua, Arawak, and Tupi-Guarani families of South America, the Uto-Aztecan, Oto-Manguean, and Mayan of Mesoamerica, and the Na-Dene, Iroquoian, and Algonquian language families of North America. In Australia, most indigenous languages belong to the Pama-Nyungan family, whereas New Guinea is home to a large number of small families and isolates, as well as a number of Austronesian languages. Due to its remoteness and geographical fragmentation, Papua New Guinea emerges in fact as the leading location worldwide for both species (8% of world total) and linguistic richness \u2013 with 830 living tongues (12% of world total).\nLanguage endangerment.\nLanguage endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language. Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers, and becomes a \"dead language\". If eventually no one speaks the language at all, it becomes an \"extinct language\". While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.\nThe more commonly spoken languages dominate the less commonly spoken languages, so the less commonly spoken languages eventually disappear from populations. Of the between 6,000 and 7,000 languages spoken as of 2010, between 50 and 90% of those are expected to have become extinct by the year 2100. The top 20 languages, those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each, are spoken by 50% of the world's population, whereas many of the other languages are spoken by smaller communities, most of them with less than 10,000 speakers.\nThe United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) operates with five levels of language endangerment: \"safe\", \"vulnerable\" (not spoken by children outside the home), \"definitely endangered\" (not spoken by children), \"severely endangered\" (only spoken by the oldest generations), and \"critically endangered\" (spoken by a few members of the oldest generation, often semi-speakers). Despite claims that the world would be better off if most adopted a single common \"lingua franca\", such as English or Esperanto, there is a consensus that the loss of languages harms the cultural diversity of the world. It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but many of the world's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda.\nMany projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages. Across the world, many countries have enacted specific legislation to protect and stabilize the language of indigenous speech communities. A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient.\nThe University of Waikato is using the Welsh language as a model for their M\u0101ori language revitalisation programme, as they deem Welsh to be the world's leading example for the survival of languages. In 2019, Hawaiian TV company Oiwi visited a Welsh language centre in Nant Gwrtheyrn, North Wales, to help find ways of preserving their \u014clelo Hawai\u02bbi language.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17525", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17525", "title": "LiberaL", "text": ""}
{"id": "17527", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17527", "title": "Laissez-faire capitalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "17528", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17528", "title": "Laura Bush", "text": "First Lady of the United States from 2001 to 2009\nLaura Lane Welch Bush (n\u00e9e Welch; born November 4, 1946) is an American educator who was the first lady of the United States from 2001 to 2009 as the wife of George W. Bush, the 43rd president of the United States. Bush was previously the first lady of Texas from 1995 to 2000 when her husband was governor.\nBorn in Midland, Texas, Bush graduated from Southern Methodist University in 1968 with a bachelor's degree in education, and took a job as a second grade teacher. After attaining her master's degree in library science at the University of Texas at Austin, she was employed as a librarian. Bush met her future husband, George W. Bush, in 1977, and they were married later that year. The couple had twin daughters in 1981. Bush's political involvement began during her marriage. She campaigned with her husband during his unsuccessful 1978 run for the United States Congress, and later for his successful Texas gubernatorial campaign.\nAs First Lady of Texas, Bush implemented many initiatives focused on health, education, and literacy. From 1999 to 2000, she aided her husband in campaigning for the presidency in a number of ways, such as delivering a keynote address at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which gained her national attention. She became first lady after her husband was inaugurated as president on January 20, 2001.\nPolled by the Gallup Organization as one of the most popular first ladies, Bush was involved in national and global concerns during her tenure. She continued to advance her trademark interests of education and literacy by establishing the annual National Book Festival in 2001. She encouraged education on a worldwide scale. She also advanced women's causes through the Heart Truth and Susan G. Komen for the Cure organizations. She represented the United States during her foreign trips, which tended to focus on HIV/AIDS and malaria awareness.\nEarly life and education.\nLaura Lane Welch was born on November 4, 1946, at Midland Memorial Hospital in Midland, Texas, the only child of Harold Bruce Welch (1912\u20131995) and Jenna Louise Welch (1919\u20132019, n\u00e9e Hawkins). She is of English, French, and Swiss ancestry.\nHer father was a house builder and later successful real estate developer, while her mother worked as the bookkeeper for her father's business. Early on, her parents encouraged her to read, leading to what would become her love of reading. She said, \"I learned [how important reading is] at home from my mother. When I was a little girl, my mother would read stories to me. I have loved books and going to the library ever since. In the summer, I liked to spend afternoons reading in the library. I enjoyed the \"Little House on the Prairie\" and \"Little Women\" books, and many others ... Reading gives you enjoyment throughout your life.\" Bush has also credited her second grade teacher, Charlene Gnagy, for inspiring her interest in education.\nOn the night of November 6, 1963, two days after her 17th birthday, Laura Bush ran a stop sign and struck another car, killing its driver. The victim was her classmate Michael Dutton Douglas. By some accounts, Douglas had been Bush's boyfriend at one time, but she stated that he was not her boyfriend at that time but rather a very close friend. Bush and her passenger, both 17, were treated for minor injuries. According to the accident report released by the city of Midland in 2000, in response to an open-records request, she was not charged in the incident. In 2000 Laura Bush's spokesman said, \"It was a very tragic accident that deeply affected the families and was very painful for all involved, including the community at large.\" In her book \"Spoken from the Heart\", she said that the crash caused her to lose her faith \"for many, many years\".\nShe attended James Bowie Elementary School, San Jacinto Junior High School, and Robert E. Lee High School in Midland. She graduated from Lee in 1964 and went on to attend Southern Methodist University in Dallas where she was a member of Kappa Alpha Theta. She graduated in 1968 with a Bachelor of Science degree in education.\nShe worked as a counselor at Camp Mystic while she was in college.\nAfter graduating from SMU, she began her career as a school teacher at Longfellow Elementary School in the Dallas Independent School District. She then taught for three years at John F. Kennedy Elementary School, a Houston Independent School District school in Houston, until 1972.\nIn 1973, Bush attained a Master of Science degree in library science from the University of Texas at Austin. She was soon employed as a librarian at the Kashmere Gardens Branch at the Houston Public Library. The following year, she moved back to Austin and took another job as a librarian in the Austin Independent School District school Dawson Elementary until 1977. She reflected on her employment experiences to a group of children in 2003, saying, \"I worked as a teacher and librarian and I learned how important reading is in school and in life.\"\nPersonal life.\nBush met her husband in July 1977 when mutual friends Joe and Jan O'Neill invited them to a backyard barbecue at their home. He proposed to her at the end of September and they were married on November 5 of that year, the day after her 31st birthday, at the First United Methodist Church in Midland, the same church in which she had been baptized. The couple honeymooned in Cozumel, Mexico. George W. Bush detailed his choice to marry Laura as the \"best decision of [his] life\". Laura, an only child, said she gained \"brothers and sisters and wonderful in-laws\" who all accepted her after she wed George W. Bush.\nThe year after their marriage, the couple began campaigning for George W. Bush's 1978 Congressional candidacy. According to George Bush, when he asked her to marry him, she had said, \"Yes. But only if you promise me that I'll never have to make a campaign speech.\" She soon relented and gave her first stump speech for him in 1978 on the courthouse steps in Muleshoe, Texas. After narrowly winning the primary, he lost the general election.\nBush attended the inauguration of her father-in-law George H. W. Bush as Ronald Reagan's vice-president in January 1981, after Reagan won the 1980 United States presidential election. She credited her father-in-law's election to the vice presidency with giving her and her husband national exposure.\nThe Bushes had tried to conceive for three years, but pregnancy did not happen easily. On November 25, 1981, Laura Bush gave birth to fraternal twin daughters, Barbara and Jenna. The twins were born five weeks early by an emergency Caesarean section in Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas, Texas, as Laura had developed life-threatening pre-eclampsia (toxemia).\nGeorge W. Bush credited his wife with his decision to stop drinking in 1986. She reflected that she thought her husband \"was drinking too much\" amid her knowing it was not his desired way of living. Approaching him, she related that her father had been alcoholic and it was not a pattern she wished to repeat in their family.\nShe is also credited with having a stabilizing effect on his private life. According to \"People\" magazine reporter Jane Simms Podesta, \"She is the steel in his back. She is a civilizing influence on him. I think she built him, in many ways, into the person he is today.\"\nBush traveled to Kuwait in April 1993, accompanying her in-laws as well as brothers-in-law Jeb and Marvin Bush after former president Bush was invited to return to the Middle East for the first time since his presidency.\nSeveral times a year, Bush and her husband travel to their sprawling family estate, the Bush compound, better known as Walker's Point. Located in Kennebunkport, Maine, the compound is where Bush family gatherings have been held for nearly 100 years.\nFirst Lady of Texas (1995\u20132000).\nBush became the first lady of Texas when her husband was elected as the governor of Texas and served as first lady of that state from January 17, 1995, to December 21, 2000. When asked about her interest in politics, she responded \"It doesn't drive me.\"\nThough during her years in the Governor's Mansion, she did not hold a single formal event, Laura worked for women's and children's causes including health, education, and literacy. She implemented four major initiatives: Take Time For Kids, an awareness campaign to educate parents and caregivers on parenting; family literacy, through cooperation with the Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy, she urged Texas communities to establish family literacy programs; Reach Out and Read, a pediatric reading program; and Ready to Read, an early childhood educational program.\nShe raised money for public libraries through her establishment of the Texas Book Festival, in 1995. She established the First Lady's Family Literacy Initiative, which encouraged families to read together. Bush further established \"Rainbow Rooms\" across the state, in an effort to provide emergency services for neglected or abused children. Through this, she promoted the Adopt-a-Caseworker Program to provide support for Child Protective Services. She used her position to advocate Alzheimer's disease and breast cancer awareness as well.\nHer husband announced his campaign for President of the United States in mid-1999, something that she agreed to. She did say, however, that she had never dreamed that he would run for office. The Bush campaign worked to assure voters that as First Lady, she would not seek to emulate then-First Lady Hillary Clinton, who had faced controversy for leading several policy initiatives from within the White House despite being unelected. When asked who she would be like out of the past first ladies, she insisted it would be herself.\nIn July, she delivered a keynote address to the delegates at the 2000 Republican National Convention, which put her on the national stage. In December 2000, her husband resigned as Governor of Texas to prepare for his inauguration as President of the United States in January 2001.\nFirst Lady of the United States (2001\u20132009).\nAs First Lady, Bush was involved in issues of concern to children and women, both nationally and internationally. Her major initiatives included education and women's health.\nEducation and children and the National Book Festival.\nEarly into the administration, Bush made it known that she would focus much of her attention on education. This included recruiting highly qualified teachers to ensure that young children would be taught well. She also focused on early child development.\nIn 2001, to promote reading and education, she partnered with the Library of Congress to launch the annual National Book Festival. More than 60 organizations that promote reading, literacy, and libraries\u2014including the National Basketball Association participated. Bush served as Honorary Chair from 2001 to 2008.\nIn January 2002, Bush testified before the Senate Committee on Education, asking for higher teachers' salaries and better training for Head Start programs. She is also credited with creating a national initiative called \"Ready to Read, Ready to Learn\", which promotes reading at a young age. To promote American patriotic heritage in schools, she helped launch the National Anthem Project. In 2006, Bush and media executives worked together to provide a $500,000 grant for school libraries along the Gulf Coast which had been devastated by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.\nImmediately following the September 11, 2001 attacks, Bush spoke regarding America's children:\n\"We need to reassure our children that they are safe in their homes and schools. We need to reassure them that many people love them and care for them, and that while there are some bad people in the world, there are many more good people.\"\nThe following day, she composed open letters to America's families, focusing on elementary and middle school students, which she distributed through state education officials. She took an interest in mitigating the emotional effects of the attacks on children, particularly the disturbing images repeatedly replayed on television. On the one-year anniversary, she encouraged parents to instead read to their children, and perhaps light a candle in memoriam, saying, \"Don't let your children see the images, especially on September 11, when you know it'll probably be on television again and again \u2013 the plane hitting the building or the buildings falling.\"\nLater in her tenure, she was honored by the United Nations, as the body named her honorary ambassador for the United Nations' Decade of Literacy. In this position, she announced that she would host a Conference on Global Literacy. The conference, held in September 2006, encouraged a constant effort to promote literacy and highlighted many successful literacy programs. She coordinated this as a result of her many trips abroad where she witnessed how literacy benefited children in poorer nations.\nOn July 28, 2008, she visited Carl Sandburg Home National Historic Site in Flat Rock, North Carolina, where she met with superintendent Connie Backlund and the Friends of Carl Sandburg Home's President Linda Holt as well as various students from Boys and Girls Club of Henderson County, North Carolina.\nOn October 3, 2008, she visited Laura Ingalls Wilder Historic Home and Museum where she praised her works such as \"Farmer Boy\", \"These Happy Golden Years\" and \"Little House on the Prairie\", the last of which she had felt an association with as a child. During the same Laura Ingalls Wilder's estate visit, she said that she read her books to her daughters and gave the writer Save America's Treasures grant.\nSeptember 11 attacks.\nOn September 11, 2001, Bush had been hosting her in-laws George H. W. Bush and Barbara Bush at the White House and was scheduled to give a testimony to Congress on education. Instead, during the September 11 attacks, Bush was taken to inside the White House and placed in an underground bunker, later being met by her husband, who had returned to Washington from Florida.\nTwo weeks after the September 11 terrorist attacks, Bush inaugurated a music concert at the Kennedy Center, organized to raise funds for families of the victims. Though she received applause, she returned the compliment to members of the audience and added that although the event was tragic, Americans had deepened their appreciation \"of life itself, how fragile it can be, what a gift it is and how much we need each other\". Senator Ted Kennedy, who introduced Bush at the event, praised her and said he knew his late brother, President John F. Kennedy, would also be proud of her. Bush believes the September 11 attacks ignited the interest in the way Afghan women were treated.\nWomen's health and rights.\nAnother of her signature issues were those relating to the health and well-being of women. She established the Women's Health and Wellness Initiative and became involved with two major campaigns.\nBush first became involved with The Heart Truth awareness campaign in 2003. It is an organization established by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to raise awareness about heart disease in women, and how to prevent the condition. She serves in the honorary position of ambassador for the program leading the federal government's effort to give women a \"wake up call\" about the risk of heart disease. She commented on the disease: \"Like many women, I assumed heart disease was a man's disease and cancer was what we would fear the most. Yet heart disease kills more women in our country than all forms of cancer combined. When it comes to heart disease, education, prevention, and even a little red dress can save lives.\" She has undertaken a signature personal element of traveling around the country and talking to women at hospital and community events featuring the experiences of women who live, or had lived, with the condition. This outreach was credited with directly saving the life of at least one woman who went to the hospital after experiencing symptoms of a heart attack after hearing her message.\nWith her predecessor, former first lady Nancy Reagan, Bush dedicated the First Ladies Red Dress Collection at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in May 2005. It is an exhibit containing red suits worn by former first ladies Lady Bird Johnson, Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter, Nancy Reagan, Barbara Bush, Hillary Clinton, and Laura Bush meant to raise awareness by highlighting America's first ladies. She has participated in fashion shows displaying red dresses worn on celebrities as well.\nBush's mother, Jenna Welch, was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 78. She endured surgery and had no further signs of cancer. Laura Bush has become a breast cancer activist on her mother's behalf through her involvement in the Susan G. Komen for the Cure. She applauded the foundation's efforts in eliminating cancer and said, \"A few short years ago, a diagnosis of breast cancer left little hope of recovery. But thanks to the work of the Komen Foundation ... more women and men are beating breast cancer and beating the odds.\" She used her position to gain international support for the foundation through the Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research of the Americas, an initiative that unites experts from the United States, Brazil, Costa Rica and Mexico.\nIn November 2001, she became the first person other than a president to deliver the weekly presidential radio address. She used the opportunity to discuss the plight of women in Afghanistan leading up to the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan, saying \"The brutal oppression of women is a central goal of the terrorists.\" Her husband was originally to give the address but he felt that she should do it; she later recalled, \"At that moment, it was not that I found my voice. Instead, it was as if my voice found me.\" Her words summarized one of the goals and moral rationales of the U.S. involvement in Afghanistan and it became one of the more famous speeches of his administration. In May 2002, she made a speech to the people of Afghanistan through Radio Liberty. In March 2005, she made the first of three trips to that country as First Lady.\nCampaigning.\nBush campaigned for Republicans around the country in 2002 for that year's midterm elections, attending and hosting fundraisers as well as giving speeches. Opponents deemed this as the Bush administration \"working against women's rights issues and using women to do their dirty work\" and partly a test for Bush on how well she could campaign for her husband in the impending two years when he sought re-election.\nDuring the 2004 election cycle, Bush made joint appearances with her husband on the campaign trail, including in battleground states such as Florida. She advocated for his re-election in a speech at the 2004 Republican National Convention, and was credited with having raised $15 million for her husband's campaign as well as the Republican Party while still succeeding in keeping a separate schedule that allowed for her to tend to the traditional duties she had as First Lady. In a July 2004 interview, Teresa Heinz, wife of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, said, \"Well, you know, I don't know Laura Bush. But she seems to be calm, and she has a sparkle in her eye, which is good. But I don't know that she's ever had a real job\u2014I mean, since she's been grown up.\" Heinz later apologized for the remark, stating that she had forgotten that Laura Bush was a teacher and librarian prior to her marriage. Bush stated that she forgave her while insisting her apology was unnecessary, citing her understanding of the \"trick questions\" asked by the media.\nBush was a participant in the 2006 midterm elections, beginning her campaigning in April. Though her poll numbers had decreased from an 80% approval rating, they still superseded that of President Bush, whose approval rating was only praised by a third of Americans. Ed Henry of CNN noted Bush's popularity, writing, \"The first lady is treated like a rock star on the campaign trail\u00a0\u2013 with local Republicans lining up for photographs and autographs\u00a0\u2013 as she criss-crosses the country to help candidates.\" Bush relied on a strategy of praising the Republican candidate for their achievements and attending events alongside them. In September 2008, Bush spoke during the first night of the 2008 Republican National Convention, her joint appearance with Cindy McCain geared toward raising hurricane relief funds for victims of Hurricane Gustav.\nPopularity and style.\nLaura Bush's approval ratings have consistently ranked very high. In January 2006, a \"USA Today\"/CBS/Gallup poll recorded her approval rating at 82 percent and disapproval at 13 percent. That places Bush as one of the most popular first ladies. Former White House press secretary Ari Fleischer said, \"She is more popular, and more welcome, in many parts of the country than the president\u00a0... In races where the moderates are in the most trouble, Laura Bush is the one who can do the most good.\"\nJude Ellison Sady Doyle reasoned that Bush was hard to dislike due to her adopting \"the least partisan causes\" such as literacy and breast cancer, which would attract the support of most Americans and her coming off as a \"mild, polite, ordinary woman who might go to church with your mother, or organize suburban potlucks\". Doyle furthered that her statements were never enough to offend others and the harshest criticism that could be bestowed upon her was that she was boring.\nShe disagreed with Fox News' Chris Wallace in 2006 when Wallace asked why the American people were beginning to lose confidence in President Bush, saying, \"Well, I don't think they are. And I don't really believe those polls. I travel around the country, I see people, I see their response to my husband, I see their response to me. There are a lot of difficult challenges right now in the United States\u00a0... All of those decisions that the President has to make surrounding each one of these very difficult challenges are hard. They're hard decisions to make. And of course some people are unhappy about what some of those decisions are. But I think people know that he is doing what he thinks is right for the United States, that he's doing what he \u2013 especially in the war on terror, what he thinks he is obligated to do for the people in the United States, and that is to protect them\u00a0... When his polls were really high they weren't on the front page.\"\nDuring the January 2005 second inauguration ceremonies for her husband, Laura Bush was looked highly upon by \"People\" magazine, \"The Washington Post\", and others for her elegance and fashion sense. At the inauguration she wore a winter white cashmere dress and matching coat designed by Oscar de la Renta. Following the inauguration were the inaugural galas, to which Bush wore a pale, aqua lace gown, sprinkled with crystals, with long sleeves in a silver blue mist. The tulle gown was also designed for her by de la Renta. According to \"The Washington Post\", \"[I]t made her look radiant and glamorous.\"\nForeign trips.\nDuring her husband's second term, Bush was more involved in foreign matters. She traveled to numerous countries as a representative of the United States.\nAs First Lady, she took five goodwill trips to Africa. The purpose of these has mostly been to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS and malaria as part of the Bush administration's initiative to address the global epidemics, but Bush has also stressed the need for education and greater opportunities for women. She has taken many other trips to other countries to promote and gain support for President Bush's Emergency Plan for AIDS relief; these countries include Zambia (2007), Mozambique (2007), Mali (2007), Senegal (2007), and Haiti (2008).\nIn mid-2007, she took a trip to Myanmar where she spoke out in support of the pro-democracy movement, and urged Burmese soldiers and militias to refrain from violence. Later that October, she ventured to the Middle East. Bush said she was in the region in an attempt to improve America's image by highlighting concern for women's health, specifically promoting her breast cancer awareness work with the US-Middle East Partnership for Breast Cancer Awareness and Research. She defined the trip as successful, saying that stereotypes were broken on both sides.\nOverall, Bush traveled to 77 countries in the eight years of her husband's presidency, touring 67 of those during the second term.\nViews on policy.\nBush is a Republican and has identified herself with the GOP since her marriage.\nWhen asked about abortion in 2000, Bush said she did not believe \"Roe v. Wade\" should be overturned. She did not comment on whether women had the right to an abortion. She did say, however, that the country should do \"what we can to limit the number of abortions, to try to reduce the number of abortions in a lot of ways, and that is, by talking about responsibility with girls and boys, by teaching abstinence, having abstinence classes everywhere in schools and in churches and in Sunday school\".\nBush responded to a question during a 2006 interview concerning the Federal Marriage Amendment by calling for elected leaders not to politicize same-sex marriage, \"I don't think it should be used as a campaign tool, obviously. It requires a lot of sensitivity to just talk about the issue\u00a0... a lot of sensitivity.\"\nOn July 12, 2005, while in South Africa, Bush suggested her husband replace retiring Supreme Court justice Sandra Day O'Connor with another woman. On October 2, during a private dinner at the White House with his wife, President Bush nominated Harriet Miers to replace O'Connor. Later that month, after Miers had faced intense criticism, Laura Bush questioned whether the charges were sexist in nature.\nLegacy.\nIn late October 2008, days before that year's presidential election, Bush hosted a three-hour session with staffers and historians discussing how she would like to be remembered, leading to this meeting being termed the \"legacy lunch\". According to historian Myra Gutin, this was the first time in history that a First Lady had ever directly reached out to historians to talk about her accomplishments. Attendants of the meeting said that Bush wanted to change the perception that she was a traditional first lady in that she always stayed by her husband's side. At a 2014 National Press Club, Anita McBride opined that it would be harder for people to understand where Bush had \"the greatest impact\" due to the several signature issues that Bush advocated for while First Lady.\nIn 2017, journalist Brooke Baldwin suggested Bush's efforts toward improving the lives of Afghan women may have contributed to more Afghanistan women being in positions within the Afghanistan private sector.\nBush enjoyed widespread approval by the American public both as the incumbent First Lady and during her retirement. \"The Washington Post\" contributor Krissah Thompson recalled Bush's favorability being \"as close to universal popularity as any modern political figure\" when the Bushes left the White House in 2009 and called her \"the most high-profile promoter of the George W. Bush legacy \u2014 a burden she carries lightly and with a smile.\" A 2014 poll which asked who was the most popular First Lady in the past 25 years found Bush ranked in fourth place (out of 4 candidates), behind Hillary Clinton, mother-in-law Barbara and direct successor Michelle Obama.\nSubsequent activities (2009\u2013present).\nIn February 2009, the month after she and her husband left office, Laura and George W. Bush moved into a new residence in Dallas. In November 2009, the former first lady, accompanied by her husband, made a visit to families of veterans in Fort Hood. The couple expressed their wishes that the trip not be publicized. However, Fox News revealed the trip the following morning.\nIn May 2010, Bush released her memoir, \"Spoken from the Heart\", in conjunction with a national tour.\nOn May 11, 2010, during an interview on \"Larry King Live\", Bush was asked about same-sex marriage. She said she viewed it as a generational issue and believed it would be made legal in the future. Bush offered support for the issue by saying \"when couples are committed to each other and love each other\u00a0... they ought to have the same sort of rights that everyone has.\" Bush referred to her 2000 interview, reaffirming her support for \"Roe v. Wade\", \"I think it's important that [abortion] remain legal. Because I think it's important for people \u2013 that for medical reasons and, and other reasons.\"\nOn February 22, 2013, without her consent, she was included in a pro-gay advertisement from the Respect of Marriage Coalition. A statement from Bush's spokesperson states that Bush \"did not approve of her inclusion in this advertisement nor is she associated with the group that made the ad in any way. When she became aware of the advertisement last night, we requested that the group remove her from it.\"\nBush continued to remain involved and concerned over the state of women in Afghanistan, speaking out editorials and appearances during 2013 that the women and girls who had been helped could not be abandoned during and after the planned withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan. In March 2016, Bush wrote an op-ed for \"The Washington Post\" on changes occurring among women in Afghanistan while noting continued violence and calling for American involvement in Afghanistan to be consistent and predictable in continuing along with the international community \"to provide significant development assistance in the areas of health care, entrepreneurship and education\". In June 2016, Bush stated that she hoped the US remained in Afghanistan and had consulted with women there who feared the departure of American troops would create \"a vacuum\" similar to Iraq, furthering that the US \"would have to start all over again\" if they withdrew troops. In late 2017, Bush and First Lady of Afghanistan Rula Ghani traveled to Washington to rally lawmaker support for Afghanistan and women there.\nIn April 2015, Bush criticized Rand Paul's isolationist stance on U.S. foreign aid, calling the view \"not really realistic\" and asserting the United States should save lives whenever it can. That August, she shared the first public photos of her newborn granddaughter Poppy Louise.\nPublic appearances.\nOn October 26, 2009, Bush spoke at the 25th Annual Women's Conference in Salt Lake City, Utah.\nOn May 31, 2012, Bush and her husband unveiled their official portraits painted by John Howard Sanden in a ceremony at the White House attended by several members of their family and former members of the Bush administration. Bush jokingly told then First Lady Michelle Obama at the ceremony that \"nothing makes a house a home like having portraits of its former occupants staring down at you from the walls\". Bush was portrayed in the White House's Green Room in her portrait, wearing a midnight blue gown.\nOn July 25, 2012, she spoke at the Luisa Hunnewell's estate, where she praised Edith Wharton's works, in particular \"Ethan Frome\" on her 150th anniversary. She also said that prior to this speech she also visited houses of Mark Twain at his 166th anniversary on November 29, 2001, and was a guest of the show \"Mark Twain Tonight\". Ten years prior to the Luisa Hunnewell's estate visit she also visited Louisa May Alcott's Orchard House in Concord, Massachusetts at which she met with the National Trust for Historic Preservation's President and listened to Concord-Carlisle High School's chorus.\nIn April 2013, Bush was in attendance at a news conference, where she said the recently built George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum was not a monument for her husband but instead a representation of the White House and the struggles of America during his tenure. She also mentioned not having trouble donating clothes to the library, admitting that she probably would have never worn them again in the first place. That month it was announced that she would serve as a keynote speaker for the 2013 Global Business Travel Association Convention in August. At the convention, she stressed the importance of child literacy, continuing her advocating of an issue that she had become associated with since her tenure as First Lady. In early August 2013, she reported that her husband was in stable condition after having a stent implanted in his heart, calling it \"terrific\" that it was caught in time, and stressed the importance of regular check ups with doctors. In September, she appeared at a fundraiser for the organization Solutions for Change.\nOn April 26, 2014, she gave a speech at the Ericsson Center in Plano, Texas, where she spoke on behalf of the company's mentoring program for girls. Throughout the month, she made appearances at fundraisers for schools in Colorado. On May 9, 2014, she was scheduled to speak at the Boston Convention and Exhibition Center on the anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombing. She was to arrive there with her daughter Barbara Pierce Bush, her husband George W. Bush, and Soledad O'Brien, a journalist.\nIn 2015, Bush had several speaking arrangements on issues relating to her husband's presidency. In July, the former first lady, accompanied by her husband, attended the centennial anniversary of Tioga Road In Yosemite National Park in July and appeared in New Orleans in order to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina. In October, she was a featured speaker for Wayland Baptist University.\nBush was keynote speaker at the Go Red for Women Summit in Austin in February 2016, an event designed to promote both financing and awareness for women fighting heart disease. In March, Bush attended the funeral of Nancy Reagan in California. and attended the memorial service for victims in the Dallas police officers shooting four months later in July.\nOn February 4, 2017, Bush appeared at the annual Union Regional Foundation's Heart of a Woman brunch, saying women do not worry about their own health due to often taking care of someone else and that their improving in health would benefit those around them. On March 8, Bush was keynote speaker at the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center's annual Humanitarian Awards Dinner, Bush relating that she had learned about the Holocaust through her father. In April, Bush was the keynote speaker of the 25th annual Art of Hope Gala at the Dallas Museum of Art. On May 17, Bush made her second visit to the Andrew Johnson Hermitage and gave the keynote address at the 117th Spring Outing celebration. On May 31, Bush delivered a speech at the South-Central Monarch Symposium on the monarch butterfly decline in recent years. On June 3, Bush served as the keynote speaker at the National Willa Cather Center dedication in Red Cloud, Nebraska and officially opened the center with a ribbon cut. The following month, Bush accepted an invitation to join the eminent international Council of Patrons of the Asian University for Women in Chittagong, Bangladesh. The university, which is the product of east\u2013west foundational partnerships (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Open Society Foundation, IKEA Foundation etc.) and regional cooperation, serves extraordinarily talented women from 15 countries across Asia and the Middle East, including Afghanistan and Myanmar. In September, Bush delivered the keynote address at the Gateway to Opportunity luncheon at the Omni Dallas Hotel.\nIn April 2020, amid the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Bush and Michelle Obama made a joint appearance on the \"One World: Together At Home\" televised concert special by the Global Citizen Festival where they expressed appreciation for healthcare workers, first responders, pharmacists, veterinarians, sanitation workers as well as grocery store workers and those delivering food and supplies to homes.\nOn September 11, 2021, Bush and her husband commemorated the 20th anniversary of the September 11 attacks at the Flight 93 National Memorial.\nObama administration.\nOver the course of the Obama presidency, she developed an alliance with Michelle Obama, her immediate successor as First Lady. Despite their political differences, Michelle Obama has called Laura Bush both her friend and a role model, crediting Bush with setting \"a high bar\" for her during her tenure as First Lady. Bush defended Obama during her husband's campaign for president in 2008, publicly coming to her defense when she received criticism for a remark she made about being proud of her country for the first time in her adulthood during the campaign.\nObama sent Bush a note thanking her and after the election met with Bush at the White House in November 2008, Bush giving Obama a tour of her and her family's soon-to-be home.\nIn September 2009, Bush openly praised President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama. She reasoned that President Obama was performing well in the presidency despite having multiple initiatives taking place and complimented the First Lady's transformation of the White House into \"a comfortable home for her family\".\nThe following year, in September 2010, Bush and Obama commemorated the ninth anniversary of the September 11 attacks by leading a ceremony from a mountaintop to national memorial park.\nThe two both acted as keynote speakers and met with the families of the 40 victims of United Airlines Flight 93 plane crash. In their remarks, the two sang each other's praises. Obama thanked Bush for her handling of the aftermath of September 11 attacks, while Bush called her a \"first lady who serves this country with such grace\".\nIn July 2013, Bush and Obama appeared together in Africa at the First Ladies Summit. Their husbands were also present, leading White House staffer Ben Rhodes to refer to the joint appearance as proof of the support for Africa in the United States regardless of political party. In their remarks, both Bush and Obama stressed the importance of being role models.\nNine months later, on April 18, 2014, Bush spoke to \"Inquisitr\" regarding income inequality where she said next regarding Michelle Obama's income: \"I want to make sure that when she's working she's getting paid the same as men. I gotta say that First Ladies right now don't [get paid], even though that's a tough job!\" In August 2014, Bush and Obama appeared together at the Kennedy Center. Shortly afterward, Bush told \"The Washington Post\" that she believed Obama was ready to leave the White House.\nIn March 2015, Bush and Obama were named as co-chairs of the Find Your Park campaign, an attempt to increase national park support and introduce millennials to the park service before its centennial the following year. The pair made a joint appearance at the George W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum in September 2015, Bush appearing physically while Obama was present through a video call. Obama spoke of her admiration for Bush, who in turn mentioned their collaborations as \"a great example for the world to see that women in different political parties, in the United States, agree on so many issues\".\nFirst Trump administration.\nOn January 20, 2017, Bush and her husband attended the inauguration of Donald Trump. In a November interview, Bush stated that she wished the Trumps \"the very best\" given that she knew what it was like to live in the White House and confirmed that she both been in contact with former first lady Melania Trump and been invited to the Diplomatic Reception Room by retained personnel from the Bush administration.\nOn June 17, 2018, Bush wrote an opinion piece firmly opposing the Trump administration family separation policy in \"The Washington Post\". She mentioned how her mother-in-law Barbara Bush had picked up a crying AIDS baby while on a visit to the HIV/AIDS shelter \"Grandma's House\" in 1989. She mentioned this to indicate her shock upon discovery that the workers at the children's border shelter have been instructed \"not to pick up or touch the children to comfort them\".\nBiden administration.\nOn January 20, 2021, Bush and her husband attended the inauguration of Joe Biden.\nInvolvement with GOP.\nIn the later months of 2012, Bush campaigned for Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney, hosting a fundraiser in September with Ann Romney and appearing in Livonia, Michigan, the following month for a Romney campaign event. Michigan spokeswoman for the Romney campaign Kelsey Knight said having Mrs. Bush there would \"just fuel the fire and the momentum we are seeing\". She also campaigned for vice presidential nominee Paul Ryan, telling a crowd in Detroit that he and Romney had \"better answers\" on the economy and foreign policy.\nAfter the 2012 election, where Romney lost to President Obama, Bush was asked in March 2013 during an interview whether the GOP's positions on social issues such as same-sex marriage and abortion led to more than half of female voters voting for the President. Bush responded that some of the candidates had \"frightened some candidates\", but at the same time expressed her liking of the Republican Party having room for difference of opinion and that within the party, \"we have room for all\".\nThroughout 2015, Bush was active in the presidential campaign of brother-in-law Jeb Bush, hosting fundraisers and endorsing him. This was the most politically involved she had been since leaving the White House seven years prior, supporting her brother-in-law alongside the rest of her family because, in her words, he was \"our candidate\".\nIn March she affirmed her support for her brother-in-law, calling herself and her husband \"huge Jeb supporters\". It was reported that she would be assisting the campaign's fundraising in Florida in October, Bloomberg News commenting that Jeb Bush was \"calling in help from perhaps the most popular member of his family\". According to Clay Johnson, a friend of the Bush family, she was reportedly surprised by Donald Trump's becoming frontrunner over the course of the election cycle. In February 2016, amid her brother-in-law's campaign trailing Trump in South Carolina polls, Bush traveled there with her husband. Jeb Bush dropped out of the race after the South Carolina primary. The following month, Bush declined answering if she would vote for Trump, who was the frontrunner in the Republican primary, should he become the nominee and said the U.S. was going through a xenophobic period at the time of the election cycle. Ultimately, Bush and her husband refused to vote for a president in 2016.\nLibraries.\nBush created the Laura Bush Foundation for America's Libraries \"to support the education of our nation's children by providing funds to update, extend, and diversify the book and print collections of America's school libraries\". Every year, the Laura Bush Foundation's grants award more than $1,000,000 to US schools.\nThe Laura Bush 21st Century Library Program grant, offered by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, provides funding for \"the recruitment and education of library students and continuing education for those already in the profession, as well as the development of new programs and curricula\". Bush's 21st Century Library Program is an equal opportunity grant that does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, disability, or age.\nIn May 2015, Bush bestowed a $7,000 grant to six schools within Austin, Texas.\nAfter Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita in 2005, the Laura Bush Foundation for America's Libraries awarded grants of $10,000 to $75,000 to school libraries whose collections were damaged or destroyed in the hurricanes. In 2017, after the devastation from Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria as well as the California wildfires, the foundation again is going to dedicate their resources to disaster-affected schools to rebuild their book collections.\nLaura W. Bush Institute for Women's Health.\nIn August 2007, the Laura W. Bush Institute for Women's Health (LWBIWH) was founded at the Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center. This institute aims to integrate research, education and community outreach in a multidisciplinary approach to women's health and has begun efforts to establish a multi-campus women's health institute in Amarillo, El Paso, Lubbock and the Permian Basin.\nA subsidiary of the center, the Jenna Welch Women's Center, opened in Midland, Texas, on August 10, 2010, to deliver expert medical care to women and their families. Operating in partnership with the Laura Bush Institute, the Jenna Welch Center, named for Bush's mother, strives for excellence in research, education and community outreach.\nWritings and recordings.\nBush wrote her first book with her daughter Jenna called \"Read All About It!\". It was published on April 23, 2008. Bush's memoir, \"Spoken from the Heart\", was published in 2010. The book received mixed reviews from critics but got positive responses from readers. The book earned \"Goodreads\" Choice Award Nominee for Memoir and Autobiography (2010). Her non-fictional book about oppressed women of Afghanistan titled \"\" was published on March 8, 2016. She wrote another children's book with her daughter Jenna, \"Our Great Big Backyard\". The book was published on May 10, 2016. She was the recipient of a lifetime achievement award from the Junior League of Dallas, of which she is a member.\nAwards and honors.\nDuring and after her tenure as the First Lady, Laura Bush received a number of awards and honors. In October 2002, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity honored her in recognition of her efforts on behalf of education. Also in 2002, she was named Barbara Walters' Most Fascinating Person of the year.\nThe American Library Association honored her for her years of support to America's libraries and librarians in April 2005.\nOn October 18, 2003, she was conferred by the former president Gloria Macapagal Arroyo the Order of Gabriela Silang, a single-class order which makes her the first U.S. First Lady recipient during the state visit of President George Bush to the Philippines.\nShe received an award in honor of her dedication to help improve the living conditions and education of children around the world, from the Kuwait-American Foundation in March 2006. She accepted The Nichols-Chancellor's Medal on behalf of disaster relief workers around the world in May 2006 from Vanderbilt University. In 2007, she received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nFour learning facilities have been named for her: the Laura Welch Bush Elementary School of Pasadena ISD in Houston, Texas, the Laura W. Bush Elementary School in the Leander ISD in Travis County, Texas, just outside Austin, the Laura Bush Middle School (Lubbock-Cooper ISD) in Lubbock, Texas, and the Laura Bush Education Center at Camp Bondsteel, a U.S. military base in Kosovo. She was awarded the 2008 Christian Freedom International Freedom Award. Bush is on the Board of Selectors of Jefferson Awards for Public Service.\nIn 2012, Bush\u2014along with Hector Ruiz, Charles Matthews, Melinda Perrin, Julius Glickman and Admiral William H. McRaven, the Navy Seal who oversaw the raid that killed Osama bin Laden\u2014was named a Distinguished Alumnus of the University of Texas at Austin.\nIn October 2015, Bush was conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Wayland Baptist University in recognition of her longtime advocacy on behalf of education, health care and human rights following an address she gave on the university's campus. November, she received the 2015 Prevent Blindness Person of Vision Award.\nIn November 2016 Bush received 10 for 10 award from \"Women's Democracy Network\" in recognition of her years of work on behalf of Afghan women's rights.\nIn May 2017 Bush received an honor at the \"Women Making History Awards\" in Washington, D.C.\nIn 2018 Laura Bush and former president George W. Bush were awarded the National Constitution Center Liberty Medal for their work with U.S. military veterans since leaving the White House.\nIn 2021 Bush received the Concordia Leadership Award.\nIn popular culture.\nLaura Bush is portrayed by Elizabeth Banks in Oliver Stone's film \"W\". Curtis Sittenfeld's bestselling novel \"American Wife\" is largely based on her life.\nIn 2018, Bush appeared in an episode of HGTV's \"Fixer Upper\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17529", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17529", "title": "Lower 48", "text": ""}
{"id": "17530", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17530", "title": "Lattice", "text": "Lattice may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17532", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17532", "title": "Lorisidae", "text": "Family of primates\nLorisidae (or sometimes Loridae) is a family of strepsirrhine primates. The lorisids are all slim arboreal animals and comprise the lorises, pottos, and angwantibos. Lorisids live in tropical, central Africa as well as in south and southeast Asia.\nClassification.\nThere are five genera and sixteen species of lorisid.\nDescription.\nLorisids have a close, woolly fur, which is usually grey or brown, darker on the top side. The eyes are large and face forward. The ears are small and often partially hidden in the fur. The thumbs are opposable and the index finger is short. The second toe of the hind legs has a fine claw for grooming, typical for strepsirrhines. Their tails are short or are missing completely. They grow to a length of 17 to 40\u00a0cm and a weight of between 0.3 and 2\u00a0kg, depending on the species. Their dental formula is similar to that of lemurs: 2.1.3.32.1.3.3\nBehavior and ecology.\nLorisids are nocturnal and arboreal. Unlike the closely related galagos, lorisids never jump. Some have slow deliberate movements, whilst others can move with some speed across branches. It was previously thought that all lorisids moved slowly, but investigations using red light proved this to be wrong. Nonetheless, even the faster species freeze or move slowly if they hear or see any potential predator. This habit of remaining motionless whilst in danger is successful only because of the leafy environment of their jungle home, which helps to conceal their true position. With their strong hands they clasp at the branches and cannot be removed without significant force. Most lorisids are solitary or live in small family groups.\nSlow lorises from southeast Asia produce a secretion from their brachial gland (a scent gland on the upper arm, between the axilla and elbow), that is licked and mixed with their saliva to form a toxin which may be used for defense. The slender lorises from Sri Lanka and South India also possess these brachial glands, but it is uncertain whether they also synthesize the toxin. The potto (\"Perodicticus potto\") is thought to lack brachial glands, though it produces similar toxic excretions with its anal glands.\nLorisids have a gestation period of four to six months and give birth to two young. These often clasp themselves to the belly of the mother or wait in nests, while the mother goes to search for food. After three to nine months - depending on the species - they are weaned and are fully mature within 10 to 18 months. The life expectancy of lorises can be to up to 20 years.\nLorisids consume insects, bird eggs and small vertebrates as well as fruits and gums.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiterature cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17537", "revid": "21408729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17537", "title": "LSD", "text": "Hallucinogenic drug\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLysergic acid diethylamide, commonly known as LSD (from German ) and by the slang names acid and lucy, is a semisynthetic hallucinogenic drug derived from ergot, known for its powerful psychological effects and serotonergic activity. It was historically used in psychiatry and 1960s counterculture; it is currently legally restricted but experiencing renewed scientific interest and increasing use.\nWhen taken orally, LSD has an onset of action within 0.4 to 1.0 hours (range: 0.1\u20131.8 hours) and a duration of effect lasting 7 to 12 hours (range: 4\u201322 hours). It is commonly administered via tabs of blotter paper. LSD is extremely potent, with noticeable effects at doses as low as 20 micrograms and is sometimes taken in much smaller amounts for microdosing. Despite widespread use, no fatal human overdoses have been documented. LSD is mainly used recreationally or for spiritual purposes. LSD can cause mystical experiences. LSD exerts its effects primarily through high-affinity binding to several serotonin receptors, especially 5-HT2A, and to a lesser extent dopaminergic and adrenergic receptors. LSD reduces oscillatory power in the brain's default mode network and flattens brain hierarchy. At higher doses, it can induce visual and auditory hallucinations, ego dissolution, and anxiety. LSD use can cause adverse psychological effects such as paranoia and delusions and may lead to persistent visual disturbances known as hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD).\nSwiss chemist Albert Hofmann first synthesized LSD in 1938 and discovered its powerful psychedelic effects in 1943 after accidental ingestion. It became widely studied in the 1950s and 1960s. It was initially explored for psychiatric use due to its structural similarity to serotonin and safety profile. It was used experimentally in psychiatry for treating alcoholism and schizophrenia. By the mid-1960s, LSD became central to the youth counterculture in places like San Francisco and London, influencing art, music, and social movements through events like Acid Tests and figures such as Owsley Stanley and Michael Hollingshead. Its psychedelic effects inspired distinct visual art styles, music innovations, and caused a lasting cultural impact. However, its association with the counterculture movement of the 1960s led to its classification as a Schedule I drug in the U.S. in 1970. It was also listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and remains without approved medical uses.\nDespite its legal restrictions, LSD remains influential in scientific and cultural contexts. Research on LSD declined due to cultural controversies by the 1960s, but has resurged since 2009. In 2024, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration designated a form of LSD (MM120) a breakthrough therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. As of 2017, about 10% of people in the U.S. had used LSD at some point, with 0.7% having used it in the past year. Usage rates have risen, with a 56.4% increase in adult use in the U.S. from 2015 to 2018.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nRecreational.\nLSD is commonly used as a recreational drug for its psychedelic effects.\nSpiritual.\nLSD can catalyze intense spiritual experiences and is thus considered an entheogen. Some users have reported out of body experiences. In 1966, Timothy Leary established the League for Spiritual Discovery with LSD as its sacrament. Stanislav Grof has written that religious and mystical experiences observed during LSD sessions appear similar to descriptions in sacred scriptures of great religions of the world and the texts of ancient civilizations.\nMedical.\nA meta analysis concluded that a single dose was shown to be effective at reducing alcohol consumption in people suffering from alcoholism. LSD has also been studied in depression, anxiety, and drug dependence, with positive preliminary results.\nDespite these results, LSD currently has no legally approved uses in medicine.\nDosing.\nLSD is an extraordinarily potent substance, and is one of the most potent psychoactive drugs known. This means that it produces its pharmacological effects at very small doses, with its dose range measured in micrograms (\u03bcg); that is, millionths of a gram. Noticeable effects can occur with doses of LSD as low as 20\u03bcg, which is around 1/200th the mass of a grain of sand. LSD is approximately 200times as potent as psilocybin and 5,000times as potent as mescaline, meaning that it produces effects of similar magnitude at 1/200 and 1/5,000 times the respective doses.\nThe usual dose range of LSD for psychedelic effects is 20 to 200\u03bcg. The typical intermediate and \"good effect\" dose for a psychedelic experience is 100\u03bcg (range 75\u2013150\u03bcg, while 20 to 50\u03bcg is a low or \"minidose\" and 200\u03bcg is a high or ego-dissolution dose. A dose range as wide as 10 to 450\u03bcg has been reported. LSD may also be used in microdosing. In this context, it may be used at subthreshold or microdoses of less than 10\u03bcg.\nThe doses of LSD present in illicit LSD samples have decreased over time. In the mid-1960s, Owsley Stanley, the most important black market LSD manufacturer in the United States, distributed LSD at a standard concentration of 270\u03bcg, while street samples of the 1970s contained 30 to 300\u03bcg. By the 1980s, the amount had reduced to between 100 and 125\u03bcg, dropping more in the 1990s to the 20 to 80\u03bcg range, and even further in the 2000s.\nEffects.\nLSD produces a variety of physical, psychological, and sensory effects.\nPsychological.\nThe primary immediate psychological effects of LSD are visual pseudo-hallucinations and altered thought, often referred to as \"trips\". These sensory alterations are considered pseudohallucinations because the subject does not perceive the patterns seen as being located in three-dimensional space outside the body. LSD is not considered addictive. An \"afterglow\" effect, characterized by an improved mood or perceived mental state, may persist for days or weeks following ingestion. Positive experiences, or \"good trips\", are described as intensely pleasurable and can include feelings of joy, euphoria, an increased appreciation for life, decreased anxiety, a sense of spiritual enlightenment, and a feeling of interconnectedness with the universe.\nNegative experiences, commonly known as \"bad trips\", can induce feelings of fear, agitation, anxiety, panic, and paranoia. While the occurrence of a bad trip is unpredictable, factors such as mood, surroundings, sleep, hydration, and social setting, collectively referred to as \"set and setting\", can influence the risk and are considered important in minimizing the likelihood of a negative experience.\nAlexander Shulgin did not include experience reports of LSD in his 1997 book \"TiHKAL\" (\"Tryptamines I Have Known and Loved\") due to the thousands of reports that already existed in the literature.\nUniquely among psychedelics, LSD appears to have two temporally and qualitatively distinct phases of psychoactive effects. These include an initial psychedelic phase associated with serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonism and a subsequent paranoia- and psychosis-like phase associated with dopamine D2-like receptor agonism. The first phase is described as a \"psychedelic experience\", with \"meaningfulness and portentousness\" as the primary effects, while the latter phase is \"clearly a paranoid state\", including feeling \"at the least self-centered, and usually suspicious, with ideas of reference or even paranoid convictions\". The second phase typically develops about 4 to 6hours after administration but at times up to 10hours after administration. Parallels have been drawn between this phase and amphetamine psychosis. There is no indication that similar effects occur with other psychedelics like phenethylamines and simple tryptamines, which lack dopamine receptor agonism. The preceding findings have been described by researchers like Daniel X. Freedman and David E. Nichols.\nSensory.\nLSD induces an animated sensory experience affecting senses, emotions, memories, time, and awareness. The effects range from subtle perceptual changes to profound cognitive shifts. Alterations in auditory and visual perception are common.\nUsers may experience enhanced visual phenomena, such as vibrant colors, objects appearing to morph, ripple or move, and geometric patterns on various surfaces. Changes in the perception of food's texture and taste are also noted, sometimes leading to aversion towards certain foods.\nThere are reports of inanimate objects appearing animated, with static objects seeming to move in additional spatial dimensions. The auditory effects of LSD may include echo-like distortions of sounds, and an intensified experience of music. Basic visual effects often resemble phosphenes and can be influenced by concentration, thoughts, emotions, or music. Higher doses can lead to more intense sensory perception alterations, including synesthesia, perception of additional dimensions, and temporary dissociation.\nPhysical.\nLSD can induce physical effects such as pupil dilation, decreased appetite, increased sweating, and wakefulness. The physical reactions to LSD vary greatly and some may be a result of its psychological effects. Commonly observed symptoms include increased body temperature, blood sugar, and heart rate, as well as goose bumps, jaw clenching, dry mouth, and hyperreflexia. In cases of adverse reactions, users may experience numbness, weakness, nausea, and tremors.\nOnset and duration.\nThe psychoactive effects of LSD last on average between 7 and 11hours, with a possible range of 4 to 22hours. Higher doses tend to lead to a longer duration of action. The onset of action when administered orally is 0.4 to 1.0hours on average, with a possible range of 0.1 to 1.8hours. The time to peak effects given orally is 2.2 to 2.8hours on average, with a range of 1.3 to 6.5hours.\nAdverse effects.\nLSD, a classical psychedelic, is deemed physiologically safe at standard doses (50\u2013200 \u03bcg) and its primary risks lie in psychological effects rather than physiological harm. A 2010 study by David Nutt ranked LSD as significantly less harmful than alcohol, placing it near the bottom of a list assessing the harm of 20 drugs.\nPsychological effects.\nMental disorders.\nLSD can induce panic attacks or extreme anxiety, colloquially termed a \"bad trip\". Despite lower rates of depression and substance abuse found in psychedelic drug users compared to controls, LSD presents heightened risks for individuals with severe mental illnesses like schizophrenia. These hallucinogens can catalyze psychiatric disorders in predisposed individuals, although they do not tend to induce illness in emotionally healthy people.\nSuggestibility.\nWhile research from the 1960s indicated increased suggestibility under the influence of LSD among both mentally ill and healthy individuals, recent documents suggest that the CIA and Department of Defense have discontinued research into LSD as a means of mind control.\nFlashbacks.\nFlashbacks are psychological episodes where individuals re-experience some of LSD's subjective effects after the drug has worn off, persisting for days or months post-hallucinogen use. These experiences are associated with hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (HPPD), where flashbacks occur intermittently or chronically, causing distress or functional impairment.\nThe etiology of flashbacks is varied. Some cases are attributed to somatic symptom disorder, where individuals fixate on normal somatic experiences previously unnoticed prior to drug consumption. Other instances are linked to associative reactions to contextual cues, similar to responses observed in individuals with past trauma or emotional experiences. The risk factors for flashbacks remain unclear, but pre-existing psychopathologies may be significant contributors.\nEstimating the prevalence of HPPD is challenging. It is considered rare, with occurrences ranging from 1 in 20 users experiencing the transient and less severe type 1 HPPD, to 1 in 50,000 for the more concerning type 2 HPPD. Contrary to internet rumors, LSD is not stored long-term in the spinal cord or other parts of the body. Pharmacological evidence indicates LSD has a half-life of 175 minutes and is metabolized into water-soluble compounds like 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD, eliminated through urine without evidence of long-term storage. Clinical evidence also suggests that chronic use of SSRIs can potentiate LSD-induced flashbacks, even months after stopping LSD use.\nTolerance.\nLSD shows significant tachyphylaxis, with tolerance developing 24 hours after administration. The progression of tolerance at intervals shorter than 24 hours remains largely unknown. Tolerance typically resets to baseline after 3\u20134 days of abstinence. Significant cross-tolerance occurs between LSD, mescaline and psilocybin. A slight cross-tolerance to DMT is observed in humans highly tolerant to LSD. Tolerance to LSD also builds up with consistent use, and is believed to result from serotonin 5-HT2A receptor downregulation. Researchers believe that tolerance returns to baseline after two weeks of not using psychedelics.\nAddiction and dependence liability.\nLSD is widely considered to be non-addictive, despite its potential for abuse. Attempts to train laboratory animals to self-administer LSD have been largely unsuccessful. Although tolerance to LSD builds up rapidly, a withdrawal syndrome does not appear, suggesting that a potential syndrome does not necessarily relate to the possibility of acquiring rapid tolerance to a substance. A report examining substance use disorder for DSM-IV noted that almost no hallucinogens produced dependence, unlike psychoactive drugs of other classes such as stimulants and depressants.\nCancer and pregnancy.\nThe mutagenic potential of LSD is unclear. Overall, the evidence seems to point to limited or no effect at commonly used doses. Studies showed no evidence of teratogenic or mutagenic effects.\nLong-term effects.\nA potential risk of frequent repeated long-term use of LSD and other serotonergic psychedelics is cardiac fibrosis and valvulopathy due to serotonin 5-HT2B receptor agonism. This may also be the case with microdosing. However, the risks are theoretical, and more research is needed to see if these complications can actually occur with psychedelics. A preliminary animal study found that chronic microdosing of LSD did not result in heart structure changes or valvulopathy in rodents. Research appears to be mixed on whether LSD is a potent serotonin 5-HT2B receptor agonist or not, with some studies finding it to be essentially inactive.\nInteractions.\nSome psychedelics, including LSD, are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2D6. Concurrent use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), some of which are potent inhibitors of CYP2D6, with LSD may heighten the risk of serotonin syndrome. Chronic usage of SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) is believed to diminish the subjective effects of psychedelics, likely due to 5-HT2A receptor downregulation or desensitization induced by elevated serotonin levels. Contrary to the preceding notions however, a clinical study found that administration of LSD to people taking paroxetine, an SSRI and strong CYP2D6 inhibitor, increased LSD exposure by about 1.5-fold, was well-tolerated, and did not modify the pleasant subjective effects or physiological effects of LSD, whereas negative effects of LSD, including \"bad drug effect\", anxiety, and nausea, were reduced. Similarly, a clinical study with LSD found that LSD levels were 75% higher in people with non-functional CYP2D6 (poor metabolizers) compared to those with functional CYP2D6. In contrast to certain other psychedelics, MAOIs do not inhibit the metabolism of or potentiate the effects of LSD and instead reduce its effects. Interactions between psychedelics and antipsychotics or anticonvulsants are not well-documented; however, co-use with mood stabilizers like lithium may induce seizures and dissociative effects, particularly in individuals with bipolar disorder. Lithium notably intensifies LSD reactions, potentially leading to acute comatose states when combined.\nOverdose.\nLSD at typical recreational doses (~50\u2013250\u03bcg) is considered to be very safe in terms of toxicity, with not a single toxicity-related death having been reported at such doses despite many millions of exposures. In addition, LSD is considered to be a relatively non-toxic drug in overdose. It is estimated, based on animal studies and human case reports, that the lethal dose of LSD in humans is approximately 100mg, or about 1,000times the usual recreational dose of 100\u03bcg. There have been a handful of reported cases of fatal overdose with LSD as of 2024. However, critical review of the literature by David E. Nichols found that of five identified cases, one was not consistent with the effects of LSD but instead may have been another drug like 25I-NBOMe, two involved normal doses of LSD in individuals who were placed in maximal physical restraint (hogtied) by police followed by presumed positional asphyxia and fatal cardiovascular collapse (hogtying being a practice that is associated with accidental death generally), and two were associated with massive LSD overdose involving doses of possibly more than 300mg. Besides death due to toxicity, LSD is associated rarely with death via suicide, accidents, or violent encounters due to induction of abnormal behavior.\nIn one well-known 1974 case series, 8people accidentally insufflated two \"lines\" of nearly pure LSD powder that they thought were cocaine. The exact doses of LSD were unknown, but were considered to be massive. For context, a typical \"line\" of cocaine for insufflation is 50 to 100mg. The individuals reported to the hospital within 10 to 15minutes, with five of them comatose, three requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation, and the conscious individuals experiencing severe hallucinogenic effects, among other toxic symptoms. All of them completely recovered within 12hours and there were no deaths. A subsequent 2020 case similarly involved accidental insufflation of a confirmed 55mg dose of LSD instead of cocaine, which was without adverse health consequences. In other reports, a 5mg overdose of LSD produced severe nausea and vomiting along with severe behavioral disturbances, while a 10mg overdose was also non-fatal.\nDespite acting as non-selective serotonin receptor agonists, major psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin do not cause serotonin syndrome even with extreme overdose. This is thought to be due to the fact that they act as partial agonists of serotonin receptors like the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor relative to serotonin itself. Conversely, NBOMe psychedelics like 25I-NBOMe are more efficacious and have been uniquely associated with serotonin syndrome-like toxicity. A 2018 retrospective analysis of 3,554 LSD-only exposures reported to poison control centers in the United States between 2000 and 2016 found that serious toxicity was infrequent. Common adverse effects (2.4\u201342%) included agitation or irritability, tachycardia, hallucinations or delusions, confusion, pupil dilation, hypertension, drowsiness or lethargy, elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK), nausea and vomiting, and others. Selected serious adverse effects included fever or hyperthermia in 3.8%, single seizure in 2.4%, coma in 1.4%, elevated creatinine in 1.4%, multiple seizures in 1.2%, rhabdomyolysis in 1.1%, respiratory depression in 0.9%, cardiac conduction disorder in 0.5%, and status epilepticus in 0.4%. There is a case report of severe neurological sequelae following a single typical recreational dose of LSD involving seizure and cardiorespiratory arrest. In general, psychedelics like LSD may rarely cause seizures in some individuals.\nThe median lethal dose (LD50) of LSD in animals varies and is 50 to 60mg/kg in mice, 16.5mg/kg in rats, and 0.3mg/kg in rabbits all given by injection. A well-known 1962 instance of an elephant named Tusko given 297mg (~0.1mg/kg) LSD by intramuscular injection proved fatal. These findings suggest that elephants may be much more sensitive to LSD in overdose than humans and other species. However, this instance has been mired in criticism and controversy due to miscalculation of LSD dose and concomitant post-LSD administration of promazine and pentobarbital. The experiment was repeated in two elephants with similar doses of LSD in 1984 without incident.\nMassive doses of LSD are largely managed by symptomatic treatments, and agitation can be addressed with benzodiazepines. Reassurance in a calm, safe environment is beneficial. Antipsychotics such as haloperidol are not recommended as they may have adverse effects. Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal is of little use due to the rapid absorption of LSD, unless performed within 30 to 60minutes of ingesting exceedingly huge amounts. Administration of anticoagulants, vasodilators, and sympatholytics may be useful for treating ergotism.\nLSD substitute overdose.\nAlthough LSD is relatively safe in overdose, 25-NB (NBOMe) psychedelics like 25I-NBOMe and 25B-NBOMe are often sold as \"LSD\" and are highly toxic in overdose, with many reported severe intoxications and deaths. Owing to their high potency analogous to LSD, these drugs are also regularly sold as \"LSD\" in blotter papers. Fatalities involved in NBOMe intoxication suggest that a significant number of individuals ingested the substance which they believed was LSD, and researchers report that \"users familiar with LSD may have a false sense of security when ingesting NBOMe inadvertently\". Researchers state that the alleged physiological toxicity of LSD is likely due to psychoactive substances other than LSD.\nNBOMe compounds are reported to have a bitter taste, are not active orally, and are usually taken sublingually. When NBOMes are administered sublingually, numbness of the tongue and mouth followed by a metallic chemical taste was observed, and researchers describe this physical side effect as one of the main discriminants between NBOMe compounds and LSD. Despite its high potency, recreational doses of LSD have only produced low incidents of acute toxicity, but NBOMe compounds have extremely different safety profiles. Testing with Ehrlich's reagent gives a positive result for LSD and a negative result for NBOMe compounds.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nLSD is a serotonergic psychedelic and acts as a non-selective serotonin receptor modulator. It binds with high affinity to most of the serotonin receptors. The psychedelic effects of LSD are thought to be mediated specifically by activation of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. However, a role of other serotonin receptors and targets in the effects of LSD cannot be ruled out and may be considered likely. Uniquely among serotonergic psychedelics, LSD also shows potentially significant affinity for the dopamine receptors, albeit much lower than for most of the serotonin receptors.\nLSD binds to most serotonin receptor subtypes except for the serotonin 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors. However, some of these serotonin receptors may not be affected at typical brain concentrations of LSD. In humans, recreational doses of LSD may affect 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, 5-HT2C, 5-HT5A, and 5-HT6 receptors. Although not present in humans, 5-HT5B receptors found in rodents also have a high affinity for LSD. The psychedelic effects of LSD are attributed to activation of 5-HT2A receptors. Many but not all serotonin 5-HT2A agonists are psychedelics and serotonin 5-HT2A antagonists block the psychedelic activity of LSD. LSD exhibits pronounced functional selectivity or biased agonism at the serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors in that it activates the signal transduction enzyme phospholipase A2 instead of activating the enzyme phospholipase C as the endogenous ligand serotonin does, among other differences.\nExactly how LSD produces its effects is unknown, but it is thought that it works by increasing glutamate release in the cerebral cortex and therefore excitation in this area, specifically in layer V. LSD, like many other drugs of recreational use, has been shown to activate DARPP-32-related pathways. The drug enhances dopamine D2 receptor protomer recognition and signaling of D2\u20135-HT2A receptor complexes, which may contribute to its psychotropic effects. LSD has been shown to have low affinity for H1 receptors, displaying antihistamine effects, although the significance of this at doses used in humans is unknown.\nLSD is a biased agonist that induces a conformation in serotonin receptors that preferentially recruits \u03b2-arrestin over activating G proteins. LSD also has an exceptionally long residence time when bound to serotonin receptors lasting hours, consistent with the long-lasting effects of LSD despite its relatively rapid clearance. A crystal structure of the serotonin 5-HT2B receptor bound to LSD reveals an extracellular loop that forms a \"lid\" over the diethylamide end of the binding cavity and \"traps\" LSD in the binding pocket, which explains the slow rate of LSD unbinding from serotonin receptors. The related lysergamide lysergic acid amide (LSA) that lacks the diethylamide moiety is far less hallucinogenic in comparison. Moreover, a specific residue in the binding pocket is partially responsible for the prolonged action of LSD, and this residue is found in the human protein but not in the receptors of rodents.\nLSD is an extraordinarily potent psychoactive drug and is among the most potent psychedelics known in humans. The very high potency of LSD in producing psychedelic-like effects is also the case in animals, including rodents and monkeys. It is unclear why LSD is so potent. The affinity and activational potency of LSD at the human serotonin 5-HT2A receptor \"in vitro\" is unremarkable compared to other psychedelics such as DOI and DOB. There is no evidence for its greater potency being related to pharmacokinetics or metabolism. It appears that the \"N\",\"N\"-diethylamide moiety of LSD fits into a sterically constrained region of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor that specifically accommodates this moiety.\nAn agonist is usually defined as a molecule that activates a receptor it binds to directly, according to that LSD binds to the TAAR1-receptor inside a dopaminergic neuron is meaning an acceleration of releasing endogenous dopamine from. So by assuming, that also the partial agonism at autoreceptors from LSD is mostly acting agonistic in these pathways, the overall activation of the dopamine system from LSD is very strong.\nLSD, like other psychedelics, has been found to increase the expression of genes related to synaptic plasticity and hence to have psychoplastogenic effects. This appears to be mediated by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonism. LSD has also been reported to act as a highly potent positive allosteric modulator of the tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), one of the receptors of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). However, subsequent studies failed to reproduce these findings and instead found no interaction of LSD with TrkB.\nThere appears to be no significant acute tolerance to the subjective effects of LSD. Hence, its duration appears to be dictated by pharmacokinetics rather than by pharmacodynamics. This is in contrast to MDMA, which shows marked acute tolerance and a duration of effects that is shorter than its elimination half-life.\nThe cryo-EM structures of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor with LSD, as well as with various other psychedelics and serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, have been solved and published by Bryan L. Roth and colleagues.\nMechanisms of action.\nNeuroimaging studies using resting state fMRI recently suggested that LSD changes the cortical functional architecture. These modifications spatially overlap with the distribution of serotonergic receptors. In particular, increased connectivity and activity were observed in regions with high expression of 5-HT2A receptor, while a decrease in activity and connectivity was observed in cortical areas that are dense with 5-HT1A receptor. Experimental data suggest that subcortical structures, particularly the thalamus, play a synergistic role with the cerebral cortex in mediating the psychedelic experience. LSD, through its binding to cortical 5-HT2A receptor, may enhance excitatory neurotransmission along frontostriatal projections and, consequently, reduce thalamic filtering of sensory stimuli towards the cortex. This phenomenon appears to selectively involve ventral, intralaminar, and pulvinar nuclei.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption.\nThe oral bioavailability of LSD was crudely estimated as approximately 71% using previous data on intravenous administration of LSD. The sample was equally divided between male and female subjects and there were no significant sex differences observed in the pharmacokinetics of LSD. In a subsequent higher-quality 2025 study, the oral bioavailability of LSD was about 80%.\nThe pharmacokinetics of LSD were not properly determined until 2015, which is not surprising for a drug with the kind of low-\u03bcg potency that LSD possesses. In a sample of 16 healthy subjects, a single mid-range 200\u03bcg oral dose of LSD was found to produce mean maximal concentrations of 4.5ng/mL at a median of 1.5hours (range 0.5\u20134hours) post-administration.\nA large meal before taking LSD has been found to result in circulating levels that were 50% lower than on an empty stomach.\nDistribution.\nIn terms of distribution, it is estimated that only about 1 to 1.5% of the drug reaches the brain both in animals and humans. Following a typical 100\u03bcg dose in humans, this would be about 1\u03bcg that is distributed into the brain. LSD levels in different brain areas have been found to vary in monkeys. Levels were equal in blood, cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem, whereas levels were 1.5times higher in the thalamus and extrapyramidal system, 2 to 3times higher in the hypothalamus and limbic system, 2 to 5times higher in the auditory and visual cortex, 5 to 7times higher in the posterior pituitary and pineal gland, and 10times higher in the anterior pituitary gland. These varying concentrations in different brain areas may explain the profile of psychedelic effects of LSD. Bodily distribution of LSD has also been studied.\nIt has been said that there is a peculiar 40-minute lag before onset of the psychedelic effects of LSD when it is administered intravenously. This has been said to be related to time-dependent interactions of LSD with the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. However, contradicting the preceding claims, other sources have stated that intravenous injection of LSD results in onset of effects within a few minutes. In a 2025 pharmacokinetic study comparing oral and intravenous LSD, the onset orally was about 45minutes and the onset by intravenous injection was about 2.5minutes. In addition, intrathecal injection (intraspinal injection) is reported to have a virtually instantaneous onset of action. However, in the 2025 study, time to maximal effects was about 2.5hours orally and about 1.2hours intravenously. In an earlier 2016 study, intravenous LSD effects similarly peaked after about 1.7hours. For comparison, intravenous dimethyltryptamine (DMT) given as a bolus has been found to produce maximal effects after about 2minutes and intravenous psilocybin given over 60seconds after about 4minutes. Doses of LSD are said to be similar by oral and injectable routes, with the exception of intrathecal injection in which the dose is reduced to about one-third of usual.\nMetabolism.\nThe metabolites of LSD include 2-oxo-3-hydroxy-LSD (O-H-LSD), 2-oxo-LSD, lysergic acid ethylamide (LAE), lysergic acid ethyl-2-hydroxyethylamide (LEO), nor-LSD, 13-hydroxy-LSD, 14-hydroxy-LSD, and the glucuronide conjugates of the 13- and 14-hydroxylated metabolites, among other possible metabolites. The major metabolite of LSD is O-H-LSD. Levels of O-H-LSD in urine have been found to be 4 to 40times higher than those of LSD, indicating extensive metabolism of LSD into this compound. It is formed by cytochrome P450 enzymes, although the specific enzymes involved are unknown, and O-H-LSD's potential pharmacology is little-studied. However, it was found to have profoundly reduced activity at the serotonin 5-HT2 receptors relative to LSD \"in vitro\". Little is known about the specific enzymes responsible for the formation of LSD metabolites.\nElimination.\nOnly 1% of the drug was eliminated in urine unchanged, whereas 13% was eliminated as O-H-LSD within 24hours.\nAghajanian and Bing (1964) found LSD had an elimination half-life of only 175minutes (about 3hours); however, using more accurate techniques, Papac and Foltz (1990) reported that 1\u03bcg/kg oral LSD given to a single male volunteer had an apparent plasma half-life of 5.1hours, with a peak plasma concentration of 5ng/mL at 3hours post-dose. In a more modern 2015 study, concentrations of LSD decreased following first-order kinetics with a half-life of 3.6 \u00b1 0.9 hours and a terminal half-life of 8.9 \u00b1 5.9 hours.\nMiscellaneous.\nThe acute effects of LSD normally last between 6 and 12hours depending on dose, tolerance, and age. In a modern study, the effects of the dose of LSD given lasted for up to 12hours and were closely correlated with the concentrations of LSD present in circulation over time, with no acute tolerance observed.\nChemistry.\nLSD is a chiral compound with two stereocenters at the carbon atoms C-5 and C-8, so that theoretically four different optical isomers of LSD could exist. LSD, also called \"d\"-LSD or (+)-LSD, has the absolute configuration (5\"R\",8\"R\"). The other stereoisomers are iso-LSD (\"d\"-iso-LSD), \"l\"-LSD, and \"l\"-iso-LSD.\nThe 5\"S\"- or \"levo\"- stereoisomers of lysergamides do not exist in nature and are not formed during the synthesis from \"d\"-lysergic acid. Retrosynthetically, the C-5 stereocenter could be analysed as having the same configuration of the alpha carbon of the naturally occurring amino acid L-tryptophan, the precursor to all biosynthetic ergoline compounds.\nHowever, LSD and iso-LSD, the two C-8 isomers, rapidly interconvert in the presence of bases, as the alpha proton is acidic and can be deprotonated and reprotonated. Non-psychoactive iso-LSD which has formed during the synthesis can be separated by chromatography and can be isomerized to LSD.\nPure salts of LSD are triboluminescent, emitting small flashes of white light when shaken in the dark. LSD is strongly fluorescent and will glow bluish-white under UV light.\nSynthesis.\nThe chemical synthesis of LSD has been described. It is commonly synthesized by reacting diethylamine with an activated form of lysergic acid. Activating reagents include phosphoryl chloride and peptide coupling reagents. Lysergic acid is made by alkaline hydrolysis of lysergamides like ergotamine, a substance usually derived from the ergot fungus on agar plate. Lysergic acid can also be produced synthetically, although these processes are not used in clandestine manufacture due to their low yields and high complexity.\nAlbert Hofmann synthesized LSD in the following manner: (1) hydrazinolysis of ergotamine into D- and L-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (2) separation of the enantiomers with di-(\"p\"-toluyl)-D-tartaric acid to get D-isolysergic acid hydrazide, (3) enantiomerization into D-lysergic acid hydrazide, (4) substitution with HNO2 to D-lysergic acid azide and (5) finally substitution with diethylamine to form D-lysergic acid diethylamide.\nThe precursor for LSD, lysergic acid, has been produced by GMO baker's yeast.\nStability.\n\"LSD,\" writes the chemist Alexander Shulgin, \"is an unusually fragile molecule ... As a salt, in water, cold, and free from air and light exposure, it is stable indefinitely.\"\nLSD has two labile protons at the tertiary stereogenic C5 and C8 positions, rendering these centers prone to epimerisation. The C8 proton is more labile due to the electron-withdrawing carboxamide attachment, but the removal of the chiral proton at the C5 position (which was once also an alpha proton of the parent molecule tryptophan) is assisted by the inductively withdrawing nitrogen and pi electron delocalisation with the indole ring.\nLSD also has enamine-type reactivity because of the electron-donating effects of the indole ring. Because of this, chlorine destroys LSD molecules on contact; even though chlorinated tap water contains only a slight amount of chlorine, the small quantity of compound typical to an LSD solution will likely be eliminated when dissolved in tap water. The double bond between the 8-position and the aromatic ring, being conjugated with the indole ring, is susceptible to nucleophilic attacks by water or alcohol, especially in the presence of UV or other kinds of light. LSD often converts to lumi-LSD (10-hydroxy-9,10-dihydro-LSD), which is inactive in human beings.\nA controlled study was undertaken to determine the stability of LSD in pooled urine samples.\nThe concentrations of LSD in urine samples were followed over time at various temperatures, in different types of storage containers, at various exposures to different wavelengths of light, and at varying pH values. These studies demonstrated no significant loss in LSD concentration at 25\u00b0C for up to four weeks. After four weeks of incubation, a 30% loss in LSD concentration at 37\u00b0C and up to a 40% at 45\u00b0C were observed. Urine fortified with LSD and stored in amber glass or nontransparent polyethylene containers showed no change in concentration under any light conditions. The stability of LSD in transparent containers under light was dependent on the distance between the light source and the samples, the wavelength of light, exposure time, and the intensity of light. After prolonged exposure to heat in alkaline pH conditions, 10 to 15% of the parent LSD epimerized to iso-LSD. Under acidic conditions, less than 5% of the LSD was converted to iso-LSD. It was also demonstrated that trace amounts of metal ions in the buffer or urine could catalyze the decomposition of LSD and that this process can be avoided by the addition of EDTA.\nDetection.\nLSD can be detected in concentrations larger than approximately 10% in a sample using Ehrlich's reagent and Hofmann's reagent. However, detecting LSD in human tissues is more challenging due to its active dose being significantly lower (in micrograms) compared to most other drugs (in milligrams).\nLSD may be quantified in urine for drug testing programs, in plasma or serum to confirm poisoning in hospitalized victims, or in whole blood for forensic investigations. The parent drug and its major metabolite are unstable in biofluids when exposed to light, heat, or alkaline conditions, necessitating protection from light, low-temperature storage, and quick analysis to minimize losses. Maximum plasma concentrations are typically observed 1.4 to 1.5 hours after oral administration of 100\u03bcg and 200\u03bcg, respectively, with a plasma half-life of approximately 2.6 hours (ranging from 2.2 to 3.4 hours among test subjects).\nDue to its potency in microgram quantities, LSD is often not included in standard pre-employment urine or hair analyses. However, advanced liquid chromatography\u2013mass spectrometry methods can detect LSD in biological samples even after a single use.\nAnalogues.\nA variety of LSD analogues are known. Many of them retain psychedelic effects similarly to LSD, although most have reduced potency and none are notably more potent than LSD. Examples include ergine (lysergic acid amide; LSA), isoergine (iso-LSA), lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide (LSH), ergonovine (ergometrine), methylergonovine (methylergometrine), methysergide, ETH-LAD, PRO-LAD, AL-LAD, 1-methyl-LSD (MLD-41), MiPLA, and LA-SS-Az (LSZ), among many others. Presumed or known prodrugs of LSD, including 1A-LSD (ALD-52), 1P-LSD, and 1V-LSD, have been developed or encountered. Some non-hallucinogenic LSD analogues, such as lisuride and 2-bromo-LSD (BOL-148), are known as well. They are lower-efficacy serotonin 5-HT2A receptor partial agonists and can notably act as hallucinogen antagonists against LSD. In addition to lysergamide derivatives, simplified or \"partial\" LSD analogues or seco-LSD compounds, such as NDTDI (8,10-seco-LSD), DEIMDHPCA (3,5-seco-LSD), 10,11-seco-LSD, and \"N\"-DEAOP-NMT, are known. A notable bioisostere of LSD is JRT, the isotryptamine analogue of LSD and a psychedelic and psychoplastogen which is under investigation for the potential treatment of schizophrenia.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n ... affected by a remarkable restlessness, combined with a slight dizziness. At home I lay down and sank into a not unpleasant intoxicated-like condition, characterized by an extremely stimulated imagination. In a dreamlike state, with eyes closed (I found the daylight to be unpleasantly glaring), I perceived an uninterrupted stream of fantastic pictures, extraordinary shapes with intense, kaleidoscopic play of colors. After some two hours this condition faded away.\n\u2014Albert Hofmann, on his first experience with LSD15\nSwiss chemist Albert Hofmann first synthesized LSD in 1938 from lysergic acid, a chemical derived from the hydrolysis of ergotamine, an alkaloid found in ergot, a fungus that infects grain. LSD was the 25th of various lysergamides Hofmann synthesized from lysergic acid while trying to develop a new analeptic, hence the alternate name LSD-25. Hofmann discovered its effects in humans on April 16, in 1943, after unintentionally ingesting an unknown amount, possibly absorbing it through his skin. On April 19, 1943, Hofmann intentionally ingested 0.25 milligrams (250 micrograms) of LSD. LSD was first published in the scientific literature by Hofmann and his colleague psychiatrist Werner Stoll in 1943 and the hallucinogenic effects of LSD were first published by Stoll in 1947.\nLSD was subject to exceptional interest within the field of psychiatry in the 1950s and early 1960s, with Sandoz distributing LSD to researchers under the trademark name Delysid in an attempt to find a marketable use for it. During this period, LSD was controversially administered to hospitalised schizophrenic autistic children, with varying degrees of therapeutic success. It was said to have been tried in every type of mental disorder by 1960. LSD was also used in an attempt to cure homosexuality. Most of the early studies of LSD for psychiatric conditions were of very low quality, often lacking even control groups. In 1975, it was concluded that LSD showed little difference from placebo for most conditions, but this conclusion was still based on low-quality evidence.\nLSD-assisted psychotherapy was used in the 1950s and early 1960s by psychiatrists such as Humphry Osmond, who pioneered the application of LSD to the treatment of alcoholism, with promising results. Osmond coined the term \"psychedelic\" (mind manifesting) as a term for LSD and related hallucinogens, superseding the previously held \"psychotomimetic\" model in which LSD was believed to mimic schizophrenia. In contrast to schizophrenia, LSD can induce transcendent experiences, or mental states that transcend the experience of everyday consciousness, with lasting psychological benefit. During this time, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began using LSD in the research project Project MKUltra, which used psychoactive substances to aid interrogation. The CIA administered LSD to unwitting test subjects to observe how they would react, the most well-known example of this being Operation Midnight Climax. LSD was one of several psychoactive substances evaluated by the U.S. Army Chemical Corps as possible non-lethal incapacitants in the Edgewood Arsenal human experiments.\nAccording to declassified CIA documents, it's possible that the American agency spread LSD on civilians in Europe in the 50s.\nIn the 1960s, LSD and other psychedelics were adopted by and became synonymous with the counterculture movement due to their perceived ability to expand consciousness. This resulted in LSD being viewed as a cultural threat to American values and the Vietnam War effort, and it was designated as a Schedule I (illegal for medical as well as recreational use) substance in 1968. It was listed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the United Nations in 1971 and currently has no approved medical uses. As of 2017[ [update]], about 10% of people in the United States have used LSD at some point in their lives, while 0.7% have used it in the last year. It was most popular in the 1960s to 1980s. The use of LSD among US adults increased by 56.4% from 2015 to 2018.\nLSD was first synthesized on November 16, 1938 by Swiss chemist Albert Hofmann at the Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, Switzerland as part of a large research program searching for medically useful ergot alkaloid derivatives. The abbreviation \"LSD\" is from the German \"Lysergs\u00e4urediethylamid\".\nLSD's psychedelic properties were discovered 5 years later when Hofmann himself accidentally ingested an unknown quantity of the chemical. The first intentional ingestion of LSD occurred on April 19, 1943, when Hofmann ingested 250 \u03bcg of LSD. He said this would be a threshold dose based on the doses of other ergot alkaloids. Hofmann found the effects to be much stronger than he anticipated. Sandoz Laboratories introduced LSD as a psychiatric drug in 1947 and marketed LSD as a psychiatric panacea, hailing it \"as a cure for everything from schizophrenia to criminal behavior, 'sexual perversions', and alcoholism.\" Sandoz would send the drug for free to researchers investigating its effects.\nBeginning in the 1950s, the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) began a research program code-named Project MKUltra. The CIA introduced LSD to the United States, purchasing the entire world's supply for $240,000 and propagating the LSD through CIA front organizations to American hospitals, clinics, prisons, and research centers. Experiments included administering LSD to CIA employees, military personnel, doctors, other government agents, prostitutes, mentally ill patients, and members of the general public to study their reactions, usually without the subjects' knowledge. The project was revealed in the US congressional Rockefeller Commission report in 1975. However, the extent of the experiments conducted under Project MKUltra are still mostly unknown, as acting CIA director Richard Helms destroyed many of the key documents related to MKUltra in 1973.\nIn 1963, the Sandoz patents on LSD expired and the Czech company Spofa began to produce the substance. Sandoz stopped the production and distribution in 1965.\nSeveral figures, including Aldous Huxley, Timothy Leary, and Al Hubbard, had begun to advocate the consumption of LSD. LSD became central to the counterculture of the 1960s. In the early 1960s the use of LSD and other hallucinogens was advocated by new proponents of consciousness expansion such as Leary, Huxley, Alan Watts and Arthur Koestler, and according to L. R. Veysey they profoundly influenced the thinking of the new generation of youth.\nOn October 24, 1968, possession of LSD was made illegal in the United States. The last FDA approved study of LSD in patients ended in 1980, while a study in healthy volunteers was made in the late 1980s. Legally approved and regulated psychiatric use of LSD continued in Switzerland until 1993.\nIn November 2020, Oregon became the first US state to decriminalize possession of small amounts of LSD after voters approved Ballot Measure 110.\nSociety and culture.\nCounterculture.\nBy the mid-1960s, the youth countercultures in California, particularly in San Francisco, had widely adopted the use of hallucinogenic drugs, including LSD. The first major underground LSD factory was established by Owsley Stanley. Around this time, the Merry Pranksters, associated with novelist Ken Kesey, organized the Acid Tests, events in San Francisco involving LSD consumption, accompanied by light shows and improvised music. Their activities, including cross-country trips in a psychedelically-decorated bus and interactions with major figures of the beat movement, were later documented in Tom Wolfe's \"The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test\" (1968).\nIn San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood, the Psychedelic Shop was opened in January 1966 by brothers Ron and Jay Thelin to promote the safe use of LSD. This shop played a significant role in popularizing LSD in the area and establishing Haight-Ashbury as the epicenter of the hippie counterculture. The Thelins also organized the Love Pageant Rally in Golden Gate Park in October 1966, protesting against California's ban on LSD.\nA similar movement developed in London, led by British academic Michael Hollingshead, who first tried LSD in America in 1961. After experiencing LSD and interacting with notable figures such as Aldous Huxley, Timothy Leary, and Richard Alpert, Hollingshead played a key role in the famous LSD research at Millbrook before moving to New York City for his experiments. In 1965, he returned to the UK and founded the World Psychedelic Center in Chelsea, London.\nArt and music.\nArt.\nBlotter art.\nBlotter art is an art form printed on perforated sheets of absorbent blotting paper infused with liquid LSD. The delivery method gained popularity following the banning of the hallucinogen LSD in the late 1960s. The use of graphics on blotter sheets originated as an underground art form in the early 1970s, sometimes to help identify the dose, maker, or batch of LSD.\nLSD art.\nLSD art is any art or visual displays inspired by psychedelic experiences and hallucinations known to follow the ingestion of LSD (also known colloquially as acid). Artists and scientists have been interested in the effect of LSD on drawing and painting since it first became available for legal use and general consumption.\nMusic.\nThe influence of LSD in the realms of music and art became pronounced in the 1960s, especially through the Acid Tests and related events involving bands like the Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane, and Big Brother and the Holding Company. San Francisco-based artists such as Rick Griffin, Victor Moscoso, and Wes Wilson contributed to this movement through their psychedelic poster and album art. The Grateful Dead, in particular, became central to the culture of \"Deadheads\", with their music heavily influenced by LSD.\nIn the United Kingdom, Michael Hollingshead, reputed for introducing LSD to various artists and musicians like Storm Thorgerson, Donovan, Keith Richards, and members of the Beatles, played a significant role in the drug's proliferation in the British art and music scene. Despite LSD's illegal status from 1966, it was widely used by groups including the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, and the Moody Blues. Their experiences influenced works such as the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" and Cream's \"Disraeli Gears\", featuring psychedelic-themed music and artwork.\nPsychedelic music of the 1960s often sought to replicate the LSD experience, incorporating exotic instrumentation, electric guitars with effects pedals, and elaborate studio techniques. Artists and bands utilized instruments like sitars and tablas, and employed studio effects such as backward tapes, panning, and phasing. Songs such as John Prine's \"Illegal Smile\" and the Beatles' \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\" have been associated with LSD, although the latter's authors denied such claims.\nContemporary artists influenced by LSD include Keith Haring in the visual arts, various electronic dance music creators, and the jam band Phish. The 2018 Leo Butler play \"All You Need is LSD\" is inspired by the author's interest in the history of LSD.\nLegal status.\nThe United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 mandates that signing parties, including the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and most of Europe, prohibit LSD. Enforcement of these laws varies by country. The convention allows medical and scientific research with LSD.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, LSD is classified as a Schedule 9 prohibited substance under the Poisons Standard (February 2017), indicating it may be abused or misused and its manufacture, possession, sale, or use should be prohibited except for approved research purposes. In Western Australia, the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 provides guidelines for possession and trafficking of substances like LSD.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, LSD is listed under Schedule III of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Unauthorized possession and trafficking of the substance can lead to significant legal penalties.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, LSD is a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, making unauthorized possession and trafficking punishable by severe penalties. The Runciman Report and Transform Drug Policy Foundation have made recommendations and proposals regarding the legal regulation of LSD and other psychedelics.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, LSD is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, making its manufacture, possession, and distribution illegal without a DEA license. The law considers LSD to have a high potential for abuse, no legitimate medical use, and to be unsafe even under medical supervision. The US Supreme Court case Neal v. United States (1995) clarified the sentencing guidelines related to LSD possession.\nOregon decriminalized personal possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, in February 2021, and California has seen legislative efforts to decriminalize psychedelics.\nMexico.\nMexico decriminalized the possession of small amounts of drugs, including LSD, for personal use in 2009. The law specifies possession limits and establishes that possession is not a crime within designated quantities.\nCzech Republic.\nIn the Czech Republic, possession of \"amount larger than small\" of LSD is criminalized, while possession of smaller amounts is a misdemeanor. The definition of \"amount larger than small\" is determined by judicial practice and specific regulations.\nIllicit supply chain.\nProduction.\nAn active dose of LSD is very minute, allowing a large number of doses to be synthesized from a comparatively small amount of raw material. Twenty-five kilograms of precursor ergotamine tartrate can produce 5\u20136kg of pure crystalline LSD; this corresponds to around 50\u201360million doses at 100\u03bcg. Because the masses involved are so small, concealing and transporting illicit LSD is much easier than smuggling cocaine, cannabis, or other illegal drugs.\nManufacturing LSD requires laboratory equipment and experience in the field of organic chemistry. It takes two to three days to produce 30 to 100 grams of pure compound. It is believed that LSD is not usually produced in large quantities, but rather in a series of small batches. This technique minimizes the loss of precursor chemicals in case a step does not work as expected. Ali Altaft, the lead chemist at the University of Okara, in Punjab, Pakistan, performed the synthesis of LSD on video.\nForms.\nLSD is produced in crystalline form and is then mixed with excipients or redissolved for production in ingestible forms. Liquid solution is either distributed in small vials or, more commonly, sprayed onto or soaked into a distribution medium. Historically, LSD solutions were first sold on sugar cubes, but practical considerations forced a change to tablet form. Appearing in 1968 as an orange tablet measuring about 6mm across, \"Orange Sunshine\" acid was the first largely available form of LSD after its possession was made illegal. Tim Scully, a prominent chemist, made some of these tablets, but said that most \"Sunshine\" in the USA came by way of Ronald Stark, who imported approximately thirty-five million doses from Europe.\nOver some time, tablet dimensions, weight, shape and concentration of LSD evolved from large (4.5\u20138.1mm diameter), heavyweight (\u2265150\u03bcg), round, high concentration (90\u2013350\u03bcg/tab) dose units to small (2.0\u20133.5mm diameter) lightweight (as low as 4.7\u03bcg/tab), variously shaped, lower concentration (12\u201385\u03bcg/tab, average range 30\u201340\u03bcg/tab) dose units. LSD tablet shapes have included cylinders, cones, stars, spacecraft, and heart shapes. The smallest tablets became known as \"Microdots\".\nAfter tablets came \"computer acid\" or \"blotter paper LSD\", typically made by dipping a preprinted sheet of blotting paper into an LSD/water/alcohol solution. More than 200 types of LSD tablets have been encountered since 1969 and more than 350 blotter paper designs have been observed since 1975. About the same time as blotter paper LSD came \"Windowpane\" (AKA \"Clearlight\"), which contained LSD inside a thin gelatin square a quarter of an inch (6mm) across. LSD has been sold under a wide variety of often short-lived and regionally restricted street names including Acid, Trips, Uncle Sid, Blotter, Lucy, Alice and doses, as well as names that reflect the designs on the sheets of blotter paper. Authorities have encountered the drug in other forms\u2014including powder or crystal, and capsule.\nBlotters.\nBlotter art designs printed on blotter paper can serve to identify dose strengths, different batches, or makers.\nOn the other hand, blotters without art may be considered safer by some, since there is no guarantee that the printer ink used in clandestine production is edible or non-toxic for long-term exposure, and it is also possible for unscrupulous dealers to mimic reputable blotter art designs in order to boost sales.\nDistribution.\nLSD manufacturers and traffickers in the United States can be categorized into two groups: A few large-scale producers, and an equally limited number of small, clandestine chemists, consisting of independent producers who, operating on a comparatively limited scale, can be found throughout the country.\nAs a group, independent producers are of less concern to the Drug Enforcement Administration than the large-scale groups because their product reaches only local markets.\nMany LSD dealers and chemists describe a religious or humanitarian purpose that motivates their illicit activity. Nicholas Schou's book \"Orange Sunshine: The Brotherhood of Eternal Love and Its Quest to Spread Peace, Love, and Acid to the World\" describes one such group, the Brotherhood of Eternal Love. The group was a major American LSD trafficking group in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, dealers and chemists loosely associated with the Grateful Dead like Owsley Stanley, Nicholas Sand, Karen Horning, Sarah Maltzer, \"Dealer McDope\", and Leonard Pickard played an essential role in distributing LSD.\nMimics.\nSince 2005, law enforcement in the United States and elsewhere has seized several chemicals and combinations of chemicals in blotter paper which were sold as LSD mimics, including DOB, a mixture of DOC and DOI, 25I-NBOMe, and a mixture of DOC and DOB. Many mimics are toxic in comparatively small doses, or have extremely different safety profiles. Many street users of LSD are often under the impression that blotter paper which is actively hallucinogenic can only be LSD because that is the only chemical with low enough doses to fit on a small square of blotter paper. While it is true that LSD requires lower doses than most other hallucinogens, blotter paper is capable of absorbing a much larger amount of material. The DEA performed a chromatographic analysis of blotter paper containing 2C-C which showed that the paper contained a much greater concentration of the active chemical than typical LSD doses, although the exact quantity was not determined. Blotter LSD mimics can have relatively small dose squares; a sample of blotter paper containing DOC seized by Concord, California police had dose markings approximately 6mm apart. Several deaths have been attributed to 25I-NBOMe.\nNotable individuals.\nSome notable individuals have commented publicly on their experiences with LSD. Some of these comments date from the era when it was legally available in the US and Europe for non-medical uses, and others pertain to psychiatric treatment in the 1950s and 1960s. Still others describe experiences with illegal LSD, obtained for philosophic, artistic, therapeutic, spiritual, or recreational purposes.\nResearch.\nPsychiatric disorders.\nLSD was initially explored for psychiatric use due to its structural similarity to the neurotransmitter serotonin and its safety profile. In the 1950s and 1960s, it was used in psychiatry to enhance psychotherapy, known as psychedelic therapy. In the United States, the earliest research began in the 1950s. Albert Kurland and his colleagues published research on LSD's therapeutic potential to treat schizophrenia. In Canada, Humphry Osmond and Abram Hoffer completed LSD studies as early as 1952. Some psychiatrists, such as Ronald A. Sandison, who pioneered its use at Powick Hospital in England, believed that LSD was especially useful at helping patients to \"unblock\" repressed subconscious material through other psychotherapeutic methods, and also for treating alcoholism. One study concluded, \"The root of the therapeutic value of the LSD experience is its potential for producing self-acceptance and self-surrender,\" presumably by forcing the user to face issues and problems in that individual's psyche. By the 1960s however, controversies surrounding \"hippie\" counterculture began to deplete institutional support for continued studies.\nIn 2001, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) stated that LSD \"produces no aphrodisiac effects, does not increase creativity, has no lasting positive effect in treating alcoholics or criminals, does not produce a \"model psychosis\", and does not generate immediate personality change.\"\nIn more recent years, there has been renewed clinical research on and interest in LSD for potential therapeutic uses. This has been supported by several organizations, including the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS), the Beckley Foundation, the Heffter Research Institute, and the Albert Hofmann Foundation, which exist to fund, encourage, and coordinate research into the medicinal and spiritual uses of LSD and related psychedelics. New clinical LSD experiments in humans started in 2009 for the first time in 35 years. As the drug is illegal in many areas of the world, potential medical uses have historically been difficult to study. Investigational uses of LSD include the treatment of alcoholism, anxiety, and depression, among other conditions. Another use is alleviation of anxiety in terminally ill cancer patients.\nA 2012 meta-analysis found evidence that a single dose of LSD in conjunction with various alcoholism treatment programs was associated with a decrease in alcohol abuse, lasting for several months, but no effect was seen at one year. Adverse events included seizure, moderate confusion and agitation, nausea, vomiting, and acting in a bizarre fashion. A couple of reviews published in 2010 and 2014 concluded that conclusions drawn from most early trials are unreliable due to serious methodological flaws. These include the absence of adequate control groups, lack of follow-up, and vague criteria for therapeutic outcome. In many cases, studies failed to convincingly demonstrate whether the drug or the therapeutic interaction was responsible for any beneficial effects. A 2020 meta-review indicated possible positive effects of LSD in reducing psychiatric symptoms, mainly in cases of alcoholism.\nIn 2024, the FDA designated a form of LSD as a breakthrough therapy to treat generalized anxiety disorder which is being developed by MindMed. A study published by the Journal of the American Medical Association in September, 2025 explored the optimal dose of LSD to lower patients' anxiety. The study was conducted by the pharmaceutical company MindMed. The researchers compared how LSD doses of 25\u03bcg, 50\u03bcg, 100\u03bcg, 200\u03bcg, or placebo impacted anxiety scores among study participants. The results of the study found that 100\u03bcg was the optimal dose to reduce anxiety among the studied patients.\nLSD is a psychoplastogen, a compound capable of promoting rapid and sustained neural plasticity, an action that hypothetically might be involved in its therapeutic benefits, although more research is needed to substantiate such notions.\nThe British critical psychiatrist Joanna Moncrieff has critiqued the use and study of psychedelics like LSD for treatment of psychiatric disorders, highlighting concerns including excessive hype around these drugs, questionable biologically-based theories of benefit, blurred lines between medical and recreational use, flawed clinical trial findings, financial conflicts of interest, strong expectancy effects and large placebo responses, small and short-term benefits over placebo, and their potential for difficult experiences and adverse effects, among others.\nOther conditions.\nLSD has been studied for relief of pain and headaches. It has been used as a treatment for cluster headaches with positive results in some small studies. The drug might have analgesic properties related to pain in terminally ill patients and phantom pain and might be useful for treating inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis due to anti-inflammatory effects.\nEnhancing creativity.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, some psychiatrists, such as Oscar Janiger, explored the potential effect of LSD on creativity. Experimental studies attempted to measure the effect of LSD on creative activity and aesthetic appreciation. In 1966, James Fadiman conducted a study with the central question \"How can psychedelics be used to facilitate problem solving?\" This study attempted to solve 44 different problems and had 40 satisfactory solutions when the FDA banned all research into psychedelics. LSD was a key component of this study.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17539", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17539", "title": "Linnaean taxonomy", "text": "Rank based classification system for organisms\nLinnaean taxonomy can mean either of two related concepts:\nLinnaean name also has two meanings, depending on the context: it may either refer to a formal name given by Linnaeus (personally), such as \"Giraffa camelopardalis\" Linnaeus, 1758; or a formal name in the accepted nomenclature (as opposed to a modernistic clade name).\nThe taxonomy of Linnaeus.\nIn his \"Imperium Naturae\", Linnaeus established three kingdoms, namely \"Regnum Animale\", \"Regnum Vegetabile\" and \"Regnum Lapideum\". This approach, the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdoms, survives today in the popular mind, notably in the form of the parlour game question: \"Is it animal, vegetable or mineral?\", and in Gilbert and Sullivan's \"Major-General's Song\". The work of Linnaeus had a huge impact on science; it was indispensable as a foundation for biological nomenclature, now regulated by the nomenclature codes. Two of his works, the first edition of the \"Species Plantarum\" (1753) for plants and the tenth edition of the \"Systema Naturae\" (1758), are accepted as part of the starting points of nomenclature; his binomials (names for species) and generic names take priority over those of others. However, the impact he had on science was not because of the value of his taxonomy.\nLinnaeus' kingdoms were in turn divided into \"classes\", and they, in turn, into \"orders\", \"genera\" (singular: \"genus\"), and \"species\" (singular: \"species\"), with an additional rank lower than species, though these do not precisely correspond to the use of these terms in modern taxonomy.\nClassification of plants.\nIn \"Systema Naturae\" (1735), his classes and orders of plants, according to his \"Systema Sexuale\", were not intended to represent natural groups (as opposed to his \"ordines naturales\" in his \"Philosophia Botanica\") but only for use in identification. However, in 1737 he published \"Genera Plantarum\" in which he claimed that his classification of genera was a natural system. His botanical classification and sexual system were used well in the nineteenth century. Within each class were several orders. This system is based on the number and arrangement of male (stamens) and female (pistils) organs.\nThe Linnaean classes for plants, in the Sexual System, were (page numbers refer to \"Species plantarum\"):\nThe classes based on the number of stamens were then subdivided by the number of pistils, e.g. \"Hexandria monogynia\" with six stamens and one pistil. Index to genera p.\u00a01201\nBy contrast his \"ordines naturales\" numbered 69, from Piperitae to Vagae.\nClassification for animals.\nOnly in the Animal Kingdom is the higher taxonomy of Linnaeus still more or less recognizable and some of these names are still in use, but usually not quite for the same groups. He divided the Animal Kingdom into six classes. In the tenth edition, of 1758, these were:\nClassification for minerals.\nHis taxonomy of minerals has long since been dropped from use. In the tenth edition, 1758, of the \"Systema Naturae\", the Linnaean classes were:\nRank-based scientific classification.\nThis rank-based method of classifying living organisms was originally popularized by (and much later named for) Linnaeus, although it has changed considerably since his time. The greatest innovation of Linnaeus, and still the most important aspect of this system, is the general use of binomial nomenclature, the combination of a genus name and a second term, which together uniquely identify each species of organism within a kingdom. For example, the human species is uniquely identified within the animal kingdom by the name \"Homo sapiens\". No other species of animal can have this same binomen (the technical term for a binomial in the case of animals). Prior to Linnaean taxonomy, animals were classified according to their mode of movement.\nLinnaeus's use of binomial nomenclature was anticipated by the theory of definition used in Scholasticism. Scholastic logicians and philosophers of nature defined the species human, for example, as \"Animal rationalis\", where \"animal\" was considered a genus and \"rationalis\" (Latin for \"rational\") the characteristic distinguishing humans from all other animals. Treating \"animal\" as the immediate genus of the species human, horse, etc. is of little practical use to the biological taxonomist, however. Accordingly, Linnaeus's classification treats \"animal\" as a class including many genera (subordinated to the animal \"kingdom\" via intermediary classes such as \"orders\"), and treats \"homo\" as the genus of a species \"Homo sapiens\", with \"sapiens\" (Latin for \"knowing\" or \"understanding\") playing a differentiating role analogous to that played, in the Scholastic system, by \"rationalis\" (the word \"homo\", Latin for \"human being\", was used by the Scholastics to denote a species, not a genus).\nA strength of Linnaean taxonomy is that it can be used to organize the different kinds of living organisms, simply and practically. Every species can be given a unique (and ideally stable) name, as compared with common names that are often neither unique nor consistent from place to place and language to language. This uniqueness and stability are, of course, a result of the acceptance by working systematists (biologists specializing in taxonomy and evolution), not merely of the binomial names themselves, but of the rules governing the use of these names, which are laid down in formal nomenclature codes.\nSpecies can be placed in a ranked hierarchy, starting with either \"domains\" or \"kingdoms\". Domains are divided into kingdoms. Kingdoms are divided into \"phyla\" (singular: \"phylum\") \u2014 for animals; the term \"division\", used for plants and fungi, is equivalent to the rank of phylum (and the current International Code of Botanical Nomenclature allows the use of either term). Phyla (or divisions) are divided into \"classes\", and they, in turn, into \"orders\", \"families\", \"genera\" (singular: \"genus\"), and \"species\" (singular: \"species\"). There are ranks below species: in zoology, \"subspecies\" (but see \"form\" or \"morph\"); in botany, \"subspecies\", \"variety\" (), and \"form\" ().\nGroups of organisms at any of these ranks are called \"taxa\" (singular: \"taxon\") or \"taxonomic groups\".\nThe Linnaean system has proven robust. However, although the number of ranks is unlimited, in practice any classification becomes more cumbersome the more ranks are added. Among the later subdivisions that have arisen are such entities as phyla, families, and tribes, as well as any number of ranks with prefixes (superfamilies, subfamilies, etc.). The use of newer taxonomic tools such as cladistics and phylogenetic nomenclature has led to a different way of looking at evolution (expressed in many nested clades) and this sometimes leads to a desire for more ranks. An example of such complexity is the scheme for mammals proposed by McKenna and Bell.\nAlternatives.\nOver time, understanding of the relationships between living things has changed. Linnaeus could only base his scheme on the structural similarities of the different organisms. The greatest change was the widespread acceptance of evolution as the mechanism of biological diversity and species formation, following the 1859 publication of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\". It then became generally understood that classifications ought to reflect the phylogeny of organisms, their descent by evolution. This led to evolutionary taxonomy, where the various extant and extinct are linked together to construct a phylogeny. This is largely what is meant by the term 'Linnaean taxonomy' when used in a modern context.\nIn cladistics, originating in the work of Willi Hennig, 1950 onwards, each taxon is grouped so as to include the common ancestor of the group's members (and thus to avoid phylogeny). Such taxa may be either monophyletic (including all descendants) such as genus \"Homo\", or paraphyletic (excluding some descendants), such as genus \"Australopithecus\".\nOriginally, Linnaeus established three kingdoms in his scheme, namely for Plants, Animals and an additional group for minerals, which has long since been abandoned. Since then, various life forms have been moved into three new kingdoms: Monera, for prokaryotes (i.e., bacteria); Protista, for protozoans and most algae; and Fungi. This five-kingdom scheme is still far from the phylogenetic ideal and has largely been supplanted in modern taxonomic work by a division into three domains: Bacteria and Archaea, which contain the prokaryotes, and Eukaryota, comprising the remaining forms. These arrangements should not be seen as definitive. They are based on the genomes of the organisms; as knowledge on this increases, classifications will change.\nRepresenting presumptive evolutionary relationships within the framework of Linnaean taxonomy is sometimes seen as problematic, especially given the wide acceptance of cladistic methodology and numerous molecular phylogenies that have challenged long-accepted classifications. Therefore, some systematists have proposed a PhyloCode to replace it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17541", "revid": "17750005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17541", "title": "Lawyer", "text": "Practitioner of law\nA lawyer is a person who is qualified to offer advice about the law, draft legal documents, or represent individuals in legal matters.\nThe exact nature of a lawyer's work varies depending on the legal jurisdiction and the legal system, as well as the lawyer's area of practice. In many jurisdictions, the legal profession is divided into various branches \u2014 including barristers, solicitors, conveyancers, notaries, canon lawyer \u2014 who perform different tasks related to the law.\nHistorically, the role of lawyers can be traced back to ancient civilizations such as Greece and Rome. In modern times, the practice of law includes activities such as representing clients in criminal or civil court, advising on business transactions, protecting intellectual property, and ensuring compliance with laws and regulations.\nDepending on the country, the education required to become a lawyer can range from completing an undergraduate law degree to undergoing postgraduate education and professional training. In many jurisdictions, passing a bar examination is also necessary before one can practice law.\nWorking as a lawyer generally involves the practical application of abstract legal theories and knowledge to solve specific problems. Some lawyers also work primarily in upholding the rule of law, human rights, and the interests of the legal profession.\nTerminology.\nSome jurisdictions have multiple types of lawyers, while others only have two or one.\nEngland, the mother of the common law jurisdictions, emerged from the Middle Ages with a complexity in its legal professions similar to that of civil law jurisdictions, but then evolved by the 19th century to a single division between barristers and solicitors.\nSeveral countries that originally had two or more legal professions have since \"fused\" or \"united\" their professions into a single type of lawyer. Most countries in this category are common law countries, though France, a civil law country, merged its jurists in 1990 and 1991 in response to Anglo-American competition. In countries with fused professions, a lawyer is usually permitted to carry out all or nearly all the responsibilities listed below.\nIn some jurisdictions descended from the English common law tradition, including England and Wales, there are often two kinds of lawyers. A barrister (also known as an advocate or counselor) is a lawyer who typically specializes in arguing before courts, particularly in higher courts. A solicitor (or attorney) is a lawyer who prepares cases and gives advice on legal subjects. In some jurisdictions, solicitors also represent people in court. Fused professions, where lawyers have rights of both barristers and solicitors, have emerged in other former English common law jurisdictions, such as the United States, India, and Pakistan.\nCivil law jurisdictions do not have \"lawyers\" in the American sense, insofar as that term is used in American English to refer to a single unified type of general-purpose legal services provider. Rather, their legal professions consist of a large number of different kinds of legally-trained persons, known as jurists, some of whom are advocates who are licensed to practice in the courts. In some civil law countries, a similar distinction to the common law tradition exists between advocates and procurators.\nIn the United States, Sri Lanka, and the Philippines, the preferred term for one practising law, \"attorney at law\", or \"attorney-at-law\", usually is abbreviated in everyday speech to \"attorney\". This term has its roots in the verb \"to attorn\", meaning to transfer one's rights and obligations to another. South Africa only applies this term for certain practitioners.\nBecause each country has traditionally had its own method of dividing up legal work among its legal professionals, it has been difficult to formulate accurate generalizations that cover all the countries with multiple legal professions. Other kinds of legal practitioners include:\nWhile some jurisdictions regulate the use of the title \"lawyer\", others do not.\nTitles.\nHistorically, lawyers in most European countries were addressed with the title of doctor. The first university degrees, starting with the law school of the University of Bologna in the 11th century, were all law degrees and doctorates. Therefore, in many southern European countries, including Portugal, Italy, and Malta, lawyers have traditionally been addressed as \"doctor\", a practice that was transferred to many countries in South America and Macau. In some jurisdictions, the term \"doctor\" has since fallen into disuse, but it is still in use in many countries within and outside of Europe.\nThe title of doctor has traditionally not been used to address lawyers in England or other common law countries. Until 1846, lawyers in England were trained by apprenticeship or in the Inns of Court, with no undergraduate degree being required. Although the most common law degree in the United States is the Juris Doctor, most J.D. holders in the United States do not use the title \"doctor\". It is, however, common for lawyers in the United States to use the honorific suffix \"Esq.\" (for \"Esquire\").\nIn French (France, Quebec, Belgium, Luxembourg, French-speaking area of Switzerland) and Dutch-speaking countries (Netherlands, Belgium), legal professionals are addressed as , abbreviated to (in French) or , abbreviated to (in Dutch). In Poland, the title is used to refer to advocates and attorneys at law, although as an informal title its status is not protected by law.\nIn South Africa and India, lawyers who have been admitted to the bar may use the title \"Advocate\", abbreviated to \"Adv\" in written correspondence. Lawyers who have completed two years of clerkship with a principal Attorney and passed all four board exams may be admitted as an \"Attorney\". Likewise, Italian law graduates who have qualified for the bar use the title \"Avvocato\", abbreviated in \"Avv.\"\nResponsibilities.\nOral arguments in a courtroom.\nSome lawyers, particularly barristers and advocates, argue the legal cases of clients case before a judge or jury in a court of law.\nIn some jurisdictions, there are specialist lawyers who have exclusive rights of audience before a court. In others, particularly fused legal jurisdictions, there are lawyers who specialize in courtroom advocacy but who do not have a legal monopoly over the profession.\nIn some countries, litigants have the option of arguing on their own behalf. In other countries, like Venezuela, no one may appear before a judge unless represented by a lawyer. The advantage of the latter regime is that lawyers are familiar with the court's customs and procedures, making the legal system more efficient for all involved. Unrepresented parties often damage their own credibility or slow the court down as a result of their inexperience.\nResearch and drafting of court papers.\nOften, lawyers brief a court in writing on the issues in a case before the issues can be orally argued. They may have to perform extensive research into relevant facts. Also, they draft legal papers and prepare for an oral argument.\nIn split common law jurisdictions, the usual division of labor is that a solicitor will obtain the facts of the case from the client and then brief a barrister, usually in writing. The barrister then researches and drafts the necessary court pleadings, which will be filed and served by the solicitor, and orally argues the case.\nIn Spanish civil law, the procurator merely signs and presents the papers to the court, but it is the advocate who drafts the papers and argues the case. In other civil law jurisdictions, like Japan, a scrivener or clerk may fill out court forms and draft simple papers for laypersons who cannot afford or do not need attorneys, and advise them on how to manage and argue their own cases.\nAdvocacy in administrative hearings.\nIn most developed countries, the legislature has granted original jurisdiction over highly technical matters to executive branch administrative agencies which oversee such things. As a result, some lawyers have become specialists in administrative law. In a few countries, there is a special category of jurists with a monopoly over this form of advocacy; for example, France formerly had \"conseils juridiques\" (who were merged into the main legal profession in 1991). In other countries, like the United States, lawyers have been effectively barred by statute from certain types of administrative hearings in order to preserve their informality.\nClient intake and counseling.\nIn some fused common law jurisdictions, the client-lawyer relationship begins with an intake interview where the lawyer gets to know the client personally, following which the lawyer discovers the facts of the client's case, clarifies what the client wants to accomplish, and shapes the client's expectations as to what actually can be accomplished. The second to last step begins to develop various claims or defenses for the client. Lastly, the lawyer explains her or his fees to the client.\nIn England, only solicitors were traditionally in direct contact with the client, but barristers nowadays may apply for rights to liaise with clients directly. The solicitor retained a barrister if one was necessary and acted as an intermediary between the barrister and the client. In most cases barristers were obliged, under what is known as the \"cab rank rule\", to accept instructions for a case in an area in which they held themselves out as practicing, at a court at which they normally appeared and at their usual rates.\nLegal advice.\nLegal advice is the application of abstract principles of law to the concrete facts of the client's case to advise the client about what they should do next. In some jurisdictions, only a properly licensed lawyer may provide legal advice to clients for good consideration, even if no lawsuit is contemplated or is in progress. In these jurisdictions, even conveyancers and corporate in-house counsel must first get a license to practice, though they may actually spend very little of their careers in court. Some jurisdictions have made the violation of such a rule the crime of unauthorized practice of law.\nIn other countries, jurists who hold law degrees are allowed to provide legal advice to individuals or to corporations, and it is irrelevant if they lack a license and cannot appear in court. Some countries go further; in England and Wales, there is \"no\" general prohibition on the giving of legal advice. Singapore does not have any admission requirements for in-house counsel. Sometimes civil law notaries are allowed to give legal advice, as in Belgium.\nIn many countries, non-jurist accountants may provide what is technically legal advice in tax and accounting matters.\nProtecting intellectual property.\nIn virtually all countries, patents, trademarks, industrial designs and other forms of intellectual property must be formally registered with a government agency in order to receive maximum protection under the law. The division of such work among lawyers, licensed non-lawyer jurists/agents, and ordinary clerks or scriveners varies greatly from one country to the next.\nNegotiating and drafting contracts.\nIn some countries, the negotiating and drafting of contracts is considered to be similar to the provision of legal advice, so that it is subject to the licensing requirement explained above. In others, jurists or notaries may negotiate or draft contracts.\nConveyancing.\nConveyancing is the drafting of the documents necessary for the transfer of real property, such as deeds and mortgages. In some jurisdictions, all real estate transactions must be carried out by a lawyer. Historically, conveyancing accounted for about half of English solicitors' income, though this has since changed, and a 1978 study showed that conveyancing \"accounts for as much as 80 percent of solicitor-client contact in New South Wales.\" In most common law jurisdictions outside of the United States, this monopoly arose from an 1804 law that was introduced by William Pitt the Younger as a \"quid pro quo\" for the raising of fees on the certification of legal professionals such as barristers, solicitors, attorneys, and notaries.\nIn others, the use of a lawyer is optional and banks, title companies, or realtors may be used instead. In some civil law jurisdictions, real estate transactions are handled by civil law notaries. In England and Wales, a special class of legal professionals\u2013the licensed conveyancer\u2013is also allowed to carry out conveyancing services for reward.\nCarrying out the intent of the deceased.\nIn many countries, only lawyers have the legal authority to draft wills, trusts, and any other documents that ensure the efficient disposition of a person's property after death. In some civil law countries, this responsibility is handled by civil law notaries.\nProsecution and defense of criminal suspects.\nIn many civil law countries, prosecutors are trained and employed as part of the judiciary. They are law-trained jurists, but may not necessarily be lawyers in the sense that the word is used in the common law world. In common law countries, prosecutors are usually lawyers holding regular licenses who work for the government office that files criminal charges against suspects. Criminal defense lawyers specialize in the defense of those charged with any crimes.\nEducation and training.\nThe educational prerequisites for becoming a lawyer vary greatly across countries. In some countries, law is an undergraduate degree culminating in a bachelors or master's degree in law. In some of these jurisdictions, it is common or even required for students to earn another bachelor's degree at the same time. Where law is taught as an undergraduate degree, legal training after law school may comprise advanced examinations, apprenticeships, and additional coursework at special government institutes. For example, in many English common law jurisdictions, individuals with a law degree have to undergo further education and professional training before qualifying as a lawyer, such as the Bar Professional Training Course.\nIn other jurisdictions, particularly the United States and Canada, law is taught at the graduate level following the completion of an unrelated bachelor's degree. In America, the Americans Bar Association decides which law schools to approve for the purposes of admission to the bar. Law schools in the United States and Canada award graduating students a J.D. (Juris Doctor) as a professional degree. In a handful of U.S. states, one may become an attorney (a so-called country lawyer) by simply \"reading law\" and passing the bar examination, without having to attend law school first, although very few people actually become lawyers that way.\nThe methods and quality of legal education vary widely. Some countries require extensive clinical training in the form of apprenticeships or special clinical courses. Others, like Venezuela, do not. A few countries prefer to teach through assigned readings of judicial opinions (the casebook method) followed by intense in-class cross-examination by the professor (the Socratic method). Many others focus on theoretical aspects of law, leaving the professional and practical training of lawyers to apprenticeship and employment contexts.\nSome countries, particularly industrialized ones, have a traditional preference for full-time law programs, while in developing countries, students often work full- or part-time to pay the tuition and fees of their part-time law programs. Law schools in developing countries share several common problems, such as an over reliance on practicing judges and lawyers who treat teaching as a part-time commitment, a concomitant scarcity of full-time law professors), incompetent faculty with underqualified credentials, and textbooks that lag behind the current state of the law.\nEarning the right to practice law.\nSome jurisdictions grant a \"diploma privilege\" to certain institutions, so that merely earning a degree or credential from those institutions is the primary qualification for practicing law. Mexico allows anyone with a law degree to practice law. However, in a large number of countries, a law student must pass a bar examination (or a series of such examinations) before receiving a license to practice. Some countries require a formal apprenticeship with an experienced practitioner, while others do not. A few jurisdictions still allow an apprenticeship in place of any kind of formal legal education, though the number of persons who actually become lawyers that way is increasingly rare. Lawyer occupational licensing was found to increase legal costs.\nCareer structure.\nThe career structure of lawyers varies widely from one country to the next.\nCommon and civil law.\nIn most common law countries, especially those with fused professions, lawyers have many options over the course of their careers. Besides private practice, they can become a prosecutor, government counsel, corporate in-house counsel, administrative law judge, judge, arbitrator, or law professor. There are also many non-legal jobs for which legal training is good preparation, such as politician, corporate executive, government administrator, investment banker, entrepreneur, or journalist. In developing countries like India, a large majority of law students never actually practice, but simply use their law degree as a foundation for careers in other fields.\nIn most civil law countries, lawyers generally structure their legal education around their chosen specialty; the boundaries between different types of lawyers are carefully defined and hard to cross. After one earns a law degree, career mobility may be severely constrained. For example, unlike their Anglo-American counterparts, it is difficult for German judges to leave the bench and become advocates in private practice. Another interesting example is France, where for much of the 20th century, all judiciary officials were graduates of an elite professional school for judges.\nIn a few civil law countries, such as Sweden, the legal profession is not rigorously bifurcated and everyone within it can easily change roles and arenas.\nSpecialization.\nIn many countries, lawyers are general practitioners who represent clients in a broad field of legal matters. In others, there has been a tendency since the start of the 20th century for lawyers to specialize early in their careers. In countries where specialization is prevalent, many lawyers specialize in representing one side in one particular area of the law; thus, it is common in the United States to hear of plaintiffs' personal injury attorneys.\nOrganizations.\nLawyers in private practice generally work in specialized businesses known as law firms, with the exception of English barristers. The vast majority of law firms worldwide are small businesses that range in size from 1 to 10 lawyers. The United States, United Kingdom and Australia are exceptions, home to several firms with more than 1,000 lawyers after a wave of mergers in the late 1990s.\nNotably, barristers in England, Wales, Ireland, Northern Ireland and some states in Australia do \"not\" work in law firms. Those who offer their services to members of the general public\u2014as opposed to those working in-house \u2014 are generally self-employed. Most work in groupings known as \"sets\" or \"chambers\", where some administrative and marketing costs are shared. An important effect of this different organizational structure is that there is no conflict of interest where barristers in the same chambers work for opposing sides in a case, and in some specialized chambers this is commonplace.\nSome large businesses employ their own legal staff in a legal department. Other organizations buy in legal services from outside companies.\nProfessional associations.\nMandatory licensing and membership in professional organizations.\nIn some jurisdictions, either the judiciary or the Ministry of Justice directly supervises the admission, licensing, and regulation of lawyers.\nOther jurisdictions, by statute, tradition, or court order, have granted such powers to a professional association which all lawyers must belong to. In the U.S., such associations are known as mandatory, integrated, or unified bar associations. In the Commonwealth of Nations, similar organizations are known as Inns of Court, bar councils or law societies. In civil law countries, comparable organizations are known as Orders of Advocates, Chambers of Advocates, Colleges of Advocates, Faculties of Advocates, or similar names. Generally, a nonmember caught practicing law may be liable for the crime of unauthorized practice of law.\nIn common law countries with divided legal professions, barristers traditionally belong to the bar council (or an Inn of Court) and solicitors belong to the law society. In the English-speaking world, the largest mandatory professional association of lawyers is the State Bar of California, with 230,000 members.\nSome countries admit and regulate lawyers at the national level, so that a lawyer, once licensed, can argue cases in any court in the land. This can be seen in countries including New Zealand, Japan, and Belgium. Others, especially those with federal governments, tend to regulate lawyers at the state or provincial level; this is the case in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Switzerland, to name a few. Brazil is the most well-known federal government that regulates lawyers at the national level.\nSome countries, like Italy, regulate lawyers at the regional level, and a few, like Belgium, even regulate them at the local level (that is, they are licensed and regulated by the local equivalent of bar associations but can advocate in courts nationwide). In Germany, lawyers are admitted to regional bars and may appear for clients before all courts nationwide with the exception of the Federal Court of Justice of Germany (\"Bundesgerichtshof\" or BGH).\nGenerally, geographic limitations can be troublesome for a lawyer who discovers that his client's cause requires him to litigate in a court beyond the normal geographic scope of his license. Although most courts have special \"pro hac vice\" rules for such occasions, the lawyer will still have to deal with a different set of professional responsibility rules, as well as the possibility of other differences in substantive and procedural law.\nSome countries grant licenses to non-resident lawyers, who may then appear regularly on behalf of foreign clients. Others require all lawyers to live in the jurisdiction or to even hold national citizenship as a prerequisite for receiving a license to practice. But the trend in industrialized countries since the 1970s has been to abolish citizenship and residency restrictions. For example, the Supreme Court of Canada struck down a citizenship requirement on equality rights grounds in 1989, and similarly, American citizenship and residency requirements were struck down as unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 and 1985, respectively. The European Court of Justice made similar decisions in 1974 and 1977 striking down citizenship restrictions in Belgium and France.\nVoluntary associations.\nVoluntary lawyer associations may exist at all geographic levels from the provincial to the global. Some associations are termed voluntary bar associations. In some countries, lawyers have also formed trade unions.\nRegulation of lawyers.\nA key difference among countries is whether lawyers should be regulated solely by an independent judiciary and its subordinate institutions (a self-regulating legal profession), or whether lawyers should be subject to supervision by the Ministry of Justice in the executive branch.\nIn most civil law countries, the government has traditionally exercised tight control over the legal profession in order to ensure a steady supply of loyal judges and bureaucrats. That is, lawyers were expected first and foremost to serve the state, and the availability of counsel for private litigants was an afterthought. Even in civil law countries like Norway which have partially self-regulating professions, the Ministry of Justice is the sole issuer of licenses, and makes its own independent re-evaluation of a lawyer's fitness to practice after a lawyer has been expelled from the Advocates' Association. Brazil is an unusual exception in that its national Order of Advocates has become a fully self-regulating institution with direct control over licensing and has successfully resisted government attempts to place it under the control of the Ministry of Labor.\nOf all the civil law countries, communist countries historically went the farthest towards total state control, with all communist lawyers forced to practice in collectives by the mid-1950s. China is a prime example: technically, the People's Republic of China did not have lawyers, and instead had only poorly trained, state-employed \"legal workers\" prior to the enactment of a comprehensive reform package in 1996 by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.\nIn contrast, common law lawyers have traditionally regulated themselves through institutions where the influence of non-lawyers, if any, was weak and indirect, despite nominal state control. Such institutions have been traditionally dominated by private practitioners who opposed strong state control of the profession on the grounds that it would endanger the ability of lawyers to zealously and competently advocate their clients' causes in the adversarial system of justice. However, the concept of the self-regulating profession has been criticized as a sham which serves to legitimize the professional monopoly while protecting the profession from public scrutiny. In some jurisdictions, mechanisms have been astonishingly ineffective, and penalties have been light or nonexistent.\nCultural perception.\nHostility towards the legal profession is a widespread phenomenon. For example, William Shakespeare famously wrote, \"The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers\" in \"Henry VI, Part 2\", Act IV, Scene 2. The legal profession was abolished in Prussia in 1780 and in France in 1789, though both countries eventually realized that their judicial systems could not function efficiently without lawyers. Complaints about too many lawyers were common in both England and the United States in the 1840s, Germany in the 1910s, and in Australia, Canada, the United States, and Scotland in the 1980s.\nPublic distrust of lawyers reached record heights in the United States after the Watergate scandal. In the aftermath of Watergate, legal self-help books became popular among those who wished to solve their legal problems without having to deal with lawyers. Lawyer jokes also soared in popularity in English-speaking North America as a result of Watergate.\nIn \"Adventures in Law and Justice\", legal researcher Bryan Horrigan dedicated a chapter to \"Myths, Fictions, and Realities\" about law and illustrated the perennial criticism of lawyers as \"amoral [...] guns for hire\" with a quote from Ambrose Bierce's satirical \"The Devil's Dictionary\" that summarized the noun as: \"LAWYER, n. One skilled in circumvention of the law.\"\nMore generally, in \"Legal Ethics: A Comparative Study\", law professor Geoffrey C. Hazard, Jr. with Angelo Dondi briefly examined the \"regulations attempting to suppress lawyer misconduct\" and noted that their similarity around the world was paralleled by a \"remarkable consistency\" in certain \"persistent grievances\" about lawyers that transcends both time and locale, from the Bible to medieval England to dynastic China. The authors then generalized these common complaints about lawyers as being classified into five \"general categories\" as follows:\nSome studies have shown that suicide rates among lawyers in certain jurisdictions may be as much as six times higher than the average population, and commentators suggest that the low opinion the public has of lawyers, combined with their own high ideals of justice, which in practice they may see denied, increase the depression rates of those in this profession. Additionally, lawyers are twice as likely to suffer from addiction to alcohol and other drugs.\nCompensation.\nIn the United States, lawyers typically earn between $100,000 and $220,000 per year, although earnings vary by age, experience, and practice setting.\nLawyers are paid for their work in a variety of ways. In private practice, they may work for an hourly fee according to a billable hour structure, a contingency fee, or a lump sum payment. Normally, most lawyers negotiate a written fee agreement up front and may require a non-refundable retainer in advance. Recent studies suggest that when lawyers charge a fixed fee rather than billing by the hour, they work less hard on behalf of clients, and clients get worse outcomes. In many countries there are fee-shifting arrangements by which the loser must pay the winner's fees and costs; the United States is the major exception, although in turn, its legislators have carved out many exceptions to the so-called \"American Rule\" of no fee shifting.\nLawyers working directly on the payroll of governments, nonprofits, and corporations usually earn a regular annual salary. In many countries, lawyers can also volunteer their labor in the service of worthy causes through an arrangement called \"pro bono\" (short for \"pro bono publico\", \"for the common good\"). Traditionally such work was performed on behalf of the poor, but in some countries it has now expanded to many other causes such as environmental law.\nIn some countries, there are legal aid lawyers who specialize in providing legal services to the indigent. France and Spain even have formal fee structures by which lawyers are compensated by the government for legal aid cases on a per-case basis. A similar system, though not as extensive or generous, operates in Australia, Canada, and South Africa.\nIn other countries, legal aid specialists are practically nonexistent. This may be because non-lawyers are allowed to provide such services; in both Italy and Belgium, trade unions and political parties provide what can be characterized as legal aid services. Some legal aid in Belgium is also provided by young lawyer apprentices subsidized by local bar associations (known as the \"pro deo\" system), as well as consumer protection nonprofit organizations and Public Assistance Agencies subsidized by local governments. In Germany, mandatory fee structures have enabled widespread implementation of affordable legal expense insurance.\nHistory.\nAncient Greece.\nThe earliest people who could be described as \"lawyers\" were probably the orators of ancient Athens. However, Athenian orators faced serious structural obstacles. First, there was a rule that individuals were supposed to plead their own cases, which was soon bypassed by the increasing tendency of individuals to ask a \"friend\" for assistance. However, around the middle of the fourth century, the Athenians disposed of the perfunctory request for a friend. Second, a more serious obstacle, which the Athenian orators never completely overcame, was the rule that no one could take a fee to plead the cause of another. This law was widely disregarded in practice, but was never abolished, which meant that orators could \"never\" present themselves as legal professionals or experts. They had to uphold the legal fiction that they were merely an ordinary citizen generously helping out a friend for free, and thus they could never organize into a real profession. If one narrows the definition of lawyers to people who could practice the legal profession openly and legally, then the first lawyers would be the orators of ancient Rome.\nAncient Rome.\nA law enacted in 204 BC barred Roman advocates from taking fees, but the law was widely ignored. The ban on fees was abolished by Emperor Claudius, who legalized advocacy as a profession and allowed the Roman advocates to become the first lawyers who could practice openly\u2014but he also imposed a fee ceiling of 10,000 sesterces. This was apparently not much money; the Satires of Juvenal complained that there was no money in working as an advocate.\nLike their Greek contemporaries, early Roman advocates were trained in rhetoric, not law, and the judges before whom they argued were also not legally trained. But very early on, unlike Athens, Rome developed a class of specialists who were learned in the law, known as jurisconsults (\"iuris consulti\"). Jurisconsults were wealthy amateurs who dabbled in law as an intellectual hobby; they did not make their primary living from it. They gave legal opinions (\"responsa\") on legal issues to all comers (a practice known as \"publice respondere\"). Roman judges and governors would routinely consult with an advisory panel of jurisconsults before rendering a decision, and advocates and ordinary people also went to jurisconsults for legal opinions. The Romans were the first to have a class of people who spent their days thinking about legal problems, and this is why their law developed in a systematic and technical way.\nDuring the Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire, jurisconsults and advocates were unregulated, since the former were amateurs and the latter were technically illegal. Any citizen could call himself an advocate or a legal expert, though whether people believed him would depend upon his personal reputation. This changed once Claudius legalized the legal profession. By the start of the Byzantine Empire, the legal profession had become well-established, heavily regulated, and highly stratified. The centralization and bureaucratization of the profession was apparently gradual at first, but accelerated during the reign of Emperor Hadrian. At the same time, the jurisconsults went into decline during the imperial period.\nBy the fourth century, advocates had to be enrolled on the bar of a court to argue before it, they could only be attached to one court at a time, and there were restrictions on how many advocates could be enrolled at a particular court. By the 380s, advocates were studying law in addition to rhetoric, thus reducing the need for a separate class of jurisconsults; in 460, Emperor Leo imposed a requirement that new advocates seeking admission had to produce testimonials from their teachers; and by the sixth century, a regular course of legal study lasting about four years was required for admission. Claudius's fee ceiling lasted all the way into the Byzantine period, though by then it was measured at 100 solidi. It was widely evaded, either through demands for maintenance and expenses or a \"sub rosa\" barter transaction. The latter was cause for disbarment.\nThe notaries (\"tabelliones\") appeared in the late Roman Empire. Like their modern-day descendants, the civil law notaries, they were responsible for drafting wills, conveyances, and contracts. They were ubiquitous and most villages had one. In Roman times, notaries were widely considered to be inferior to advocates and jury consults.\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the onset of the Early Middle Ages, the legal profession of Western Europe collapsed. As James Brundage has explained: \"[by 1140], no one in Western Europe could properly be described as a professional lawyer or a professional canonist in anything like the modern sense of the term 'professional.' \" However, from 1150 (when was compiled) onward, a small but increasing number of men became experts in canon law but only in furtherance of other occupational goals, such as serving the Catholic Church as priests. From 1190 to 1230, however, there was a crucial shift in which some men began to practice canon law as a lifelong profession in itself.\nThe legal profession's return was marked by the renewed efforts of church and state to regulate it. In 1231, two French councils mandated that lawyers had to swear an oath of admission before practicing before the bishop's courts in their regions, and a similar oath was promulgated by the papal legate in London in 1237. During the same decade, the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire Frederick II, the king of the Kingdom of Sicily, imposed a similar oath in his civil courts. By 1250, the nucleus of a new legal profession had clearly formed. The new trend towards professionalization culminated in a controversial proposal at the Second Council of Lyon in 1275 that \"all\" ecclesiastical courts should require an oath of admission. Although not adopted by the council, it was highly influential in many such courts throughout Europe. The civil courts in England also joined the trend towards professionalization; in 1275 a statute was enacted that prescribed punishment for professional lawyers guilty of deceit, and in 1280 the mayor's court of the city of London promulgated regulations concerning admission procedures, including the administering of an oath. And in 1345, the French crown promulgated a royal ordinance which set forth 24 rules governing advocates, of which 12 were integrated into the oath to be taken by them.\nThe French medieval oaths were widely influential and of enduring importance; for example, they directly influenced the structure of the advocates' oath adopted by the Canton of Geneva in 1816. In turn, the 1816 Geneva oath served as the inspiration for the attorney's oath drafted by David Dudley Field as Section 511 of the proposed New York Code of Civil Procedure of 1848, which was the first attempt in the United States at a comprehensive statement of a lawyer's professional duties.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17542", "revid": "50970500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17542", "title": "Logrolling", "text": "Trading of favors by legislative members\nLogrolling is the trading of favors, or \"quid pro quo\", such as vote trading by legislative members to obtain passage of actions of interest to each legislative member. In organizational analysis, it refers to a practice in which different organizations promote each other's agendas, each in the expectation that the other will reciprocate. In an academic context, the \"Nuttall Encyclopedia\" describes logrolling as \"mutual praise by authors of each other's work\". Where intricate tactics or strategy are involved, the process may be called horse trading.\nConcept and origin.\nThere are three types of logrolling:\nDistributive logrolling is the most prevalent kind of logrolling found in a democratic system of governance.\n\"Quid pro quo\" sums up the concept of logrolling in the United States' political process today. Logrolling is the process by which politicians trade support for one issue or piece of legislation in exchange for another politician's support, especially by means of legislative votes (Holcombe 2006). If a legislator logrolls, he initiates the trade of votes for one particular act or bill in order to secure votes on behalf of another act or bill. Logrolling means that two parties will pledge their mutual support, so both bills can attain a simple majority. For example, a vote on behalf of a tariff may be traded by a congressman for a vote from another congressman on behalf of an agricultural subsidy to ensure that both acts will gain a majority and pass through the legislature (Shughart 2008). Logrolling cannot occur during presidential elections, where a vast voting population necessitates that individual votes have little political power, or during secret-ballot votes (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Because logrolling is pervasive in the political process, it is important to understand which external situations determine when, why, and how logrolling will occur, and whether it is beneficial, efficient, or neither.\nOrigins.\nThe widest accepted origin is the old custom of neighbors assisting each other with the moving of logs. If two neighbors had cut a lot of timber that needed to be moved, it made more sense for them to work together to roll the logs. In this way, it is similar to a barn-raising where a neighbor comes and helps a family build their barn, and, in turn, that family goes and returns the favor, helping him build his. Here is an example of the term's original use:\n\"A family comes to sit in the forest,\" wrote an observer in 1835; \"Their neighbors lay down their employments, shoulder their axes, and come in to the log-rolling. They spend the day in hard labor, and then retire, leaving the newcomers their good wishes, and a habitation.\"\nAmerican frontiersman Davy Crockett was one of the first to apply the term to legislation:\nThe first known use of the term was by Congressman Davy Crockett, who said on the floor (of the U.S. House of Representatives) in 1835, \"my people don't like me to log-roll in their business, and vote away pre-emption rights to fellows in other states that never kindle a fire on their own land.\"\nChoice to logroll.\nHuman beings, whether ignorant or informed, rational or irrational, logical or illogical, determine individual and group action through choices. Economics studies these choices, including the choice to logroll, and their particular influence within the market sector (Schwartz 1977). In America, political and economic decisions are usually made by politicians elected to legislative assemblies, and not directly by the citizenry (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Although legislative votes are recorded and are available to the American public, legislators can exchange their votes on issues they do not care much about for votes on other issues that are more important to their personal agendas (Holcombe 2006). In \"The Calculus of Consent\", James M. Buchanan and Gordon Tullock explore the relationship between individual choice in the voting process and in the marketplace, specifically within logrolling. Logrolling vote trades, like any activity within the marketplace, must be mutually beneficial (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nA vote trade is like a legislative IOU. When a legislator needs a few more votes to acquire a simple majority, he will seek support through a vote exchange. He will promise a fellow legislator an IOU vote for another piece of legislation in return for a vote on his own act or bill. Legislators who logroll within a small body, for example, the U.S. House or Senate, have an incentive to honor their IOU votes because they cannot have their reputations tainted if they wish to be effective politicians (Holcombe 2006).\nLogrolling and the role of preference.\nPeople have varying preferences, and make decisions at the margin to maximize their utility and improve their welfare. The same is true for legislators, who all enter office with different agendas, passions, and goals. Ideological diversity plays a significant role in the result of a vote and carries with it a significant cost. In addition, legislators will favor interests that offer them the most support. Legislative votes are determined by the intensity of personal preference, desires of constituents, and, ultimately, what will lead to the particular legislator's greatest utility. When people have ideologies at opposite ends of the political spectrum, it's difficult to ensure a simple majority, so buying a supermajority vote through logrolling may be the most cost effective (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nIn the General Possibility Theorem, Kenneth Arrow argues that if a legislative consensus can be reached through a simple majority, then minimum conditions must be satisfied, and these conditions must provide a superior ranking to any subset of alternative votes (Arrow 1963). A bill must be attractive to a legislator, or else he will not cast his vote for it. A vote, by the pure nature of the voting process, demonstrates explicit interest in whatever is voted upon. In logrolling, a superior ranking means that the marginal benefit of the vote is greater than any alternatives, so exchanging votes is worthwhile. The General Possibility Theorem necessitates that allocating one vote for another must constitute true utility and a sincere vote. Arrow's theory may place more restrictions and limitations on an individual voter's preferences than Buchanan and Tullock's; regardless, individuals will always choose the option they value most.\nLogrolling to reach the optimal decision.\nDecisions reach an optimum only when they are unanimous, when votes are not coerced and everyone has veto power (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Unanimous votes, however, are not required for the American voting process. This is why some logrolling advocates argue that logrolling must be allowed within a democracy\u2014sometimes there may not be a \"best\" or \"most efficient\" option on a vote.\nLogrolling creates a market within which votes are exchanged as a sort of currency, and thus, facilitates the political process that produces the highest valued outcomes (Holcombe 2006). If individual participants recognize the value of their own vote, they are motivated to trade. When methods of trade do not conflict with given standards or ethical procedures, individuals naturally seek mutually advantageous vote trades. An individual may effectually, but imperfectly, \"sell\" his vote on a particular issue to, in return, secure votes from other individuals on behalf of legislation he prefers (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nLogrolling has one necessary condition: benefits from the public activity must be significantly more concentrated or localized than the costs. In economics, decisions are made at the margin. Logrolling depends on the reality that the marginal benefit (or utility) of at least some elected officials, or the citizenry, will increase when the legislation is passed (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Any economist will consider the immediate opportunity cost of the logrolling procedure within the legislative body, as well as the external cost of the vote (the cost to enact and see the bill through to fruition).\nWhen transaction costs are low and parties involved are perfectly informed, a mutually beneficial agreement will occur: whoever values the property the highest will end up with it. This is what Ronald H. Coase proposed in his \"Theory of Property Rights\" in 1960. This theory holds true within the world of economics. In the American system of government, legislators have the incentive to logroll because transaction costs are low. When transaction costs are low, the Coase theorem says that the political marketplace (the decisions of the legislatures) will allocate resources to the highest valued point (Coase 1960).\nTypically, logrolling is a mechanism used to gain support for special interest and minority groups. However, because of the ideological mix that already exists within the legislature itself, minority views are often represented, even if only marginally. With low transaction costs, the Coase theorem will come into play. The highest valued outcome is chosen by the legislature, regardless the member's ideological stance or political affiliation (Holcombe 2006).\nThe problem of cyclical majorities may arise with the absence of logrolling. The cyclical majority problem occurs when voters are faced with multiple voting options but cannot choose the option they most prefer, since it is not available. Voters must consider whether the alternative option is closer to their original preference (Bara and Weale 2006). However, when logrolling is allowed, the highest valued outcome is secure without the threat of a cyclical majority. For example, suppose a country road in West Virginia is in disrepair. The local congressman proposes a bill to have the main road in his community resurfaced and paved. The road leads to a town of merely 600 residents. Thus, the other legislators will vote against the measure because the funding is not worthwhile to their constituents. In a logrolling system, the local legislator can use his vote to bargain with his fellow legislators. He will exchange his vote for his fellow legislators' bills to promote, for instance, the construction of new hospitals and the increase of veteran's benefits, in return for their votes to repair the road (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nLogrolling: An example.\nTable 1-1 explains another example of logrolling. In the example, we have three individuals: Tanya, Alvin, and Rebecca. Tanya favors subsidies for agriculture, Alvin favors school construction, and Rebecca favors the recruitment of more firefighters. It seems as if the proposals are doomed to fail because each is opposed by a majority of voters. Even so, this may not be the outcome. Tanya may visit Rebecca and tell her that she will vote for Rebecca's bill to recruit more firefighters so long as Rebecca votes for her policy, subsidies for agriculture, in return. Now both proposals will win because they have gained a simple majority (Table 1-2), even though in reality the subsidy is opposed by two of the three voters. It's easy to see the Coase theorem at work in examples like this. Here, transaction costs are low, so mutually beneficial agreements are found, and the person who values the service the most will hold it (Browning and Browning 1979). Still, outcomes may be inefficient.\nEfficient logrolling.\nIf the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all the voters is less than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is inefficient. Despite its inefficiency, however, it still may pass if logrolling is permitted. If Tanya trades her vote to recruit more firemen to Rebecca in exchange for Rebecca's vote in favor of agriculture subsidies, a mutually beneficial agreement will be reached, even though the outcome is inefficient. On the other hand, if the sum of the total benefit of the legislation for all voters is greater than the cost of the legislation itself, the legislation is efficient. If Tanya trades her vote once again for Rebecca's vote, both parties will reach a mutually beneficial agreement and an efficient outcome.\nMinimum winning coalitions and logrolling.\nA minimum winning coalition is the smallest number of votes required to win the passage of a piece of legislation. Minimum winning coalitions demonstrate the importance of logrolling within a democracy, because the minimal winning coalition may be overthrown with the sway of a single vote. As previously mentioned, coalitions will buy a supermajority of votes if the support for the proposed legislation sways. If a legislator logrolls a few votes beyond the minimal winning coalition to his side, he will ensure that the final vote will be in favor of his legislation. In a way, vote trading does combine positions on distinct issues to form single legislative votes and packages (Stratmann 1992). Logrolled votes transcend affiliations and party lines and become feasible outcomes preferred by a majority or winning coalition (Schwartz 1977).\nLogrolling in real politics.\nA problem in research is that it is impossible to identify vote trading directly within the House of Representatives or the Senate because roll call votes on specific goods are not observed (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). However, examples of refurbished bills can shed some light on the working-out of logrolling within the legislature. For example, in 1930, the Smoot-Hawley tariff, the second-highest tariff in U.S. history, passed the House and Senate. Congress voted to increase tariffs exponentially, which worked to push the United States from a stagnant recession into a plummeting depression (Irwin and Kroszner 1996). Strict party line votes suggest that partisan polarization in 1929 prevented the Smoot-Hawley bill from passing through Congress. The bill, however, was revamped, and legislators used logrolling to pass it through both chambers in 1930.\nOmnibus bills can be an alternative market to logrolling. Various clauses are added to a bill to satisfy all involved parties sufficiently. However, large bills, like the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, require an in depth knowledge of 1,000 plus pages. Many sections of these types of bills are initially opposed but are later supported because of special benefit clauses (Evans 1994).\nBecause logrolling allows special-interest groups a voice in the political process, programs that benefit a minority group can get the approval of a majority. However, this may not be in the best interest of the majority. Special-interest groups typically do not represent the typical voter, but rather, small branches of minority ideologies (Holcombe 2006). Voting results with or without logrolling will differ only if the minority is more interested in an issue than the majority, enough to separate the marginal voters from the majority. Studies show that lobbying and political pressure exerted by special-interest groups are not atypical behavior in a modern democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Conditions imposed upon the social choice of the legislature imply a more severe restriction on the individual voter's preferences than the theory of logrolling presented by Buchanan and Tullock and presumed by Arrow's General Possibility Theory (Wilson 1969).\nCritics reproach members of Congress for protecting their own electoral interests at the expense of the general welfare. Congressmen tend to distribute specialized benefits at a great cost and ignore the particular costs the legislation bears upon the taxpayers (Evans 1994). Legislators, who seek their personal benefit via logrolling even though it may not benefit those who must pay for the measure, are known as maximizers. Maximizers only take into account their personal cost and electability, instead of the effects of their actions on other parties involved. In short, other taxpayers will pay for the policy even if it does not affect them (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). Initially, maximizers will encourage other legislators to have the same selfish behavior because significant gains can be accrued in the short run. Buchanan and Tullock state that within a system of maximizers, all individuals are worse off than if they had all adopted Kantian norms of behavior.\nLegislative bodies can expect higher government spending and taxation when logrolling is allowed to flourish. Logrolling does not imply excessive spending; members can trade tax reductions just as easily as they can trade pork barrel policies. The problem is that benefits of a vote only reach a particular portion of the population, while the tax costs that pay for the vote are spread throughout the entire populace, especially when the act depends on revenue from sales or income taxes. Benefits are concentrated in localities, and the costs are dispersed throughout the nation. Committee members can thus exploit pork barrel projects for electoral purposes. The citizenry is seen as a \"common pool,\" used to finance projects through taxes. Somehow the citizens end up paying higher taxes than those who are not in a logroll system (Dalenberg and Duffy-Deno 1991 and Gilligan and Matsusaka 1995). In a system where logrolling is permitted, a third party may bear the cost of the project, rather than those who receive the full benefit of the legislation. This is always inefficient.\nThe logic of collective action shows that votes for bills are motivated by politicians and are determined by a simple majority (Olson 1971). Politicians are in the game to win it. Collective effort explains why farms acquire government subsidies at the expense of millions of consumers and why those in the textile industry benefit at the expense of clothing buyers (Shughart 2008). Congressional committees ensure that each committee leader will create legislative coalitions to push his policies to fruition. Thus, ceteris paribus, members who receive such projects, are likely to vote in support of their leader's wishes (Evans 1994).\nPolicymakers and congressmen have goals of power, and making their own mark in public policy, not pure aims of reelection (Dodd 1977). Reelection does play a great part in the legislative process as a condition to achieving any other political goal. Thus, logrolling can be a powerful tool for committee chairs, who control the voting agendas (Evans 1994). While committee leaders create the supermajority, they try to achieve their personal goals and help a bare majority of members achieve theirs. A skilled policy-oriented committee leader often seeks to exploit the goals of other members in order to construct legislation he or she will prefer (Arnold 1979 and Strahan 1989).\nWafelijzerpolitiek.\n\"Wafelijzerpolitiek\" (lit. waffle iron politics) is a form of logrolling used in Belgium. Until the split of the unitary Belgium in several parts, the unitary government decided on the funds given to big projects. As there were usually two opposing groups of about equal size in Belgium, this norm resulted in the approval of two equally sized projects in the two parts of the country, with the funds given to the two projects being equal. As a result, one project was always overfunded. Many see \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" as the source of Belgium's high debt.\nAfter the first state reformation in 1988, many big projects were decided regionally, so the number of \"wafelijzer\" projects went down. There are still some things that fall under the supervision of the federal government, where \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" still happens. One example is the Belgian railway network.\nAnother result of the \"wafelijzerpolitiek\" is the big useless works. As Flanders is a part of Belgium with many ports (e.g., big ports in Antwerp and Zeebrugge), for every investment in Flemish waterways there had to be an investment in Walloon waterways. Some results are the Ronqui\u00e8res inclined plane and the Str\u00e9py-Thieu boat lift.\nSimple referendums.\nIn a referendum on a simple issue, the voter cannot easily trade his own vote for a vote on a reciprocal favor. This is because first, he is unsure as to when and how the other issues will be voted upon, and second, he and his immediate neighbors represent a fraction of the total electorate. Thus, trading may not be worthwhile (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nVote trading under a democratic, majority-rule institution is sometimes considered morally reprehensible behavior. However, the only perfect solution to rid the political system of distributive logrolling would be to develop a specific formula to weigh the costs and benefits of legislation perfectly and only allow efficient programs to be enacted (This is inconceivable. Therefore, logrolling must occur, but only by observing the constitutional rules that have been laid down as safeguards of democracy (Buchanan and Tullock 1962).\nSummary.\nThe reality is that transaction costs are high, and most voters, who are ignorant of political issues and the political process, see little incentive to attempt to influence their local legislator's political decisions (Holcombe 2006). It is also difficult for voters to be informed of their legislator's voting habits. Because of this, distributive logrolling will occur in democratic systems. Furthermore, it is the responsibility of the legislator to measure the costs and benefits of legislation and determine what is most efficient for his constituents. Logrolling will occur only if members of the legislature fail to gather enough votes for the passage of specific legislation. In essence, logrolling is a legal way to manipulate voter preference toward either an efficient or an inefficient outcome that would not otherwise be enacted (Browning 1979).\nLegality.\nLogrolling is illegal in numerous jurisdictions, and in some instances is a crime. Sophisticated computational techniques have been developed for the detection and prosecution of this crime.\nOther usages.\n\"Spy Magazine\" ran a feature entitled \"Logrolling in Our Time\" that cited suspicious or humorous examples of mutually admiring book jacket blurbs by pairs of authors. \"Private Eye\" magazine regularly draws attention to alleged logrolling by authors in \"books of the year\" features published by British newspapers and magazines.\nLog rolling or a hodgepodge legislation in the Philippines also refers to any legislation that have several subjects on unrelated matters combined together. It is expressed in Article 6 Section 26.1 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution as a guarantee to prevent surprise or fraud from the legislature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17544", "revid": "2325890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17544", "title": "Playing by ear", "text": "Ability to reproduce music without seeing notation\nPlaying or learning by ear is the ability of a performing musician to reproduce a piece of music they have heard, without having seen it notated in any form of sheet music. It is considered to be a desirable skill among musical performers, especially for those that play in a musical tradition where notating music is not the norm.\nIt is a misconception that musicians who play by ear do not have or do not require musical education, or have no theoretical understanding of the music they are playing.\nPlaying by ear is often also used to refer more generally to making music without using musical notation, perhaps using (elements of) improvisation and instant composition.\nBlues, pop, jazz, and many forms of non-western music are fundamentally rooted in the concept of playing by ear, where musical compositions are passed down from generation to generation. In this respect, playing by ear can also be seen as a music-specific example of oral tradition.\nThe concept of playing by ear has led to the development of the idiom to play by ear or \"play \"it\" by ear.\"\nMethod.\nOne learns a piece of music by ear by repeatedly listening to it performed, memorizing it, and then trying to recreate what one has heard. This requires the use of several related skills such as ear training, musical perception, tonal memory, audiation, music theory, techniques, and knowledge about the culture of the music one is trying to learn. As such, learning to play by ear involves training those skills as well.\nTo practice playing music by ear, music teachers often have a student listen to short musical examples which the student will have to write out in musical notation, play back on an instrument, sing, or describe using note names or a solf\u00e8ge system. Musicians will also train their playing by ear skills by taking recordings of full songs and pieces, figuring out the notes by ear, and either transcribing or memorizing them. According to studies playing by ear is associated with a higher level of creativity and musical intelligence. \nAudiation is a vital skill for playing music by ear. Edwin Gordon, originator of the term, describes audiation as: \"the foundation of musicianship. It takes place when we hear and comprehend music for which the sound is no longer or may never have been present.\" It is often described as the ability to hear music in your head. In this sense, audiation is to music what thought is to language. \nLearning to play by ear, in the sense of making music without notation, is often compared to learning to speak a language. When sufficiently mastered, playing music by ear should be as comfortable and easy as having a conversation. We speak and react to what we hear, without having to think too deeply about every word we use. The same would be true when playing by ear. A musician can produce a sound at the same time they think of it, without having to consider every separate note they play.\nExistence in musical traditions.\nIn most instances, traditions in which music is primarily learned by ear do not use musical notation in any form. Some examples are early Blues guitarists and pianists, Romani fiddlers, and folk music guitarists.\nOne particularly prominent example is Indian classical music: the teaching methods of its two major strands (\"Hindustani\" and \"Carnatic\") are almost exclusively oral.\nIn the West.\nHistorically, the Western classical music tradition has been based on the process of learning new pieces from musical notation, and hence playing by ear has a lower importance in musical training. Before the widespread use of sheet music, much early medieval Western music was learnt by ear, particularly in monasteries.\nHowever, many teaching methods in this tradition incorporate playing by ear in some form. For instance, \"ear training\" courses are a standard part of conservatory or college music programs (including use of Solf\u00e8ge), and the Suzuki method, which incorporates a highly developed focus on playing by ear from a very young age.\nIn the West, learning by ear is also used heavily in the genres of folk music, blues, rock, pop, funk, reggae, and jazz. While most professional musicians currently active in these genres are capable of reading musical notation, playing by ear is still widely practiced for a number of reasons. Among those are ease and speed of learning songs, flexibility while improvising and playing variations, and working around the limitations of western musical notation. \nSince western musical notation was developed for classical music, musicians sometimes run into issues when musical expressions are commonly used in the genre they are performing but not in classical music. Examples of this are percussion instruments in Afro-Cuban music, where different strokes and techniques are used to produce different tones and timbres, or improvised music like jazz and classical Indian music, where large parts of the composition consists of guidelines for improvisation. Western musical notation can be ill-suited for these situations, and although supplements to musical notation can be invented to try to accommodate this, playing by ear and oral learning are often preferred because of readability, ease, and tradition.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17546", "revid": "51068845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17546", "title": "Louvre", "text": "Art museum in Paris, France\nThe Louvre, or the Louvre Museum ( ), is a national art museum in Paris, France, and the most visited museum in the world. It is located on the Right Bank of the Seine in the city's 1st arrondissement (district) and home to some of the most canonical works of Western art, including the \"Mona Lisa\", \"Venus de Milo\", and \"Winged Victory\". The museum is housed in the Louvre Palace, originally built in the late 12th to 13th\u00a0century under Philip II. Remnants of the Medieval Louvre fortress are visible in the basement of the museum. Due to urban expansion, the fortress eventually lost its defensive function, and in 1546 Francis I converted it into the primary residence of the French kings.\nThe building was redesigned and extended many times to form the present Louvre Palace. In 1682, Louis XIV chose the Palace of Versailles for his household, leaving the Louvre primarily as a place to display the royal collection, including, from 1692, a collection of ancient Greek and Roman sculpture. In 1692, the building was occupied by the and the Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Peinture et de Sculpture, which in 1699 held the first of a series of salons. The Acad\u00e9mie remained at the Louvre for 100 years. During the French Revolution, the National Assembly decreed that the Louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation's masterpieces. The palace and exhibition space was expanded in the 19th century and again in the 20th.\nThe museum opened on 10 August 1793 with an exhibition of 537\u00a0paintings, the majority of the works being royal and confiscated church property. Because of structural problems with the building, the museum was closed from 1796 until 1801. The collection was increased under Napoleon, after the Napoleonic looting of art in Europe, Egypt, and Syria, and the museum was renamed \"Mus\u00e9e Napol\u00e9on\", but after Napoleon's abdication, many works seized by his armies were returned to their original owners. The collection was further increased during the reigns of Louis XVIII and Charles X, and during the Second French Empire the museum gained 20,000\u00a0pieces. Holdings have grown steadily through donations and bequests since the Third Republic. The collection is divided into eight departments: Egyptian Antiquities; Near Eastern Antiquities; Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Antiquities; Islamic Art; Sculpture; Decorative Arts; Paintings; Prints and Drawings.\nThe Mus\u00e9e du Louvre contains approximately 500,000\u00a0objects and displays 35,000\u00a0works of art in eight curatorial departments with more than dedicated to the permanent collection. The Louvre exhibits sculptures, objets d'art, paintings, drawings, and archaeological finds. At any given point in time, approximately 38,000\u00a0objects from prehistory to the 21st century are being exhibited over an area of , making it the largest museum in the world. It received 8.7 million visitors in 2024, ranking it as the most-visited art museum, and most-visited museum of any category, in the world.\nLocation and visiting.\nThe Louvre Museum is located inside the Louvre Palace, in the center of Paris, adjacent to the Tuileries Gardens. The two nearest M\u00e9tro stations are Louvre\u2013Rivoli and Palais Royal\u2013Mus\u00e9e du Louvre, the latter having a direct underground access to the Carrousel du Louvre commercial mall.\nBefore the Grand Louvre overhaul of the late 1980s and 1990s, the Louvre had several street-level entrances, most of which are now permanently closed. Since 1993, the museum's main entrance has been the underground space under the Louvre Pyramid, or \"Hall Napol\u00e9on\", which can be accessed from the Pyramid itself, from the underground Carrousel du Louvre, or (for authorised visitors) from the connecting to the nearby rue de Rivoli. A secondary entrance at the , near the western end of the Denon Wing, was created in 1999 but is not permanently open.\nThe museum's entrance conditions have varied over time. Prior to the 1850s, artists and foreign visitors had privileged access. At the time of initial opening in 1793, the French Republican calendar had imposed ten-day \"weeks\" (), the first six days of which were reserved for visits by artists and foreigners and the last three for visits by the general public.37 In the early 1800s, after the seven-day week had been reinstated, the general public had only four hours of museum access per week, between 2pm and 4pm on Saturdays and Sundays. In 1824, a new regulation allowed public access only on Sundays and holidays; the other days the museum was open only to artists and foreigners, except for closure on Mondays.39 That changed in 1855 when the museum became open to the public all days except Mondays.40 It was free until 1922, when an entrance fee was introduced except on Sundays.42 Since its post-World War II reopening in 1946, the Louvre has been closed on Tuesdays, and habitually open to the public the rest of the week except for some holidays.\nThe use of cameras and video recorders is permitted inside, but flash photography is forbidden.\nBeginning in 2012, Nintendo 3DS portable video game systems were used as the official museum audio guides. The following year, the museum contracted Nintendo to create a 3DS-based audiovisual visitor guide. Entitled \"Nintendo 3DS Guide: Louvre\", it contains over 30 hours of audio and over 1,000 photographs of artwork and the museum itself, including 3D views, and also provides navigation thanks to differential GPS transmitters installed within the museum.\nThe upgraded 2013 Louvre guide was also announced in a special Nintendo Direct featuring Satoru Iwata and Shigeru Miyamoto demonstrating it at the museum, and 3DS XLs pre-loaded with the guide are available to rent at the museum. The 3DS Louvre guide was scheduled to be retired in September 2025 and will be replaced by a different guide system.\nHistory.\nBefore the museum.\nThe Louvre Palace, which houses the museum, was begun by King Philip II in the late 12th century to protect the city from the attack from the west, as the Kingdom of England still held Normandy at the time. Remnants of the Medieval Louvre are still visible in the crypt.32 Whether this was the first building on that spot is not known, and it is possible that Philip modified an existing tower.\nThe origins of the name \"Louvre\" are somewhat disputed. According to the authoritative \"Grand Larousse encyclop\u00e9dique\", the name derives from an association with a wolf hunting den (via Latin: \"lupus\", lower Empire: \"lupara\"). In the 7th century, Burgundofara (also known as Saint Fare), abbess in Meaux, is said to have given part of her \"Villa called Luvra situated in the region of Paris\" to a monastery, even though it is doubtful that this land corresponded exactly to the present site of the Louvre.\nThe Louvre Palace has been subject to numerous renovations since its construction. In the 14th\u00a0century, Charles V converted the building from its military role into a residence. In 1546, Francis I started its rebuilding in French Renaissance style. After Louis XIV chose Versailles as his residence in 1682, construction works slowed to a halt. The royal move away from Paris resulted in the Louvre being used as a residence for artists, under Royal patronage.42 For example, four generations of craftsmen-artists from the Boulle family were granted Royal patronage and resided in the Louvre.\nMeanwhile, the collections of the Louvre originated in the acquisitions of paintings and other artworks by the monarchs of the House of France. At the Palace of Fontainebleau, Francis collected art that would later be part of the Louvre's art collections, including Leonardo da Vinci's \"Mona Lisa\".\nThe Cabinet du Roi consisted of seven rooms west of the Galerie d'Apollon on the upper floor of the remodelled Petite Galerie. Many of the king's paintings were placed in these rooms in 1673, when it became an art gallery, accessible to certain art lovers as a kind of museum. In 1681, after the court moved to Versailles, 26 of the paintings were transferred there, somewhat diminishing the collection, but it is mentioned in Paris guide books from 1684 on, and was shown to ambassadors from Siam in 1686.\nBy the mid-18th\u00a0century there were proposals to create a public gallery in the Louvre. Art critic \u00c9tienne La Font de Saint-Yenne in 1747 published a call for a display of the royal collection. On 14 October 1750, Louis XV decided on a display of 96 pieces from the royal collection, mounted in the Galerie royale de peinture of the Luxembourg Palace. A hall was opened by Le Normant de Tournehem and the Marquis de Marigny for public viewing of the \"king's paintings\" (\"Tableaux du Roy\") on Wednesdays and Saturdays. The Luxembourg gallery included Andrea del Sarto's \"Charity\" and works by Raphael; Titian; Veronese; Rembrandt; Poussin or Van Dyck. It closed in 1780 as a result of the royal gift of the Luxembourg palace to the Count of Provence (the future king, Louis XVIII) by the king in 1778. Under Louis XVI, the idea of a royal museum in the Louvre came closer to fruition. The comte d'Angiviller broadened the collection and in 1776 proposed to convert the of the Louvre \u2013 which at that time contained the \"plans-reliefs\" or 3D models of key fortified sites in and around France \u2013 into the \"French Museum\". Many design proposals were offered for the Louvre's renovation into a museum, without a final decision being made on them. Hence the museum remained incomplete until the French Revolution.\nRevolutionary opening.\nThe Louvre finally became a public museum during the French Revolution. In May 1791, the National Constituent Assembly declared that the Louvre would be \"a place for bringing together monuments of all the sciences and arts\". On 10 August 1792, Louis XVI was imprisoned and the royal collection in the Louvre became national property. Because of fear of vandalism or theft, on 19 August, the National Assembly pronounced the museum's preparation urgent. In October, a committee to \"preserve the national memory\" began assembling the collection for display.\nThe museum opened on 10 August 1793, the first anniversary of the monarchy's demise, as \"Mus\u00e9um central des Arts de la R\u00e9publique\". The public was given free access on three days per week, which was \"perceived as a major accomplishment and was generally appreciated\". The collection showcased 537\u00a0paintings and 184\u00a0objects of art. Three-quarters were derived from the royal collections, the remainder from confiscated \u00e9migr\u00e9s and Church property (\"biens nationaux\").68-69 To expand and organise the collection, the Republic dedicated 100,000\u00a0livres per year. In 1794, France's revolutionary armies began bringing pieces from Northern Europe, augmented after the Treaty of Tolentino (1797) by works from the Vatican, such as the \"Laoco\u00f6n\" and \"Apollo Belvedere\", to establish the Louvre as a museum and as a \"sign of popular sovereignty\".\nBertrand Clauzel then chief of staff to Emmanuel de Grouchy, serving in the Army of Italy, negotiated the abdication of the King of Sardinia in December 1798 from his mainland territories. To secure the agreement Clauzel returned with the Woman with Dropsy, a painting by the Dutch master Gerard Dou. Clauzel would donate it to the Louvre, making it the first donation in the museums history.\nThe early days were hectic. Privileged artists continued to live in residence, and the unlabelled paintings hung \"frame to frame from floor to ceiling\". The museum closed in May 1796 due to structural deficiencies. It reopened on 14 July 1801, arranged chronologically and with new lighting and columns. On 15 August 1797, the Galerie d'Apollon was opened with an exhibition of drawings. Meanwhile, the Louvre's Gallery of Antiquity sculpture (\"mus\u00e9e des Antiques\"), with artefacts brought from Florence and the Vatican, had opened in November 1800 in Anne of Austria's former summer apartment, located on the ground floor just below the Galerie d'Apollon. \nNapoleonic era.\nOn 19 November 1802, Napoleon appointed Vivant Denon, a scholar and polymath who had participated in the Egyptian campaign of 1798\u20131801, as the museum's first director, in preference to alternative contenders such as antiquarian Ennio Quirino Visconti, painter Jacques-Louis David, sculptor Antonio Canova and architects L\u00e9on Dufourny or Pierre Fontaine. On Denon's suggestion in July 1803, the museum itself was renamed \"Mus\u00e9e Napol\u00e9on\".\nThe collection grew through successful military campaigns.52 Acquisitions were made of Spanish, Austrian, Dutch, and Italian works, either as the result of war looting or formalised by treaties such as the Treaty of Tolentino. At the end of Napoleon's First Italian Campaign in 1797, the Treaty of Campo Formio was signed with Count Philipp von Cobenzl of the Austrian Monarchy. This treaty marked the completion of Napoleon's conquest of Italy and the end of the first phase of the French Revolutionary Wars. It compelled Italian cities to contribute pieces of art and heritage to Napoleon's \"parades of spoils\" through Paris before being put into the Louvre Museum. The Horses of Saint Mark, which had adorned the basilica of San Marco in Venice after the sack of Constantinople in 1204, were brought to Paris where they were placed atop Napoleon's Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel in 1797. Under the Treaty of Tolentino, the two statues of the Nile and Tiber were taken to Paris from the Vatican in 1797, and were both kept in the Louvre until 1815. (The Nile was later returned to Rome, whereas the Tiber has remained in the Louvre to this day.) The despoilment of Italian churches and palaces outraged the Italians and their artistic and cultural sensibilities.\nAfter the French defeat at Waterloo, the looted works' former owners sought their return. The Louvre's administrator, Denon, was loath to comply in absence of a treaty of restitution. In response, foreign states sent emissaries to London to seek help, and many pieces were returned, though far from all.69 In 1815 Louis XVIII finally concluded agreements with the Austrian government for the keeping of works such as Veronese's \"Wedding at Cana\" which was exchanged for a large Le Brun or the repurchase of the Albani collection.\nFrom 1815 to 1852.\nFor most of the 19th century, from Napoleon's time to the Second Empire, the Louvre and other national museums were managed under the monarch's civil list and thus depended much on the ruler's personal involvement. Whereas the most iconic collection remained that of paintings in the , a number of other initiatives mushroomed in the vast building, named as if they were separate museums even though they were generally managed under the same administrative umbrella. Correspondingly, the museum complex was often referred to in the plural (\"\") rather than singular.\nDuring the Bourbon Restoration (1814\u20131830), Louis XVIII and Charles X added to the collections. The Greek and Roman sculpture gallery on the ground floor of the southwestern side of the Cour Carr\u00e9e was completed on designs by Percier and Fontaine. In 1819 an exhibition of manufactured products was opened in the first floor of the Cour Carr\u00e9e's southern wing and would stay there until the mid-1820s.87 Charles X in 1826 created the and in 1827 included it in his broader , a new section of the museum complex located in a suite of lavishly decorated rooms on the first floor of the South Wing of the Cour Carr\u00e9e. The Egyptian collection, initially curated by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion, formed the basis for what is now the Louvre's Department of Egyptian Antiquities. It was formed from the purchased collections of Edm\u00e9-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt and the second collection of Bernardino Drovetti (the first one having been purchased by Victor Emmanuel I of Sardinia to form the core of the present Museo Egizio in Turin). The Restoration period also saw the opening in 1824 of the , a section of largely French sculptures on the ground floor of the Northwestern side of the Cour Carr\u00e9e, many of whose artefacts came from the Palace of Versailles and from Alexandre Lenoir's Mus\u00e9e des Monuments Fran\u00e7ais following its closure in 1816. Meanwhile, the French Navy created an exhibition of ship models in the Louvre in December 1827, initially named in honour of Dauphin Louis Antoine, building on an 18th-century initiative of Henri-Louis Duhamel du Monceau. This collection, renamed in 1833 and later to develop into the Mus\u00e9e national de la Marine, was initially located on the first floor of the Cour Carr\u00e9e's North Wing, and in 1838 moved up one level to the 2nd-floor attic, where it remained for more than a century.\nFollowing the July Revolution, King Louis Philippe focused his interest on the repurposing of the Palace of Versailles into a Museum of French History conceived as a project of national reconciliation, and the Louvre was kept in comparative neglect. Louis-Philippe did, however, sponsor the creation of the to host the monumental Assyrian sculpture works brought to Paris by Paul-\u00c9mile Botta, in the ground-floor gallery north of the eastern entrance of the Cour Carr\u00e9e. The Assyrian Museum opened on 1 May 1847. Separately, Louis-Philippe had his Spanish gallery displayed in the Louvre from 7 January 1838, in five rooms on the first floor of the Cour Carr\u00e9e's East (Colonnade) Wing, but the collection remained his personal property. As a consequence, the works were removed after Louis-Philippe was deposed in 1848, and were eventually auctioned away in 1853.\nThe short-lived Second Republic had more ambitions for the Louvre. It initiated repair work, the completion of the Galerie d'Apollon and of the , and the overhaul of the (former site of the iconic yearly Salon) and of the Grande Galerie.52 In 1848, the Naval Museum in the Cour Carr\u00e9e's attic was brought under the common Louvre Museum management, a change which was again reversed in 1920. In 1850 under the leadership of curator Adrien de Longp\u00e9rier, the mus\u00e9e mexicain opened within the Louvre as the first European museum dedicated to pre-Columbian art.\nSecond Empire.\nThe rule of Napoleon III was transformational for the Louvre, both the building and the museum. In 1852, he created the Mus\u00e9e des Souverains in the Colonnade Wing, an ideological project aimed at buttressing his personal legitimacy. In 1861, he bought 11,835\u00a0artworks including 641 paintings, Greek gold and other antiquities of the Campana collection. For its display, he created another new section within the Louvre named , occupying a number of rooms in various parts of the building. Between 1852 and 1870, the museum added 20,000\u00a0new artefacts to its collections.\nThe main change of that period was to the building itself. In the 1850s architects Louis Visconti and Hector Lefuel created massive new spaces around what is now called the Cour Napol\u00e9on, some of which (in the South Wing, now Aile Denon) went to the museum.52-54 In the 1860s, Lefuel also led the creation of the with a new closer to Napoleon III's residence in the Tuileries Palace, with the effect of shortening the by about a third of its previous length. A smaller but significant Second Empire project was the decoration of the below the Salon carr\u00e9. \nFrom 1870 to 1981.\nThe Louvre narrowly escaped serious damage during the suppression of the Paris Commune. On 23 May 1871, as the French Army advanced into Paris, a force of \"Communards\" led by Jules Bergeret set fire to the adjoining Tuileries Palace. The fire burned for forty-eight hours, entirely destroying the interior of the Tuileries and spreading to the north west wing of the museum next to it. The emperor's Louvre library (\"Biblioth\u00e8que du Louvre\") and some of the adjoining halls, in what is now the Richelieu Wing, were separately destroyed. But the museum was saved by the efforts of Paris firemen and museum employees led by curator Henry Barbet de Jouy.\nFollowing the end of the monarchy, several spaces in the Louvre's South Wing went to the museum. The Salle du Man\u00e8ge was transferred to the museum in 1879, and in 1928 became its main entrance lobby. The large Salle des Etats that had been created by Lefuel between the and Pavillon Denon was redecorated in 1886 by Edmond Guillaume, Lefuel's successor as architect of the Louvre, and opened as a spacious exhibition room. Edomond Guillaume also decorated the first-floor room at the northwest corner of the Cour Carr\u00e9e, on the ceiling of which he placed in 1890 a monumental painting by Carolus-Duran, \"The Triumph of Marie de' Medici\" originally created in 1879 for the Luxembourg Palace.\nMeanwhile, during the Third Republic (1870\u20131940) the Louvre acquired new artefacts mainly via donations, gifts, and sharing arrangements on excavations abroad. The 583-item , donated in 1869 by Louis La Caze, included works by Chardin; Fragonard, Rembrandt and Watteau.70-71 In 1883, the \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\", which had been found in the Aegean Sea in 1863, was prominently displayed as the focal point of the Escalier Daru.70-71 Major artefacts excavated at Susa in Iran, including the massive \"Apadana capital\" and glazed brick decoration from the Palace of Darius there, accrued to the Oriental (Near Eastern) Antiquities Department in the 1880s. The Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des amis du Louvre was established in 1897 and donated prominent works, such as the \"Piet\u00e0 of Villeneuve-l\u00e8s-Avignon\". The expansion of the museum and its collections slowed after World War I, however, despite some prominent acquisitions such as Georges de La Tour's \"Saint Thomas\" and Baron Edmond de Rothschild's 1935 donation of 4,000\u00a0prints, 3,000\u00a0drawings, and 500\u00a0illustrated books.\nFrom the late 19th century, the Louvre gradually veered away from its mid-century ambition of universality to become a more focused museum of French, Western and Near Eastern art, covering a space ranging from Iran to the Atlantic. The collections of the Louvre's mus\u00e9e mexicain were transferred to the Mus\u00e9e d'Ethnographie du Trocad\u00e9ro in 1887. As the was increasingly constrained to display its core naval-themed collections in the limited space it had in the second-floor attic of the northern half of the Cour Carr\u00e9e, many of its significant holdings of non-Western artefacts were transferred in 1905 to the Trocad\u00e9ro ethnography museum, the National Antiquities Museum in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and the Chinese Museum in the Palace of Fontainebleau. The Mus\u00e9e de Marine itself was relocated to the Palais de Chaillot in 1943. The Louvre's extensive collections of Asian art were moved to the Guimet Museum in 1945. Nevertheless, the Louvre's first gallery of Islamic art opened in 1893.\nIn the late 1920s, Louvre Director Henri Verne devised a master plan for the rationalisation of the museum's exhibitions, which was partly implemented in the following decade. In 1932\u20131934, Louvre architects Camille Lef\u00e8vre and Albert Ferran redesigned the Escalier Daru to its current appearance. The in the South Wing was covered by a glass roof in 1934. Decorative arts exhibits were expanded in the first floor of the North Wing of the Cour Carr\u00e9e, including some of France's first period room displays. In the late 1930s, The La Caze donation was moved to a remodelled above the , with reduced height to create more rooms on the second floor and a sober interior design by Albert Ferran.\nDuring World War II, the Louvre conducted an elaborate plan of evacuation of its art collection. When Germany occupied the Sudetenland, many important artworks such as the \"Mona Lisa\" were temporarily moved to the Ch\u00e2teau de Chambord. When war was formally declared a year later, most of the museum's paintings were sent there as well. Select sculptures such as \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" and the \"Venus de Milo\" were sent to the Ch\u00e2teau de Valen\u00e7ay. On 27 August 1939, after two days of packing, truck convoys began to leave Paris. By 28 December, the museum was cleared of most works, except those that were too heavy and \"unimportant paintings [that] were left in the basement\". In early 1945, after the liberation of France, art began returning to the Louvre.\nNew arrangements after the war revealed the further evolution of taste away from the lavish decorative practices of the late 19th century. In 1947, Edmond Guillaume's ceiling ornaments were removed from the , where the \"Mona Lisa\" was first displayed in 1966. Around 1950, Louvre architect Jean-Jacques Haffner streamlined the interior decoration of the . In 1953, a new ceiling by Georges Braque was inaugurated in the , next to the . In the late 1960s, seats designed by Pierre Paulin were installed in the . In 1972, the 's museography was remade with lighting from a hung tubular case, designed by Louvre architect Marc Saltet with assistance from designers Andr\u00e9 Monpoix, Joseph-Andr\u00e9 Motte and Paulin.\nIn 1961, the Finance Ministry accepted to leave the Pavillon de Flore at the southwestern end of the Louvre building, as Verne had recommended in his 1920s plan. New exhibition spaces of sculptures (ground floor) and paintings (first floor) opened there later in the 1960s, on a design by government architect Olivier Lahalle.\nGrand Louvre.\nIn 1981, French President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand proposed, as one of his Grands Projets, the Grand Louvre plan to relocate the Finance Ministry, until then housed in the North Wing of the Louvre, and thus devote almost the entire Louvre building (except its northwestern tip, which houses the separate Mus\u00e9e des Arts D\u00e9coratifs) to the museum which would be correspondingly restructured. In 1984 I. M. Pei, the architect personally selected by Mitterrand, proposed a master plan including an underground entrance space accessed through a glass pyramid in the Louvre's central \"Cour Napol\u00e9on\".66\nThe open spaces surrounding the pyramid were inaugurated on 15 October 1988, and its underground lobby was opened on 30 March 1989. New galleries of early modern French paintings on the 2nd floor of the Cour Carr\u00e9e, for which the planning had started before the \"Grand Louvre\", also opened in 1989. Further rooms in the same sequence, designed by Italo Rota, opened on 15 December 1992.\nOn 18 November 1993, Mitterrand inaugurated the next major phase of the Grand Louvre plan: the renovated North (Richelieu) Wing in the former Finance Ministry site, the museum's largest single expansion in its entire history, designed by Pei, his French associate Michel Macary, and Jean-Michel Wilmotte. Further underground spaces known as the Carrousel du Louvre, centred on the Inverted Pyramid and designed by Pei and Macary, had opened in October 1993. Other refurbished galleries, of Italian sculptures and Egyptian antiquities, opened in 1994. The third and last main phase of the plan unfolded mainly in 1997, with new renovated rooms in the Sully and Denon wings. A new entrance at the \"porte des Lions\" opened in 1998, leading on the first floor to new rooms of Spanish paintings.\nAs of 2002, the Louvre's visitor count had doubled from its pre-Grand-Louvre levels.\n21st century.\nPresident Jacques Chirac, who had succeeded Mitterrand in 1995, insisted on the return of non-Western art to the Louvre, upon a recommendation from his friend the art collector and dealer Jacques Kerchache. On his initiative, a selection of highlights from the collections of what would become the Mus\u00e9e du Quai Branly \u2013 Jacques Chirac was installed on the ground floor of the and opened in 2000, six years ahead of the Mus\u00e9e du Quai Branly itself.\nThe main other initiative in the aftermath of the Grand Louvre project was Chirac's decision to create a new department of Islamic Art, by executive order of 1 August 2003, and to move the corresponding collections from their prior underground location in the Richelieu Wing to a more prominent site in the Denon Wing. That new section opened on 22 September 2012, together with collections from the Roman-era Eastern Mediterranean, with financial support from the Al Waleed bin Talal Foundation and on a design by Mario Bellini and Rudy Ricciotti.\nIn 2007, German painter Anselm Kiefer was invited to create a work for the North stairs of the Perrault Colonnade, \"Athanor\". This decision announces the museum's reengagement with contemporary art under the direction of Henri Loyrette, fifty years after the institution's last order to a contemporary artists, George Braque.\nIn 2010, American painter Cy Twombly completed a new ceiling for the (the former ), a counterpoint to that of Braque installed in 1953 in the adjacent . The room's floor and walls were redesigned in 2021 by Louvre architect Michel Goutal to revert the changes made by his predecessor Albert Ferran in the late 1930s, triggering protests from the Cy Twombly Foundation on grounds that the then-deceased painter's work had been created to fit with the room's prior decoration.\nThat same year, the Louvre commissioned French artist Fran\u00e7ois Morellet to create a work for the Lefuel stairs, on the first floor. For \"L'esprit d'escalier\" Morellet redesigned the stairscase's windows, echoing their original structures but distorting them to create a disturbing optical effect.\nOn 6 June 2014, the Decorative Arts section on the first floor of the Cour Carr\u00e9e's northern wing opened after comprehensive refurbishment.\nIn January 2020, under the direction of Jean-Luc Martinez, the museum inaugurated a new contemporary art commission, \"L'Onde du Midi\" by Venezuelan kinetic artist Elias Crespin. The sculpture hovers under the Escalier du Midi, the staircase on the South of the Perrault Colonnade.\nThe Louvre, like many other museums and galleries, felt the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the arts and cultural heritage. The museum closed after the end of the day on 29 February 2020, and it did not reopen until 6 July. The museum operated with limited capacity until 29 October, when it was ordered closed again due to an increase in COVID cases in France, and reopened on 19 May 2021. As a result, the museum recorded only 2.7 million visitors in 2020, down from 9.6 million in 2019 and a record 10.2 million in 2018.\nIn preparation for the 2024 Olympics, the Louvre staged an exhibit about the Games' history that links their ancient beginnings to the modern era.\nAttendance rose to 8.9 million in 2023, 14 percent above 2022, but still short of the record of 10.2 million in 2018.\nIn January 2025, French President Emmanuel Macron announced plans for a renovation and expansion of the Louvre, including a room solely for the Mona Lisa. The planned renovation and expansion was a result of the increasing number of visitors each year to the Louvre. On 16 June 2025, the museum's employees went on strike in protest against chronic issues such as overcrowding, understaffing and \"untenable\" working conditions.\nOn 19 October 2025, the Louvre was subjected to a robbery through a forced window in the Galerie d'Apollon. The museum reported that jewellery had been stolen, and the perpetrators fled by motorbike. They used a construction platform left by the building to enter a window and leave with their score. The museum was closed for the day. French interior minister Laurent Nu\u00f1ez said the robbery involved intruders entering the museum via a basket lift using a platform mounted on a lorry and then cut into the window using what appeared to be angle grinders. Nine major pieces of jewellery from the crowns of France were taken in a few minutes. Eight pieces were stolen, including an emerald necklace that belonged to Empress Marie-Louise and three jewels that belonged to queens Marie-Amelie and Hortense. The ninth item, the Crown of Empress Eug\u00e9nie, was recovered the same day in a street close to the Louvre but in a damaged condition.\nOn 25 October, two of the suspected thieves were arrested, one was trying to fly to Algeria from Charles de Gaulle Airport.On 29 October, the prosecutor in charge said that they had \"partially admitted\" to their involvement in the heist. She added that the jewels were yet to be recovered.On the same day, five additional suspects were arrested, but only one of them was allegedly part of the four-man heist team.\nOn 30 October, police arrested five more suspects, but there was still no sign of the stolen jewels. \nCollections.\nThe Mus\u00e9e du Louvre owns 615,797\u00a0objects of which 482,943 are accessible online since 24 March 2021 and displays 35,000\u00a0works of art in eight curatorial departments.\nThe Louvre is home to one of the world's most extensive collections of art, including works from diverse cultures and time periods. Visitors can view iconic works like the Mona Lisa and the Winged Victory of Samothrace, as well as pieces from ancient civilisations such as Egypt, Greece, and Rome. The museum also features collections of decorative arts, Islamic art, and sculptures.\nEgyptian antiquities.\nThe department, comprising over 50,000\u00a0pieces,74 includes artefacts from the Nile civilisations which date from 4,000\u00a0BC to the 4th\u00a0century AD. The collection, among the world's largest, overviews Egyptian life spanning Ancient Egypt, the Middle Kingdom, the New Kingdom, Coptic art, and the Roman, Ptolemaic, and Byzantine periods.\nThe department's origins lie in the royal collection, but it was augmented by Napoleon's 1798 expeditionary trip with Dominique Vivant, the future director of the Louvre.76-77 After Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion translated the Rosetta Stone, Charles\u00a0X decreed that an Egyptian Antiquities department be created. Champollion advised the purchase of three collections, formed by Edm\u00e9-Antoine Durand, Henry Salt, and Bernardino Drovetti; these additions added 7,000\u00a0works. Growth continued via acquisitions by Auguste Mariette, founder of the Egyptian Museum in Cairo. Mariette, after excavations at Memphis, sent back crates of archaeological finds including \"The Seated Scribe\".76-77\nGuarded by the Great Sphinx of Tanis, the collection is housed in more than 20\u00a0rooms. Holdings include art, papyrus scrolls, mummies, tools, clothing, jewellery, games, musical instruments, and weapons.76-77 Pieces from the ancient period include the \"Gebel el-Arak Knife\" from 3400\u00a0BC, \"The Seated Scribe\", and the \"Head of King Djedefre\". Middle Kingdom art, \"known for its gold work and statues\", moved from realism to idealisation; this is exemplified by the schist statue of Amenemhatankh and the wooden \"Offering Bearer\". The New Kingdom and Coptic Egyptian sections are deep, but the statue of the goddess Nephthys and the limestone depiction of the goddess Hathor demonstrate New Kingdom sentiment and wealth.\nNear Eastern antiquities.\nNear Eastern antiquities, the second newest department, dates from 1881 and presents an overview of early Near Eastern civilisation and \"first settlements\", before the arrival of Islam. The department is divided into three geographic areas: the Levant, Mesopotamia (Iraq), and Persia (Iran). The collection's development corresponds to archaeological work such as Paul-\u00c9mile Botta's 1843 expedition to Khorsabad and the discovery of Sargon II's palace.119 These finds formed the basis of the Assyrian museum, the precursor to today's department.\nThe museum contains exhibits from Sumer and the city of Akkad, with monuments such as the Prince of Lagash's \"Stele of the Vultures\" from 2450\u00a0BC and the stele erected by Naram-Sin, King of Akkad, to celebrate a victory over barbarians in the Zagros Mountains. The Code of Hammurabi, discovered in 1901, displays Babylonian Laws prominently, so that no man could plead their ignorance. The 18th-century BC mural of the \"Investiture of Zimrilim\" and the 25th-century BC \"Statue of Ebih-Il\" found in the ancient city-state of Mari are also on display at the museum.\nA significant portion of the department covers the ancient Levant, including the \"Sarcophagus of Eshmunazar II\" discovered in 1855, which catalysed Ernest Renan's 1860 \"Mission de Ph\u00e9nicie\". It contains one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions. The section also covers North African Punic antiquities (Punic = Western Phoenician), given the significant French presence in the region in the 19th century, with early finds including the 1843 discovery of the Ain Nechma inscriptions.\nThe Persian portion of Louvre contains work from the archaic period, like the \"Funerary Head\" and the Persian \"Archers of Darius I\", and rare objects from Persepolis.\nGreek, Etruscan, and Roman.\nThe Greek, Etruscan, and Roman department displays pieces from the Mediterranean Basin dating from the Neolithic to the 6th\u00a0century. The collection spans from the Cycladic period to the decline of the Roman Empire. This department is one of the museum's oldest, and contains works acquired by Francis I.155-58 Initially, the collection focused on marble sculptures, such as the \"Venus de Milo\". Works such as the \"Apollo Belvedere\" arrived during the Napoleonic Wars, of which some were returned after Napoleon I's fall in 1815. Other works, such as the Borghese Vase, were bought by Napoleon. Later in the 19th\u00a0century, the Louvre acquired works including vases from the Durand collection and bronzes.92\nThe archaic is demonstrated by jewellery and pieces such as the limestone Lady of Auxerre, from 640 BC; and the cylindrical \"Hera of Samos\", c.\u2009570\u2013560\u00a0BC. After the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC, focus on the human form increased, exemplified by the \"Borghese Gladiator\". The Louvre holds masterpieces from the Hellenistic era, including The \"Winged Victory of Samothrace\" (190\u00a0BC) and the Venus de Milo, symbolic of classical art.155 The long \"Galerie Campana\" displays an outstanding collection of more than one thousand Greek potteries. In the galleries paralleling the Seine, much of the museum's Roman sculpture is displayed. The Roman portraiture is representative of that genre; examples include the portraits of Agrippa and Annius Verus; among the bronzes is the Greek Apollo of Piombino.\nIslamic art.\nThe Islamic art collection, the museum's newest, spans \"thirteen centuries and three continents\". These exhibits, of ceramics, glass, metalware, wood, ivory, carpet, textiles, and miniatures, include more than 5,000\u00a0works and 1,000\u00a0shards. Originally part of the decorative arts department, the holdings became separate in 2003. Among the works are the \"Pyxide d'al-Mughira\", a 10th\u00a0century ivory box from Andalusia; the \"Baptistery of Saint-Louis\", an engraved brass basin from the 13th\u00a0or\u00a014th\u00a0century Mamluk period; and the 10th\u00a0century \"Shroud of Saint-Josse\" from Iran.119-121 The collection contains three pages of the \"Shahnameh\", an epic book of poems by Ferdowsi in Persian, and a Syrian metalwork named the \"Barberini Vase\". In September 2019, a new and improved Islamic art department was opened by Princess Lamia bint Majed Al Saud. The new department exhibits 3,000 pieces were collected from Spain to India via the Arabian peninsula dating from the 7th to the 19th centuries.\nSculptures.\nThe sculpture department consists of works created before 1850 not belonging in the Etruscan, Greek, and Roman department. The Louvre has been a repository of sculpted material since its time as a palace; however, only ancient architecture was displayed until 1824, except for Michelangelo's \"Dying Slave\" and \"Rebellious Slave\".397-401 Initially the collection included only 100\u00a0pieces, the rest of the royal sculpture collection being at Versailles. It remained small until 1847, when L\u00e9on Laborde was given control of the department. Laborde developed the medieval section and purchased the first such statues and sculptures in the collection, \"King Childebert\" and \"stanga door\", respectively.397-401 The collection was part of the Department of Antiquities but was given autonomy in 1871 under Louis Courajod, a director who organised a wider representation of French works.397-401 In 1986, all post-1850 works were relocated to the new Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay. The Grand Louvre project separated the department into two exhibition spaces; the French collection is displayed in the Richelieu Wing, and foreign works in the Denon Wing.\nThe collection's overview of French sculpture contains Romanesque works such as the 11th-century \"Daniel in the Lions' Den\" and the 12th-century \"Virgin of Auvergne\". In the 16th century, Renaissance influence caused French sculpture to become more restrained, as seen in Jean Goujon's bas-reliefs, and Germain Pilon's \"Descent from the Cross\" and \"Resurrection of Christ\". The 17th and 18th centuries are represented by Gian Lorenzo Bernini's 1640\u20131 Bust of Cardinal Richelieu, \u00c9tienne Maurice Falconet's \"Woman Bathing\" and \"Amour mena\u00e7ant\", and Fran\u00e7ois Anguier's obelisks. Neoclassical works includes Antonio Canova's \"Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss\" (1787).397-401 The 18th and 19th centuries are represented by the French sculptors like Alfred Barye and \u00c9mile Guillemin.\nDecorative arts.\nThe Objets d'art collection spans the time from the Middle Ages to the mid-19th\u00a0century. The department began as a subset of the sculpture department, based on royal property and the transfer of work from the Basilique Saint-Denis, the burial ground of French monarchs that held the \"Coronation Sword of the Kings of France\".451-454 Among the budding collection's most prized works were pietre dure vases and bronzes. The Durand collection's 1825 acquisition added \"ceramics, enamels, and stained glass\", and 800\u00a0pieces were given by Pierre R\u00e9voil. The onset of Romanticism rekindled interest in Renaissance and Medieval artwork, and the Sauvageot donation expanded the department with 1,500\u00a0middle-age and fa\u00efence works. In 1862, the Campana collection added gold jewellery and maiolicas, mainly from the 15th\u00a0and\u00a016th\u00a0centuries.451-454\nThe works are displayed on the Richelieu Wing's first floor and in the Apollo Gallery, named by the painter Charles Le Brun, who was commissioned by Louis\u00a0XIV (the Sun King) to decorate the space in a solar theme. The medieval collection contains the coronation crown of Louis\u00a0XV, Charles\u00a0V's sceptre, and the 12th\u00a0century \"porphyry vase\". The Renaissance art holdings include Giambologna's bronze \"Nessus and Deianira\" and the tapestry \"Maximillian's Hunt\". From later periods, highlights include Madame de Pompadour's S\u00e8vres vase collection and Napoleon\u00a0III's apartments.\nIn September 2000, the Louvre Museum dedicated the Gilbert Chagoury and Rose-Marie Chagoury Gallery to display tapestries donated by the Chagourys, including a 16th-century six-part tapestry suite, sewn with gold and silver threads representing sea divinities, which was commissioned in Paris for Colbert de Seignelay, Secretary of State for the Navy.\nPainting.\nThe painting collection has more than 7,500\u00a0works229 from the 13th\u00a0century to 1848 and is managed by 12\u00a0curators who oversee the collection's display. Nearly two-thirds are by French artists, and more than 1,200\u00a0are Northern European. The Italian paintings compose most of the remnants of Francis\u00a0I and Louis\u00a0XIV's collections, others are unreturned artwork from the Napoleon era, and some were bought.199-201, 272\u2013273, 333\u2013335 The collection began with Francis, who acquired works from Italian masters such as Raphael and Michelangelo and brought Leonardo da Vinci to his court. After the French Revolution, the Royal Collection formed the nucleus of the Louvre. When the \"d'Orsay\" train station was converted into the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay in 1986, the collection was split, and pieces completed after the 1848 Revolution were moved to the new museum. French and Northern European works are in the Richelieu Wing and \"Cour Carr\u00e9e\"; Spanish and Italian paintings are on the first floor of the Denon Wing.199\nExemplifying the French School are the early \"Avignon Piet\u00e0\" of Enguerrand Quarton; the anonymous painting of \"King Jean le Bon\" (c. 1360), possibly the oldest independent portrait in Western painting to survive from the postclassical era;201 Hyacinthe Rigaud's \"Louis XIV\"; Jacques-Louis David's \"The Coronation of Napoleon\"; Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault's \"The Raft of the Medusa\"; and Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix's \"Liberty Leading the People\". Nicolas Poussin, the Le Nain brothers, Philippe de Champaigne, Le Brun, La Tour, Watteau, Fragonard, Ingres, Corot, and Delacroix are well represented.\nNorthern European works include Johannes Vermeer's \"The Lacemaker\" and \"The Astronomer\"; Caspar David Friedrich's \"The Tree of Crows\"; Rembrandt's \"The Supper at Emmaus\", \"Bathsheba at Her Bath\", and \"The Slaughtered Ox\".\nThe Italian holdings are notable, particularly the Renaissance collection. The works include Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini's \"Calvary\"s, which reflect realism and detail \"meant to depict the significant events of a greater spiritual world\". The High Renaissance collection includes Leonardo da Vinci's \"Mona Lisa\", \"Virgin and Child with St. Anne\", \"St. John the Baptist\", and \"Madonna of the Rocks\". The Baroque collection includes Giambattista Pittoni's \"The Continence of Scipio\", \"Susanna and the Elders\", \"Bacchus and Ariadne\", \"Mars and Venus\", and others Caravaggio is represented by \"The Fortune Teller\" and \"Death of the Virgin\". From 16th\u00a0century Venice, the Louvre displays Titian's \"Le Concert Champetre\", \"The Entombment,\" and \"The Crowning with Thorns\".378\nThe La Caze Collection, a bequest to the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre in 1869 by Louis La Caze, was the largest contribution of a person in the history of the Louvre. La Caze gave 584 paintings of his personal collection to the museum. The bequest included Antoine Watteau's Commedia dell'arte player of Pierrot (\"Gilles\"). In 2007, this bequest was the topic of the exhibition \"1869: Watteau, Chardin... entrent au Louvre. La collection La Caze\".\nSome of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitised by the French Centre for Research and Restoration of Museums of France.\nPrints and drawings.\nThe prints and drawings department encompasses works on paper.496 The origins of the collection were the 8,600\u00a0works in the Royal Collection (\"Cabinet du Roi\"), which were increased via state appropriation, purchases such as the 1,200\u00a0works from Fillipo Baldinucci's collection in 1806, and donations.92 The department opened on 5 August 1797, with 415\u00a0pieces displayed in the Galerie d'Apollon. The collection is organised into three sections: the core \"Cabinet du Roi\", 14,000\u00a0royal copper printing-plates, and the donations of Edmond de Rothschild, which include 40,000\u00a0prints, 3,000\u00a0drawings, and 5,000\u00a0illustrated books. The holdings are displayed in the Pavillon de Flore; due to the fragility of the paper medium, only a portion are displayed at one time.496\nManagement, administration, partnerships.\nThe Louvre is owned by the French government. Since the 1990s, its management and governance have been made more independent. Since 2003, the museum has been required to generate funds for projects. By 2006, government funds had dipped from 75\u00a0percent of the total budget to 62\u00a0percent. Every year, the Louvre now raises as much as it gets from the state, about \u20ac122\u00a0million. The government pays for operating costs (salaries, safety, and maintenance), while the rest \u2013 new wings, refurbishments, acquisitions \u2013 is up to the museum to finance. A further \u20ac3\u00a0million to \u20ac5\u00a0million a year is raised by the Louvre from exhibitions that it curates for other museums, while the host museum keeps the ticket money. As the Louvre became a point of interest in the book \"The Da Vinci Code\" and the 2006 film based on the book, the museum earned $2.5\u00a0million by allowing filming in its galleries. In 2008, the French government provided $180\u00a0million of the Louvre's yearly $350\u00a0million budget; the remainder came from private contributions and ticket sales.\nThe Louvre employs a staff of 2,000 led by Director Jean-Luc Martinez, who reports to the French Ministry of Culture and Communications. Martinez replaced Henri Loyrette in April 2013. Under Loyrette, who replaced Pierre Rosenberg in 2001, the Louvre has undergone policy changes that allow it to lend and borrow more works than before. In 2006, it loaned 1,300\u00a0works, which enabled it to borrow more foreign works. From 2006 to 2009, the Louvre lent artwork to the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, Georgia, and received a $6.9\u00a0million payment to be used for renovations.\nIn 2009, Minister of culture Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mitterrand approved a plan that would have created a storage facility northwest of Paris to hold objects from the Louvre and two other national museums in Paris's flood zone, the Mus\u00e9e du Quai Branly and the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay; the plan was later scrapped. In 2013, his successor Aur\u00e9lie Filippetti announced that the Louvre would move more than 250,000 works of art held in a basement storage area in Li\u00e9vin; the cost of the project, estimated at \u20ac60\u00a0million, will be split between the region (49%) and the Louvre (51%). The Louvre will be the sole owner and manager of the store. In July 2015, a team led by British firm Rogers Stirk Harbour + Partners was selected to design the complex, which will have light-filled work spaces under one vast, green roof.\nIn 2012, the Louvre and the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco announced a five-year collaboration on exhibitions, publications, art conservation and educational programming. The \u20ac98.5\u00a0million expansion of the Islamic Art galleries in 2012 received state funding of \u20ac31\u00a0million, as well as \u20ac17\u00a0million from the Alwaleed Bin Talal Foundation founded by the eponymous Saudi prince. The Republic of Azerbaijan, the Emir of Kuwait, the Sultan of Oman and King Mohammed VI of Morocco donated in total \u20ac26\u00a0million. In addition, the opening of the Louvre Abu Dhabi is supposed to provide \u20ac400\u00a0million over the course of 30 years for its use of the museum's brand. Loyrette has tried to improve weak parts of the collection through income generated from loans of art and by guaranteeing that \"20% of admissions receipts will be taken annually for acquisitions\". He has more administrative independence for the museum and achieved 90\u00a0percent of galleries to be open daily, as opposed to 80\u00a0percent previously. He oversaw the creation of extended hours and free admission on Friday nights and an increase in the acquisition budget to $36\u00a0million from $4.5\u00a0million.\nIn March 2018, an exhibition of dozens of artworks and relics belonging to France's Louvre Museum was opened to visitors in Tehran, as a result of an agreement between Iranian and French presidents in 2016. In the Louvre, two departments were allocated to the antiquities of the Iranian civilisation, and the managers of the two departments visited Tehran. Relics belonging to Ancient Egypt, Rome and Mesopotamia as well as French royal items were showcased at the Tehran exhibition.\nIran's National Museum building was designed and constructed by French architect Andr\u00e9 Godard. Following its time in Tehran, the exhibition is set to be held in the Khorasan Grand Museum in Mashhad, northeastern Iran in June 2018.\nOn the 500th anniversary of Leonardo da Vinci's death, the Louvre held the largest ever single exhibit of his work, from 24 October 2019 to 24 February 2020. The event included over a hundred items: paintings, drawings and notebooks. A full 11 of the fewer than 20 paintings that Da Vinci completed in his lifetime were displayed. Five of them are owned by the Louvre, but the Mona Lisa was not included because it is in such great demand among visitors to the Louvre museum; the work remained on display in its gallery. Salvator Mundi was also not included since the Saudi owner did not agree to move the work from its hiding place. Vitruvian Man, however, was on display, after a successful legal battle with its owner, the Galleria dell'Accademia in Venice.\nIn 2021, a Renaissance era ceremonial helmet and breastplate stolen from the museum in 1983 were recovered. The museum noted that the 1983 theft had \"deeply troubled all the staff at the time.\" There are few publicly accessible details on the theft itself.\nThe current director of the Louvre is Laurence des Cars, who was selected by French president Emmanuel Macron in 2021. She is the first woman to hold this position.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, the Louvre has launched a digital platform where most of its works, including those that are not on display, can be seen. The database includes more than 482,000 illustrated records, representing 75% of the Louvre's collections. The museum was visited by over 7.6 million visitors in 2022, up 170 percent from 2021, but still below the 10.8 million visitors in 2018 before the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2023, the Louvre Museum in Paris implemented a significant change in its pricing policy, marking the first price increase since 2017. The decision to raise ticket prices by 30% is part of a broader strategy aimed at supporting free entry during the Olympics and effectively managing the anticipated crowd. Director Laurence des Cars has introduced measures to regulate attendance, including capping daily visitors at 30,000 and planning a new entrance to alleviate congestion. These efforts are geared towards ensuring a top-notch experience for art enthusiasts during the Olympic Games, as the museum expects to host approximately 8.7 million visitors this year, with a remarkable 80% seeking to view the Mona Lisa.\nArchaeological research.\nThe Louvre's ancient art collections are to a significant extent the product of excavations, some of which the museum sponsored under various legal regimes over time, often as a companion to France's diplomacy and colonial enterprises. In the , a carved marble panel lists a number of such campaigns, led by:\nThe rest of the plaque combines donors of archaeological items, many of whom were archaeologists themselves, and other archaeologists whose excavations contributed to the Louvre's collections:\nSatellites and offshoots.\nSeveral museums in and outside France have been or are placed under the Louvre's administrative authority or linked to it through exclusive partnerships, while not being located in the Louvre Palace. Since 2019, the Louvre has also maintained a large art storage and research facility in the Northern French town of Li\u00e9vin, the Centre de conservation du Louvre, which is not open to the public.\nMus\u00e9e de Cluny (1926\u20131977).\nIn February 1926, the Mus\u00e9e de Cluny, whose creation dates back to the 19th century, was brought under the aegis of the Louvre's department of decorative arts (). That affiliation was terminated in 1977.\nMus\u00e9e du Jeu de Paume (1947\u20131986).\nThe building in the Tuileries Garden, initially intended as a sports venue, was repurposed from 1909 as an art gallery. In 1947, it became the exhibition space for the Louvre's collections of late 19th and early 20th paintings, most prominently Impressionism, as the Louvre Palace was lacking space to display them, and was consequently brought under direct management by the Louvre's . In 1986, these collections were transferred to the newly created Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay.\nMus\u00e9e du Petit Palais, Avignon (since 1976).\nThe Mus\u00e9e du Petit Palais opened in 1976 in the former urban mansion of the archbishops of Avignon, close to the Papal Palace in Avignon. An initiative led by Avignon Mayor Henri Duffaut and Louvre President-Director Michel Laclotte, part of its permanent collection is made of artworks from the Collection Campana deposited by the Louvre. On none }}, a new agreement between the City of Avignon and the Louvre allowed its rebranding as .\nGypsoth\u00e8que du Louvre (since 2001).\nThe (plaster cast gallery) of the Louvre is a collection of plaster casts that was formed in 1970 by the reunion of the corresponding inventories of the Louvre, the and the Art and Archaeology Institute of the Sorbonne University, the latter two following depredations during the May 68 student unrest. Initially called the from 1970 to 1978, the project was subsequently left unfinished and only came to fruition after being brought under the Louvre's management by ministerial decision in 2001. It is located in the Petite \u00c9curie, a dependency of Versailles Palace, and has been open to the public since 2012.\nMus\u00e9e Delacroix (since 2004).\nThe small museum located in Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix's former workshop in central Paris, created in the 1930s, has been placed under management by the Louvre since 2004.\nLouvre-Lens (since 2012).\nThe Louvre-Lens follows a May 2003 initiative by then culture minister Jean-Jacques Aillagon to promote cultural projects outside of Paris that would make the riches of major Parisian institutions available to a broader French public, including a satellite () of the Louvre. After several rounds of competition, a former mining site in the town of Lens was selected for its location and announced by Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin on 2004-11-29. Japanese architects SANAA and landscape architect Catherine Mosbach were respectively selected in September 2005 to design the museum building and garden. Inaugurated by President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande on 2012-12-04, the Louvre-Lens is run by the Hauts-de-France region under a contract () with the Louvre for art loans and brand use. Its main attraction is an exhibition of roughly 200 artworks from the Louvre on a rotating basis, presented chronologically in a single large room (the or \"gallery of time\") that transcends the geographical and object-type divisions along which the Parisian Louvre's displays are organised. The Louvre-Lens has been successful at attracting around 500,000 visitors per year until the COVID-19 pandemic.\nLouvre Abu Dhabi (since 2017).\nThe Louvre Abu Dhabi is a separate entity from the Louvre, but the two entities have a multifaceted contractual relationship that allows the Emirati museum to use the Louvre name until 2037, and to exhibit artworks from the Louvre until 2027. It was inaugurated on 2017-11-08 and opened to the public three days later. A 30-year agreement, signed in early 2007 by French Culture Minister Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres and Sheik Sultan bin Tahnoon Al Nahyan, establishes that Abu Dhabi shall pay \u20ac832,000,000 (US$1.3\u00a0billion) in exchange for the Louvre name use, managerial advice, art loans, and special exhibitions. The Louvre Abu Dhabi is located on Saadiyat Island and was designed by the French architect Jean Nouvel and engineering firm of Buro Happold. It occupies and is covered by an iconic metallic dome designed to cast rays of light mimicking sunlight passing through date palm fronds in an oasis. The French art loans, expected to total between 200 and 300\u00a0artworks during a 10-year period, come from multiple museums, including the Louvre, the Centre Georges Pompidou, the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay, Versailles, the Guimet Museum, the Mus\u00e9e Rodin, and the Mus\u00e9e du quai Branly.\nControversies.\nThe Louvre is involved in controversies that surround cultural property seized under Napoleon I, as well as during World War II by the Nazis. In the early 2010s, workers' rights in the construction of Louvre Abu Dhabi were also a point of controversy for the museum.\nNapoleonic looting.\nNapoleon's campaigns acquired Italian pieces by treaties, as war reparations, and Northern European pieces as spoils, as well as some antiquities excavated in Egypt, though the vast majority of the latter were seized as war reparations by the British army and are now part of collections of the British Museum. On the other hand, the Dendera zodiac is, like the Rosetta Stone, claimed by Egypt even though it was acquired in 1821, before the Egyptian Anti-export legislation of 1835. The Louvre administration has thus argued in favour of retaining this item despite requests by Egypt for its return. The museum participates too in arbitration sessions held via UNESCO's Committee for Promoting the Return of Cultural Property to Its Countries of Origin. The museum consequently returned in 2009 five Egyptian fragments of frescoes (30\u00a0cm x 15\u00a0cm each) whose existence of the tomb of origin had only been brought to the authorities attention in 2008, eight to five years after their good-faith acquisition by the museum from two private collections and after the necessary respect of the procedure of \"d\u00e9classement\" from French public collections before the Commission scientifique nationale des collections des mus\u00e9es de France.\nNazi looting.\nDuring Nazi occupation, thousands of artworks were stolen. But after the war, 61,233 articles of more than 150,000 seized artworks returned to France and were assigned to the Office des Biens Priv\u00e9s. In 1949, it entrusted 2,130 unclaimed pieces (including 1,001 paintings) to the Direction des Mus\u00e9es de France in order to keep them under appropriate conditions of conservation until their restitution and meanwhile classified them as MNRs (Mus\u00e9es Nationaux Recuperation or, in English, the National Museums of Recovered Artwork). Some 10% to 35% of the pieces are believed to come from Jewish spoliations and until the identification of their rightful owners, which declined at the end of the 1960s, they are registered indefinitely on separate inventories from the museum's collections.\nThey were exhibited in 1946 and shown all together to the public during four years (1950\u20131954) in order to allow rightful claimants to identify their properties, then stored or displayed, according to their interest, in several French museums including the Louvre. From 1951 to 1965, about 37 pieces were restituted. Since November 1996, the partly illustrated catalogue of 1947\u20131949 has been accessible online and completed. In 1997, Prime Minister Alain Jupp\u00e9 initiated the Matt\u00e9oli Commission, headed by Jean Matt\u00e9oli, to investigate the matter and according to the government, the Louvre is in charge of 678\u00a0pieces of artwork still unclaimed by their rightful owners. During the late 1990s, the comparison of the American war archives, which had not been done before, with the French and German ones as well as two court cases which finally settled some of the heirs' rights (Gentili di Giuseppe and Rosenberg families) allowed more accurate investigations. Since 1996, the restitutions, according sometimes to less formal criteria, concerned 47 more pieces (26 paintings, with 6 from the Louvre including a then displayed Tiepolo), until the last claims of French owners and their heirs ended again in 2006.\nAccording to Serge Klarsfeld, since the now complete and constant publicity which the artworks got in 1996, the majority of the French Jewish community is nevertheless in favour of the return to the normal French civil rule of \"prescription acquisitive\" of any unclaimed good after another long period of time and consequently to their ultimate integration into the common French heritage instead of their transfer to foreign institutions like during World War II.\nConstruction of Louvre Abu Dhabi.\nIn 2011, over 130 international artists urged a boycott of the new Guggenheim museum as well as Louvre Abu Dhabi, citing reports, since 2009, of abuses of foreign construction workers on Saadiyat Island, including the arbitrary withholding of wages, unsafe working conditions, and failure of companies to pay or reimburse the steep recruitment fees being charged to labourers. According to \"Architectural Record\", Abu Dhabi has comprehensive labour laws to protect the workers, but they are not conscientiously implemented or enforced. In 2010, the Guggenheim Foundation placed on its website a joint statement with Abu Dhabi's Tourism Development and Investment Company (TDIC) recognising the following workers' rights issues, among others: health and safety of the workers; their access to their passports and other documents that the employers have been retaining to guaranty that they stay on the job; using a general contractor that agrees to obey the labour laws; maintaining an independent site monitor; and ending the system that has been generally used in the Persian Gulf region of requiring workers to reimburse recruitment fees.\nIn 2013, \"The Observer\" reported that conditions for the workers at the Louvre and New York University construction sites on Saadiyat amounted to \"modern-day slavery\". In 2014, the Guggenheim's Director, Richard Armstrong, said that he believed that living conditions for the workers at the Louvre project were now good and that \"many fewer\" of them were having their passports confiscated. He stated that the main issue then remaining was the recruitment fees charged to workers by agents who recruit them. Later in 2014, the Guggenheim's architect, Gehry, commented that working with the Abu Dhabi officials to implement the law to improve the labour conditions at the museum's site is \"a moral responsibility.\" He encouraged the TDIC to build additional worker housing and proposed that the contractor cover the cost of the recruitment fees. In 2012, TDIC engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers as an independent monitor required to issue reports every quarter. Labour lawyer Scott Horton told \"Architectural Record\" that he hoped the Guggenheim project will influence the treatment of workers on other Saadiyat sites and will \"serve as a model for doing things right.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17547", "revid": "39720493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17547", "title": "Love", "text": "Strong, positive emotional/mental states\nLove is an emotion involving strong attraction, affection, emotional attachment or concern for a person, animal, or thing. It is expressed in many forms, encompassing a range of strong and positive emotional and mental states, from the most sublime virtue, good habit, deepest interpersonal affection, to the simplest pleasure. An example of this range of meanings is that the love of a mother differs from the love of a spouse, which differs from the love of food.\nLove is considered to be both positive and negative, with its virtue representing kindness, compassion, and affection\u2014\"the unselfish, loyal, and benevolent concern for the good of another\"\u2014and its vice representing a moral flaw akin to vanity, selfishness, amour-propre, and egotism. It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, oneself, or animals. In its various forms, love acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships, and owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts. Love has been postulated to be a function that keeps human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species.\nAncient Greek philosophers identified six forms of love: familial love (), friendly love or platonic love (), romantic love (), self-love (), guest love (), and divine or unconditional love (). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of love: fatuous love, unrequited love, empty love, companionate love, consummate love, compassionate love, infatuated love (passionate love or limerence), obsessive love, amour de soi, and courtly love. Numerous cultures have also distinguished , , , , , , , , , , charity, (and other variants or symbioses of these states), as culturally unique words, definitions, or expressions of love in regard to specified \"moments\" currently lacking in the English language.\nThe triangular theory of love suggests intimacy, passion, and commitment are core components of love. Love has additional religious or spiritual meaning. This diversity of uses and meanings, combined with the complexity of the feelings involved, makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinitions.\nThe word \"love\" can have a variety of related but distinct meanings in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that in English are denoted as \"love\"; one example is the plurality of Greek concepts for \"love\" (, , , ). Cultural differences in conceptualizing love makes it difficult to establish a universal definition.\nAlthough the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what is \"not\" love (antonyms of \"love\"). Love, as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of \"like\"), is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy). As a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust. As an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word \"love\" is often applied to close friendships or platonic love. Further possible ambiguities come with usages like \"girlfriend\", \"boyfriend\", and \"just good friends\".\n Abstractly discussed, \"love\" usually refers to a feeling one person experiences for another person. Love often involves caring for, or identifying with, a person or thing (cf. vulnerability and care theory of love), including oneself (cf. narcissism). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry.\nThe complex nature of love often reduces its discourse to a thought-terminating clich\u00e9. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's \"Love conquers all\" to The Beatles' \"All You Need Is Love\". St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as \"to will the good of another.\" Bertrand Russell describes love as \"absolute value,\" as opposed to relative value. Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is \"to be delighted by the happiness of another.\" Meher Baba stated that in love there is a \"feeling of unity\" and an \"active appreciation of the intrinsic worth of the object of love.\" Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as \"unconditional selflessness\". According to Ambrose Bierce, love is a temporary insanity curable by marriage.\nImpersonal.\nPeople can express love towards things other than humans; this can range from expressing a strong liking of something, such as \"I love popcorn\" or that something is essential to one's identity, such as \"I love being an actor\".\nPeople can have a profound dedication and immense appreciation for an object, principle, or objective, thereby experiencing a sense of love towards it. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' \"love\" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions.\nPeople can also \"love\" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia.\nInterpersonal.\nInterpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a much more potent sentiment than \"liking\" a person. Unrequited love refers to feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships. Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are several psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.\nThroughout history, philosophy and religion have speculated about the phenomenon of love. In the 20th century, the science of psychology has studied the subject. The sciences of anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have also added to the understanding of the concept of love.\nBiological basis.\nBiological models tend to view romantic love as a mammalian drive or motivation system, much like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, an anthropologist and human behavior researcher, divides the experience of love into three brain systems which can operate independently of one another: \"lust\", \"attraction\", and \"attachment\". \"Lust\" is the feeling of sexual desire; \"attraction\" determines what partners find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing a preferred mating partner over others; and \"attachment\" involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security.\nLust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of hormones such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate form. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, reduced appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research indicates that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years.\nSince the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin, to a greater degree than what is found in short-term relationships. Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year.\nPsychological basis.\nPsychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love in which love has three components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is when two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Consummate love includes all three components.\nAmerican psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define \"love\" by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work identifies a different set of three factors that constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy.\nFollowing developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were envisioned, such as \"opposites attract\". Research on human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personality\u2014people tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), perhaps because this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds.\nIn recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.\nSome Western authorities into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the \"concern for the spiritual growth of another\" and simple narcissism. In combination, love is an \"activity\", not simply a feeling.\nPsychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book \"The Art of Loving\" that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact the \"feeling\" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time. Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration. Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment.\nLove as a necessity.\nThe extent to which love can be labelled as a necessity varies in psychology. For infants, attachment theory states that there is a need to form a close relationship with at least one primary caregiver to ensure their survival, and to develop healthy social and emotional functioning (particularly between the ages of six months and two years). As children grow, they use these attachment figures as a secure base from which to explore the world and return to for comfort.\nPsychiatrist Stephanie Cacioppo states, \"the need for love might be less immediate than the need to avoid danger, but it is by no means a luxury\", vaguely placing love neither as a complete need or want, but in between. Professor Ingrid V. Albrecht suggests that \"love participates in a unique form of practical necessity, different from both moral and psychological necessity, yet bearing resemblances to each.\" It is further described as \"an engagement with a person as essentially particular, rather than as an instance of a rational agent in general.\" Ingrid's view suggests that morality or rationality are not the limiting factors of love, but that love is its own distinct need independent of those factors.\nPsychologist Abraham Maslow places love as a basic and foundational human need. In his model, love is a driving factor of human behavior that a person necessitates to fulfill their psychological needs. For many people, it is usually prioritized after one's physiological and safety needs are met.\nEvolutionary basis.\nEvolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Furthermore, researchers as early as Charles Darwin identified unique features of human love compared to other mammals and credited love as a major factor for creating social support systems that enabled the development and expansion of the human species. Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy.\nAdaptive benefit.\nInterpersonal love between a man and woman provides an evolutionary adaptive benefit since it facilitates mating and sexual reproduction. However, some organisms can reproduce asexually without mating. Understanding the adaptive benefit of interpersonal love depends on understanding the adaptive benefit of sexual reproduction as opposed to asexual reproduction. Richard Michod reviewed evidence that love, and consequently sexual reproduction, provides two major adaptive advantages. First, sexual reproduction facilitates repair of damages in the DNA that is passed from parent to progeny (during meiosis, a key stage of the sexual process). Second, a gene in either parent may contain a harmful mutation, but in the progeny produced by sexual reproduction, expression of a harmful mutation introduced by one parent is likely to be masked by expression of the unaffected homologous gene from the other parent.\nComparison of scientific models.\nBiological models tend to view romantic love as a mammalian drive or motivation system, much like hunger or thirst. Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.\nHealth.\nLove plays a role in human well-being and health. Engaging in activities associated with love, such as nurturing relationships, has been shown to activate key brain regions responsible for emotion, attention, motivation, and memory. These activities also contribute to the regulation of the autonomic nervous system, leading to stress reduction over time, although the initial stages of love may induce stress. Love's social bonds enhance both physical and mental health, fostering resilience, compassion, and closeness. It boosts immune function and promotes healing, while also encouraging positive motivations and behaviors for individual flourishing and survival. Breakups can evoke a range of emotional states, including distrust, rejection, and anger, leading to trauma and various psychological challenges such as anxiety, social withdrawal, and even love addiction. Individuals may become fixated on past relationships, perpetuating emotional distress akin to addiction. Health benefits grow bigger when married couples are older, this is because the partners play a crucial role in promoting each other's well-being. Feeling unloved stunts human health in aspects such as growth and happiness.\nCultural views.\nAncient Greek.\nGreek distinguishes several different senses in which the word \"love\" is used. Ancient Greeks identified three main forms of love: friendship or platonic desire (), sexual or romantic desire (), and self-emptying or divine love (). Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love.\n \"Agape\", often a Christian term, denotes a form of love that stands apart from the conventional understanding of affection. Rooted in theological discourse, \"agape\" represents a love that is characterized by its spontaneous nature and its independence from the inherent value of its object. Originating from the Greek term for \"love\", \"agape\" has been examined within theological scholarship, particularly in contrast to \"eros.\" In the Christian tradition, agape is often attributed to the love of God for humanity, as well as humanity's reciprocal love for God and for one another, often termed as brotherly love. \"Agape\" is considered to be unmerited and unmotivated by any inherent worthiness in its recipient. Instead, it is portrayed as an expression of the nature of God, exemplifying divine love that transcends human comprehension.\n \"Eros\" originally referred to a passionate desire, often synonymous with sexual passion, reflecting an egocentric nature. However, its modern interpretation portrays it as both selfish and responsive to the merits of the beloved, thus contingent on reasons. Plato, in his \"Symposium\", argued that sexual desire, fixated on physical beauty, is inadequate and should evolve into an appreciation of the beauty of the soul, culminating in an appreciation of the form of beauty itself. In Greek mythology, Eros symbolizes the state of being in love, extending beyond mere physical sexuality (referred to as \"Venus\"). Unrestrained Venus can reduce individuals to mere appetite, but when Eros is present, the focus shifts to the beloved, elevating intimacy beyond physical gratification. Eros is depicted as divine yet potentially dangerous, capable of inspiring both altruism and selfishness.\n \"Philia\" originally describing an affectionate regard or friendly feeling, extended to relationships like friendship, family members, business partners, and one's nation. Similar to \"eros\", \"philia\" is often seen as responsive to positive attributes in the beloved. This similarity has led scholars to think whether the primary difference between romantic \"eros\" and \"philia\" lies solely in the sexual dimension of the former. The distinction between the two becomes more complex with attempts from scholars to diminish the importance of the sexual aspect in eros, contributing to a nuanced understanding of these forms of love. \"Philia\" was articulated by Aristotle in his \"Nicomachean Ethics.\" Aristotle suggests that \"philia\" can be motivated by considerations for either one's own benefit or the benefit of the other. \"Philia\" often arises from the utility found in the relationship or from admiration for the character or virtues of the other individual. Aristotle further elucidates that the foundation of philia rests on objective grounds; individuals must share similar dispositions, refrain from holding grudges, and embody qualities such as justice, among others.\nAncient Roman.\nIn Latin, friendship was distinctly termed \"amicitia,\" while \"amor\" encompassed erotic passion, familial attachment, and, albeit less commonly, the affection between friends. Cicero, in his essay \"On Friendship\" reflects on the innate human tendency to both love oneself and seek out another with whom to intertwine minds, nearly blending them into a singular entity. This suggests that while friends remain distinct individuals, they also, in some sense, become intertwined, embodying a shared essence.\nLucretius perceives love as a disruptive and irrational force, leading to madness and despair. To him, it is an affliction distorting reality, a primal urge rooted in the biological need for species to propagate. He emphasizes love's futility and self-destructive nature. In contrast, Ovid acknowledges the pleasure of love alongside its risks and complexities. He views love as a game of manipulation and deception, marked by a blend of hedonism and cynicism. Ovid recognizes the transient nature of passion and the inevitable disappointment in romantic relationships.\nChinese.\n\"Ren\" (), a concept in Confucianism philosophy, embodies the essence of humanity and virtue. It is regarded as the sum of all virtues within a person, encompassing traits such as selflessness and self-cultivation. Ren emphasizes the cultivation of harmonious relationships within society, starting from the family unit and extending outward. Within Confucianism, these relationships are delineated by five main categories: father-son, older brother-younger brother, husband-wife, older friend-younger friend, and lord-servant. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parents, loyalty to the king and so forth.\nCentral to the concept of \"ren\" is the notion of reciprocity and empathetic understanding. It is often interpreted as akin to love (), but sometimes it also considered a stage between \"ai\" and \"ling\", characterized by the sincere and open-hearted expression of human feelings. Through genuine love for others, individuals cultivate \"ren\" and foster deeper connections that bridge the gap between the human and the divine. \"Ren\"'s significance lies in its ability to foster genuine human connection and empathy, laying the foundation for harmonious relationships within society.\nMozi, a Chinese philosopher, articulated a philosophy centered on the principle of universal love. At the core of his teachings lay the belief that genuine harmony and societal well-being could only be achieved through love for others, transcending narrow self-interest. Mozi contended that universal love was not merely an abstract concept but a practical imperative, requiring individuals to actively promote the welfare of all members of society through their actions.\nIn Mozi's philosophical framework, universal love was not only a moral obligation but also a divine principle originating from Heaven itself. He argued that this principle was exemplified through the actions of sage-kings from ancient times, who demonstrated how love could manifest in tangible ways within human interactions. Mozi's advocacy for universal love extended beyond interpersonal relationships; he believed it should guide the selection of rulers and the structuring of society, emphasizing reciprocity and egalitarianism as foundational principles for a harmonious social order.\nIn Taoism, the concept of \"ci\" () embodies compassion or love, with connotations of tender nurturing akin to a mother's care. It emphasizes the idea that creatures can only thrive through raising and nurturing. \"Ci\" serves as the wellspring of compassion or love that transcends preconceived notions of individuals, instead fostering compassion for people as they are. As depicted in the \"Tao Te Ching\", love is as open and responsive to each person's unique circumstances. Taoism juxtaposes human beings with the vastness of nature, likening the creation of people to the formation of waves in the ocean. Unlike Confucianism, Taoist responses to the loss of a loved one as portrayed in the \"Zhuangzi\" may involve either mourning their death or embracing the loss and finding joy in new creations. Taoist love seeks connections that surpass distinctions and superficial reflections.\nJapanese.\nThe Japanese language uses three words to convey the English equivalent of love \u2014 , and . The term \"ai\" carries a multiple meanings, encompassing feelings of feelings from superior to inferiors, compassion and empathy towards others and selfless love, originally referred to beauty and was often used in a religious context. Initially synonymous with \"koi\", representing romantic love between a man and a woman, emphasizing its physical expression, \"ai\" underwent a transformation during the early Meiji era. It evolved into a euphemistic term for or love attachment, signifying a shift towards a more egalitarian treatment and consideration of others as equals. Prior to Western influence, the term \"koi\" generally represented romantic love. describes a longing for a member of the opposite sex and is typically interpreted as selfish and wanting. The term's origins come from the concept of lonely solitude as a result of separation from a loved one. Though modern usage of focuses on sexual love and infatuation, the Many\u014d used the term to cover a wider range of situations, including tenderness, benevolence, and material desire. The fusion of \"ai\" and \"koi\" gave rise to the modern term \"ren'ai\"; its usage more closely resembles that of in the form of romantic love.\nThe concept , the dependency and emotional bonds between an infant and its mother\u2014a bond that lays the foundation for the archetypal concept of love. Japanese culture traditionally distinguishes between marriage and love, valuing practical considerations and complementarity within family units.\nIndian.\nIn ancient India, there was an understanding of erotics and the art of love. References in the Rigveda suggest the presence of romantic narratives in ancient Indo-Aryan society, evident in dialogues between deities like Yama and Yami, and Pururavas and Urvashi. The Sanskrit language, offered various terms to convey the concept of love, such as \"kama,\" \"sneha, priya, vatsalya,\" \"bhakti\", \"priti\" and \"prema\".\nIn Indian literature, there are seven stages of love. The first is \"preska\", characterized by the desire to see something pleasant. Next is \"abhilasa,\" involving constant thoughts about the beloved. Then comes \"raga,\" signifying the mental inclination to be united with the beloved. Following that is \"shena\", which involves favorable activities directed towards the beloved. \"Prema\" is the stage where one cannot live without the beloved. Then there is \"rati\", which involves living together with the beloved. Finally, \"srngara\" represents the playful interaction with the beloved.\n\"Kama\" initially representing desire and longing. Later, V\u0101tsy\u0101yana, the author of the Kama Sutra, explored the concept of \"kama\", defining it as the enjoyment of sensory pleasures with conscious awareness. However, there were also teachings cautioning against becoming overly attached to desire, advocating for the pursuit of genuine happiness through transcending desires. The Atharvaveda, presents \"kama\" as the tender affection between partners.\nNevertheless, \"kama\" is also often associated with insatiable sexual desire intertwined with intense emotions like anger and greed, portraying it as potentially harmful. Over time, \"kama\" took on anthropomorphic qualities, evolving into the figure of the Indian Cupid.\n\"Sneha\", considered the emotional facet of love, stands in contrast to the intense passion of \"kama\" with its calm demeanor. Characterized by moisture and viscosity, the term originally denoted oiliness. It is often compounded with words for family members, reflecting attachment to individuals like mothers, fathers, and sons. Those experiencing \"sneha\" tend to exhibit great concern for one another. While traditionally attributed to sensing, the Harshacharita presents a spontaneous perspective, suggesting it lacks a definitive cause. Due to its emotional nature, \"sneha\" is transient, emerging without reason and disappearing likewise.\n\"Preman\" represents a heightened stage in the development of love, characterized by the unbearable feeling of separation from the beloved. Etymologically, it denotes the sense of endearment akin to one's own. \"Priti\", similar to \"preman\", denotes fondness for anything delightful and familiar. It encompasses a general liking for arts, sports, and objects, while also encompassing a human instinct. \"Priti\" is built on foundations of trust and fidelity. Friendly relations (\"priti\") may persist between individuals but are not necessarily bound by affection (\"sneha\").\n\"Vatsalya\" originally signifies the tender affection exhibited by a cow towards her calf, extending to denote the love nurtured by elders or superiors towards the younger or inferior. This love is exemplified in the affection of parents towards their children, a husband's care for his wife, or a ruler's concern for their subjects. Conversely, \"bhakti\" denotes the love expressed by the younger towards the seniors, exemplified in a child's devotion to their parents.\nPersian.\nInterpretations of Rumi's poetry and Sufi cosmology by scholars emphasize a divine-centric perspective, focusing on the transcendent nature of love. These interpretations emphasize Rumi's rejection of mortal attachments in favor of a love for the ultimate beloved, seen as embodying absolute beauty and grandeur. Scholars like William Chittick assert that all love stems from the divine, with God being both lover and beloved. Leonard Lewisohn characterizes Rumi's poetry as part of a mystical tradition that celebrates love as pathways to union with the divine, highlighting a transcendent experience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;The children of Adam are limbs of one body\nHaving been created of one essence.\nWhen the calamity of time afflicts one limb\nThe other limbs cannot remain at rest.\nIf you have no sympathy for the troubles of others\nYou are not worthy to be called by the name of \"man\".&lt;/poem&gt;\n Sa'di\n, \"Gulistan\"\nIn Persian mysticism, the concept of creation stems from love, viewed as the fundamental essence from which all beings originate and to which they ultimately return. This notion, influenced by neoplatonism, portrays love as both earthly and transcendent, embodying a universal striving for reunion with the divine. Scholars such as Abdolhossein Zarrinkoob trace this philosophical stance, highlighting its fusion with ancient Persian religious beliefs in figures like Ibn Arabi. According to Islamicists like William Chittick and Leonard Lewisohn, all forms of love find their origin in divine love, with creation serving as a reflection of God's beauty and love. This perspective is evident in the poetry of Hafez and others, where the concept of tajalli, or divine self-manifestation, underscores the profound spiritual significance of love as it pertains to both human relationships and devotion to God.\nReligious views.\nUntil the 18th century, the concept of love in relationships had been largely based on the former principles of God. Authors of the high Middle Ages emphasized using God to help guide those of authority in relationships. As a result, consequences were seen as in accordance to divine order, \"for the ruler's right to punish was directly derived from the obligation of love towards the subject.\"\nAbrahamic.\nJudaism.\nIn Hebrew, (\"ahavah\") signifies the love of Israelites for God and each other. However, the concept \"hesed\" offers a deeper understanding of love within Jewish thought and life. It goes beyond mere passion, embodying a character trait that is actively expressed through generosity and grace. \"Hesed\" has a dual nature: when attributed to God, it denotes grace or favor, while when practiced by humans, it reflects piety and devotion.\n\"Hasidim\", demonstrate their commitment and love for God through acts of \"hesed\". The Torah serves as a guide, outlining how Israelites should express their love for God, show reverence for nature, and demonstrate compassion toward fellow human beings. The commandment \"Love thy neighbor as thyself\" from the Torah's, gives emphasis on ethical obligations and impartiality in judgment. It highlights the importance of treating all individuals equally before the law, rejecting favoritism and bribery; deuteronomy further emphasizes impartiality in judgment.\nAs for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: \"See life with the wife you love\" (Ecclesiastes ). Rabbi David Wolpe writes that \"love is not only about the feelings of the lover... It is when one person believes in another person and shows it.\" He further states that \"love... is a feeling that expresses itself in action. What we really feel is reflected in what we do.\" The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading it reads like a love song. The 20th-century rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as \"giving without expecting to take\".\nChristianity.\nThe Christian understanding is that love comes from God, who is himself love (). The love of man and woman\u2014 in Greek\u2014and the unselfish love of others (), are often contrasted as \"descending\" and \"ascending\" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing. In ancient Christianity, the concept of \"caritas\" became a prominent topic, advocating love for one\u2019s neighbor as the likeness of God (Augustine, \"De civitate Dei\").\nThere are several Greek words for \"love\" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.\nTwo other words for love in the Greek language, (sexual love) and (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.\nChristians believe that to \"love God with all your heart, mind, and strength\" and \"love your neighbor as yourself\" are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark ). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote \"Love God, and do as thou wilt.\"\nThe Old Testament is said to place greater emphasis on \"the active character of love\" than the New, which shifts its focus to the love of God \"as a principle pervading the world\". Out of the three divine virtues (faith, hope, and love) in Christianity, it is said that love has the highest status (1 Cor 13,13). Paul the Apostle similarly glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poetic interpretation in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, \"Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres.\" ()\nJohn the Apostle wrote, \"For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.\" (John ) John also wrote, \"Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love.\" ()\nAugustine wrote that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, \"I was in love with love.\" Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God because love with a human only allows for flaws such as \"jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention.\"III.1 According to Augustine, to love God is \"to attain the peace which is yours.\"X.27\nAugustine regards the duplex commandment of love in as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of \"De Doctrina Christiana\" (1.22.21\u20131.40.44).\nChristian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C. S. Lewis wrote a book called \"The Four Loves\". Benedict XVI named his first encyclical \"God is love\". He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others () and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Mother Teresa and Mary, the mother of Jesus and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them. Teresa described feeling unloved as \"the most terrible poverty\".\nPope Francis asserts that the \"Cross (Jesus crucified) is the greatest meaning of the greatest love,\" and in the crucifixion is found everything, all knowledge and the entirety of God's love. Pope Francis taught that \"True love is both loving and letting oneself be loved... what is important in love is not our loving, but allowing ourselves to be loved by God.\" And so, in the analysis of a Catholic theologian, for Pope Francis, \"the key to love... is not our activity. It is the activity of the greatest, and the source, of all the powers in the universe: God's.\"\nIn Christianity the practical definition of love is summarized by Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as \"to will the good of another,\" or to desire for another to succeed. This is an explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. Thomas Aquinas explains that Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.\nRegarding love for enemies, Jesus is quoted in the Gospel of Matthew:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have heard that it was said, \"Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.\" But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.\nTertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: \"Our individual, extraordinary, and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies. To love one's friends is common practice, to love one's enemies only among Christians.\"\nIslam.\nLove encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Among the 99 names of God (Allah) is the name \"Al-Wadud\", or \"the Loving One,\" which is found in Surah https:// and https://. God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as \"Ar-Rahman\" and \"Ar-Rahim\", or the \"Most Compassionate\" and the \"Most Merciful\", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate, and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being \"full of loving kindness.\"\nThe Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat , with or \"deep kindness\" as stated in Surah https://. is also used by the Qur'an to describe the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.\n, or divine love, is emphasized by Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God into the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God \"looks\" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices seeing the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love. God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms\u2014Lover, Loved, and Beloved\u2014with the last of these terms often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can return to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being \"drunk\" due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1'\u00ed concept of the human soul emphasizes its expression through capacities such as knowledge, love, and will. According to Bah\u00e1'\u00ed teachings, conscious recognition of one's Creator and a reciprocal love relationship with that Creator form the basis of obedience to religious law. This perspective grounds adherence to law within the spiritual dynamics of each individual's journey, portraying obedience as a conscious choice driven by love rather than as mere compliance with external dictates.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith, emphasizes the importance of observing God's commandments out of love, describing them as \"the lamps of My loving providence\" and urging followers to adhere to them for \"the love of My beauty.\" This framing positions love as the motive force for individuals striving to follow divine laws. In Bah\u00e1'\u00ed understanding, love is considered the fundamental universal law. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h's son and successor, describes love as the \"most great law\" and the force that binds together the diverse elements of the material world. He further asserts that love is the establisher of true civilization and the source of glory for every race and nation.\nFrom the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed perspective, God's revelation of laws to humanity is an act of love, and the legitimate reason for their application and adherence lies in their expression of love. This understanding underscores the intimate connection between spiritual principles, individual growth, and the practice of religious law within the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nDharmic.\nBuddhism.\nIn Buddhism, love is understood as a selfless, universal quality that serves as the foundation for compassion, joy in others' happiness, and equanimity. Together, these four qualities\u2014loving-kindness (\"maitr\u012b\"), compassion (\"karu\u1e47\u0101\"), sympathetic joy (\"mudita\"), and equanimity (\"upek\u1e63\u0101\")\u2014are known as the brahmavihara. Loving-kindness, the first of the four, fosters goodwill toward all beings and leads naturally to compassion for those who suffer, joy in others' achievements, and, ultimately, to equanimity, a balanced state free from attachment and aversion. This progression helps practitioners to reduce negative tendencies like ill-will, jealousy, and possessiveness, with the ultimate aim of cultivating inner peace and a compassionate view toward all beings, supporting both personal growth and societal harmony.\nIn Theravada, love and sympathy play key roles in shaping ethical behavior and social actions. Sympathy motivates altruistic acts like teaching and helping others, while loving-kindness is cultivated primarily through meditation, acting as a form of mental liberation. Together, these qualities encourage impartial love and empathy, fostering personal peace and societal harmony, and supporting both individual growth and a more compassionate world.\nIn Mahayana, love is understood as profound compassion and a commitment to mutual support. This concept is central to the Bodhisattva ideal, where practitioners vow to help all beings reach enlightenment, often delaying their own liberation to support others. Mahayana teachings emphasize selfless love, blurring the boundary between self and others, and seeing all beings as interconnected. This love, framed within the Mahayana understanding of reality as ultimately illusory, transcends ego and guides both the practitioner and others toward collective liberation.\nIn Vajrayana, love is a transformative force that, when disciplined, leads to spiritual enlightenment. Rather than rejecting desire, Vajrayana encourages the refinement of love and other potent energies as pathways to higher consciousness. By controlling and sublimating these energies, often represented through sexual energy as a life force (k\"Kundalini\"), practitioners unite the principles of wisdom and skill. Here, love becomes a symbol and method for ultimate unity, guiding practitioners to enlightenment by transforming personal desire into a universal connection.\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end () in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava Temple, Belur, in Karnataka, India. \"Maara\" is another name for .\nIn contrast to , \u2014or refers to \"elevated\" love. is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. is a Sanskrit term meaning \"loving devotion to the divine.\" A person who practices is called a . Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of , which can be found in the \"Bhagavata Purana\" and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work \"Narada Bhakti Sutra\", written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.\nIn certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unadulterated, unconditional, and incessant love for the Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas, who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes, consider Love for Godhead, (), to act in two ways: and (union and separation)\u2014two opposites.\nIn the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union, there is supreme happiness. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (love for Godhead) burns away one's material desires, pierces the heart, and washes away everything\u2014one's pride, one's religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of the material realm, as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India, such as the \"Gita Govinda\" of Jayadeva and \"Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.\"\nIn the tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God (), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination (). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination, and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life.\nPolitical views.\nFor some critical approaches such as strands of feminism and Marxism, love is seen as a way for social dominance, particularly in patriarchies. That is, it is a constructivist concept that serves to empower men, operating as \"the opiate of women\". These approaches thus resist the language and ideals of love that could serve as a means of resisting systemic oppression.\nAnthropological perspectives relate love with power, inequality, and governance, that is shaped by kinship, religion, class, race, and nationalism. Love can then be a form of resistance and solidarity, as in queer relationships. Love is also shaped by governments and markets through regulation and commodification. For example, colonial restrictions on intimacy or conspiracy theories such as love jihad.\nPhilosophical views.\nPhilosophically, love is often categorized into four types: love as a union, robust concern, valuing, and emotion. Love as a union suggests love forms a \"we\" by merging individual identities, as proposed by thinkers like Roger Scruton and Robert Nozick, who argue this fusion enhances shared care. Critics, however, contend that union threatens individual autonomy, though Nozick and others believe this merging enriches love. Michael Friedman offers a compromise with his federation model, where love unifies yet preserves individual identities.\nLove as robust concern defines love as a deep care for the beloved's well-being without creating a union. This view prioritizes concern for the beloved's welfare, but critics argue it misses the interactive and emotional aspects of love. Supporters maintain that love's essence lies in respecting the beloved's autonomy. Monique Wonderly adds that attachment complements this view, making the beloved important for both themselves and the lover.\nLove as valuing includes two approaches: appraisal and bestowal of value. J. David Velleman argues that appraisal responds to the inherent dignity in others, making love a unique emotional vulnerability. However, this view struggles to explain love's selectivity and constancy. Peter Singer's bestowal view posits that love creates intrinsic value in the beloved, yet critics question how this explains love's discernment.\nLove as an emotion is seen either as an emotion proper or as an emotion complex. Emotion properly treats love as a specific motivational response, but some find this too simplistic. The emotion complex perspective suggests that love is a dynamic, interconnected emotional history shaped by the relationship. Figures like Annette Baier and Neera K. Badhwar highlight emotional interdependence, though critics wonder how this distinguishes love from other relationships and defines its unique narrative.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17549", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17549", "title": "Forever Changes", "text": "Forever Changes is the third studio album by the American rock band Love, released in November 1967 by Elektra Records. The album saw the group embrace a subtler folk-influenced sound based around acoustic guitars and orchestral arrangements, while primary songwriter Arthur Lee explored darker themes alluding to mortality and his growing disillusionment with the era's counterculture. It was the final album recorded by the original band lineup; after its completion, guitarist Bryan MacLean left the group acrimoniously, and Lee subsequently dismissed the other members.\n\"Forever Changes\" had only moderate success on the album charts upon release, peaking at No. 154 in the US and No. 24 in the UK. In subsequent years, it has become recognized as an influential document of 1960s psychedelia and named among the greatest albums of all time by a variety of publications.\nBackground.\nIn 1966, Love released two albums: a self-titled debut album and \"Da Capo\". Both were moderately successful, as were the singles \"My Little Red Book\" and \"7 and 7 Is\"; however, success was halted by bandleader Arthur Lee's refusal to tour. Lee expressed a fear of leaving the band's home city, Los Angeles.\nFor \"Da Capo\", Love had expanded from five members to seven in order to experiment with a more jazz-influenced style. However, shortly after the album released, Lee decided the experiment had run its course and fired saxophonist/flautist Tjay Cantrelli and drummer-turned-keyboardist Alban \"Snoopy\" Pfisterer. The \"Forever Changes\" lineup of Love comprised Lee, Bryan MacLean (rhythm guitar), Johnny Echols (lead guitar), Ken Forssi (bass guitar), and Michael Stuart (drums).\nBy 1967, the band was facing major internal conflicts. Echols explained: \"We were [before] totally united: living together, practicing together, and playing together. [...] But as more people started to recognize the group, there became these little factions. Arthur had his little clique, Bryan had his [...] They began to pull the group apart.\" Lee's relationship with MacLean, Love's other songwriter, was deteriorating. In a 1992 interview, Lee spoke of him and MacLean \"competing a bit like Lennon and McCartney to see who would come up with the better song. It was part of our charm. Everybody had different behaviour patterns. Eventually, the others couldn't cut it\".\nLove were also at odds with their label, Elektra Records. After recording \"Da Capo\", the band attempted for a third time to sever their contract with the label. The resulting May 1967 agreement required them to produce one more album. Throughout 1967, Lee also grew envious of the success of fellow Elektra band the Doors, whom he had been integral in getting signed. However, it has been countered that the Doors were more willing to work on the road than Lee.\nInspiration.\nLee's material for \"Forever Changes\" was drawn from his lifestyle and environment, which contrasted greatly from the typical hippie culture of the time. The songs reflected upon dark themes, such as paranoia, the Vietnam War, race issues in the US, societal breakdown, and the negative effects of drug use. In his \"33 1/3\" book on the album, Andrew Hultkrans explained Lee's frame of mind at the time: \"Arthur Lee was one member of the '60s counterculture who didn't buy flower-power wholesale, who intuitively understood that letting the sunshine in wouldn't instantly vaporize the world's (or his own) dark stuff\". With the band in disarray, and increasingly concerned over his own mortality, Lee envisioned \"Forever Changes\" as a lament to his memory.\nRecording and style.\nHaving already engineered the group's first two albums, Bruce Botnick was enlisted to oversee the production of the third album along with Lee. Botnick, who had also worked with Buffalo Springfield, invited Neil Young to co-produce the album, but Young, after initially agreeing, excused himself from the project. As Botnick recalled, \"Neil really had the burning desire to go solo and realize his dream without being involved in another band\". It was reported that Young arranged the song \"The Daily Planet\", but he denied any involvement.\nAccording to AllMusic, the band embraced \"a more gentle, contemplative, and organic sound on \"Forever Changes\",\" with much of the album \"built around interwoven acoustic guitar textures and subtle orchestrations, with strings and horns both reinforcing and punctuating the melodies.\" Elektra Records founder Jac Holzman had suggested that Love \"advance backwards\" by embracing the more subtle approach of folk music, and Lee, while typically independent in his musical directions, accepted the suggestion. Stephen M. Deusner of \"Pitchfork\" stated that Lee paired his \"dark, discomfiting lyrics\" with music that draws from rock, psychedelia, folk, pop, classical, and mariachi influences without being reducible to any of those labels.\nLove started recording \"Forever Changes\" in June 1967 at Sunset Sound Recorders. However, beginning with the early recording sessions, the band was plagued by internal conflicts and lack of preparation for Lee's intricate arrangements. Through Holzman's perspective, Botnick was an \"album savior\", guiding and motivating the musicians out of their trying period. To compel the band to refocus, Botnick and Lee enlisted Wrecking Crew session musicians Billy Strange (guitar), Don Randi (piano), Hal Blaine (drums), and Carol Kaye (bass guitar) to work with Lee, completing the rhythm tracks for \"Andmoreagain\" and \"The Daily Planet\" in a single three-hour session. Shocked by the notion of losing their roles, the plan succeeded in motivating the other Love members to participate in recording the remaining material.\nLee spent three weeks with arranger David Angel, playing and singing the orchestral parts to him. Lee envisioned the horns and strings as part of the material from the beginning. String and horn overdubs on September 18, followed by two more stereo mixing sessions, completed the sessions.\nAccording to the staff of \"BrooklynVegan\", the tensions between Arthur Lee and Bryan MacLean \"made for a unique energy\" present on the album, said to be \"[running] electric.\" The site described the album's production as \"sweeping [and] baroque.\" \"NME\" wrote that the album is \"joyous, uplifting and sweet in parts, while at the same time menacing, introverted and paranoid.\"\nTitle and artwork.\nThe title of the album came from a break-up Lee had with his girlfriend. She said, \"But you said you would love me forever?\" and he replied, \"Yeah well, you know, forever changes.\" The album's title has also been interpreted as meaning \"Love Forever Changes\".\nThe album's front cover, designed by Bob Pepper, shows the faces of all five members of the band in the shape of a human heart. Fans have also seen it as the shape of Africa. The back cover photo was taken by the band's manager Ronnie Haran, at Lee's house after one of the rehearsals. While taking photos, Haran accidentally knocked over and broke a flower vase. Lee picked it up and is shown holding it in the final product. Some have interpreted the broken vase and dead flowers as symbolizing the \"death of flower power\", though Lee denied that it had any deeper meaning.\nRelease, commercial performance, and aftermath.\nReleased in November 1967, \"Forever Changes\" initially only achieved moderate commercial success. It peaked at number 154 in the US, the lowest showing of a Love album up to that point. However, it fared much better in the UK, where it reached number 24. Holzman partially attributed the album's small impact to the fact that it was released in November, only to be overshadowed by the Christmas market rush.\nThe underwhelming reaction to \"Forever Changes\" from the general public further contributed to the band's state of disarray. Live performances became less and less frequent, and the members' addictions to heroin and cocaine worsened. This line-up of Love released one more single, \"Your Mind and We Belong Together\"/\"Laughing Stock\", in January 1968. It was later falsely rumored that these songs were meant to be the beginning of work on another album titled \"Gethsemane\". Lee was also angered by the prospect of MacLean recording a solo album for Elektra. By August 1968, Lee had replaced the members of Love with a new line-up that \"hated \"Forever Changes\"\" and took a more hard rock and blues rock direction.\nCritical reception.\nContemporaneous reviews.\nInitial reviews were positive. Writing for \"Rolling Stone\" in 1968, Jim Bickhart regarded \"Forever Changes\" as Love's \"most sophisticated album yet\", applauding the orchestral arrangements and recording quality. In \"Esquire\", Robert Christgau called it an elaboration on Love's original musical style and \"a vast improvement\" over their previous recordings, because \"Lee has stopped trying to imitate Mick Jagger with his soft voice, and the lyrics, while still obscure, now have an interesting surface as well.\" Pete Johnson of the \"Los Angeles Times\" believed the album could \"survive endless listening with no diminishing either of power or of freshness\", adding that \"parts of the album are beautiful; others are disturbingly ugly, reflections of the pop movement towards realism\". Gene Youngblood of \"LA Free Express\" also praised the album, calling it \"melancholy iconoclasm and tasteful romanticism.\" Harvey Kubernik believed that the reaction to \"Forever Changes\" in Los Angeles was comparable to that of the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" in the UK.\nRetrospective acclaim.\nAfter the initial reactions to \"Forever Changes\" died down, the album maintained a cult following, with Richie Unterberger calling it \"the biggest cult album of all time, its following just growing and growing through subsequent decades and generations.\" Biographer John Einarson agrees, adding that \"its reputation as one of the greatest albums of all time has been built almost exclusively by rediscovery and word of mouth.\" In a retrospective review, AllMusic stated that the album \"became recognized as one of the finest and most haunting albums to come out of the Summer of Love,\" calling it \"an album that heralds the last days of a golden age and anticipates the growing ugliness that would dominate the counterculture in 1968 and 1969.\" The 1979 edition of \"The Rolling Stone Record Guide\" gave the album a rating of five stars (out of five). It also received five stars in the 1983 edition of the guide and in the 1992 guide four. In a special issue of \"Mojo\" magazine, \"Forever Changes\" was ranked the second greatest psychedelic album of all time. In the January 1996 issue, \"Mojo\" readers selected \"Forever Changes\" as number 11 on the \"100 Greatest Albums Ever Made\". In 2002, members of the UK Parliament signed https:// declaring \"Forever Changes\" \"the greatest album of all time\".\nIn a survey of 1960s folk rock, Richie Unterberger named the album his second favorite of the genre, but only 24th in terms of historical importance.\nReissues.\n\"Forever Changes\" was included in its entirety on the 2-CD retrospective Love compilation \"Love Story 1966\u20131972\", released by Rhino Records in 1995. The album was re-released in an expanded single-CD version by Rhino in 2001, featuring alternate mixes, outtakes and the group's 1968 single, \"Your Mind and We Belong Together\"/\"Laughing Stock\", the final tracks ever to feature the \"Forever Changes\" line-up of Arthur Lee, Johnny Echols, Ken Forssi, Michael Stuart-Ware and Bryan MacLean (Forssi and MacLean both died in 1998).\n\"The Forever Changes Concert\" was released on DVD in 2003 and marked the first time many of the songs had been performed live. The set features the entire album performed in its original running order, recorded in early 2003 during Lee's tour of England, in which he was backed by the band Baby Lemonade and members of the Stockholm Strings 'n' Horns ensemble. The DVD features the album concert, five bonus performances, documentary footage and an interview with Lee.\nA double-CD \"Collector's Edition\" of the album was issued by Rhino Records on April 22, 2008. The first disc consists of a remastered version of the original 1967 album. The second disc contains a previously unissued alternate stereo mix of the album, plus ten bonus tracks.\nA Super High Material CD (SHM-CD) version of \"Forever Changes\" was released by Warner Music Japan in 2009, and a 24 bit 192\u00a0kHz High Resolution version of the album was released by HDTracks in 2014, and in the same year a hybrid Super Audio CD (SACD) version of the album was released by Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab.\nA 50th anniversary deluxe edition box set was released by Rhino on April 6, 2018, featuring four CDs, a DVD and an LP. It contains remastered versions of the stereo, mono and alternate stereo mixes of the album, a disc of demos, outtakes, alternate mixes and non-album tracks, a DVD containing a 24/96 stereo mix of the album and a bonus music video, and a new LP remaster of the album, remastered by Bruce Botnick and cut from high resolution audio by Bernie Grundman.\nLegacy.\n\"Forever Changes\" was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2008 and added to the National Recording Registry in 2011. \"Rolling Stone\" ranked it number 180 on its 2020 list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. The album was also included in Robert Christgau's \"Basic Record Library\" of 1950s and 1960s recordings, published in \"\" (1981). It was voted number 12 in Colin Larkin's All Time Top 1000 Albums 3rd Edition (2000). In 2013, \"NME\" ranked the album number 37 on their list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. Publishers such as AllMusic and \"Slant Magazine\" have praised the album as well. In a 2005 survey held by British television's Channel 4, the album was ranked 83rd in the 100 greatest albums of all time. The album was included in the 2005 book \"1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die\".\nAccording to \"NME\", the Stone Roses' relationship with their future producer John Leckie was settled when they all agreed that \"Forever Changes\" was the \"best record ever\". Robert Plant is an admirer of the album.\nThe staff of \"BrooklynVegan\" named the album as the best psychedelic rock album of the Summer of Love, and \"NME\" named the album as the greatest psychedelic album of all time.\nTrack listing.\nAll songs written by Arthur Lee, except \"Alone Again Or\" and \"Old Man\" by Bryan MacLean. Details are taken from the 50th Anniversary Edition. Bonus track \"Wooly Bully\" written by Sam Samudio.\n2001 Rhino bonus tracks\nA single disc collection, presenting the original stereo album, remastered, plus the following bonus tracks:\n2008 Rhino \"Collector's Edition\" bonus tracks\nA two-disc collection. Disc 1 presents the original stereo album, remastered, while disc 2 is a previously unreleased alternate stereo mix of the album, featuring the following bonus tracks:\n2018 \"50th Anniversary Edition\" bonus discs\nA box set comprising four CDs, one LP and one DVD: disc 2 presents the original mono album, remastered; disc 3 is the alternate stereo mix; disc 4 is outtakes, single versions, demos, session highlights and non album tracks from the era; disc 5 is the original stereo album on vinyl, remastered and cut from high resolution audio; and disc 6 is a 24/96 stereo mix on DVD, featuring a bonus music video.\nPersonnel.\nAccording to the 2001 reissue CD booklet.\nLove\nAdditional musicians\nProduction and design\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17552", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17552", "title": "Logical fallacy", "text": ""}
{"id": "17553", "revid": "50468286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17553", "title": "Kepler's laws of planetary motion", "text": "In astronomy, Kepler's laws of planetary motion, published by Johannes Kepler in 1609 (except the third law, which was fully published in 1619), describe the orbits of planets around the Sun. These laws replaced the circular orbits and epicycles of Copernicus's heliostatic model of the planets with a genuinely heliocentric theory that described how planetary velocities vary following elliptical orbits. The three laws state that:\nThe elliptical orbits of planets were indicated by calculations of the orbit of Mars. From this, Kepler inferred that other bodies in the Solar System, including those farther away from the Sun, also have elliptical orbits. The second law establishes that when a planet is closer to the Sun, it travels faster. The third law expresses that the farther a planet is from the Sun, the longer its orbital period.\nIsaac Newton showed in 1687 that relationships like Kepler's would apply in the Solar System as a consequence of his own laws of motion and law of universal gravitation.\nA more precise historical approach is found in \"Astronomia nova,\" \"Harmonice Mundi\" and \"Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae\".\nComparison to Copernicus.\nJohannes Kepler's laws improved the model of Copernicus. According to Copernicus:\nDespite being correct in saying that the planets revolved around the Sun, Copernicus was incorrect in defining their orbits. Introducing physical explanations for movement in space beyond just geometry, Kepler correctly defined the orbit of planets as follows:\nThe eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth makes the time from the March equinox to the September equinox, around 186 days, unequal to the time from the September equinox to the March equinox, around 179 days. A diameter would cut the orbit into equal parts, but the plane through the Sun parallel to the equator of the Earth cuts the orbit into two parts with areas in a 186 to 179 ratio, so the eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth is approximately\nformula_1\nwhich is close to the correct value (0.016710218). The accuracy of this calculation requires that the two dates chosen be along the elliptical orbit's minor axis and that the midpoints of each half be along the major axis. As the two dates chosen here are equinoxes, this will be correct when perihelion, the date the Earth is closest to the Sun, falls on a solstice. The current perihelion, near January 4, is fairly close to the solstice of December 21 or 22.\nNomenclature.\nIt took nearly two centuries for the current formulation of Kepler's work to take on its settled form. Voltaire's \"El\u00e9ments de la philosophie de Newton\" (\"Elements of Newton's Philosophy\") of 1738 was the first publication to use the terminology of \"laws\". The \"Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers\" in its article on Kepler (p.\u00a0620) states that the terminology of scientific laws for these discoveries was current at least from the time of Joseph de Lalande. It was the exposition of Robert Small, in \"An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler\" (1814) that made up the set of three laws, by adding in the third. Small also claimed, against the history, that these were empirical laws, based on inductive reasoning.\nFurther, the current usage of \"Kepler's second law\" is something of a misnomer. Kepler had two versions, related in a qualitative sense: the \"distance law\" and the \"area law\". The \"area law\" is what became the second law in the set of three; but Kepler did himself not privilege it in that way.\nHistory.\nKepler published his first two laws about planetary motion in 1609, having found them by analyzing the astronomical observations of Tycho Brahe. Kepler's third law was published in 1619. Kepler had believed in the Copernican model of the Solar System, which called for circular orbits, but he could not reconcile Brahe's highly precise observations with a circular fit to Mars' orbit \u2013 Mars coincidentally having the highest eccentricity of all planets except Mercury. His first law reflected this discovery.\nIn 1621, Kepler noted that his third law applies to the four brightest moons of Jupiter. Godefroy Wendelin also made this observation in 1643. The second law, in the \"area law\" form, was contested by Nicolaus Mercator in a book from 1664, but by 1670 his \"Philosophical Transactions\" were in its favour. As the century proceeded it became more widely accepted. The reception in Germany changed noticeably between 1688, the year in which Newton's \"Principia\" was published and was taken to be basically Copernican, and 1690, by which time work of Gottfried Leibniz on Kepler had been published.\nNewton was credited with understanding that the second law is not special to the inverse square law of gravitation, being a consequence just of the radial nature of that law, whereas the other laws do depend on the inverse square form of the attraction. Carl Runge and Wilhelm Lenz much later identified a symmetry principle in the phase space of planetary motion (the orthogonal group O(4) acting) which accounts for the first and third laws in the case of Newtonian gravitation, as conservation of angular momentum does via rotational symmetry for the second law.\nFormulary.\nThe mathematical model of the kinematics of a planet subject to the laws allows a large range of further calculations.\nFirst law.\nKepler's first law states that:\nThe orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the sun at one of the two foci.\nMathematically, an ellipse can be represented by the formula:\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the semi-latus rectum, \"\u03b5\" is the eccentricity of the ellipse, \"r\" is the distance from the Sun to the planet, and \"\u03b8\" is the angle to the planet's current position from its closest approach, as seen from the Sun. So (\"r\",\u00a0\"\u03b8\") are polar coordinates.\nFor an ellipse 0\u00a0&lt;\u00a0\"\u03b5\"\u00a0&lt;\u00a01 ; in the limiting case \"\u03b5\" = 0, the orbit is a circle with the Sun at the centre (i.e. where there is zero eccentricity).\nAt \"\u03b8\" = 0\u00b0, perihelion, the distance is minimum\nformula_4\nAt \"\u03b8\" = 90\u00b0 and at \"\u03b8\" = 270\u00b0 the distance is equal to formula_3.\nAt \"\u03b8\" = 180\u00b0, aphelion, the distance is maximum (by definition, aphelion is \u2013 invariably \u2013 perihelion plus 180\u00b0)\nformula_6\nThe semi-major axis \"a\" is the arithmetic mean between \"r\"min and \"r\"max:\nformula_7\nThe semi-minor axis \"b\" is the geometric mean between \"r\"min and \"r\"max:\nformula_8\nThe semi-latus rectum \"p\" is the harmonic mean between \"r\"min and \"r\"max:\nformula_9\nThe eccentricity \"\u03b5\" is the coefficient of variation between \"r\"min and \"r\"max:\nformula_10\nThe area of the ellipse is\nformula_11\nThe special case of a circle is \"\u03b5\" = 0, resulting in \"r\" = \"p\" = \"r\"min = \"r\"max = \"a\" = \"b\" and \"A\" = \"\u03c0r\"2.\nSecond law.\nKepler's second law states that:\nA line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time.\nThe orbital radius and angular velocity of the planet in the elliptical orbit will vary. This is shown in the animation: the planet travels faster when closer to the Sun, then slower when farther from the Sun. Kepler's second law states that the blue sector has constant area.\nHistory and proofs.\nKepler notably arrived at this law through assumptions that were either only approximately true or outright false and can be outlined as follows:\nNevertheless, the result of the second law is exactly true, as it is logically equivalent to the conservation of angular momentum, which is true for any body experiencing a radially symmetric force. A correct proof can be shown through this. Since the cross product of two vectors gives the area of a parallelogram possessing sides of those vectors, the triangular area dA swept out in a short period of time is given by half the cross product of the \"r\" and \"dx\" vectors, for some short piece of the orbit, \"dx\".\nformula_12\nfor a small piece of the orbit \"dx\" and time to cover it \"dt\".\nThus formula_13\nformula_14\nSince the final expression is proportional to the total angular momentum formula_15, Kepler's equal area law will hold for any system that conserves angular momentum. Since any radial force will produce no torque on the planet's motion, angular momentum will be conserved.\nIn terms of elliptical parameters.\nIn a small time formula_16 the planet sweeps out a small triangle having base line formula_17 and height formula_18 and area formula_19, so the constant areal velocity is formula_20\nThe area enclosed by the elliptical orbit is formula_21. So the period formula_22 satisfies\nformula_23\nand the mean motion of the planet around the Sun\nformula_24\nsatisfies\nformula_25\nAnd so, formula_26\nThird law.\nKepler's third law states that:\nThe ratio of the square of an object's orbital period with the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit is the same for all objects orbiting the same primary.\nBy symbol : formula_27\nWith formula_22 is the object's orbital period and formula_29 is the semi-major axis of its orbit.\nThis captures the relationship between the distance of planets from the Sun, and their orbital periods.\nKepler enunciated in 1619 this third law in a laborious attempt to determine what he viewed as the \"music of the spheres\" according to precise laws, and express it in terms of musical notation. It was therefore known as the \"harmonic law\". The original form of this law (referring to not the semi-major axis, but rather a \"mean distance\") holds true only for planets with small eccentricities near zero.\nUsing Newton's law of gravitation (published 1687), this relation can be found in the case of a circular orbit by setting the centripetal force equal to the gravitational force:\n formula_30\nThen, expressing the angular velocity \u03c9 in terms of the orbital period formula_31 and then rearranging, results in Kepler's third law:\n formula_32\nA more detailed derivation can be done with general elliptical orbits, instead of circles, as well as orbiting the center of mass, instead of just the large mass. This results in replacing a circular radius, formula_17, with the semi-major axis, formula_29, of the elliptical relative motion of one mass relative to the other, as well as replacing the large mass formula_35 with formula_36. However, with planet masses being so much smaller than the Sun, this correction is often ignored. The full corresponding formula is:\nformula_37\nwhere formula_35 is the mass of the Sun, formula_39 is the mass of the planet, formula_40 is the gravitational constant, formula_22 is the orbital period and formula_29 is the elliptical semi-major axis, and formula_43 is the astronomical unit, the average distance from earth to the sun.\nTable.\nThe following table shows the data used by Kepler to empirically derive his law:\nKepler became aware of John Napier's recent invention of logarithms and log-log graphs before he discovered the pattern.\nUpon finding this pattern Kepler wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I first believed I was dreaming... But it is absolutely certain and exact that the ratio which exists between the period times of any two planets is precisely the ratio of the 3/2th power of the mean distance.\u2014\u200a\nFor comparison, here are modern estimates:\nPlanetary acceleration.\nIsaac Newton computed in his \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second laws.\nThis implies that the Sun may be the physical cause of the acceleration of planets. However, Newton states in his \"Principia\" that he considers forces from a mathematical point of view, not a physical, thereby taking an instrumentalist view. Moreover, he does not assign a cause to gravity.\nNewton defined the force acting on a planet to be the product of its mass and the acceleration (see Newton's laws of motion). So:\nThe Sun plays an unsymmetrical part, which is unjustified. So he assumed, in Newton's law of universal gravitation:\nAs the planets have small masses compared to that of the Sun, the orbits conform approximately to Kepler's laws. Newton's model improves upon Kepler's model, and fits actual observations more accurately. (See two-body problem.)\nBelow comes the detailed calculation of the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second laws.\nAcceleration vector.\nFrom the heliocentric point of view consider the vector to the planet formula_44 where formula_45 is the distance to the planet and formula_46 is a unit vector pointing towards the planet.\nformula_47\nwhere formula_48 is the unit vector whose direction is 90 degrees counterclockwise of formula_46, and formula_50 is the polar angle, and where a dot on top of the variable signifies differentiation with respect to time.\nDifferentiate the position vector twice to obtain the velocity vector and the acceleration vector:\nformula_51\nSo\nformula_52\nwhere the radial acceleration is\nformula_53\nand the transversal acceleration is\nformula_54\nInverse square law.\nKepler's second law says that formula_55 is constant.\nThe transversal acceleration formula_56 is zero:\nformula_57\nSo the acceleration of a planet obeying Kepler's second law is directed towards the Sun.\nThe radial acceleration formula_58 is\nformula_59\nKepler's first law states that the orbit is described by the equation:\nformula_60\nDifferentiating with respect to time\nformula_61\nor formula_62\nDifferentiating once more\nformula_63\nThe radial acceleration formula_58 satisfies\nformula_65\nSubstituting the equation of the ellipse gives\nformula_66\nThe relation formula_67 gives the simple final result\nformula_68\nThis means that the acceleration vector formula_69 of any planet obeying Kepler's first and second law satisfies the inverse square law\nformula_70\nwhere\nformula_71\nis a constant, and formula_46 is the unit vector pointing from the Sun towards the planet, and formula_73 is the distance between the planet and the Sun.\nSince mean motion formula_74 where formula_22 is the period, according to Kepler's third law, formula_76 has the same value for all the planets. So the inverse square law for planetary accelerations applies throughout the entire Solar System.\nThe inverse square law is a differential equation. The solutions to this differential equation include the Keplerian motions, as shown, but they also include motions where the orbit is a hyperbola or parabola or a straight line. (See Kepler orbit.)\nNewton's law of gravitation.\nBy Newton's second law, the gravitational force that acts on the planet is:\nformula_77\nwhere formula_78 is the mass of the planet and formula_76 has the same value for all planets in the Solar System. According to Newton's third law, the Sun is attracted to the planet by a force of the same magnitude. Since the force is proportional to the mass of the planet, under the symmetric consideration, it should also be proportional to the mass of the Sun, formula_80. So\nformula_81\nwhere formula_40 is the gravitational constant.\nThe acceleration of Solar System body number \"i\" is, according to Newton's laws:\nformula_83\nwhere formula_84 is the mass of body \"j\", formula_85 is the distance between body \"i\" and body \"j\", formula_86 is the unit vector from body \"i\" towards body \"j\", and the vector summation is over all bodies in the Solar System, besides \"i\" itself.\nIn the special case where there are only two bodies in the Solar System, Earth and Sun, the acceleration becomes\nformula_87\nwhich is the acceleration of the Kepler motion. So this Earth moves around the Sun according to Kepler's laws.\nIf the two bodies in the Solar System are Moon and Earth the acceleration of the Moon becomes\nformula_88\nSo in this approximation, the Moon moves around the Earth according to Kepler's laws.\nIn the three-body case the accelerations are\nformula_89\nThese accelerations are not those of Kepler orbits, and the three-body problem is complicated. But Keplerian approximation is the basis for perturbation calculations. (See Lunar theory.)\nPosition as a function of time.\nKepler used his two first laws to compute the position of a planet as a function of time. His method involves the solution of a transcendental equation called Kepler's equation.\nThe procedure for calculating the heliocentric polar coordinates (\"r\",\"\u03b8\") of a planet as a function of the time \"t\" since perihelion, is the following five steps:\nThe position polar coordinates (\"r\",\"\u03b8\") can now be written as a Cartesian vector formula_95 and the Cartesian velocity vector can then be calculated as formula_96, where formula_97 is the standard gravitational parameter.\nThe important special case of circular orbit, \"\u03b5\"\u00a0=\u00a00, gives \"\u03b8\" = \"E\" = \"M\". Because the uniform circular motion was considered to be \"normal\", a deviation from this motion was considered an anomaly.\nThe proof of this procedure is shown below.\nMean anomaly, \"M\".\nThe Keplerian problem assumes an elliptical orbit and the four points:\nand\nDivision by \"a\"2/2 gives Kepler's equation\nformula_100\nThis equation gives \"M\" as a function of \"E\". Determining \"E\" for a given \"M\" is the inverse problem. Iterative numerical algorithms are commonly used.\nHaving computed the eccentric anomaly \"E\", the next step is to calculate the true anomaly\u00a0\"\u03b8\".\nBut note: Cartesian position coordinates with reference to the center of ellipse are (\"a\"\u00a0cos\u00a0\"E\",\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0sin\u00a0\"E\")\nWith reference to the Sun (with coordinates (\"c\",0) = (\"ae\",0) ), \"r\" = (\"a\"\u00a0cos\u00a0\"E\" \u2013 \"ae\", \"b\"\u00a0sin\u00a0\"E\")\nTrue anomaly would be arctan(\"r\"\"y\"/\"r\"\"x\"), magnitude of \"r\" would be \u221a\"r\"\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0\"r\".\nTrue anomaly, \"\u03b8\".\nNote from the figure that\nformula_101\nso that\nformula_102\nDividing by formula_29 and inserting from Kepler's first law\nformula_104\nto get\nformula_105\nThe result is a usable relationship between the eccentric anomaly \"E\" and the true anomaly\u00a0\"\u03b8\".\nA computationally more convenient form follows by substituting into the trigonometric identity:\nformula_106\nGet\nformula_107\nMultiplying by 1\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03b5\" gives the result\nformula_108\nThis is the third step in the connection between time and position in the orbit.\nDistance, \"r\".\nThe fourth step is to compute the heliocentric distance \"r\" from the true anomaly \"\u03b8\" by Kepler's first law:\nformula_109\nUsing the relation above between \"\u03b8\" and \"E\" the final equation for the distance \"r\" is:\nformula_110\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17556", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17556", "title": "Laser", "text": "Device which emits light via optical amplification\nA laser is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The word \"laser\" originated as an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation. The first laser was built in 1960 by Theodore Maiman at Hughes Research Laboratories, based on theoretical work by Charles\u00a0H. Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow and the optical amplifier patented by Gordon Gould.\nA laser differs from other sources of light in that it emits light that is \"coherent\". Spatial coherence allows a laser to be focused to a tight spot, enabling uses such as optical communication, laser cutting, and lithography. It also allows a laser beam to stay narrow over great distances (collimation), used in laser pointers, lidar, and free-space optical communication. Lasers can also have high temporal coherence, which permits them to emit light with a very narrow frequency spectrum. Temporal coherence can also be used to produce ultrashort pulses of light with a broad spectrum but durations measured in attoseconds.\nLasers are used in fiber-optic and free-space optical communications, optical disc drives, laser printers, barcode scanners, semiconductor chip manufacturing (photolithography, etching), laser surgery and skin treatments, cutting and welding materials, military and law enforcement devices for marking targets and measuring range and speed, and in laser lighting displays for entertainment. The laser is regarded as one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century.\nTerminology.\nThe first device using amplification by stimulated emission operated at microwave frequencies, and was called a \"maser\", for \"microwave amplification by stimulated emission of radiation\". When similar optical devices were developed they were first called \"optical masers\", until \"microwave\" was replaced by \"light\" in the acronym, to become \"laser\".\nToday, all such devices operating at frequencies higher than microwaves (approximately above 300 GHz) are called lasers (e.g. \"infrared lasers\", \"ultraviolet lasers\", \"X-ray lasers\", \"gamma-ray lasers\"), whereas devices operating at microwave or lower radio frequencies are called masers.\nThe back-formed verb \"to lase\" is frequently used in the field, meaning \"to give off coherent light,\" especially about the gain medium of a laser; when a laser is operating, it is said to be \"lasing\". The terms \"laser\" and \"maser\" are also used for naturally occurring coherent emissions, as in \"astrophysical maser\" and \"atom laser\".\nA laser that produces light by itself is technically an optical oscillator rather than an optical amplifier as suggested by the acronym. It has been humorously noted that the acronym LOSER, for \"light oscillation by stimulated emission of radiation\", would have been more correct. Some sources refer to the word laser as an anacronym, meaning an acronym so widely used as a noun that it is no longer considered an abbreviation.\nFundamentals.\nPhotons, the quanta of electromagnetic radiation, are released and absorbed from energy levels in atoms and molecules. In a lightbulb or a star, the energy is emitted from many different levels giving photons with a broad range of energies. This process is called thermal radiation.\nThe underlying physical process creating photons in a laser is the same as in thermal radiation, but the actual emission is not the result of random thermal processes. Instead, the release of a photon is triggered by the nearby passage of another photon. This is called stimulated emission. For this process to work, the passing photon must be similar in energy, and thus wavelength, to the one that could be released by the atom or molecule, and the atom or molecule must be in the suitable excited state.\nThe photon that is emitted by stimulated emission is identical to the photon that triggered its emission, and both photons can go on to trigger stimulated emission in other atoms, creating the possibility of a chain reaction. For this to happen, many of the atoms or molecules must be in the proper excited state so that the photons can trigger them. In most materials, atoms or molecules drop out of excited states fairly rapidly, making it difficult or impossible to produce a chain reaction. The materials chosen for lasers are the ones that have metastable states, which stay excited for a relatively long time. In laser physics, such a material is called an active laser medium. Combined with an energy source that continues to \"pump\" energy into the material, it is possible to have enough atoms or molecules in an excited state for a chain reaction to develop.\nLasers are distinguished from other light sources by their coherence. Spatial (or transverse) coherence is typically expressed through the output being a narrow beam, which is diffraction-limited. Laser beams can be focused to very tiny spots, achieving a very high irradiance, or they can have a very low divergence to concentrate their power at a great distance. Temporal (or longitudinal) coherence implies a polarized wave at a single frequency, whose phase is correlated over a relatively great distance (the coherence length) along the beam. A beam produced by a thermal or other incoherent light source has an instantaneous amplitude and phase that vary randomly with respect to time and position, thus having a short coherence length.\nLasers are characterized according to their wavelength in a vacuum. Most \"single wavelength\" lasers produce radiation in several \"modes\" with slightly different wavelengths. Although temporal coherence implies some degree of monochromaticity, some lasers emit a broad spectrum of light or emit different wavelengths of light simultaneously. Certain lasers are not single spatial mode and have light beams that diverge more than is required by the diffraction limit. All such devices are classified as \"lasers\" based on the method of producing light by stimulated emission. Lasers are employed where light of the required spatial or temporal coherence can not be produced using simpler technologies.\nDesign.\nA laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to energize it, and something to provide optical feedback. The gain medium is a material with properties that allow it to amplify light by way of stimulated emission. Light of a specific wavelength that passes through the gain medium is amplified (power increases). Feedback enables stimulated emission to amplify predominantly the optical frequency at the peak of the gain-frequency curve. As stimulated emission grows, eventually one frequency dominates over all others, meaning that a coherent beam has been formed.\nThe process of stimulated emission is analogous to that of an audio oscillator with positive feedback which can occur, for example, when the speaker in a public-address system is placed in proximity to the microphone. The screech one hears is audio oscillation at the peak of the gain-frequency curve for the amplifier.\nFor the gain medium to amplify light, it needs to be supplied with energy in a process called pumping. The energy is typically supplied as an electric current or as light at a different wavelength. Pump light may be provided by a flash lamp or by another laser.\nThe most common type of laser uses feedback from an optical cavity\u2014a pair of mirrors on either end of the gain medium. Light bounces back and forth between the mirrors, passing through the gain medium and being amplified each time. Typically one of the two mirrors, the output coupler, is partially transparent. Some of the light escapes through this mirror. Depending on the design of the cavity (whether the mirrors are flat or curved), the light coming out of the laser may spread out or form a narrow beam. In analogy to electronic oscillators, this device is sometimes called a \"laser oscillator\".\nMost practical lasers contain additional elements that affect the properties of the emitted light, such as the polarization, wavelength, and shape of the beam.\nLaser physics.\nElectrons and how they interact with electromagnetic fields are important in the understanding of chemistry and physics.\nStimulated emission.\nIn the classical view, the energy of an electron orbiting an atomic nucleus is larger for orbits further from the nucleus of an atom. However, quantum mechanical effects force electrons to take on discrete positions in orbitals. Thus, electrons are found in specific energy levels of an atom, two of which are shown below:\nAn electron in an atom can absorb energy from light (photons) or heat (phonons) only if there is a transition between energy levels that match the energy carried by the photon or phonon. For light, this means that any given transition will only absorb one particular wavelength of light. Photons with the correct wavelength can cause an electron to jump from the lower to the higher energy level. The photon is consumed in this process.\nWhen an electron is excited from one state to that at a higher energy level with energy difference \u0394E, it will not stay that way forever. Eventually, a photon will be spontaneously created from the vacuum having energy \u0394E. Conserving energy, the electron transitions to a lower energy level that is not occupied, with transitions to different levels having different time constants. This process is called spontaneous emission. Spontaneous emission is a quantum-mechanical effect and a direct physical manifestation of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. The emitted photon has a random direction, but its wavelength matches the absorption wavelength of the transition. This is the mechanism of fluorescence and thermal emission.\nA photon with the correct wavelength to be absorbed by a transition can also cause an electron to drop from the higher to the lower level, emitting a new photon. The emitted photon exactly matches the original photon in wavelength, phase, and direction. This process is called stimulated emission.\nGain medium and cavity.\nThe gain medium is put into an excited state by an external source of energy. In most lasers, this medium consists of a population of atoms that have been excited into such a state using an outside light source, or an electrical field that supplies energy for atoms to absorb and be transformed into their excited states.\nThe gain medium of a laser is normally a material of controlled purity, size, concentration, and shape, which amplifies the beam by the process of stimulated emission described above. This material can be of any state: gas, liquid, solid, or plasma. The gain medium absorbs pump energy, which raises some electrons into higher energy (\"excited\") quantum states. Particles can interact with light by either absorbing or emitting photons. Emission can be spontaneous or stimulated. In the latter case, the photon is emitted in the same direction as the light that is passing by. When the number of particles in one excited state exceeds the number of particles in some lower-energy state, population inversion is achieved. This situation results in light amplification from the atoms in excited states because there are more stimulated emissions than absorptions. Population inversion cannot occur in a two-level energy system: as the upper level is populated, the probability of stimulated emission increases. This prevents population inversion as the number of atoms transitioning from excited to relaxed states would be the same, deeming the process inefficient. Lasers instead use three-level or higher systems, where the additional energy level allows electrons to relax quickly and produce a consistent population inversion. A system with this property is called an optical amplifier. When an optical amplifier is placed inside a resonant optical cavity, one obtains a laser.\nFor lasing media with extremely high gain, so-called superluminescence, light can be sufficiently amplified in a single pass through the gain medium without requiring a resonator. Although often referred to as a laser (see, for example, nitrogen laser), the light output from such a device lacks the spatial and temporal coherence achievable with lasers. Such a device cannot be described as an oscillator but rather as a high-gain optical amplifier that amplifies its spontaneous emission. The same mechanism describes so-called astrophysical masers/lasers.\nThe optical resonator is sometimes referred to as an \"optical cavity\", but this is a misnomer: lasers use open resonators as opposed to the literal cavity that would be employed at microwave frequencies in a maser.\nThe resonator typically consists of two mirrors between which a coherent beam of light travels in both directions, reflecting on itself so that an average photon will pass through the gain medium repeatedly before it is emitted from the output aperture or lost to diffraction or absorption.\nIf the gain (amplification) in the medium is larger than the resonator losses, then the power of the recirculating light can rise exponentially. But each stimulated emission event returns an atom from its excited state to the ground state, reducing the gain of the medium. With increasing beam power, the net gain (gain minus loss) reduces to unity and the gain medium is said to be saturated. In a continuous wave (CW) laser, the balance of pump power against gain saturation and cavity losses produces an equilibrium value of the laser power inside the cavity; this equilibrium determines the operating point of the laser. If the applied pump power is too small, the gain will never be sufficient to overcome the cavity losses, and laser light will not be produced. The minimum pump power needed to begin laser action is called the \"lasing threshold\". The gain medium will amplify any photons passing through it, regardless of direction; but only the photons in a spatial mode supported by the resonator will pass more than once through the medium and receive substantial amplification.\nThe light emitted.\nIn most lasers, lasing begins with spontaneous emission into the lasing mode. This initial light is then amplified by stimulated emission in the gain medium. Stimulated emission produces light that matches the input signal in direction, wavelength, and polarization, whereas the phase of the emitted light is 90 degrees in lead of the stimulating light. This, combined with the filtering effect of the optical resonator gives laser light its characteristic coherence, and may give it uniform polarization and monochromaticity, depending on the resonator's design. The fundamental laser linewidth of light emitted from the lasing resonator can be orders of magnitude narrower than the linewidth of light emitted from the passive resonator. Some lasers use a separate injection seeder to start the process off with a beam that is already highly coherent. This can produce beams with a narrower spectrum than would otherwise be possible.\nIn 1963, Roy J. Glauber showed that coherent states are formed from combinations of photon number states, for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. A coherent beam of light is formed by single-frequency quantum photon states distributed according to a Poisson distribution. As a result, the arrival rate of photons in a laser beam is described by Poisson statistics.\nMany lasers produce a beam that can be approximated as a Gaussian beam; such beams have the minimum divergence possible for a given beam diameter. Some lasers, particularly high-power ones, produce multimode beams, with the transverse modes often approximated using Hermite\u2013Gaussian or Laguerre-Gaussian functions. Some high-power lasers use a flat-topped profile known as a \"tophat beam\". Unstable laser resonators (not used in most lasers) produce fractal-shaped beams. Specialized optical systems can produce more complex beam geometries, such as Bessel beams and optical vortexes.\nNear the \"waist\" (or focal region) of a laser beam, it is highly \"collimated\": the wavefronts are planar, normal to the direction of propagation, with no beam divergence at that point. However, due to diffraction, that can only remain true well within the Rayleigh range. The beam of a single transverse mode (gaussian beam) laser eventually diverges at an angle that varies inversely with the beam diameter, as required by diffraction theory. Thus, the \"pencil beam\" directly generated by a common helium\u2013neon laser would spread out to a size of perhaps 500 kilometers when shone on the Moon (from the distance of the Earth). On the other hand, the light from a semiconductor laser typically exits the tiny crystal with a large divergence: up to 50\u00b0. However even such a divergent beam can be transformed into a similarly collimated beam employing a lens system, as is always included, for instance, in a laser pointer whose light originates from a laser diode. That is possible due to the light being of a single spatial mode. This unique property of laser light, spatial coherence, cannot be replicated using standard light sources (except by discarding most of the light) as can be appreciated by comparing the beam from a flashlight (torch) or spotlight to that of almost any laser.\nA laser beam profiler is used to measure the intensity profile, width, and divergence of laser beams.\nDiffuse reflection of a laser beam from a matte surface produces a speckle pattern with interesting properties.\nQuantum vs. classical emission processes.\nThe mechanism of producing radiation in a laser relies on stimulated emission, where energy is extracted from a transition in an atom or molecule. This is a quantum phenomenon that was predicted by Albert Einstein, who derived the relationship between the \"A\" coefficient, describing spontaneous emission, and the \"B\" coefficient which applies to absorption and stimulated emission. The spontaneous emission coefficient A21 is the probability per unit time of spontaneous emission from an energy state, that is emission in the absense of an electric field.\nIn stimulated-emission an electric field is present and B21 indicates the emission due to a transition from an excited state (level 2) to the ground state (level 1). B12 indicates absorption of a photon. In the case of the free-electron laser, atomic energy levels are not involved; it appears that the operation of this rather exotic device can be explained without reference to quantum mechanics.\nModes of operation.\nA laser can be classified as operating in either continuous or pulsed mode, depending on whether the power output is essentially continuous over time or whether its output takes the form of pulses of light on one or another time scale. Of course, even a laser whose output is normally continuous can be intentionally turned on and off at some rate to create pulses of light. When the modulation rate is on time scales much slower than the cavity lifetime and the period over which energy can be stored in the lasing medium or pumping mechanism, then it is still classified as a \"modulated\" or \"pulsed\" continuous wave laser. Most laser diodes used in communication systems fall into that category.\nContinuous-wave operation.\nSome applications of lasers depend on a beam whose output power is constant over time. Such a laser is known as a \"continuous-wave\" (\"CW\") laser. Many types of lasers can be made to operate in continuous-wave mode to satisfy such an application. Many of these lasers lase in several longitudinal modes at the same time, and beats between the slightly different optical frequencies of those oscillations will produce amplitude variations on time scales shorter than the round-trip time (the reciprocal of the frequency spacing between modes), typically a few nanoseconds or less. In most cases, these lasers are still termed \"continuous-wave\" as their output power is steady when averaged over longer periods, with the very high-frequency power variations having little or no impact on the intended application. (However, the term is not applied to mode-locked lasers, where the \"intention\" is to create very short pulses at the rate of the round-trip time.)\nFor continuous-wave operation, the population inversion of the gain medium needs to be continually replenished by a steady pump source. In some lasing media, this is impossible. In some other lasers, it would require pumping the laser at a very high continuous power level, which would be impractical, or destroying the laser by producing excessive heat. Such lasers cannot be run in CW mode.\nPulsed operation.\nThe pulsed operation of lasers refers to any laser not classified as a continuous wave so that the optical power appears in pulses of some duration at some repetition rate. This encompasses a wide range of technologies addressing many different motivations. Some lasers are pulsed simply because they cannot be run in continuous mode.\nIn other cases, the application requires the production of pulses having as large an energy as possible. Since the pulse energy is equal to the average power divided by the repetition rate, this goal can sometimes be satisfied by lowering the rate of pulses so that more energy can be built up between pulses. In laser ablation, for example, a small volume of material at the surface of a workpiece can be evaporated if it is heated in a very short time, while supplying the energy gradually would allow for the heat to be absorbed into the bulk of the piece, never attaining a sufficiently high temperature at a particular point.\nOther applications rely on the peak pulse power (rather than the energy in the pulse), especially to obtain nonlinear optical effects. For a given pulse energy, this requires creating pulses of the shortest possible duration utilizing techniques such as Q-switching.\nThe optical bandwidth of a pulse cannot be narrower than the reciprocal of the pulse width. In the case of extremely short pulses, that implies lasing over a considerable bandwidth, quite contrary to the very narrow bandwidths typical of CW lasers. The lasing medium in some \"dye lasers\" and \"vibronic solid-state lasers\" produces optical gain over a wide bandwidth, making a laser possible that can thus generate pulses of light as short as a few femtoseconds (10\u221215 s).\nQ-switching.\nIn a Q-switched laser, the population inversion is allowed to build up by introducing loss inside the resonator which exceeds the gain of the medium; this can also be described as a reduction of the quality factor or 'Q' of the cavity. Then, after the pump energy stored in the laser medium has approached the maximum possible level, the introduced loss mechanism (often an electro- or acousto-optical element) is rapidly removed (or that occurs by itself in a passive device), allowing lasing to begin which rapidly obtains the stored energy in the gain medium. This results in a short pulse incorporating that energy, and thus a high peak power.\nMode locking.\nA mode-locked laser is capable of emitting extremely short pulses on the order of tens of picoseconds down to less than 10\u00a0femtoseconds. These pulses repeat at the round-trip time, that is, the time that it takes light to complete one round trip between the mirrors comprising the resonator. Due to the Fourier limit (also known as energy\u2013time uncertainty), a pulse of such short temporal length has a spectrum spread over a considerable bandwidth. Thus such a gain medium must have a gain bandwidth sufficiently broad to amplify those frequencies. An example of a suitable material is titanium-doped, artificially grown sapphire (Ti:sapphire), which has a very wide gain bandwidth and can thus produce pulses of only a few femtoseconds duration.\nSuch mode-locked lasers are a most versatile tool for researching processes occurring on extremely short time scales (known as femtosecond physics, femtosecond chemistry and ultrafast science), for maximizing the effect of nonlinearity in optical materials (e.g. in second-harmonic generation, parametric down-conversion, optical parametric oscillators). Unlike the giant pulse of a Q-switched laser, consecutive pulses from a mode-locked laser are phase-coherent; that is, the pulses (and not just their envelopes) are identical and perfectly periodic. For this reason, and the extremely large peak powers attained by such short pulses, such lasers are invaluable in certain areas of research.\nPulsed pumping.\nAnother method of achieving pulsed laser operation is to pump the laser material with a source that is itself pulsed, either through electronic charging in the case of flash lamps, or another laser that is already pulsed. Pulsed pumping was historically used with dye lasers where the inverted population lifetime of a dye molecule was so short that a high-energy, fast pump was needed. The way to overcome this problem was to charge up large capacitors which are then switched to discharge through flashlamps, producing an intense flash. Pulsed pumping is also required for three-level lasers in which the lower energy level rapidly becomes highly populated, preventing further lasing until those atoms relax to the ground state. These lasers, such as the excimer laser and the copper vapor laser, can never be operated in CW mode.\nHistory.\nFoundations.\nIn 1917, Albert Einstein established the theoretical foundations for the laser and the maser in the paper \"Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung\" (\"On the Quantum Theory of Radiation\") via a re-derivation of Max Planck's law of radiation, conceptually based upon probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. In 1928, Rudolf W. Ladenburg confirmed the existence of the phenomena of stimulated emission and negative absorption. In 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant predicted using stimulated emission to amplify \"short\" waves. In 1947, Willis\u00a0E. Lamb and R.C.Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission. In 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, which was experimentally demonstrated two years later by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter.\nMaser.\nIn 1951, Joseph Weber submitted a paper on using stimulated emissions to make a microwave amplifier to the June 1952 Institute of Radio Engineers Vacuum Tube Research Conference in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. After this presentation, RCA asked Weber to give a seminar on this idea, and Charles\u00a0H. Townes asked him for a copy of the paper.\nIn 1953, Charles H. Townes and graduate students James\u00a0P. Gordon and Herbert\u00a0J. Zeiger produced the first microwave amplifier, a device operating on similar principles to the laser, but amplifying microwave radiation rather than infrared or visible radiation. Townes's maser was incapable of continuous output. Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Nikolay Basov and Aleksandr Prokhorov were independently working on the quantum oscillator and solved the problem of continuous-output systems by using more than two energy levels. These gain media could release stimulated emissions between an excited state and a lower excited state, not the ground state, facilitating the maintenance of a population inversion. In 1955, Prokhorov and Basov suggested optical pumping of a multi-level system as a method for obtaining the population inversion, later a main method of laser pumping.\nTownes reports that several eminent physicists\u2014among them Niels Bohr, John von Neumann, and Llewellyn Thomas\u2014argued the maser violated Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and hence could not work. Others such as Isidor Rabi and Polykarp Kusch expected that it would be impractical and not worth the effort. In 1964, Charles H. Townes, Nikolay Basov, and Aleksandr Prokhorov shared the Nobel Prize in Physics, \"for fundamental work in the field of quantum electronics, which has led to the construction of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maser\u2013laser principle\".\nLaser.\nIn April 1957, Japanese engineer Jun-ichi Nishizawa proposed the concept of a \"semiconductor optical maser\" in a patent application. That same year, Charles H. Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow, then at Bell Labs, began a serious study of infrared \"optical masers\". As ideas developed, they abandoned infrared radiation to instead concentrate on visible light.\nSimultaneously, Columbia University graduate student Gordon Gould was working on a doctoral thesis about the energy levels of excited thallium. Gould and Townes met and talked about radiation emission as a general subject, but not the specific work they were pursuing. Later, in November 1957, Gould noted his ideas for how a \"laser\" could be made, including using an open resonator (an essential laser-device component). His notebook included a diagram of an optically pumped laser. It also contained the first recorded use of the term \"laser,\" an acronym for \"light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation,\" along with suggestions for potential applications of the coherent light beams described.\nIn 1958, Bell Labs filed a patent application for Schawlow and Townes's proposed optical maser; and Schawlow and Townes published a paper with their theoretical calculations in the \"Physical Review\". That same year, Prokhorov independently proposed using an open resonator, the first published appearance of this idea.\nAt a conference in 1959, Gordon Gould first published the acronym \"LASER\" in the paper \"The LASER, Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation\". Gould's intention was that different \"-ASER\" acronyms should be used for different parts of the spectrum: \"XASER\" for x-rays, \"UVASER\" for ultraviolet, \"RASER\" for radio-wave, etc. Instead, the term \"LASER\" ended up being used for all devices operating at wavelengths shorter than microwaves.\nGould's notes included possible applications for a laser, such as optical telecommunications, spectrometry, interferometry, radar, and nuclear fusion. He continued developing the idea and filed a patent application in April 1959. The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) denied his application, and awarded a patent to Bell Labs, in 1960. That provoked a twenty-eight-year legal fight over the rights to various laser technologies and applications. Gould won his first patent in 1977 for optically pumped laser amplifiers, yet it was not until 1987 that he won his first significant patent infringement claim. Many aspects of a working laser were patented by different people: the question of just how to assign credit for inventing the laser remains unresolved by historians.\nOn May 16, 1960, Theodore H. Maiman operated the first functioning laser at Hughes Research Laboratories, Malibu, California, ahead of several research teams, including those of Townes, at Columbia University, Arthur\u00a0L. Schawlow, at Bell Labs, and Gould, at the TRG (Technical Research Group) company. Maiman's functional laser used a flashlamp-pumped synthetic ruby crystal to produce red laser light at 694 nanometers wavelength. The device was only capable of pulsed operation, due to its three-level pumping design scheme. Later that year, the Iranian physicist Ali Javan, and William\u00a0R. Bennett Jr., and Donald\u00a0R. Herriott, constructed the first gas laser, using helium and neon that was capable of continuous operation in the infrared (U.S. Patent 3,149,290); later, Javan received the Albert Einstein World Award of Science in 1993. In 1962, Robert\u00a0N. Hall demonstrated the first semiconductor laser, which was made of gallium arsenide and emitted in the near-infrared band of the spectrum at 850\u00a0nm. Later that year, Nick Holonyak Jr. demonstrated the first semiconductor laser with a visible emission. This first semiconductor laser could only be used in pulsed-beam operation, and when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures (77\u00a0K). In 1970, Zhores Alferov, in the USSR, and Izuo Hayashi and Morton Panish of Bell Labs also independently developed room-temperature, continual-operation diode lasers, using the heterojunction structure.\nRecent innovations.\nSince the early period of laser history, laser research has produced a variety of improved and specialized laser types, optimized for different performance goals, including:\nResearch on improving these aspects of lasers continues to this day.\nIn 2015, researchers made a white laser, whose light is modulated by a synthetic nanosheet made out of zinc, cadmium, sulfur, and selenium that can emit red, green, and blue light in varying proportions, with each wavelength spanning 191\u00a0nm.\nIn 2017, researchers at the Delft University of Technology demonstrated an AC Josephson junction microwave laser. Since the laser operates in the superconducting regime, it is more stable than other semiconductor-based lasers. The device has the potential for applications in quantum computing. In 2017, researchers at the Technical University of Munich demonstrated the smallest mode locking laser capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond laser pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200\u00a0GHz.\nIn 2017, researchers from the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), together with US researchers from JILA, a joint institute of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the University of Colorado Boulder, established a new world record by developing an erbium-doped fiber laser with a linewidth of only 10millihertz.\nTypes and operating principles.\nGas lasers.\nFollowing the invention of the HeNe gas laser, many other gas discharges have been found to amplify light coherently.\nGas lasers using many different gases have been built and used for many purposes. The helium\u2013neon laser (HeNe) can operate at many different wavelengths, however, the vast majority are engineered to lase at 633\u00a0nm; these relatively low-cost but highly coherent lasers are extremely common in optical research and educational laboratories. Commercial carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers can emit many hundreds of watts in a single spatial mode which can be concentrated into a tiny spot. This emission is in the thermal infrared at 10.6\u00a0\u03bcm; such lasers are regularly used in industry for cutting and welding. The efficiency of a CO2 laser is unusually high: over 30%. Argon-ion lasers can operate at several lasing transitions between 351 and 528.7\u00a0nm. Depending on the optical design one or more of these transitions can be lasing simultaneously; the most commonly used lines are 458\u00a0nm, 488\u00a0nm and 514.5\u00a0nm. A nitrogen transverse electrical discharge in gas at atmospheric pressure (TEA) laser is an inexpensive gas laser, often home-built by hobbyists, which produces rather incoherent UV light at 337.1\u00a0nm. Metal ion lasers are gas lasers that generate deep ultraviolet wavelengths. Helium-silver (HeAg) 224\u00a0nm and neon-copper (NeCu) 248\u00a0nm are two examples. Like all low-pressure gas lasers, the gain media of these lasers have quite narrow oscillation linewidths, less than 3 GHz (0.5 picometers), making them candidates for use in fluorescence suppressed Raman spectroscopy.\nLasing without maintaining the medium excited into a population inversion was demonstrated in 1992 in sodium gas and again in 1995 in rubidium gas by various international teams. This was accomplished by using an external maser to induce \"optical transparency\" in the medium by introducing and destructively interfering the ground electron transitions between two paths so that the likelihood for the ground electrons to absorb any energy has been canceled.\nChemical lasers.\nChemical lasers are powered by a chemical reaction permitting a large amount of energy to be released quickly. Such very high-power lasers are especially of interest to the military; however continuous wave chemical lasers at very high power levels, fed by streams of gasses, have been developed and have some industrial applications. As examples, in the hydrogen fluoride laser (2700\u20132900\u00a0nm) and the deuterium fluoride laser (3800\u00a0nm) the reaction is the combination of hydrogen or deuterium gas with combustion products of ethylene in nitrogen trifluoride.\nThe first chemical laser was demonstrated in 1965 by Jerome V. V. Kasper and George C. Pimentel at the University of California, Berkeley. It was a hydrogen chloride laser operating at 3.7 micrometers.\nExcimer lasers.\nExcimer lasers are a special sort of gas laser powered by an electric discharge in which the lasing medium is an excimer, or more precisely an exciplex in existing designs. These are molecules that can only exist with one atom in an excited electronic state. Once the molecule transfers its excitation energy to a photon, its atoms are no longer bound to each other, and the molecule disintegrates. This drastically reduces the population of the lower energy state thus greatly facilitating a population inversion. Excimers currently used are all ; noble gasses are chemically inert and can only form compounds while in an excited state. Excimer lasers typically operate at ultraviolet wavelengths, with major applications including semiconductor photolithography and LASIK eye surgery. Commonly used excimer molecules include ArF (emission at 193\u00a0nm), KrCl (222\u00a0nm), KrF (248\u00a0nm), XeCl (308\u00a0nm), and XeF (351\u00a0nm).\nThe molecular fluorine laser, emitting at 157\u00a0nm in the vacuum ultraviolet, is sometimes referred to as an excimer laser; however, this appears to be a misnomer since F2 is a stable compound.\nSolid-state lasers.\nSolid-state lasers use a crystalline or glass rod that is \"doped\" with ions that provide the required energy states. For example, the first working laser was a ruby laser, made from ruby (chromium-doped corundum). The population inversion is maintained in the dopant. These materials are pumped optically using a shorter wavelength than the lasing wavelength, often from a flash tube or another laser. The usage of the term \"solid-state\" in laser physics is narrower than in typical use. Semiconductor lasers (laser diodes) are typically \"not\" referred to as solid-state lasers.\nNeodymium is a common dopant in various solid-state laser crystals, including yttrium orthovanadate (Nd:YVO4), yttrium lithium fluoride () and yttrium aluminium garnet (). All these lasers can produce high powers in the infrared spectrum at 1064\u00a0nm. They are used for cutting, welding, and marking of metals and other materials, and also in spectroscopy and for pumping dye lasers. These lasers are also commonly doubled, tripled or quadrupled in frequency to produce 532\u00a0nm (green, visible), 355\u00a0nm and 266\u00a0nm (UV) beams, respectively. Frequency-doubled diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) lasers are used to make low power (&lt;10\u00a0mW) bright green laser pointers, and high power (&gt;3W) medical lasers.\nYtterbium, holmium, thulium, and erbium are other common \"dopants\" in solid-state lasers. Ytterbium is used in crystals such as Yb:YAG, Yb:KGW, Yb:KYW, Yb:SYS, Yb:BOYS, Yb:CaF2, typically operating around 1020\u20131050\u00a0nm. They are potentially very efficient and high-powered due to a small quantum defect. Extremely high powers in ultrashort pulses can be achieved with Yb:YAG. Holmium-doped YAG crystals emit at 2097\u00a0nm and form an efficient laser operating at infrared wavelengths strongly absorbed by water-bearing tissues. The Ho-YAG is usually operated in a pulsed mode and passed through optical fiber surgical devices to resurface joints, remove rot from teeth, vaporize cancers, and pulverize kidney and gall stones.\nTitanium-doped sapphire (Ti:sapphire) produces a highly tunable infrared laser, commonly used for spectroscopy. It is also notable for use as a mode-locked laser producing ultrashort pulses of extremely high peak power.\nOptical parametric oscillators shift the wavelength of solid-state lasers across the spectrum from ultraviolet to infrared. Non-critically phase-matched OPOs can convert laser wavelengths with up to 70% efficiency, creating highly efficient lasers at so-called \"eyesafe\" wavelengths that enabled lasers to be used safely in public without eye damage.\nThermal limitations in solid-state lasers arise from unconverted pump power that heats the medium. This heat, when coupled with a high thermo-optic coefficient (d\"n\"/d\"T\") can cause thermal lensing and reduce the quantum efficiency. Diode-pumped thin disk lasers overcome these issues by having a gain medium that is much thinner than the diameter of the pump beam. This allows for a more uniform temperature in the material. Thin disk lasers have been shown to produce beams of up to one kilowatt.\nFiber lasers.\nSolid-state lasers or laser amplifiers where the light is guided due to the total internal reflection in a single mode optical fiber are instead called fiber lasers. Guiding of light allows extremely long gain regions, providing good cooling conditions; fibers have a high surface area to volume ratio which allows efficient cooling. In addition, the fiber's waveguiding properties tend to reduce thermal distortion of the beam. Erbium and ytterbium ions are common active species in such lasers.\nQuite often, the fiber laser is designed as a double-clad fiber. This type of fiber consists of a fiber core, an inner cladding, and an outer cladding. The index of the three concentric layers is chosen so that the fiber core acts as a single-mode fiber for the laser emission while the outer cladding acts as a highly multimode core for the pump laser. This lets the pump propagate a large amount of power into and through the active inner core region while still having a high numerical aperture (NA) to have easy launching conditions.\nPump light can be used more efficiently by creating a fiber disk laser, or a stack of such lasers.\nFiber lasers, like other optical media, can suffer from the effects of photodarkening when they are exposed to radiation of certain wavelengths. In particular, this can lead to degradation of the material and loss in laser functionality over time. The exact causes and effects of this phenomenon vary from material to material, although it often involves the formation of color centers.\nPhotonic crystal lasers.\nPhotonic crystal lasers are lasers based on nano-structures that provide the mode confinement and the density of optical states (DOS) structure required for the feedback to take place. They are typical micrometer-sized and tunable on the bands of the photonic crystals.\nSemiconductor lasers.\nSemiconductor lasers are diodes that are electrically pumped. Recombination of electrons and holes created by the applied current introduces optical gain. Reflection from the ends of the crystal forms an optical resonator, although the resonator can be external to the semiconductor in some designs.\nCommercial laser diodes emit at wavelengths from 375\u00a0nm to 3500\u00a0nm. Low to medium power laser diodes are used in laser pointers, laser printers and CD/DVD players. Laser diodes are also frequently used to optically pump other lasers with high efficiency. The highest-power industrial laser diodes, with power of up to 20\u00a0kW, are used in industry for cutting and welding. External-cavity semiconductor lasers have a semiconductor active medium in a larger cavity. These devices can generate high power outputs with good beam quality, wavelength-tunable narrow-linewidth radiation, or ultrashort laser pulses.\nIn 2012, Nichia and OSRAM developed and manufactured commercial high-power green laser diodes (515/520\u00a0nm), which compete with traditional diode-pumped solid-state lasers.\nVertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are semiconductor lasers whose emission direction is perpendicular to the surface of the wafer. VCSEL devices typically have a more circular output beam than conventional laser diodes. As of 2005, only 850\u00a0nm VCSELs are widely available, with 1300\u00a0nm VCSELs beginning to be commercialized and 1550\u00a0nm devices being an area of research. VECSELs are external-cavity VCSELs. Quantum cascade lasers are semiconductor lasers that have an active transition between energy \"sub-bands\" of an electron in a structure containing several quantum wells.\nThe development of a silicon laser is important in the field of optical computing. Silicon is the material of choice for integrated circuits, and so electronic and silicon photonic components (such as optical interconnects) could be fabricated on the same chip. Unfortunately, silicon is a difficult lasing material to deal with, since it has certain properties which block lasing. However, recently teams have produced silicon lasers through methods such as fabricating the lasing material from silicon and other semiconductor materials, such as indium(III) phosphide or gallium(III) arsenide, materials that allow coherent light to be produced from silicon. These are called hybrid silicon lasers. Recent developments have also shown the use of monolithically integrated nanowire lasers directly on silicon for optical interconnects, paving the way for chip-level applications. These heterostructure nanowire lasers capable of optical interconnects in silicon are also capable of emitting pairs of phase-locked picosecond pulses with a repetition frequency up to 200\u00a0GHz, allowing for on-chip optical signal processing. Another type is a Raman laser, which takes advantage of Raman scattering to produce a laser from materials such as silicon.\nSemiconductor quantum dot lasers use quantum dots as the active laser medium. These lasers exhibit device performance that is closer to gas lasers and avoid some of the disadvantages of traditional semiconductor laser media. Improvements in modulation bandwidth, lasing threshold, relative intensity noise, linewidth enhancement factor and temperature insensitivity have all been observed. The quantum dot active region may also be engineered to operate at different wavelengths by varying dot size and composition. This allows quantum dot lasers to be fabricated to operate at wavelengths previously not possible using semiconductor laser technology.\nDye lasers.\nDye lasers use an organic dye as the gain medium. The wide gain spectrum of available dyes, or mixtures of dyes, allows these lasers to be highly tunable, or to produce very short-duration pulses (on the order of a few femtoseconds). Although these tunable lasers are mainly known in their liquid form, researchers have also demonstrated narrow-linewidth tunable emission in dispersive oscillator configurations incorporating solid-state dye gain media. In their most prevalent form, these solid-state dye lasers use dye-doped polymers as laser media.\nBubble lasers are dye lasers that use a bubble as the optical resonator. Whispering gallery modes in the bubble produce an output spectrum composed of hundreds of evenly spaced peaks: a frequency comb. The spacing of the whispering gallery modes is directly related to the bubble circumference, allowing bubble lasers to be used as highly sensitive pressure sensors.\nFree-electron lasers.\nFree-electron lasers (FEL) generate coherent, high-power radiation that is widely tunable, currently ranging in wavelength from microwaves through terahertz radiation and infrared to the visible spectrum, to soft X-rays. They have the widest frequency range of any laser type. While FEL beams share the same optical traits as other lasers, such as coherent radiation, FEL operation is quite different. Unlike gas, liquid, or solid-state lasers, which rely on bound atomic or molecular states, FELs use a relativistic electron beam as the lasing medium, hence the term \"free-electron\".\nExotic media.\nThe pursuit of a high-quantum-energy laser using transitions between isomeric states of an atomic nucleus has been the subject of wide-ranging academic research since the early 1970s. Much of this is summarized in three review articles. This research has been international in scope but mainly based in the former Soviet Union and the United States. While many scientists remain optimistic that a breakthrough is near, an operational gamma-ray laser is yet to be realized.\nSome of the early studies were directed toward short pulses of neutrons exciting the upper isomer state in a solid so the gamma-ray transition could benefit from the line-narrowing of M\u00f6ssbauer effect. In conjunction, several advantages were expected from two-stage pumping of a three-level system. It was conjectured that the nucleus of an atom embedded in the near field of a laser-driven coherently-oscillating electron cloud would experience a larger dipole field than that of the driving laser. Furthermore, the nonlinearity of the oscillating cloud would produce both spatial and temporal harmonics, so nuclear transitions of higher multipolarity could also be driven at multiples of the laser frequency.\nIn September 2007, the BBC News reported that there was speculation about the possibility of using positronium annihilation to drive a very powerful gamma ray laser. David Cassidy of the University of California, Riverside proposed that a single such laser could be used to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction, replacing the banks of hundreds of lasers currently employed in inertial confinement fusion experiments.\nSpace-based X-ray lasers pumped by nuclear explosions have also been proposed as antimissile weapons. Such devices would be one-shot weapons.\nLiving cells have been used to produce laser light. The cells were genetically engineered to produce green fluorescent protein, which served as the laser's gain medium. The cells were then placed between two 20-micrometer-wide mirrors, which acted as the laser cavity. When the cell was illuminated with blue light, it emitted intensely directed green laser light.\nNatural lasers.\nLike astrophysical masers, irradiated planetary or stellar gases may amplify light producing a natural laser. Mars, Venus, and MWC 349 exhibit this phenomenon.\nUses.\nWhen the laser was first invented, it was called \"a solution looking for a problem\", although Gould noted numerous possible applications in his notebook and patent applications. Since then, they have become ubiquitous, finding utility in thousands of highly varied applications in every section of modern society, including consumer electronics, information technology, science, medicine, industry, law enforcement, entertainment, and the military. Fiber-optic communication relies on multiplexed lasers in dense wave-division multiplexing (WDM) systems to transmit large amounts of data over long distances.\nThe first widely noticeable use of lasers was the supermarket barcode scanner, introduced in 1974. The laserdisc player, introduced in 1978, was the first successful consumer product to include a laser, but the compact disc player was the first laser-equipped device to become common, commercialized in 1982, followed shortly by laser printers.\nSome other uses are:\nIn 2004, excluding diode lasers, approximately 131,000 lasers were sold, with a value of US$\u00a0billion. In the same year, approximately 733\u00a0million diode lasers, valued at US$\u00a0billion, were sold. Global Industrial laser sales in 2023 reached $21.85 billion.\nIn medicine.\nLasers have many uses in medicine, including laser surgery (particularly eye surgery), curing blindness, laser healing (photobiomodulation therapy), kidney stone treatment, ophthalmoscopy, and cosmetic skin treatments such as acne treatment, cellulite and striae reduction, and hair removal.\nLasers are used to treat cancer by shrinking or destroying tumors or precancerous growths. They are most commonly used to treat superficial cancers that are on the surface of the body or the lining of internal organs. They are used to treat basal cell skin cancer and the very early stages of others like cervical, penile, vaginal, vulvar, and non-small cell lung cancer. Laser therapy is often combined with other treatments, such as surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. Laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy (LITT), or interstitial laser photocoagulation, uses lasers to treat some cancers using hyperthermia, which uses heat to shrink tumors by damaging or killing cancer cells. Lasers are more precise than traditional surgery methods and cause less damage, pain, bleeding, swelling, and scarring. A disadvantage is that surgeons must acquire specialized training, and thus it will likely be more expensive than other treatments.\nLow-level laser therapy (LLLT) is a treatment in which low-power light from lasers or light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is applied to the surface of the body. This is claimed to stimulate healing, relieve pain, and enhance cell function. The effects appear to be limited to specific wavelengths of light. The effectiveness of this form of treatment is still under investigation. Repeated low-level red light therapy may be effective for controlling myopia in children. Several such devices are cleared by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and low level red light therapy is being tested for treating a range of medical problems including rheumatoid arthritis and oral mucositis.\nAs weapons.\nA laser weapon is a type of directed-energy weapon that uses lasers to inflict damage. Whether they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons remains to be seen. One of the major issues with laser weapons is atmospheric thermal blooming, which is still largely unsolved. This issue is exacerbated when there is fog, smoke, dust, rain, snow, smog, foam, or purposely dispersed obscurant chemicals present. The United States Navy has tested the very short range (1 mile), 30-kW Laser Weapon System or LaWS to be used against targets like small UAVs, rocket-propelled grenades, and visible motorboat or helicopter engines. It has been described as \"six welding lasers strapped together.\" A 60\u00a0kW system, HELIOS, is being developed for destroyer-class ships as of 2020[ [update]].\nLasers can be used as incapacitating non-lethal weapons. They can cause temporary or permanent vision loss when directed at the eyes. Even lasers with a power output of less than one watt can cause immediate and permanent vision loss under certain conditions, making them potentially non-lethal but incapacitating weapons. The use of such lasers is morally controversial due to the extreme handicap that laser-induced blindness represents. The Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons bans the use of weapons designed to cause permanent blindness. Weapons designed to cause temporary blindness, known as dazzlers, are used by military and sometimes law enforcement organizations.\nHobbies.\nIn recent years, some hobbyists have taken an interest in lasers. Lasers used by hobbyists are generally of class IIIa or IIIb &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;, although some have made their own class IV types. However, due to the cost and potential dangers, this is an uncommon hobby. Some hobbyists salvage laser diodes from broken DVD players (red), Blu-ray players (violet), or even higher power laser diodes from CD or DVD burners.\nHobbyists have also used surplus lasers taken from retired military applications and modified them for holography. Pulsed ruby and YAG lasers work well for this application.\nExamples by power.\nDifferent applications need lasers with different output powers. Lasers that produce a continuous beam or a series of short pulses can be compared on the basis of their average power. Lasers that produce pulses can also be characterized based on the \"peak\" power of each pulse. The peak power of a pulsed laser is many orders of magnitude greater than its average power. The average output power is always less than the power consumed.\nExamples of pulsed systems with high peak power:\nSafety.\nEven the first laser was recognized as being potentially dangerous. Theodore Maiman characterized the first laser as having the power of one \"Gillette\", as it could burn through one Gillette razor blade. Today, it is accepted that even low-power lasers with only a few milliwatts of output power can be hazardous to human eyesight when the beam hits the eye directly or after reflection from a shiny surface. At wavelengths which the cornea and the lens can focus well, the coherence and low divergence of laser light means that it can be focused by the eye into an extremely small spot on the retina, resulting in localized burning and permanent damage in seconds or even less time.\nLasers are usually labeled with a safety class number, which identifies how dangerous the laser is:\nThe indicated powers are for visible-light, continuous-wave lasers. For pulsed lasers and invisible wavelengths, other power limits apply. People working with class 3B and class 4 lasers can protect their eyes with safety goggles which are designed to absorb light of a particular wavelength.\nInfrared lasers with wavelengths longer than about 1.4micrometers are often referred to as \"eye-safe\", because the cornea tends to absorb light at these wavelengths, protecting the retina from damage. The label \"eye-safe\" can be misleading, however, as it applies only to relatively low-power continuous wave beams; a high-power or Q-switched laser at these wavelengths can burn the cornea, causing severe eye damage, and even moderate-power lasers can injure the eye.\nLasers can be a hazard to both civil and military aviation, due to the potential to temporarily distract or blind pilots. See Lasers and aviation safety for more on this topic.\nCameras based on charge-coupled devices may be more sensitive to laser damage than biological eyes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17559", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17559", "title": "Library of Congress catalogue scheme", "text": ""}
{"id": "17560", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17560", "title": "Live action role-playing game", "text": "Form of role-playing game where participants act out the roles\nLive action role-playing (LARP) is a form of role-playing game where the participants physically portray their characters. The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by real-world environments while interacting with each other in character. The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players. Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play.\nThe first LARPs were run in the late 1970s, inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction. The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles. Play may be very game-like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression. Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals. The fictional genres used vary greatly, from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras. Production values are sometimes minimal, but can involve elaborate venues and costumes. LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours, to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days.\nTerminology.\nLARP has also been referred to as \"live role-playing\" (\"LRP\"), \"interactive literature\", and \"free form role-playing\". Some of these terms are still in common use; however, LARP has become the most commonly accepted term. It is sometimes written in lowercase, as \"larp\".\nPlay overview.\nThe participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting, improvising their characters' speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre. This is distinct from tabletop role-playing games, where character actions are described verbally. LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days. There is usually no audience. Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment, and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting. LARPs can be one-off events or a series of events in the same setting, and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand.\nArrangers called \"gamemasters\" (\"GMs\") determine the rules and setting of a LARP, and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place. The GMs may also do the logistical work, or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event, booking a venue, and financial management. Unlike the GM in a tabletop role-playing game, a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once. For this reason, a LARP GM's role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play.\nParticipants sometimes known as the \"crew\" may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing \"non-player characters\" (\"NPCs\") who fill out the setting. Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do. In a tabletop role-playing game, a GM usually plays all the NPCs, whereas in a LARP, each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member.\nMuch of play consists of interactions between characters. Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs. Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting, including NPCs, that are under the direction of the GMs.\nHistory.\nLARP does not have a single point of origin, but was invented independently by groups in North America, Europe, and Australia. These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role-playing games, and a desire to physically experience such settings. In addition to tabletop role-playing, LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe, play fighting, costume parties, roleplay simulations, Commedia dell'arte, improvisational theatre, psychodrama, military simulations, and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative Anachronism.\nThe earliest recorded LARP group is \"Dagorhir\", which was founded in 1977 in the United States and focuses on fantasy battles. Soon after the release of the movie \"Logan's Run\" in 1976, rudimentary live role-playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions. In 1981, the \"International Fantasy Gaming Society\" (IFGS) started, with rules influenced by \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". IFGS was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel \"Dream Park\", which described futuristic LARPs. In 1982, the \"Society for Interactive Literature\", a predecessor of the \"Live Action Roleplayers Association\" (LARPA), formed as the first recorded theatre-style LARP group in the US.\n\"Treasure Trap\", formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle, was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there. The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983, using the science fiction \"Traveller\" setting. In 1993, White Wolf Publishing released \"Mind's Eye Theatre,\" which is played internationally and is the most commercially successful published LARP. The first German events were in the early 1990s, with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there, so that since 2001, two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe.\nToday, LARP is a widespread activity internationally. Games with thousands of participants are run by for-profit companies, and a small industry exists to sell costume, armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP. In 2023, \"Dicebreaker\" reported that \"China has developed its own LARP phenomenon in recent years. Jubensha is far more commercially successful and influential than anything we have seen before even in Nordic countries \u2013 and there is a good chance it might change our perception of what live-action roleplaying games are capable of in the future\".\nPurpose.\nMost LARPs are intended as games for entertainment. Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story, the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character's objectives, and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting. LARPs may also include other game-like aspects such as intellectual puzzles, and sport-like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons.\nSome LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter. Avant-garde or \"arthaus\" events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine art contexts such as festivals or art museums. The themes of avant-garde events often include politics, culture, religion, sexuality and the human condition. Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere.\nIn addition to entertainment and artistic merit, LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes. For example, the Danish secondary school \u00d8sterskov Efterskole uses LARP to teach most of its classes. Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role-playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning. Politically-themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture.\nBecause LARP involves a controlled artificial environment within which people interact, it has sometimes been used as a research tool to test theories in social fields such as economics or law. For example, LARP has been used to study the application of game theory to the development of criminal law.\nFiction and reality.\nDuring a LARP, player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting. Game rules, physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting. For example, a rope could signify an imaginary wall. Realistic-looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons. While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in \"game-time\", which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players, LARPs are different in that they usually run in real-time, with game-time only being used in special circumstances.\nThere is a distinction between when a player is \"in character\", meaning they are actively representing their character, and when the player is \"out-of-character\", meaning they are being themselves. Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies, while others accept players being out-of-character at times. In a LARP, it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted, which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role-playing games.\nWhile most LARPs maintain a clear distinction between the real world and the fictional setting, \"pervasive\" LARPs mingle fiction with modern reality in a fashion similar to alternate reality games. Bystanders who are unaware that a game is taking place may be treated as part of the fictional setting, and in-character materials may be incorporated into the real world.\nRules.\nMany LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting. The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters. Some LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations. In Russian LARP events, weapons made of hard plastic, metal or wood are used. The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role-play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically, for example by rolling dice, playing rock paper scissors or comparing character attributes.\nThere are also LARPs that do without rules, instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be.\nGenres.\nLARPs can have any genre, although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction. Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium (e.g., \"The Lord of the Rings\" or the \"World of Darkness\"), while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP.\nFantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use. Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo-historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role-playing games such as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". These settings typically have magic, fantasy races, and limited technology. Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on conflict between character factions. In contrast, science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life. This describes a broad array of LARPs, including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk, space opera and post-apocalyptic fiction.\nHorror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction. Popular subgenres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos, sometimes using the published \"Cthulhu Live\" rules. The World of Darkness, published by White Wolf Publishing, is a widely used goth\u2013punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves.\nStyles.\nLARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap. Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used, the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules, and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters. There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable. While some LARPs are open to participants of all ages, others have a minimum age requirement. There are also youth LARPs, specifically intended for children and young people. Some are run through institutions such as schools, churches, or the Scouts. Denmark has an especially high number of youth LARPs.\nFests.\nSome very large events known as fests (short for \"festival\") have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue. There are only a few fests in the world, all based in Europe and Canada; however, their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design. At the other end of the size scale, some small events known as \"linear\" or \"line-course\" LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP.\nNordic LARP.\nNordic larp emphasises a collaborative \"play to lose\" strategy, keeping rules unobtrusive, and often explores emotionally complex issues. The style emerged in Finland and Scandinavia during the 1990s with a focus on \"collaborative storytelling around intense human experiences\". \"Wired\" commented that this style adds \"distinct challenges, including the possibility of real emotional harm. To work out issues of how to keep players safe and push the limits of the form, the community gathers at Knutepunkt, an annual meeting that is as much hardcore game jam as academic conference\".\nScript murder games.\nScript murder games, also known as \"jubensha\" (lit.\u2009'scripted murder'), are murder mystery LARP games that emerged in China. Typically, script murder games can be experienced in a tabletop game format or a format which combines larping and escape rooms. Players are given different script options and are assigned characters to play through the murder mystery; these games often occur at dedicated gaming stores where players pay to participate. The style become popularized in 2015 \"when reality shows with names like 'Lying Man,' 'Dinner Party Seduction,' and later 'Who's The Murderer,' showed celebrities playing whodunits\" which led to the development of jubensha clubs that run games in this style.\nCultural significance.\nRoleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts, as opposed to traditional spectator arts. Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture. The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co-creators of the game. This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning \"geek\" culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education, high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time. In comparison to the mainstream video-game industry, which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience, LARP is less commoditized, and women actively contribute as authors and participants.\nLARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role-playing, reenactment, costuming, or dramatic activities. While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries, LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability. This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend, a perceived risk of over-identification with the characters, and the absence of mass marketing. In US films such as the 2006 documentary \"Darkon\", the 2007 documentary \"Monster Camp\", and the 2008 comedy \"Role Models\", fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist, but also treated affectionately as a \"constructive social outlet\". In the Nordic countries, LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity. It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media, with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects. However, even in Norway, where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries, it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies.\nCommunities have formed around the creation, play and discussion of LARP. These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role-playing, fan, reenactment, and drama subcultures. Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien-like fantasy, but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres, especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the \"World of Darkness\" setting in the 1990s. Like many subcultures, LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience, language, humour, and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle.\nLARP has been a subject of academic research and theory. Much of this research originates from role-players, especially from the publications of the Nordic Knutepunkt role-playing conventions. The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well, both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming, and also to evaluate it in its own right. In 2010, William Bainbridge speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location-based games using ubiquitous computing.\nIn Denmark, \u00d8sterskov Efterskole uses LARP as an educational method of teaching subjects to high school boarding students through interactivity and simulation. LARP groups are also using simulations of current and historical events and topics like refugees and the AIDS crisis to roleplay and explore these subjects.\nIn China, the script murder game industry (jubensha) has continued to grow since 2015. \"The New York Times\" reported that in 2021 \"the number of scripted murder enterprises registered in China totaled about 6,500, a more than 60 percent increase from the prior year, according to state-run media\". The \"Agence France-Presse\" reported that \"the live action murder mystery market appears to have captured the imagination of China's urban youth before the Covid-19 pandemic emerged\". During the COVID-19 pandemic, \"Murder Mystery Game\" (MMG) apps allowed people to play jubensha digitally and were \"available to millions of people across\" China. \"Dicebreaker\" reported that following the easing of pandemic restrictions in China, \"more than 45,000 [jubensha] shops\" opened with \"nearly 10 million active players. It is estimated that soon the Jubensha market will reach 23.89 billion Chinese Yuan\". Voice of America commented that, per the Chinese market research firm iResearch, script murder games are \"the third most popular form of entertainment for Chinese people, after watching movies and participating in sports\".\nThe popularization of script murder games and industry growth in China has led to both national and governmental attention with the Chinese government considering formal regulation of the industry. In September 2020, the \"Agence France-Presse\" commented that \"a report on China National Radio last month voiced fears that too many of the scripts relied on murders, violent plots and sexual content, but others see the games as a way to get young people off their smartphones and back interacting with each other in real life\". In October 2021, the \"South China Morning Post\" reported that \"advertisements for script-killing are prominent in China. [...] The fact that it is a new industry is precisely the problem in the eyes of the authorities. Since the Covid-19 case that brought 'script-killing' to national attention, the game has been getting mainstream traction, inviting official concerns and possible future regulations\". In October 2022, \"Polygon\" commented that Chinese \"regulators are beginning to take notice of the genre's mature content. A story published Wednesday indicates that municipal and provincial authorities have now begun regulating content and demanding that some retailers remove certain materials from sale. [...] As a result, some store owners are now curating their selection to fall in line with government regulation\". \"China Daily\", a publication owned by the Chinese Communist Party, reported in April 2023 that China's Ministry of Culture and Tourism was beginning to draft regulations for script murder games and \"soliciting public opinions\". The draft regulations state that \"the contents of such games must not smear the traditional Chinese culture or contain inappropriate materials involving obscenity, gambling, drugs, and other elements that could go against moral standards\". The regulations also include additional rules for minors such as not allowing \"underage customers on school days\" and that \"children under the age of 14 must be accompanied by their parents or other guardians\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17561", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17561", "title": "Lithium", "text": "element with atomic number 3 (Li)\nLithium (from , , 'stone') is a chemical element; it has symbol Li and atomic number\u00a03. It is a soft, silvery-white alkali metal. Under standard conditions, it is the least dense metal and the least dense solid element. Like all alkali metals, lithium is highly reactive and flammable, and must be stored in vacuum, inert atmosphere, or inert liquid such as purified kerosene or mineral oil. It exhibits a metallic luster when pure, but quickly corrodes in air to a dull silvery gray, then black tarnish. It does not occur freely in nature, but occurs mainly as pegmatitic minerals, which were once the main source of lithium. Due to its solubility as an ion, it is present in ocean water and is commonly obtained from brines. Lithium metal is isolated electrolytically from a mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.\nThe nucleus of the lithium atom verges on instability, since the two stable lithium isotopes found in nature have among the lowest binding energies per nucleon of all stable nuclides. Because of its relative nuclear instability, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements even though its nuclei are very light: it is an exception to the trend that heavier nuclei are less common. For related reasons, lithium has important uses in nuclear physics. The transmutation of lithium atoms to helium in 1932 was the first fully human-made nuclear reaction, and lithium deuteride serves as a fusion fuel in staged thermonuclear weapons.\nLithium and its compounds have several industrial applications, including heat-resistant glass and ceramics, lithium grease lubricants, flux additives for iron, steel and aluminium production, lithium metal batteries, and lithium-ion batteries. Batteries alone consume more than three-quarters of lithium production.\nLithium is present in biological systems in trace amounts. Lithium-based drugs are useful as a mood stabilizer and antidepressant in the treatment of mental illness such as bipolar disorder.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nProperties.\nAtomic and physical.\nThe alkali metals are also called the lithium family, after its leading element. Like the other alkali metals (which are sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs), and francium (Fr)), lithium has a single valence electron that, in the presence of solvents, is easily released to form Li+. Because of this, lithium is a good conductor of heat and electricity as well as a highly reactive element, though it is the least reactive of the alkali metals. Lithium's lower reactivity is due to the proximity of its valence electron to its nucleus (the remaining two electrons are in the 1s orbital, much lower in energy, and do not participate in chemical bonds). Molten lithium is significantly more reactive than its solid form.\nLithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife. It is silvery-white. In air it oxidizes to lithium oxide. Its melting point of and its boiling point of are each the highest of all the alkali metals while its density of 0.534 g/cm3 is the lowest.\nLithium has a very low density (0.534\u00a0g/cm3), comparable with pine wood. It is the least dense of all elements that are solids at room temperature; the next lightest solid element (potassium, at 0.862\u00a0g/cm3) is more than 60% denser. Apart from helium and hydrogen, as a solid it is less dense than any other element as a liquid, being only two-thirds as dense as liquid nitrogen (0.808\u00a0g/cm3). Lithium can float on the lightest hydrocarbon oils and is one of only three metals that can float on water, the other two being sodium and potassium.\nLithium's coefficient of thermal expansion is twice that of aluminium and almost four times that of iron. Lithium is superconductive below 400 \u03bcK at standard pressure and at higher temperatures (more than 9 K) at very high pressures (&gt;20 GPa). At temperatures below 70 K, lithium, like sodium, undergoes diffusionless phase change transformations. At 4.2 K it has a rhombohedral crystal system (with a nine-layer repeat spacing); at higher temperatures it transforms to face-centered cubic and then body-centered cubic. At liquid-helium temperatures (4 K) the rhombohedral structure is prevalent. Multiple allotropic forms have been identified for lithium at high pressures.\nLithium has a mass specific heat capacity of 3.58 kilojoules per kilogram-kelvin, the highest of all solids. Because of this, lithium metal is often used in coolants for heat transfer applications.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring lithium is composed of two stable isotopes, 6Li and 7Li, the latter being the more abundant (95.15% natural abundance). Both natural isotopes have anomalously low nuclear binding energy per nucleon (compared to the neighboring elements on the periodic table, helium and beryllium); lithium is the only low numbered element that can produce net energy through nuclear fission. The two lithium nuclei have lower binding energies per nucleon than any other stable nuclides other than hydrogen-1, deuterium and helium-3. As a result of this, though very light in atomic weight, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements. Seven radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being 8Li with a half-life of 838 ms and 9Li with a half-life of 178\u00a0ms. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are shorter than 8.6\u00a0ms. The shortest-lived isotope of lithium is 4Li, which decays through proton emission and has a half-life of 7.6 \u00d7 10\u221223 s. The 6Li isotope is one of only five stable nuclides to have both an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons, the other four stable odd-odd nuclides being hydrogen-2, boron-10, nitrogen-14, and tantalum-180m.\n7Li is one of the primordial elements (or, more properly, primordial nuclides) produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis. A small amount of both 6Li and 7Li are produced in stars during stellar nucleosynthesis, but it is further \"burned\" as fast as produced. 7Li can also be generated in carbon stars. Additional small amounts of both 6Li and 7Li may be generated from solar wind, cosmic rays hitting heavier atoms, and from early solar system 7Be radioactive decay.\nLithium isotopes fractionate substantially during a wide variety of natural processes, including mineral formation (chemical precipitation), metabolism, and ion exchange. Lithium ions substitute for magnesium and iron in octahedral sites in clay minerals, where 6Li is preferred to 7Li, resulting in enrichment of the light isotope in processes of hyperfiltration and rock alteration. The exotic 11Li is known to exhibit a neutron halo, with 2 neutrons orbiting around its nucleus of 3 protons and 6 neutrons. The process known as laser isotope separation can be used to separate lithium isotopes, in particular 7Li from 6Li.\nNuclear weapons manufacture and other nuclear physics applications are a major source of artificial lithium fractionation, with the light isotope 6Li being retained by industry and military stockpiles to such an extent that it has caused slight but measurable change in the 6Li to 7Li ratios in natural sources, such as rivers. This has led to unusual uncertainty in the standardized atomic weight of lithium, since this quantity depends on the natural abundance ratios of these naturally occurring stable lithium isotopes, as they are available in commercial lithium mineral sources.\nBoth stable isotopes of lithium can be laser cooled and were used to produce the first quantum degenerate Bose\u2013Fermi mixture.\nOccurrence.\nAstronomical.\nAlthough it was synthesized in the Big Bang, lithium (together with beryllium and boron) is markedly less abundant in the universe than other elements. This is a result of the comparatively low stellar temperatures necessary to destroy lithium, along with a lack of common processes to produce it.\nAccording to modern cosmological theory, lithium\u2014in both stable isotopes (lithium-6 and lithium-7)\u2014was one of the three elements synthesized in the Big Bang. Though the amount of lithium generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis is dependent upon the number of photons per baryon, for accepted values the lithium abundance can be calculated, and there is a \"cosmological lithium discrepancy\" in the universe: older stars seem to have less lithium than they should, and some younger stars have much more. The lack of lithium in older stars is apparently caused by the \"mixing\" of lithium into the interior of stars, where it is destroyed, while lithium is produced in younger stars. Although it transmutes into two atoms of helium due to collision with a proton at temperatures above 2.4 million degrees Celsius (most stars easily attain this temperature in their interiors), lithium is more abundant than computations would predict in later-generation stars.\nLithium is also found in brown dwarf substellar objects and certain anomalous orange stars. Because lithium is present in cooler, less-massive brown dwarfs, but is destroyed in hotter red dwarf stars, its presence in the stars' spectra can be used in the \"lithium test\" to differentiate the two, as both are smaller than the Sun. Certain orange stars can also contain a high concentration of lithium. Those orange stars found to have a higher than usual concentration of lithium (such as Centaurus X-4) orbit massive objects\u2014neutron stars or black holes\u2014whose gravity evidently pulls heavier lithium to the surface of a hydrogen-helium star, causing more lithium to be observed.\nOn 27 May 2020, astronomers reported that classical nova explosions are galactic producers of lithium-7.\nTerrestrial.\nAlthough lithium is widely distributed on Earth, it does not naturally occur in elemental form due to its high reactivity. The total lithium content of seawater is very large and is estimated as 230 billion tonnes, where the element exists at a relatively constant concentration of 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm), or 25 micromolar; higher concentrations approaching 7 ppm are found near hydrothermal vents.\nEstimates for the Earth's crustal content range from 20 to 70 ppm by weight. In keeping with its name, lithium forms a minor part of igneous rocks, with the largest concentrations in granites. Granitic pegmatites also provide the greatest abundance of lithium-containing minerals, with spodumene and petalite being the most commercially viable sources. Another significant mineral of lithium is lepidolite which is now an obsolete name for a series formed by polylithionite and trilithionite. Another source for lithium is hectorite clay, the only active development of which is through the Western Lithium Corporation in the United States. At 20\u00a0mg lithium per kg of Earth's crust, lithium is the 31st most abundant element.\nAccording to the \"Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium\", \"Lithium is a comparatively rare element, although it is found in many rocks and some brines, but always in very low concentrations. There are a fairly large number of both lithium mineral and brine deposits but only comparatively few of them are of actual or potential commercial value. Many are very small, others are too low in grade.\"\nChile is estimated (2020) to have the largest reserves by far (9.2 million tonnes), and Australia the highest annual production (40,000 tonnes). One of the largest \"reserve bases\" of lithium is in the Salar de Uyuni area of Bolivia, which has 5.4 million tonnes. Other major suppliers include Argentina and China. As of 2015, the Czech Geological Survey considered the entire Ore Mountains in the Czech Republic as lithium province. Five deposits are registered, one near C\u00ednovec is considered as a potentially economical deposit, with 160 000 tonnes of lithium. In December 2019, Finnish mining company Keliber Oy reported its Rapasaari lithium deposit has estimated proven and probable ore reserves of 5.280 million tonnes.\nIn June 2010, \"The New York Times\" reported that American geologists were conducting ground surveys on dry salt lakes in western Afghanistan believing that large deposits of lithium are located there. These estimates are \"based principally on old data, which was gathered mainly by the Soviets during their occupation of Afghanistan from 1979\u20131989\". The Department of Defense estimated the lithium reserves in Afghanistan to amount to the ones in Bolivia and dubbed it as a potential \"Saudi-Arabia of lithium\". In Cornwall, England, the presence of brine rich in lithium was well known due to the region's historic mining industry, and private investors have conducted tests to investigate potential lithium extraction in this area.\nBiological.\nLithium is found in trace amount in numerous plants, plankton, and invertebrates, at concentrations of 69 to 5,760 parts per billion (ppb). In vertebrates the concentration is slightly lower, and nearly all vertebrate tissue and body fluids contain lithium ranging from 21 to 763 ppb. Marine organisms tend to bioaccumulate lithium more than terrestrial organisms. Whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms is unknown.\nLithium concentrations in human tissue averages about 24 ppb (4 ppb in blood, and 1.3 ppm in bone).\nLithium is easily absorbed by plants and lithium concentration in plant tissue is typically around 1 ppm. Some plant families bioaccumulate more lithium than others. Dry weight lithium concentrations for members of the family Solanaceae (which includes potatoes and tomatoes), for instance, can be as high as 30 ppm while this can be as low as 0.05 ppb for corn grains.\nStudies of lithium concentrations in mineral-rich soil give ranges between around 0.1 and 50\u2212100 ppm, with some concentrations as high as 100\u2212400 ppm, although it is unlikely that all of it is available for uptake by plants.\nLithium accumulation does not appear to affect the essential nutrient composition of plants. Tolerance to lithium varies by plant species and typically parallels sodium tolerance; maize and Rhodes grass, for example, are highly tolerant to lithium injury while avocado and soybean are very sensitive. Similarly, lithium at concentrations of 5 ppm reduces seed germination in some species (e.g. Asian rice and chickpea) but not in others (e.g. barley and wheat).\nMany of lithium's major biological effects can be explained by its competition with other ions.\nThe monovalent lithium ion Li+ competes with other ions such as sodium (immediately below lithium on the periodic table), which like lithium is also a monovalent alkali metal.\nLithium also competes with bivalent magnesium ions, whose ionic radius (86 pm) is approximately that of the lithium ion (90 pm).\nMechanisms that transport sodium across cellular membranes also transport lithium.\nFor instance, sodium channels (both voltage-gated and epithelial) are particularly major pathways of entry for lithium.\nLithium ions can also permeate through ligand-gated ion channels as well as cross both nuclear and mitochondrial membranes.\nLike sodium, lithium can enter and partially block (although not permeate) potassium channels and calcium channels.\nThe biological effects of lithium are many and varied but its mechanisms of action are only partially understood.\nFor instance, studies of lithium-treated patients with bipolar disorder show that, among many other effects, lithium partially reverses telomere shortening in these patients and also increases mitochondrial function, although how lithium produces these pharmacological effects is not understood.\nHistory.\nPetalite (LiAlSi4O10) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist and statesman Jos\u00e9 Bonif\u00e1cio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Ut\u00f6, Sweden. However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore. This element formed compounds similar to those of sodium and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in water and less alkaline. Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name \"\"lithion\"/\"lithina\"\", from the Greek word \"\u03bb\u03b9\u03b8o\u03c2\" (transliterated as \"lithos\", meaning \"stone\"), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium, which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the new element \"lithium\".\nArfwedson later showed that this same element was present in the minerals spodumene and lepidolite. In 1818, Christian Gmelin was the first to observe that lithium salts give a bright red color to flame. However, both Arfwedson and Gmelin tried and failed to isolate the pure element from its salts. It was not isolated until 1821, when William Thomas Brande obtained it by electrolysis of lithium oxide, a process that had previously been employed by the chemist Sir Humphry Davy to isolate the alkali metals potassium and sodium. Brande also described some pure salts of lithium, such as the chloride, and, estimating that lithia (lithium oxide) contained about 55% metal, estimated the atomic weight of lithium to be around 9.8\u00a0g/mol (modern value ~6.94 g/mol). In 1855, larger quantities of lithium were produced through the electrolysis of lithium chloride by Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen. The discovery of this procedure led to commercial production of lithium in 1923 by the German company Metallgesellschaft AG, which performed an electrolysis of a liquid mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.\nAustralian psychiatrist John Cade is credited with reintroducing and popularizing the use of lithium to treat mania in 1949. Shortly after, throughout the mid-20th century, lithium's mood stabilizing applicability for mania and depression took off in Europe and the United States.\nThe production and use of lithium underwent several drastic changes in history. The first major application of lithium was in high-temperature lithium greases for aircraft engines and similar applications in World War II and shortly after. This use was supported by the fact that lithium-based soaps have a higher melting point than other alkali soaps, and are less corrosive than calcium based soaps. The small demand for lithium soaps and lubricating greases was supported by several small mining operations, mostly in the US.\nThe demand for lithium increased dramatically during the Cold War with the production of nuclear fusion weapons. Both lithium-6 and lithium-7 produce tritium when irradiated by neutrons, and are thus useful for the production of tritium by itself, as well as a form of solid fusion fuel used inside hydrogen bombs in the form of lithium deuteride. The US became the prime producer of lithium between the late 1950s and the mid-1980s. At the end, the stockpile of lithium was roughly 42,000 tonnes of lithium hydroxide. The stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75%, which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals, and even the atomic weight of lithium in some \"natural sources\" of lithium ion which had been \"contaminated\" by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities, which had found its way into ground water. \nLithium is used to decrease the melting temperature of glass and to improve the melting behavior of aluminium oxide in the Hall-H\u00e9roult process. These two uses dominated the market until the middle of the 1990s. After the end of the nuclear arms race, the demand for lithium decreased and the sale of department of energy stockpiles on the open market further reduced prices. In the mid-1990s, several companies started to isolate lithium from brine which proved to be a less expensive option than underground or open-pit mining. Most of the mines closed or shifted their focus to other materials because only the ore from zoned pegmatites could be mined for a competitive price. For example, the US mines near Kings Mountain, North Carolina, closed before the beginning of the 21st century.\nThe development of lithium-ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007. With the surge of lithium demand in batteries in the 2000s, new companies have expanded brine isolation efforts to meet the rising demand.\nChemistry.\nOf lithium metal.\nLithium reacts with water easily, but with noticeably less vigor than other alkali metals. The reaction forms hydrogen gas and lithium hydroxide. When placed over a flame, lithium compounds give off a striking crimson color, but when the metal burns strongly, the flame becomes a brilliant silver. Lithium will ignite and burn in oxygen when exposed to water or water vapor. In moist air, lithium rapidly tarnishes to form a black coating of lithium hydroxide (LiOH and LiOH\u00b7H2O), lithium nitride (Li3N) and lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, the result of a secondary reaction between LiOH and CO2). Lithium is one of the few metals that react with nitrogen gas.\nBecause of its reactivity with water, and especially nitrogen, lithium metal is usually stored in a hydrocarbon sealant, often petroleum jelly. Although the heavier alkali metals can be stored under mineral oil, lithium is not dense enough to fully submerge itself in these liquids.\nLithium has a diagonal relationship with magnesium, an element of similar atomic and ionic radius. Chemical resemblances between the two metals include the formation of a nitride by reaction with N2, the formation of an oxide (Li2O) and peroxide (Li2O2) when burnt in O2, salts with similar solubilities, and thermal instability of the carbonates and nitrides. The metal reacts with hydrogen gas at high temperatures to produce lithium hydride (LiH).\nLithium forms a variety of binary and ternary materials by direct reaction with the main group elements. These Zintl phases, although highly covalent, can be viewed as salts of polyatomic anions such as Si44-, P73-, and Te52-. With graphite, lithium forms a variety of intercalation compounds.\nIt dissolves in ammonia (and amines) to give [Li(NH3)4]+ and the solvated electron.\nInorganic compounds.\nLithium forms salt-like derivatives with all halides and pseudohalides. Some examples include the halides LiF, LiCl, LiBr, LiI, as well as the pseudohalides and related anions. Lithium carbonate has been described as the most important compound of lithium. This white solid is the principal product of beneficiation of lithium ores. It is a precursor to other salts including ceramics and materials for lithium batteries.\nThe compounds LiBH4 and LiAlH4 are useful reagents. These salts and many other lithium salts exhibit distinctively high solubility in ethers, in contrast with salts of heavier alkali metals.\nIn aqueous solution, the coordination complex [Li(H2O)4]+ predominates for many lithium salts. Related complexes are known with amines and ethers.\nOrganic chemistry.\nOrganolithium compounds are numerous and useful. They are defined by the presence of a bond between carbon and lithium. They serve as metal-stabilized carbanions, although their solution and solid-state structures are more complex than this simplistic view. Thus, these are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles. They have also been applied in asymmetric synthesis in the pharmaceutical industry. For laboratory organic synthesis, many organolithium reagents are commercially available in solution form. These reagents are highly reactive, and are sometimes pyrophoric.\nLike its inorganic compounds, almost all organic compounds of lithium formally follow the duet rule (e.g., BuLi, MeLi). However, in the absence of coordinating solvents or ligands, organolithium compounds form dimeric, tetrameric, and hexameric clusters (e.g., BuLi is actually [BuLi]6 and MeLi is actually [MeLi]4) which feature multi-center bonding and increase the coordination number around lithium. These clusters are broken down into smaller or monomeric units in the presence of solvents like dimethoxyethane (DME) or ligands like tetramethylethylenediamine (TMEDA). As an exception to the duet rule, a two-coordinate lithate complex with four electrons around lithium, [Li(thf)4]+[((Me3Si)3C)2Li]\u2013, has been characterized crystallographically.\nProduction.\nLithium production has greatly increased since the end of World War II. The main sources of lithium are brines and ores.\nLithium metal is produced through electrolysis applied to a mixture of fused 55% lithium chloride and 45% potassium chloride at about 450\u00a0\u00b0C.\nLithium is one of the elements critical in a world running on renewable energy and dependent on batteries. This suggests that lithium will be one of the main objects of geopolitical competition, but this perspective has also been criticised for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production.\nReserves and occurrence.\nThe small ionic size makes it difficult for lithium to be included in early stages of mineral crystallization. As a result, lithium remains in the molten phases, where it gets enriched, until it gets solidified in the final stages. Such lithium enrichment is responsible for all commercially promising lithium ore deposits. Brines (and dry salt) are another important source of Li+. Although the number of known lithium-containing deposits and brines is large, most of them are either small or have too low Li+ concentrations. Thus, only a few appear to be of commercial value.\nThe US Geological Survey (USGS) estimated worldwide identified lithium reserves in 2022 and 2023 to be 26 million and 28 million tonnes, respectively. An accurate estimate of world lithium reserves is difficult. One reason for this is that most lithium classification schemes are developed for solid ore deposits, whereas brine is a fluid that is problematic to treat with the same classification scheme due to varying concentrations and pumping effects.\nIn 2019, world production of lithium from spodumene was around 80,000\u00a0t per annum, primarily from the Greenbushes pegmatite and from some Chinese and Chilean sources. The Talison mine in Greenbushes is reported to be the largest and to have the highest grade of ore at 2.4% Li2O (2012 figures).\nLithium triangle and other brine sources.\nThe world's top four lithium-producing countries in 2019, as reported by the US Geological Survey, were Australia, Chile, China and Argentina.\nThe three countries of Chile, Bolivia, and Argentina contain a region known as the Lithium Triangle. The Lithium Triangle is known for its high-quality salt flats, which include Bolivia's Salar de Uyuni, Chile's Salar de Atacama, and Argentina's Salar de Arizaro. As of 2018[ [update]], the Lithium Triangle had been estimated to contain over 75% of then known lithium reserves. Deposits found in subsurface brines have also been found in the United States (southwest Texas and Arkansas) and South America throughout the Andes mountain chain. In 2010, Chile was the leading producer, followed by Argentina. Both countries recover lithium from brine pools. According to USGS, Bolivia's Uyuni Desert has 5.4 million tonnes of lithium. Half the world's known reserves as of 2022 were located in Bolivia along the central eastern slope of the Andes. The Bolivian government invested US$900 million in lithium production by 2022, and in 2021 successfully produced 540 tons. The brines in the salt pans of the Lithium Triangle vary widely in lithium content. Concentrations can also vary over time as brines are fluids that are changeable and mobile.\nExtracting lithium from brine deep in Wyoming's Rock Springs Uplift has been proposed as revenue source to make atmospheric carbon sequestration economically viable. Additional deposits in the same formation were estimated to be as much as 18 million tons if economic means of recovery can be employed. Similarly in Nevada, the McDermitt Caldera hosts lithium-bearing volcanic muds that consist of the largest known deposits of lithium within the United States.\nIn the US, lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada. Projects are also under development in Lithium Valley in California and from brine in southwest Arkansas using the direct lithium extraction process, drawing on the deep brine resource in the Smackover Formation.\nA deposit of Rotliegend lithium brines containing 43 million tons of lithium carbonate equivalent was discovered in the Altmark region of Saxony-Anhalt, Germany, in 2025, potentially eliminating the dependency of European electric vehicle battery producers on imported lithium.\nHard-rock deposits.\nSince 2018 the Democratic Republic of Congo is known to have the largest lithium spodumene hard-rock deposit in the world. The deposit located in Manono, DRC, may hold up to 1.5 billion tons of lithium spodumene hard-rock. The two largest pegmatites (known as the Carriere de l'Este Pegmatite and the Roche Dure Pegmatite) are each of similar size or larger than the famous Greenbushes Pegmatite in Western Australia. Thus, the Democratic Republic of Congo is expected to be a significant supplier of lithium to the world with its high grade and low impurities.\nOn 16 July 2018 2.5 million tonnes of high-grade lithium resources and 124 million pounds of uranium resources were found in the Falchani hard rock deposit in the region Puno, Peru.\nIn 2020, Australia granted Major Project Status (MPS) to the Finniss Lithium Project for a strategically important lithium deposit: an estimated 3.45 million tonnes (Mt) of mineral resource at 1.4 percent lithium oxide. Operational mining began in 2022.\nThe Pampean Pegmatite Province in Argentina is known to have a total of at least 200,000 tons of spodumene with lithium oxide (Li2O) grades varying between 5 and 8 wt %.\nIn Russia the largest lithium deposit Kolmozerskoye is located in Murmansk region. In 2023, Polar Lithium, a joint venture between Nornickel and Rosatom, has been granted the right to develop the deposit. The project aims to produce 60,000 tonnes of lithium carbonate and hydroxide per year and plans to reach full design capacity by 2030.\nOther sources.\nAnother potential source of lithium as of 2012[ [update]] was identified as the leachates of geothermal wells, which are carried to the surface. Recovery of this type of lithium has been demonstrated in the field; the lithium is separated by simple filtration. Reserves are more limited than those of brine reservoirs and hard rock.\nPricing.\nIn 1998, the price of lithium metal was about 95 USD/kg (or US$43/lb). After the 2008 financial crisis, major suppliers, such as Sociedad Qu\u00edmica y Minera (SQM), dropped lithium carbonate pricing by 20%. Prices rose in 2012. A 2012 Business Week article outlined an oligopoly in the lithium space: \"SQM, controlled by billionaire Julio Ponce, is the second-largest, followed by Rockwood, which is backed by Henry Kravis's KKR &amp; Co., and Philadelphia-based FMC\", with Talison mentioned as the biggest producer.\nA 2012 \"Business Week\" article projected that global lithium consumption could increase to 300,000 metric tons a year by 2020, from about 150,000 tons in 2012, to match the demand for lithium batteries that had then been growing at about 25% a year, outpacing the late-2000s 4% to 5% overall gain in lithium production.\nThe price information service ISE \u2013 Institute of Rare Earths Elements and Strategic Metals \u2013 gives for various lithium substances in the average of March to August 2022 the following kilo prices stable in the course: Lithium carbonate, purity 99.5% min, from various producers between 63 and 72 EUR/kg. Lithium hydroxide monohydrate LiOH 56.5% min, China, at 66 to 72 EUR/kg; delivered South Korea \u2013 73 EUR/kg. Lithium metal 99.9% min, delivered China \u2013 42 EUR/kg.\nExtraction.\nLithium and its compounds were historically isolated and extracted from hard rock. However, by the 1990s mineral springs, brine pools, and brine deposits had become the dominant source. Most of these were in Chile, Argentina and Bolivia and the lithium is extracted from the brine by evaporative processes. Large lithium-clay deposits under development in the McDermitt caldera (Nevada, United States) require concentrated sulfuric acid to leach lithium from the clay ore.\nBy early 2021, much of the lithium mined globally came from either \"spodumene, the mineral contained in hard rock formations found in places such as Australia and North Carolina\" or from salty brine pumped directly out of the ground, as it is in locations in Chile, Argentina, and Arkansas. \nIn Chile's Salar de Atacama, the lithium concentration in the brine is raised by solar evaporation in a system of ponds. The enrichment by evaporation process may require up to one-and-a-half years, when the brine reaches a lithium content of 6%. The final processing in this example is done in Salar del Carmen and La Negra near the coastal city of Antofagasta where pure lithium carbonate, lithium hydroxide, and lithium chloride are produced from the brine.\nDirect Lithium Extraction (DLE) technologies are being developed as alternatives to the evaporitic technology long used to extract lithium salts from brines. The traditional evaporitic technology is a long duration process requiring large amounts of land and intensive water use, and can only be applied to the large continental brines. In contrast, DLE technologies are proposed to tackle the environmental and techno\u2013economic shortcomings by avoiding brine evaporation. Some recent lithium mining projects in the United States are attempting to bring DLE into commercial production by these non-evaporative DLE approaches.\nOne method of direct lithium extraction, as well as other valuable minerals, is to process geothermal brine water through an electrolytic cell, located within a membrane.\nThe use of electrodialysis and electrochemical intercalation was proposed in 2020 to extract lithium compounds from seawater (which contains lithium at 0.2 parts per million). Ion-selective cells within a membrane in principle could collect lithium either by use of electric field or a concentration difference. In 2024, a redox/electrodialysis system was claimed to offer enormous cost savings, shorter timelines, and less environmental damage than traditional evaporation-based systems.\nEnvironmental issues.\nThe manufacturing processes of lithium, including the solvent and mining waste of particular extraction processes can present environmental and health hazards.\nLithium extraction done poorly can be fatal to aquatic life due to water pollution. The surface brine evaporation process has been known to cause surface water contamination, drinking water contamination, respiratory problems, ecosystem degradation and landscape damage, and could lead to unsustainable water consumption in arid regions (1.9 million liters per ton of lithium), such as in northwestern Argentina. Massive byproduct generation of evaporative surface lithium extraction also presents unsolved problems, such as large amounts of magnesium and lime waste.\nAlthough lithium occurs naturally, it is a non-renewable resource yet is seen as crucial in the transition away from fossil fuels, and the extraction process has been criticised for long-term degradation of water resources. In the southern reaches of Salar de Atacama lithium-producing company Albemarle Limitada reached a concialiatory agreement in 2024 to make reparations freshwater uptake that would have contributed \u2013along with the uptake of copper mining companies\u2013 to dry meadows locatede in the traditional lands of the indigenous Atacame\u00f1o people. In its defense Albemarle Limitada have asserted that its use is minimal compared to that of the nearby copper mining companies. \nIn the United States, open-pit mining and mountaintop removal mining compete with brine extraction mining. Environmental concerns include wildlife habitat degradation, potable water pollution including arsenic and antimony contamination, unsustainable water table reduction, and massive mining waste, including radioactive uranium byproduct and sulfuric acid discharge.\nDuring 2021, a series of mass protests broke out in Serbia against the construction of a lithium mine in Western Serbia by the Rio Tinto corporation. In 2024, an EU backed lithium mining project created large scale protests in Serbia.\nSome animal species associated with salt lakes in the Lithium Triangle (in Argentina, Bolivia and Chile) are particularly threatened by the damages of lithium production to the local ecosystem, including the Andean flamingo and \"Orestias parinacotensis\", a small fish locally known as \"karachi\".\nHuman rights issues.\nReporting on lithium extraction companies and indigenous peoples in Argentina found that the state may did not always protect indigenous peoples' right to free prior and informed consent, and that extraction companies generally controlled community access to information and set the terms for discussion of the projects and benefit sharing.\nIn Argentina's Puna region, in 2023, two mining companies (Minera Exar and Sales de Jujuy) extracted over 3.7 billion liters of fresh water, over 31 times the annual water consumption of the local community of Susques department.\nExtraction of lithium-rich brines in Salar de Atacama in Chile led to conflict about water use with local communities. The local indigenous population of Likan Antay have a history of both opposing lithium extraction and negotiating for shared benefits with lithium companies. Negotiations occur under the framework of the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention which Chile signed in 2008. It is argued that in Chile \"[a]greements between Indigenous organizations and lithium companies have brought significant economic resources for community development, but have also expanded the mining industry's capacity for social control in the area.\".\nIn Zimbabwe, the global increase in lithium prices in the early 2020s triggered a 'lithium fever' that led to displacement of locals and conflicts between small-scale artisanal miners and large-scale mining companies. Some local farmers agreed to relocate and were satisfied with their compensation. Artisanal miners occupied parts of the Sandawana mines and a privately owned lithium claim area in Goromonzi, a rural area close to the capital Harare. The artisanal miners were later evicted after the area was cordoned off and shut down by Zimbabwe's Environmental Management Agency.\nDevelopment of the Thacker Pass lithium mine in Nevada, United States, has met with protests and lawsuits from several indigenous tribes who have said they were not provided free prior and informed consent and that the project threatens cultural and sacred sites. They have also expressed concerns that development of the project will create risks to indigenous women, because resource extraction is linked to missing and murdered Indigenous women. Protestors have been occupying the site of the proposed mine since January 2021.\nApplications.\nBatteries.\nIn 2021, most lithium is used to make lithium-ion batteries for electric cars and mobile devices.\nCeramics and glass.\nLithium oxide is widely used as a flux for processing silica, reducing the melting point and viscosity of the material and leading to glazes with improved physical properties including low coefficients of thermal expansion. Worldwide, this is one of the largest use for lithium compounds. Glazes containing lithium oxides are used for ovenware. Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) is generally used in this application because it converts to the oxide upon heating.\nElectrical and electronic.\nLate in the 20th century, lithium became an important component of battery electrolytes and electrodes, because of its high electrode potential. Because of its low atomic mass, it has a high charge- and power-to-weight ratio. A typical lithium-ion battery can generate approximately 3 volts per cell, compared with 2.1 volts for lead-acid and 1.5 volts for zinc-carbon. Lithium-ion batteries, which are rechargeable and have a high energy density, differ from lithium metal batteries, which are disposable (primary) batteries with lithium or its compounds as the anode. Other rechargeable batteries that use lithium include the lithium-ion polymer battery, lithium iron phosphate battery, and the nanowire battery.\nOver the years opinions have been differing about potential growth. A 2008 study concluded that \"realistically achievable lithium carbonate production would be sufficient for only a small fraction of future PHEV and EV global market requirements\", that \"demand from the portable electronics sector will absorb much of the planned production increases in the next decade\", and that \"mass production of lithium carbonate is not environmentally sound, it will cause irreparable ecological damage to ecosystems that should be protected and that LiIon propulsion is incompatible with the notion of the 'Green Car'\".\nLubricating greases.\nThe third most common use of lithium is in greases. Lithium hydroxide is a strong base, and when heated with a fat, it produces a soap, such as lithium stearate from stearic acid. Lithium soap has the ability to thicken oils, and it is used to manufacture all-purpose, high-temperature lubricating greases.\nMetallurgy.\nLithium (e.g. as lithium carbonate) is used as an additive to continuous casting mould flux slags where it increases fluidity, a use which accounts for 5% of global lithium use (2011). Lithium compounds are also used as additives (fluxes) to foundry sand for iron casting to reduce veining.\nLithium (as lithium fluoride) is used as an additive to aluminium smelters (Hall\u2013H\u00e9roult process), reducing melting temperature and increasing electrical resistance, a use which accounts for 3% of production (2011).\nWhen used as a flux for welding or soldering, metallic lithium promotes the fusing of metals during the process and eliminates the formation of oxides by absorbing impurities. Alloys of the metal with aluminium, cadmium, copper and manganese are used to make high-performance, low density aircraft parts (see also Lithium-aluminium alloys).\nSilicon nano-welding.\nLithium has been found effective in assisting the perfection of silicon nano-welds in electronic components for electric batteries and other devices.\nPyrotechnics.\nLithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares.\nAir purification.\nLithium chloride and lithium bromide are hygroscopic and are used as desiccants for gas streams. Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are the salts most commonly used in confined areas, such as aboard spacecraft and submarines, for carbon dioxide removal and air purification. Lithium hydroxide absorbs carbon dioxide from the air by forming lithium carbonate, and is preferred over other alkaline hydroxides for its low weight.\nLithium peroxide (Li2O2) in presence of moisture not only reacts with carbon dioxide to form lithium carbonate, but also releases oxygen. The reaction is as follows:\n2 Li2O2 + 2 CO2 \u2192 2 Li2CO3 + O2\nSome of the aforementioned compounds, as well as lithium perchlorate, are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen. These can also include small amounts of boron, magnesium, aluminium, silicon, titanium, manganese, and iron.\nOptics.\nLithium fluoride, artificially grown as crystal, is clear and transparent and often used in specialist optics for IR, UV and VUV (vacuum UV) applications. It has one of the lowest refractive indices and the furthest transmission range in the deep UV of most common materials. Finely divided lithium fluoride powder has been used for thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): when a sample of such is exposed to radiation, it accumulates crystal defects which, when heated, resolve via a release of bluish light whose intensity is proportional to the absorbed dose, thus allowing this to be quantified. Lithium fluoride is sometimes used in focal lenses of telescopes.\nThe high non-linearity of lithium niobate also makes it useful in non-linear optics applications. It is used extensively in telecommunication products such as mobile phones and optical modulators, for such components as resonant crystals. Lithium applications are used in more than 60% of mobile phones.\nOrganic and polymer chemistry.\nOrganolithium compounds are widely used in the production of polymer and fine-chemicals. In the polymer industry, which is the dominant consumer of these reagents, alkyl lithium compounds are catalysts/initiators in anionic polymerization of unfunctionalized olefins. For the production of fine chemicals, organolithium compounds function as strong bases and as reagents for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Organolithium compounds are prepared from lithium metal and alkyl halides.\nMany other lithium compounds are used as reagents to prepare organic compounds. Some popular compounds include lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), lithium triethylborohydride, \"n\"-butyllithium and \"tert\"-butyllithium.\nMilitary.\nMetallic lithium and its complex hydrides, such as lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), are used as high-energy additives to rocket propellants. LiAlH4 can also be used by itself as a solid fuel.\nThe Mark 50 torpedo stored chemical energy propulsion system (SCEPS) uses a small tank of sulfur hexafluoride, which is sprayed over a block of solid lithium. The reaction generates heat, creating steam to propel the torpedo in a closed Rankine cycle.\nLithium hydride containing lithium-6 is used in thermonuclear weapons, where it serves as fuel for the fusion stage of the bomb.\nNuclear.\nLithium-6 is valued as a source material for tritium production and as a neutron absorber in nuclear fusion. Natural lithium contains about 7.5% lithium-6 from which large amounts of lithium-6 have been produced by isotope separation for use in nuclear weapons. Lithium-7 gained interest for use in nuclear reactor coolants.\nLithium deuteride was the fusion fuel of choice in early versions of the hydrogen bomb. When bombarded by neutrons, both 6Li and 7Li produce tritium \u2014 this reaction, which was not fully understood when hydrogen bombs were first tested, was responsible for the runaway yield of the Castle Bravo nuclear test. Tritium fuses with deuterium in a fusion reaction that is relatively easy to achieve. Although details remain secret, lithium-6 deuteride apparently still plays a role in modern nuclear weapons as a fusion material.\nLithium fluoride, when highly enriched in the lithium-7 isotope, forms the basic constituent of the fluoride salt mixture LiF-BeF2 used in liquid fluoride nuclear reactors. Lithium fluoride is exceptionally chemically stable and LiF-BeF2 mixtures have low melting points. In addition, 7Li, Be, and F are among the few nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross-sections not to poison the fission reactions inside a nuclear fission reactor.\nIn conceptualized (hypothetical) nuclear fusion power plants, lithium will be used to produce tritium in magnetically confined reactors using deuterium and tritium as the fuel. Naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare and must be synthetically produced by surrounding the reacting plasma with a 'blanket' containing lithium, where neutrons from the deuterium-tritium reaction in the plasma will fission the lithium to produce more tritium:\n6Li + n \u2192 4He + 3H.\nLithium is also used as a source for alpha particles, or helium nuclei. When 7Li is bombarded by accelerated protons 8Be is formed, which almost immediately undergoes fission to form two alpha particles. This feat, called \"splitting the atom\" at the time, was the first fully human-made nuclear reaction. It was produced by Cockroft and Walton in 1932. Injection of lithium powders is used in fusion reactors to manipulate plasma-material interactions and dissipate energy in the hot thermo-nuclear fusion plasma boundary.\nIn 2013, the US Government Accountability Office said a shortage of lithium-7 critical to the operation of 65 out of 100 American nuclear reactors \"places their ability to continue to provide electricity at some risk.\" The problem stems from the decline of US nuclear infrastructure. The equipment needed to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7 is mostly a cold war leftover. The US shut down most of this machinery in 1963, when it had a huge surplus of separated lithium, mostly consumed during the twentieth century. The report said it would take five years and $10 million to $12 million to reestablish the ability to separate lithium-6 from lithium-7.\nReactors that use lithium-7 heat water under high pressure and transfer heat through heat exchangers that are prone to corrosion. The reactors use lithium to counteract the corrosive effects of boric acid, which is added to the water to absorb excess neutrons.\nMedicine.\nLithium is useful in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Lithium salts may also be helpful for related diagnoses, such as schizoaffective disorder and cyclic major depressive disorder. The active part of these salts is the lithium ion Li+. Lithium may increase the risk of developing Ebstein's cardiac anomaly in infants born to women who take lithium during the first trimester of pregnancy.\nPrecautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nLithium metal is corrosive and requires special handling to avoid skin contact. Breathing lithium dust or lithium compounds (which are often alkaline) initially irritate the nose and throat, while higher exposure can cause a buildup of fluid in the lungs, leading to pulmonary edema. The metal itself is a handling hazard because contact with moisture produces the caustic lithium hydroxide. Lithium metal is safely stored in non-reactive compounds such as naphtha.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17562", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17562", "title": "Leni Riefenstahl", "text": "German filmmaker (1902\u20132003)\nHelene Bertha Amalie \"Leni\" Riefenstahl (; 22 August 1902 \u2013 8 September 2003) was a German filmmaker, photographer, and actress. She is considered one of the most controversial personalities in film history. Regarded by many critics as an \"innovative filmmaker and creative aesthete\", she is also criticized for her works in the service of propaganda during the Nazi era.\nA talented swimmer and an artist, Riefenstahl became interested in dancing during her childhood, taking lessons and performing across all Europe. After seeing a promotional poster for the 1924 film \"Mountain of Destiny\", she was inspired to move into acting and between 1925 and 1929 starred in five successful motion pictures. Riefenstahl became one of the few women in Germany to direct a film during the Weimar era when, in 1932, she decided to try directing with her own film, \"The Blue Light\".\nIn the 1930s, she directed the Nazi propaganda films \"Triumph of the Will\" (1935) and \"Olympia\" (1938), resulting in worldwide attention and acclaim. The films are widely considered two of the most effective and technically innovative propaganda films ever made. Her involvement in \"Triumph of the Will\", however, significantly damaged her career and reputation after World War II. Adolf Hitler closely collaborated with Riefenstahl during the production of at least three important Nazi films, and they formed a friendly relationship.\nAfter the war, Riefenstahl was arrested and found to be a Nazi \"fellow traveller\" but was not charged with war crimes. Throughout her later life, she denied having known about the Holocaust, and was criticized as the \"voice of the 'how could we have known?' defence.\" Riefenstahl's postwar work included her autobiography and two photography books on the Nuba peoples of southern Sudan.\nEarly life.\nHelene Bertha Amalie Riefenstahl was born in Berlin on 22 August 1902. Her father, Alfred Theodor Paul Riefenstahl, owned a successful heating and ventilation company and wanted his daughter to follow him into the business world. Since Riefenstahl was the only child for several years, Alfred wanted her to carry on the family name and secure the family fortune. However, her mother, Bertha Ida (Scherlach), who had been a part-time seamstress before her marriage, had faith in Riefenstahl and believed that her daughter's future was in show business. Riefenstahl had a younger brother, Heinz, who was killed at the age of 39 on the Eastern Front in Nazi Germany's war against the Soviet Union.\nRiefenstahl fell in love with the arts in her childhood. She began to paint and write poetry at the age of four. She was also athletic, and at the age of twelve joined a gymnastics and swimming club called \"Nixe\". Her mother was confident her daughter would grow up to be successful in the field of art and therefore gave her full support, unlike Riefenstahl's father, who was not interested in his daughter's artistic inclinations. In 1918, when she was 16, Riefenstahl attended a presentation of Snow White which interested her deeply; it led her to want to be a dancer. Her father instead wanted to provide his daughter with an education that could lead to a more dignified occupation. His wife, however, continued to support her daughter's passion. Without her husband's knowledge, she enrolled Riefenstahl in dance and ballet classes at the Grimm-Reiter Dance School in Berlin, where she quickly became a star pupil.\nDancing and acting careers.\nRiefenstahl attended dancing academies and became well known for her self-styled interpretive dancing skills, traveling across Europe with Max Reinhardt in a show funded by Jewish producer Harry Sokal. Riefenstahl often made almost 700\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 for each performance. She began to suffer a series of foot injuries, which led to knee surgery that threatened her dancing career. It was while going to a doctor's appointment that she first saw a poster for the 1924 film \"Mountain of Destiny\". She became inspired to go into movie making, and began visiting the cinema to see films and also attended film shows.\nOn one of her adventures, Riefenstahl met Luis Trenker, an actor who had appeared in \"Mountain of Destiny\". At a meeting arranged by her friend Gunther Rahn, she met Arnold Fanck, the director of \"Mountain of Destiny\" and a pioneer of the mountain film genre. Fanck was working on a film in Berlin. After Riefenstahl told him how much she admired his work, she also convinced him of her acting skill. She persuaded him to feature her in one of his films. Riefenstahl later received a package from Fanck containing the script of the 1926 film \"The Holy Mountain\". She made a series of films for Fanck, where she learned from him acting and film editing techniques. One of Fanck's films that brought Riefenstahl into the limelight was \"The White Hell of Pitz Palu\" of 1929, co-directed by G. W. Pabst. She had to undergo many physical challenges that would probably be deemed unethical in today's standards. Some of the torments included: being engulfed in small avalanches, jumping into mountain lakes and icy streams, climbing rocky pinnacles while barefoot, letting herself be pulled up a rock face being pelted by snow and ice, balancing on a ladder above a deep glacial crevasse, and enduring obscene jokes from her exclusively male colleagues. Her fame spread to countries outside Germany.\nRiefenstahl produced and directed her own work called \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\") in 1932, co-written by Carl Mayer and B\u00e9la Bal\u00e1zs. This film won the silver medal at the Venice Film Festival, but was not universally well-received, for which Riefenstahl blamed the critics, many of whom were Jewish. Upon its 1938 re-release, the names of Bal\u00e1zs and Sokal, both Jewish, were removed from the credits; some reports say this was at Riefenstahl's behest. In the film, Riefenstahl played an innocent peasant girl who is hated by the villagers because they think she is diabolical and cast out. She is protected by a glowing mountain grotto. According to herself, Riefenstahl received invitations to travel to Hollywood to create films, but she refused them in favor of remaining in Germany with a boyfriend. Hitler was a fan of the film, and thought Riefenstahl epitomized the perfect German female. He saw talent in Riefenstahl and arranged a meeting.\nIn 1933, Riefenstahl appeared in the U.S.-German co-productions of the Arnold Fanck-directed, German-language \"SOS Eisberg\" and the Tay Garnett-directed, English-language \"S.O.S. Iceberg\". The films were filmed simultaneously in English and German and produced and distributed by Universal Studios. Her role as an actress in \"S.O.S. Iceberg\" was her only English language role in film.\nDirecting career.\nPropaganda films.\nRiefenstahl heard Nazi Party (NSDAP) leader Adolf Hitler speak at a rally in 1932 and was mesmerized by his talent as a public speaker. Describing the experience in her memoir, Riefenstahl wrote, \"I had an almost apocalyptic vision that I was never able to forget. It seemed as if the Earth's surface were spreading out in front of me, like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle, spewing out an enormous jet of water, so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the earth.\"\nHitler was immediately captivated by Riefenstahl's work. She is described as fitting in with Hitler's ideal of Aryan womanhood, a feature he had noted when he saw her starring performance in \"Das Blaue Licht\". In May 1933, Hitler asked Riefenstahl to make a film about Horst Wessel, but she declined. Riefenstahl was offered the opportunity to direct \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\", an hour-long propaganda film about the fifth Nuremberg Rally in 1933. The opportunity that was offered was a huge surprise to Riefenstahl. Hitler had ordered Joseph Goebbels's Propaganda Ministry to give the film commission to Riefenstahl, but the Ministry had never informed her. Riefenstahl agreed to direct the movie even though she was only given a few days before the rally to prepare. She and Hitler got on well, forming a friendly relationship. The propaganda film was funded entirely by the NSDAP.\nDuring the filming of \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\", Hitler had stood side by side with the leader of the \"Sturmabteilung\" (SA), Ernst R\u00f6hm, a man with whom he clearly had a close working relationship. R\u00f6hm was murdered on Hitler's orders a short time later, during the purge of the SA referred to as the Night of the Long Knives. It has gone on record that, immediately following the killings, Hitler ordered all copies of the film to be destroyed, although Riefenstahl disputed that this ever happened.\nImpressed with Riefenstahl's work, Hitler asked her to film \"Triumph des Willens\" (\"Triumph of the Will\"), a new propaganda film about the 1934 party rally in Nuremberg. More than one million Germans participated in the rally. The film is sometimes considered the greatest propaganda film ever made. Initially, according to Riefenstahl, she resisted and did not want to create further Nazi Party films, instead wanting to direct a feature film based on Eugen d'Albert's \"Tiefland\" (\"Lowlands\"), an opera that was extremely popular in Berlin in the 1920s. Riefenstahl received private funding for the production of \"Tiefland\", but the filming in Spain was derailed and the project was cancelled. (When \"Tiefland\" was eventually shot, between 1940 and 1944, it was done in black and white, and was the third most expensive film produced in Nazi Germany. During the filming of \"Tiefland,\" Riefenstahl utilized Romani from internment camps for extras, who were severely mistreated on set, and when the filming completed they were sent to the death camp Auschwitz.) Hitler was able to convince her to film \"Triumph des Willens\" on the condition that she would not be required to make further films for the party, according to Riefenstahl. The motion picture was generally recognized as an epic, innovative work of propaganda filmmaking. The film took Riefenstahl's career to a new level and gave her further international recognition.\nIn interviews for the 1993 documentary \"The Wonderful Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl\", Riefenstahl adamantly denied any deliberate attempt to create Nazi propaganda and said she was disgusted that \"Triumph des Willens\" was used in such a way.\nIn a private letter to Hitler, quoted in a 2024 documentary, Riefenstahl seems enthusiastic about the propaganda effects of \"Triumph des Willens\": \"the film's impact as German propaganda is greater than I could have imagined and your image, my F\u00fchrer, is always applauded.\"\nDespite allegedly vowing not to make any more films about the Nazi Party, Riefenstahl made the 28-minute \"\" (\"Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces\") about the German Army in 1935. Like \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\" and \"Triumph des Willens\", this was filmed at the annual Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg. Riefenstahl said this film was a sub-set of \"Der Sieg des Glaubens\", added to mollify the German Army which felt it was not represented well in \"Triumph des Willens\".\nHitler invited Riefenstahl to film the 1936 Summer Olympics scheduled to be held in Berlin, a film which Riefenstahl said had been commissioned by the International Olympic Committee. She visited Greece to take footage of the route of the inaugural torch relay and the games' original site at Olympia, where she was aided by Greek photographer Nelly's. This material became \"Olympia\", a hugely successful film which has since been widely noted for its technical and aesthetic achievements. \"Olympia\" was secretly funded by the Nazis. She was one of the first filmmakers to use tracking shots in a documentary, placing a camera on rails to follow the athletes' movement. The film is also noted for its slow motion shots. Riefenstahl played with the idea of slow motion, underwater diving shots, extremely high and low shooting angles, panoramic aerial shots, and tracking system shots for allowing fast action. Riefenstahl also \"reversed the film to make the divers turn backwards, holding them in the air as if to defy the laws of gravity\". Many of these shots were relatively unheard of at the time, but Riefenstahl's use and augmentation of them set a standard, and is the reason they are still used to this day. Riefenstahl's work on \"Olympia\" has been cited as a major influence in modern sports photography. Riefenstahl filmed competitors of all races, including African-American Jesse Owens in what later became famous footage.\n\"Olympia\" premiered for Hitler's 49th birthday in 1938. Its international debut led Riefenstahl to embark on an American publicity tour in an attempt to secure commercial release. In February 1937, Riefenstahl enthusiastically told a reporter for the \"Detroit News\", \"To me, Hitler is the greatest man who ever lived. He truly is without fault, so simple and at the same time possessed of masculine strength.\" On 31 August 1938, \"Olympia\" won the Mussolini cup at the Venice Film Festival as \"Best foreign film\". She arrived in New York City on 4 November 1938, five days before \"Kristallnacht\" (the \"Night of the Broken Glass\"). When news of the event reached the United States, Riefenstahl publicly defended Hitler. On 18 November, she was received by Henry Ford in Detroit. \"Olympia\" was shown at the Chicago Engineers Club two days later. Avery Brundage, President of the International Olympic Committee, praised the film and held Riefenstahl in the highest regard. She negotiated with Louis B. Mayer, and on 8 December, Walt Disney brought her on a three-hour tour showing her the ongoing production of \"Fantasia\".\nFrom the \"Goebbels Diaries\", researchers learned that Riefenstahl had been friendly with Joseph Goebbels and his wife Magda, attending the opera with them and going to his parties. Riefenstahl maintained that Goebbels was upset when she rejected his advances and was jealous of her influence on Hitler, seeing her as an internal threat. She therefore insisted his diary entries could not be trusted. By later accounts, Goebbels thought highly of Riefenstahl's filmmaking but was angered with what he saw as her overspending of Nazi-provided filmmaking budgets.\nIconography.\nIn \"Triumph of the Will\", Tom Saunders argues that Hitler serves as the object of the camera's gaze. Saunders writes, \"Without denying that 'rampant masculinity' (the 'sexiness' of Hitler and the SS) serves as the object of the gaze, I would suggest that desire is also directed toward the feminine. This occurs not in the familiar sequences of adoring women greeting Hitler's arrival and cavalcade through Nuremberg. In these Hitler clearly remains the focus of attraction, as more generally in the visual treatment of his mass following. Rather, it is encoded in representation of flags and banners, which were shot in such a way as to make them visually desirable as well as potent political symbols\". The flag serves as a symbol of masculinity, equated with national pride and dominance, that supposedly channels men's sexual and masculine energy. Riefenstahl's cinematic framing of the flags encapsulated its iconography. Saunders continues, \"The effect is a significant double transformation: the images mechanize human beings and breathe life into flags. Even when the carriers are not mostly submerged under the sea of colored cloth, and when facial features are visible in profile, they attain neither character nor distinctiveness. The men remain ants in a vast enterprise. By contrast and paradoxically, the flags, whether a few or hundreds peopling the frame, assume distinct identities\".\nUse of music.\nRiefenstahl distorts the diegetic sound in \"Triumph of the Will\". Her distortion of sound suggests she was influenced by German art cinema. Influenced by Classical Hollywood cinema's style, German art film employed music to enhance the narrative, establish a sense of grandeur, and to heighten the emotions in a scene. In \"Triumph of the Will\", Riefenstahl used traditional folk music to accompany and intensify her shots. Ben Morgan comments on Riefenstahl's distortion of sound: \"In \"Triumph of the Will\", the material world leaves no aural impression beyond the music. Where the film does combine diegetic noise with the music, the effects used are human (laughter or cheering) and offer a rhythmic extension to the music rather than a contrast to it. By replacing diegetic sound, Riefenstahl's film employs music to combine the documentary with the fantastic.\"\nWorld War II.\nWhen Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, Riefenstahl was photographed in Poland wearing a military uniform and a pistol on her belt in the company of German soldiers; she had gone to Poland as a war correspondent. On 12 September, she was in the town of Ko\u0144skie when 30 civilians were executed in retaliation for an alleged attack on German soldiers. According to her memoir, Riefenstahl tried to intervene but a furious German soldier held her at gunpoint and threatened to shoot her on the spot. She said she did not realize the victims were Jews. According to another account given by a German officer, Riefenstahl had asked that the Jews be removed from the market, which was relayed to the soldiers as \"Get rid of the Jews\", thus leading to the massacre. Photographs of a distraught Riefenstahl survive from that day. Nevertheless, by 5 October 1939, Riefenstahl was back in occupied Poland filming Hitler's victory parade in Warsaw. Afterwards, she left Poland and chose not to make any more Nazi-related films.\nOn 14 June 1940, the day Paris was declared an open city by the French and occupied by German troops, Riefenstahl wrote to Hitler in a telegram, \"With indescribable joy, deeply moved and filled with burning gratitude, we share with you, my F\u00fchrer, your and Germany's greatest victory, the entry of German troops into Paris. You exceed anything human imagination has the power to conceive, achieving deeds without parallel in the history of mankind. How can we ever thank you?\" She later explained, \"Everyone thought the war was over, and in that spirit I sent the cable to Hitler\". Riefenstahl was friends with Hitler for 12 years. However, her relationship with Hitler severely declined in 1944 after her brother died on the Russian Front.\nAfter the Nuremberg rallies trilogy and \"Olympia\", Riefenstahl began work on the movie she had tried and failed to direct once before, namely \"Tiefland\". On Hitler's direct order, the German government paid her 7 million\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 in compensation. From 23 September until 13 November 1940, she filmed in Kr\u00fcn near Mittenwald. The extras playing Spanish women and farmers were drawn from Romani detained in a camp at Salzburg-Maxglan who were forced to work with her. Filming at the Babelsberg Studios near Berlin began 18 months later in April 1942. This time Sinti and Roma people from the Marzahn detention camp near Berlin were compelled to work as extras. Almost to the end of her life, despite overwhelming evidence that the concentration camp occupants that had been forced to work on the movie were later sent to the Auschwitz death camp, Riefenstahl continued to maintain that all the film extras survived. Riefenstahl sued filmmaker Nina Gladitz, who said Riefenstahl personally chose the extras at their holding camp; Gladitz had found one of the Romani survivors and matched his memory with stills of the movie for a documentary Gladitz was filming. The German court ruled largely in favour of Gladitz, declaring that Riefenstahl had known the extras were from a concentration camp, but they also agreed that Riefenstahl had not been informed the Romani would be sent to Auschwitz after filming was completed.\nThis issue came up again in 2002, when Riefenstahl was 100 years old and she was taken to court by a Roma group for denying the Nazis had exterminated Romani. Riefenstahl apologized and said, \"I regret that Sinti and Roma [people] had to suffer during the period of National Socialism. It is known today that many of them were murdered in concentration camps\".\nIn October 1944 the production of \"Tiefland\" moved to Barrandov Studios in Prague for interior filming. Lavish sets made these shots some of the most costly of the film. The film was not edited and released until almost ten years later.\nThe last time Riefenstahl saw Hitler was when she married Peter Jacob on 21 March 1944. Riefenstahl and Jacob divorced in 1946. As Germany's military situation became impossible by early 1945, Riefenstahl left Berlin and was hitchhiking with a group of men, trying to reach her mother, when she was taken into custody by American troops. She walked out of a holding camp, beginning a series of escapes and arrests across the chaotic landscape. At last making it back home on a bicycle, she found that American troops had seized her house. She was surprised by how kindly they treated her.\nThwarted film projects.\nMost of Riefenstahl's unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war. The French government confiscated all of her editing equipment, along with the production reels of \"Tiefland\". After years of legal wrangling, these were returned to her, but the French government had reportedly damaged some of the film stock while trying to develop and edit it, with a few important scenes being missing (although Riefenstahl was surprised to find the original negatives for \"Olympia\" in the same shipment). During the filming of \"Olympia\", Riefenstahl was funded by the state to create her own production company in her own name, Riefenstahl-Film GmbH, which was uninvolved with her most influential works. She edited and dubbed the remaining material and \"Tiefland\" premiered on 11 February 1954 in Stuttgart. However, it was denied entry into the Cannes Film Festival. Although Riefenstahl lived for almost another half century, \"Tiefland\" was her last feature film.\nRiefenstahl tried many times to make more films during the 1950s and 1960s, but was met with resistance, public protests and sharp criticism. Many of her filmmaking peers in Hollywood had fled Nazi Germany and were unsympathetic to her. Although both film professionals and investors were willing to support her work, most of the projects she attempted were stopped owing to ever-renewed and highly negative publicity about her past work in Nazi Germany.\nIn 1954, Jean Cocteau, who greatly admired the film, insisted on \"Tiefland\" being shown at the Cannes Film Festival, which he was running that year. In 1960, Riefenstahl attempted to prevent filmmaker Erwin Leiser from juxtaposing scenes from \"Triumph des Willens\" with footage from concentration camps in his film \"Mein Kampf\". Riefenstahl had high hopes for a collaboration with Cocteau called \"Friedrich und Voltaire\" (\"Friedrich and Voltaire\"), wherein Cocteau was to play two roles. They thought the film might symbolize the love-hate relationship between Germany and France. Cocteau's illness and 1963 death put an end to the project. A musical remake of \"Das Blaue Licht\" (\"The Blue Light\") with an English production company also fell apart.\nIn the 1960s, Riefenstahl became interested in Africa from Ernest Hemingway's \"Green Hills of Africa\" and from the photographs of George Rodger. She visited Kenya for the first time in 1956 and later Sudan, where she photographed Nuba tribes with whom she sporadically lived, learning about their culture so she could photograph them more easily. Even though her film project about modern slavery entitled \"Die Schwarze Fracht\" (\"The Black Cargo\") was never completed, Riefenstahl was able to sell the stills from the expedition to magazines in various parts of the world. While scouting shooting locations, she almost died from injuries received in a truck accident. After waking up from a coma in a Nairobi hospital, she finished writing the script, but was soon thoroughly thwarted by uncooperative locals, the Suez Canal crisis and bad weather. In the end, the film project was called off. Even so, Riefenstahl was granted Sudanese citizenship for her services to the country, becoming the first foreigner to receive a Sudanese passport.\nDetention and trials.\nNovelist and sports writer Budd Schulberg, assigned by the U.S. Navy to the OSS for intelligence work while attached to John Ford's documentary unit, was ordered to arrest Riefenstahl at her chalet in Kitzb\u00fchel, ostensibly to have her identify Nazi war criminals in German film footage captured by the Allied troops shortly after the war. Riefenstahl said she was not aware of the nature of the internment camps. According to Schulberg, \"She gave me the usual song and dance. She said, 'Of course, you know, I'm really so misunderstood. I'm not political'\".\nRiefenstahl said she was fascinated by the Nazis, but also politically naive, claiming ignorance about any war crimes. Throughout 1945 to 1948, she was held in various Allied-controlled prison camps across Germany. She was also under house arrest for a period of time. She was tried four times by postwar authorities for denazification and eventually found to be a \"fellow traveller\" (\"Mitl\u00e4ufer\") who sympathised with the Nazis. While never an official member of the Nazi party, she was always seen in association due to the propaganda films she made in Nazi Germany. Over the years, she filed and won over fifty libel cases against people who had accused her of complicity in Nazi crimes.\nRiefenstahl said that her biggest regret in life was meeting Hitler, declaring, \"It was the biggest catastrophe of my life. Until the day I die people will keep saying, 'Leni is a Nazi', and I'll keep saying, 'But what did she do?'\" Even though she went on to win up to fifty libel cases, details about her relation to the Nazi party remained unclear during her lifetime. \nShortly before she died, Riefenstahl voiced her final words on the subject of her connection to Hitler in a BBC interview: \"I was one of millions who thought Hitler had all the answers. We saw only the good things; we didn't know bad things were to come.\"\nIn October 2024, Andres Veiel and Sandra Maischberger released a documentary based on Riefenstahl's legacy document collection of 700 archive boxes.\nAfrica, photography, books and final film.\nRiefenstahl began a lifelong companionship with her cameraman Horst Kettner, who was 40 years her junior and assisted her with the photographs; they were together from the time she was 60 and he was 20.\nRiefenstahl travelled to Africa, inspired by the works of George Rodger that celebrated the ceremonial wrestling matches of the Nuba. Riefenstahl's books with photographs of the Nuba tribes were published in 1974 and republished in 1976 as \"Die Nuba\" (translated as \"The Last of the Nuba\") and \"Die Nuba von Kau\" (\"The Nuba People of Kau\"). They were harshly criticized by American writer and critic Susan Sontag, who wrote in \"The New York Review of Books\" that they were evidence of Riefenstahl's continued adherence to \"fascist aesthetics\". In this review, which art critic Hilton Kramer described as \"one of the most important inquiries into the relation of esthetics to ideology we have had in many years\", Sontag argued that:Although the Nuba are black, not Aryan, Riefenstahl's portrait of them is consistent with some of the larger themes of Nazi ideology: the contrast between the clean and the impure, the incorruptible and the defiled, the physical and the mental, the joyful and the critical. [...] What is distinctive about the fascist version of the old idea of the Noble Savage is its contempt for all that is reflective, critical, and pluralistic. [...] In celebrating a society where the exhibition of physical skill and courage and the victory of the stronger man over the weaker have, at least as she sees it, become the unifying symbol of the communal culture\u2014where success in fighting is the \"main aspiration of a man's life\"\u2014Riefenstahl seems only to have modified the ideas of her Nazi films.In December 1974, American writer and photographer Eudora Welty reviewed \"Die Nuba\" positively for the \"New York Times\", giving an impressionistic account of the aesthetics of Riefenstahl's book:She uses the light purposefully: the full, blinding brightness to make us see the all\u2010absorbing blackness of the skin; the ray of light slanting down from the single hole, high in the wall, that is the doorway of the circular house, which tells us how secret and safe it has been made; the first dawn light streaking the face of a calf in the sleeping camp where the young men go to live, which suggests their world apart. All the pictures bring us the physical beauty of the people: a young girl, shy and mischievous of face, with a bead sewn into her lower lip like a permanent cinnamon drop; a wrestler prepared for his match, with his shaven head turned to look over the massive shoulder, all skin color taken away by a coating of ashes.Art Director's Club of Germany awarded Riefenstahl a gold medal for the best photographic achievement of 1975. She also sold some of the pictures to German magazines.\nRiefenstahl photographed the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich, and rock star Mick Jagger along with his wife Bianca for \"The Sunday Times\". Years later, Riefenstahl photographed Las Vegas entertainers Siegfried &amp; Roy. She was guest of honour at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.\nIn 1978, Riefenstahl published a book of her sub-aquatic photographs called \"Koralleng\u00e4rten\" (\"Coral Gardens\"), followed by the 1990 book \"Wunder unter Wasser\" (\"Wonder under Water\"). On 22 August 2002, her 100th birthday, she released the film \"Impressionen unter Wasser\" (\"Underwater Impressions\"), an idealized documentary of life in the oceans and her first film in over 25 years. Riefenstahl was a member of Greenpeace for eight years. When filming \"Impressionen unter Wasser\", Riefenstahl lied about her age in order to be certified for scuba diving.\nRiefenstahl survived a helicopter crash in Sudan in 2000 while trying to learn the fates of her Nuba friends during the Second Sudanese Civil War, and was airlifted to a Munich hospital, where she received treatment for two broken ribs.\nDeath.\nRiefenstahl celebrated her 101st birthday on 22 August 2003 at a hotel in Feldafing, on Lake Starnberg, Bavaria, near her home. The day after her birthday celebration, she became ill.\nRiefenstahl had been diagnosed with cancer for some time, and her health rapidly deteriorated during the last weeks of her life. Kettner said in an interview in 2002, \"Ms. Riefenstahl is in great pain and she has become very weak and is taking painkillers\". Riefenstahl died in her sleep at around 10:00 pm on 8 September 2003 at her home in P\u00f6cking. After cremation, her ashes were buried in Munich Waldfriedhof.\nAfter her death, there was a varied response in the obituary pages of leading publications, although most recognized her technical breakthroughs in filmmaking.\nGisela Jahn, Leni Riefenstahl's former secretary and sole heir, donated the estate bequeathed to her to the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation. Items included photographs, films, manuscripts, letters, files, and documents dating back to the 1920s.\nReception.\nRiefenstahl claimed in her memoir that Hitler made advances on her at their first meeting in May 1932. Her press secretary Ernst Jaeger came with her to the United States in 1938, but did not return to Germany. He published \"How Riefenstahl became Hitler's girlfriend\" in the \"Hollywood Tribune\" in 1939. Trenker sold a fake version of Eva Braun's diary, which included stories of Riefenstahl dancing naked for Hitler, to the press. The book was published in French in 1948, and translated to Italian and English. Fritz Wiedemann, the personal adjutant to Hitler, stated that Riefenstahl \"was never Hitler's lover\".\nAccording to Taylor Downing, Riefenstahl's Nazi-era work \"made it acceptable, even desirable, for millions of Germans to go along with Hitler. And in promoting the Nazi leadership, there is a direct line from her infamous Nazi party films to Auschwitz and Belsen.\" Similarly, Abraham Cooper argues that Riefenstahl's work was essential to the carrying out of the mission of the Holocaust and describes her as an \"unindicted co-conspirator.\"\nFilm scholar Mark Cousins notes in his book \"The Story of Film\" that, \"Next to Orson Welles and Alfred Hitchcock, Leni Riefenstahl was the most technically talented Western film maker of her era.\"\nWhen traveling to Hollywood to showcase her film \"Olympia\" shortly after the coordinated attack on German Jews known as \"Kristallnacht\", Riefenstahl was criticized by the Non-Sectarian Anti-Nazi League and others.\nReviewer Gary Morris called Riefenstahl, \"An artist of unparalleled gifts, a woman in an industry dominated by men, one of the great formalists of the cinema on a par with Eisenstein or Welles.\"\nFilm critic Hal Erickson of \"The New York Times\" states that the \"Jewish Question\" is mainly unmentioned in \"Triumph des Willens\"; \"filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl prefers to concentrate on cheering crowds, precision marching, military bands, and Hitler's climactic speech, all orchestrated, choreographed and illuminated on a scale that makes Griffith and DeMille look like poverty-row directors.\"\nCharles Moore of \"The Daily Telegraph\" wrote, \"She was perhaps the most talented female cinema director of the 20th century; her celebration of Nazi Germany in film ensured that she was certainly the most infamous.\"\nFilm journalist Sandra Smith from \"The Independent\" remarked, \"Opinions will be divided between those who see her as a young, talented and ambitious woman caught up in the tide of events which she did not fully understand, and those who believe her to be a cold and opportunist propagandist and a Nazi by association.\"\nCritic Judith Thurman said in \"The New Yorker\" that, \"Riefenstahl's genius has rarely been questioned, even by critics who despise the service to which she lent it. Riefenstahl was a consummate stylist obsessed with bodies in motion, particularly those of dancers and athletes. Riefenstahl relies heavily for her transitions on portentous cutaways to butts, mist, statuary, foliage, and rooftops. Her reaction shots have a tedious sameness: shining, ecstatic faces\u2014nearly all young and Aryan, except for Hitler's.\"\nPauline Kael, also a film reviewer employed for \"The New Yorker\", called \"Triumph des Willens\" and \"Olympia\", \"the two greatest films ever directed by a woman\".\nWriter Richard Corliss wrote in \"Time\" that he was \"impressed by Riefenstahl's standing as a total auteur: producer, writer, director, editor and, in the fiction films, actress. The issues her films and her career raise are as complex and they are important, and her vilifiers tend to reduce the argument to one of a director's complicity in atrocity or her criminal ignorance.\"\nIn 2002, Steven Bach wrote that \"Riefenstahl disturbs because she remains the adamant, fierce, glib voice of the 'how could we have known?' defense, an argument fewer and fewer Germans, and almost none of the current generation, still feel comfortable making.\"\nFilm biographies.\nIn 1993, Riefenstahl was the subject of the award-winning German documentary film \"The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl\", directed by Ray M\u00fcller. Riefenstahl appeared in the film and answered several questions and detailed the production of her films. The biofilm was nominated for seven Emmy Awards, winning in one category. Riefenstahl, who for some time had been working on her memoirs, decided to cooperate in the production of this documentary to tell her life story about the struggles she had gone through in her personal life, her film-making career and what people thought of her. She was also the subject of M\u00fcller's 2000 documentary film \"\", about her return to Sudan to visit the Nuba people.\nIn 2000, Jodie Foster was planning a biographical drama on Riefenstahl, then seen as the last surviving member of Hitler's \"inner circle\", causing protests, with the Simon Wiesenthal Centre's dean Marvin Hier warning against a revisionist view that glorified the director, observing that Riefenstahl had seemed \"quite infatuated\" with Hitler. In 2007, British screenwriter Rupert Walters was reported to be writing a script for the movie. The project did not receive Riefenstahl's approval prior to her death, as Riefenstahl asked for a veto on any scenes to which she did not agree. Riefenstahl reportedly wanted Sharon Stone to play her rather than Foster.\nIn 2011, director Steven Soderbergh revealed that he had also been working on a biopic of Riefenstahl for about six months. He eventually abandoned the project over concerns of its commercial prospects.\nIn 2024, director Andres Veiel released a documentary titled \"Riefenstahl\". It premiered at the 81st Venice International Film Festival, and was also screened at the MAMI Mumbai Film Festival 2024.\nIn popular culture.\nRiefenstahl was portrayed by Zdena Studenkov\u00e1 in \"Leni\", a 2014 Slovak drama play about her fictional participation in \"The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson\". She was portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in \"Race\", a sports drama film directed by Stephen Hopkins about Jesse Owens. It was released in North America on 19 February 2016.\nIn the 2016 short film \"Leni. Leni.\", based on the play by Tom McNab and directed by Adrian Vitoria, Hildegard Neil portrays Riefenstahl. In 2021, she was the subject of Nigel Farndale's novel \"The Dictator's Muse\".\nAt the 2024 Venice Film Festival, the documentary \"Riefenstahl\" was launched by director Andres Veiel and produced by Sandra Maischberger. The feature points to the filmmaker's ideological affinity with Nazism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17565", "revid": "50920811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17565", "title": "Labatt Brewing Company", "text": "Belgian-owned brewery in Canada\nLabatt Brewing Company Limited () is a Anheuser-Busch InBev-owned brewery headquartered in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Founded in 1847, Labatt is the largest brewer in Canada.\nIn 1995, it was purchased by Belgian brewer Interbrew. In 2004, Interbrew merged with Brazilian brewer AmBev to form InBev. In 2008, InBev merged with American brewer Anheuser-Busch to form Anheuser-Busch InBev (abbreviated as AB InBev), making Labatt part of Anheuser-Busch InBev. On October 10, 2016, an over $100 billion merger between Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller closed. Labatt is now part of the new company, Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV, which is trading as BUD on the New York Stock Exchange (ABI:BB in Brussels).\nIn the United States, Labatt brand beers are sold under license by Labatt USA. Since 2009, it has been fully independent of the Canadian firm; it is a subsidiary of the privately held FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.\nHistory.\nLabatt Breweries was founded by John Kinder Labatt in 1847 in London, Canada West (now Ontario). Kinder had immigrated to Canada from Ireland in the 1830s and initially established himself as a farmer near London. In 1847, he invested in a brewery with a partner, Samuel Eccles, launching \"Labatt and Eccles\". When Eccles retired in 1854, Labatt acquired his interest and renamed the firm the \"London Brewery\". He was assisted by his sons Ephraim, Robert and John.\nWhen John Kinder Labatt died in 1866, his son John assumed control of the company. Under his supervision, it grew to be the largest brewery in Canada. Following his death in 1915, the company was controlled by a trust operated by his nine children, although his sons John Sackville Labatt and Hugh Francis Labatt assumed managerial control.\nIn 1901, Prohibition in Canada began through provincial legislation in Prince Edward Island. In 1916, prohibition was instituted in Ontario as well, affecting all 64 breweries in the province. Although some provinces totally banned alcohol manufacture, some permitted production for export to the United States. Labatt survived by producing full strength beer for export south of the border and by introducing two \"temperance ales\" with less than two per cent alcohol for sale in Ontario. However, the Canadian beer industry suffered a second blow when Prohibition in the United States began in 1919. When Prohibition was repealed in Ontario in 1926, just 15 breweries remained, and only Labatt retained its original management. This resulted in a strengthened industry position. In 1945, Labatt became a publicly traded company with the issuance of 900,000 shares.\nJohn and Hugh Labatt, grandsons of founder John K. Labatt, launched Labatt 50 in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership. The first light ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada's best-selling beer until 1979.\nBy the 1960s, both John S. Labatt and Hugh Labatt were deceased, and John Moore was Labatt's president, with the Labatt family holding a controlling interest. In 1964, the Schlitz brewing company of the US purchased majority control of Labatt in a friendly takeover. Their ownership of Labatt was short-lived, as Labatt's holdings in the United States along with those of Schlitz constituted an anti-trust position in California. By 1966, Schlitz sold its interest to a group led by Moore, putting it back under Canadian ownership.\nIn 1951, Labatt launched its Pilsener Lager; when it was introduced in Manitoba, the beer was nicknamed \"Blue\" for the colour of its label and the company's support of Winnipeg's Canadian Football League (CFL) franchise, the Blue Bombers. The brew-master at the time was Robert Frank Lewarne (b. 1921 Toronto; R. F. Lewarne also headed the team that produced the famous Labatt 50, mainly for the Quebec market). The new name allowed Labatt to play to their Western base while sidestepping the politics of \u201cred and white\u201d which was prominent and fueled by \u201cBritish\u201d versus \u201cCanadian\u201d nationalism in the 1960s. The nickname \"Blue\" stuck and in 1979, Labatt Blue claimed the top spot in the Canadian beer market. It lost this status in the late eighties to Molson Canadian, but over the next decade, it periodically regained the top spot as consumer preferences fluctuated. In 2004, Budweiser took the top spot, pushing Blue to third for the first time in twenty-five years. However, since Labatt has brewed Budweiser (and other Anheuser-Busch products) in Canada under licence since the 1980s, Labatt likely did not suffer from this shift. Moreover, Labatt Blue remains the best selling Canadian beer in the world, based upon worldwide sales.\nLabatt was also the majority owner of the Toronto Blue Jays from their inception in 1976 until 1995, when Interbrew purchased Labatt. In 2000, Rogers Communications purchased an 80% stake in the team and Interbrew retained the other 20%; Rogers later acquired full ownership of the team.\nLabatt's innovations include the introduction of the first twist-off cap on a refillable bottle in 1984. In 1989, Labatt had the opportunity to hire Canadian model Pamela Anderson as a Labatt's Blue Zone Girl after she was picked out of the crowd by a TV camera man at a BC Lions football game wearing a Blue Zone crop-top. Photographer and boyfriend Dann Ilicic produced the Blue Zone Girl poster on his own after Labatt's refused to have anything to do with it. Later, Labatt's did buy 1000 posters to deal with consumer demand.\nIn 1995, Labatt was acquired by the large Belgian multinational brewer Interbrew (now InBev), the world market leader. Labatt is part-owner of Brewers Retail Inc., operator of The Beer Store retail chain, which\u2014protected by legislation\u2014has over 90% market share of Ontario off-premises beer sales. \nThe company also operated its broadcasting assets through Labatt Communications, namely The Sports Network and Discovery Channel. Labbatt Communications was spun out from Labbatt to form NetStar Communications in 1995 which was owned by multiple Canadian investors and ESPN Inc.; NetStar would later be acquired outright by CTV Inc. (formerly Baton Broadcasting) in 2000, which was then sold to BCE Inc. to form Bell Globemedia, who would later renamed to CTVglobemedia and now Bell Media.\nIn early 2007, Labatt also acquired Lakeport Brewing Company of Hamilton, Ontario., Two years later, in 2009, the company sold Labatt USA, including the American rights to its core Labatt products (such as Blue, Blue Light, and Labatt 50) to FIFCO USA, and agreed to brew those brands on Labatt USA's behalf until 2012. This sale was mandated by the U.S. Department of Justice for competitive reasons following InBev's merger with Anheuser-Busch, since Budweiser and Labatt Blue were both among the top brands in upstate New York, despite the latter having less than 1% market share in the U.S. overall.\nThe sale did not include U.S. rights to Labatt products not carrying the \"Labatt\" label, such as Kokanee or Alexander Keith's, which are now distributed in the U.S. by Anheuser-Busch. Moreover, the underlying intellectual property (such as the Labatt trademarks) remains the property of the Canadian firm. Finally, the sale did not affect Labatt's Canadian operations in any way, however Anheuser-Busch InBev retains full control of the Labatt brand portfolio within Canada.\nIn 2020, Labatt acquired Canadian distiller Goodridge &amp; Williams, a company known for creating N\u00fctrl Vodka Soda and other ready-to-drink (RTD) canned cocktails.\nOperations.\n\"Canada\"\n\"United States\" (previous to sale)\nLabatt's US headquarters were originally located in Buffalo for some years. Labatt then decided to relocate their headquarters to Norwalk, Connecticut, for a time. In 2007 Labatt decided to relocate their US operations back to Buffalo due to strong sales in the city and closer proximity to their Ontario operations. Labatt USA is now owned by FIFCO USA of Rochester, New York.\nLabatt's Toronto (Rexdale) brewery was built in 1970. It ceased operations in 2005 and was demolished by 2007, thus ending the brewery's ties to the city.\nBrands.\n\"Labatt 50\" is a 5% abv ale launched in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership between the grandsons of the brewer's founder. The first light-tasting ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canada's best-selling beer until 1979, when, with the increasing popularity of lagers, it was surpassed by \"Labatt Blue\". Labatt 50 is fermented using a special ale yeast, in use at Labatt since 1933.\n\"Labatt Blue\" is a 5% abv pale lager. There are of beer in a bottle of \"Labatt Blue\". There are 355\u00a0mL of beer in a standard can of Labatt Blue/Bleue in Canada with other volumes available in specific regions of the country.\nIn Quebec, Labatt also produces a stronger lager, \"Labatt Bleue Dry\", at 6.1%.\nBlue, the company's flagship brand, has entered a number of international beer ratings competitions and has always performed notably well. In 2003, \"Labatt Blue\" received a Gold Quality Award at the World Quality Selections, organized yearly by Monde Selection.\nLabatt had patented a specific method for making ice beer in 1997, 1998 and 2000: \"A process for chill-treating, which is exemplified by a process for preparing a fermented malt beverage wherein brewing materials are mashed with water and the resulting mash is heated and wort separated therefrom. The wort is boiled, cooled and fermented, and the beer is subjected to a finishing stage, which includes aging, to produce the final beverage. The improvement comprises subjecting the beer to a cold stage comprising rapidly cooling the beer to a temperature of about its freezing point in such a manner that ice crystals are formed therein in only minimal amounts. The resulting cooled beer is then mixed for a short period of time with a beer slurry containing ice crystals, without any appreciable collateral increase in the amount of ice crystals in the resulting mixture. Finally, the so-treated beer is extracted from the mixture.\" The company provides the following explanation about \"Labatt Ice\" and \"Maximum Ice\" for the layman: \"During this unique process, the temperature is reduced until fine ice crystals form in the beer. Then using an exclusive process, the crystals are removed. The result is a full flavoured balanced beer.\"\nCorporate activities.\nLabatt has sponsored the construction of many buildings in London, including Labatt Park, the John Labatt Centre, and the John Labatt Visual Arts Centre at the University of Western Ontario (UWO). Bessie Labatt's son Arthur Labatt was the 19th chancellor of UWO (2004\u20132008). In 1998 Labatt announced a 20-year sponsorship agreement with the now defunct Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals), which included naming rights for a downtown Montreal ballpark that was never built.\nThey sponsored the English football team Nottingham Forest F.C. from 1992 (interchanging with Shipstones Brewery until 1994) to 1997.\nThey also are the official beer and corporate sponsor of the OHL hockey franchise Plymouth Whalers. In the 1950s, the company sponsored a PGA Tour golf tournament, the Labatt Open.\nLabatt sponsored Gilles Villeneuve as well as being the main sponsor of the Formula One Canadian Grand Prix from 1972 to 1986, as well as Williams F1 racing team from 1991 to 1994.\nIn 1983\u20131986, Labatt sponsored Ken Westerfield, Canadian Frisbee champion and world record holder, to perform Frisbee shows throughout Ontario, as well as sponsor the World Guts (Frisbee) Championships on Toronto Islands in 1986.\nMarketing.\nLabatt Blue is sold in all provinces of Canada; however, in Quebec it is sold under the French name Labatt Bleue, with a fleur-de-lis logo. Aside from the name, and containing 4.9% alcohol/volume instead of 5.0%, the red maple leaf on the logo has also been changed to a stylized red sheaf of wheat, which Labatt calls its symbol of \"brewing quality.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17566", "revid": "8551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17566", "title": "Lexical definition of definition", "text": ""}
{"id": "17567", "revid": "51070", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17567", "title": "Longword", "text": ""}
{"id": "17568", "revid": "16078769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17568", "title": "Local color", "text": "Local color/colour may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17570", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17570", "title": "Linear equation", "text": "Equation that does not involve powers or products of variables\nIn mathematics, a linear equation is an equation that may be put in the form\nformula_1 where formula_2 are the variables (or unknowns), and formula_3 are the coefficients, which are often real numbers. The coefficients may be considered as parameters of the equation and may be arbitrary expressions, provided they do not contain any of the variables. To yield a meaningful equation, the coefficients formula_4 are required to not all be zero.\nAlternatively, a linear equation can be obtained by equating to zero a linear polynomial over some field, from which the coefficients are taken.\nThe solutions of such an equation are the values that, when substituted for the unknowns, make the equality true.\nIn the case of just one variable, there is exactly one solution (provided that formula_5). Often, the term \"linear equation\" refers implicitly to this particular case, in which the variable is sensibly called the \"unknown\".\nIn the case of two variables, each solution may be interpreted as the Cartesian coordinates of a point of the Euclidean plane. The solutions of a linear equation form a line in the Euclidean plane, and, conversely, every line can be viewed as the set of all solutions of a linear equation in two variables. This is the origin of the term \"linear\" for describing this type of equation. More generally, the solutions of a linear equation in n variables form a hyperplane (a subspace of dimension \"n\" \u2212 1) in the Euclidean space of dimension n.\nLinear equations occur frequently in all mathematics and their applications in physics and engineering, partly because non-linear systems are often well approximated by linear equations.\nThis article considers the case of a single equation with coefficients from the field of real numbers, for which one studies the real solutions. All of its content applies to complex solutions and, more generally, to linear equations with coefficients and solutions in any field. For the case of several simultaneous linear equations, see system of linear equations.\nOne variable.\nA linear equation in one variable x can be written as formula_6 with formula_7. \nThe solution is formula_8.\nTwo variables.\nA linear equation in two variables x and y can be written as formula_9 where a and b are not both 0.\nIf a and b are real numbers, it has infinitely many solutions.\nLinear function.\nIf \"b\" \u2260 0, the equation \nformula_10\nis a linear equation in the single variable y for every value of x. It therefore has a unique solution for y, which is given by \nformula_11\nThis defines a function. The graph of this function is a line with slope formula_12 and y-intercept formula_13 The functions whose graph is a line are generally called \"linear functions\" in the context of calculus. However, in linear algebra, a linear function is a function that maps a sum to the sum of the images of the summands. So, for this definition, the above function is linear only when \"c\" = 0, that is when the line passes through the origin. To avoid confusion, the functions whose graph is an arbitrary line are often called \"affine functions\", and the linear functions such that \"c\" = 0 are often called \"linear maps\".\nGeometric interpretation.\nEach solution (\"x\", \"y\") of a linear equation\nformula_14 \nmay be viewed as the Cartesian coordinates of a point in the Euclidean plane. With this interpretation, all solutions of the equation form a line, provided that a and b are not both zero. Conversely, every line is the set of all solutions of a linear equation.\nThe phrase \"linear equation\" takes its origin in this correspondence between lines and equations: a \"linear equation\" in two variables is an equation whose solutions form a line.\nIf \"b\" \u2260 0, the line is the graph of the function of x that has been defined in the preceding section. If \"b\" = 0, the line is a \"vertical line\" (that is a line parallel to the y-axis) of equation formula_15 which is not the graph of a function of x.\nSimilarly, if \"a\" \u2260 0, the line is the graph of a function of y, and, if \"a\" = 0, one has a horizontal line of equation formula_16\nEquation of a line.\nThere are various ways of defining a line. In the following subsections, a linear equation of the line is given in each case.\nSlope\u2013intercept form or Gradient-intercept form.\nA non-vertical line can be defined by its slope m, and its y-intercept \"y\"0 (the y coordinate of its intersection with the y-axis). In this case, its \"linear equation\" can be written \nformula_17\nIf, moreover, the line is not horizontal, it can be defined by its slope and its x-intercept \"x\"0. In this case, its equation can be written\nformula_18\nor, equivalently,\nformula_19\nThese forms rely on the habit of considering a nonvertical line as the graph of a function. For a line given by an equation \nformula_20\nthese forms can be easily deduced from the relations \nformula_21\nPoint\u2013slope form or Point-gradient form.\nA non-vertical line can be defined by its slope m, and the coordinates formula_22 of any point of the line. In this case, a linear equation of the line is\nformula_23\nor \nformula_24\nThis equation can also be written\nformula_25\nto emphasize that the slope of a line can be computed from the coordinates of any two points.\nIntercept form.\nA line that is not parallel to an axis and does not pass through the origin cuts the axes into two different points. The intercept values \"x\"0 and \"y\"0 of these two points are nonzero, and an equation of the line is\nformula_26\n(It is easy to verify that the line defined by this equation has \"x\"0 and \"y\"0 as intercept values).\nTwo-point form.\nGiven two different points (\"x\"1, \"y\"1) and (\"x\"2, \"y\"2), there is exactly one line that passes through them. There are several ways to write a linear equation of this line.\nIf \"x\"1 \u2260 \"x\"2, the slope of the line is formula_27 Thus, a point-slope form is\nformula_28\nBy clearing denominators, one gets the equation \nformula_29\nwhich is valid also when \"x\"1 = \"x\"2 (to verify this, it suffices to verify that the two given points satisfy the equation).\nThis form is not symmetric in the two given points, but a symmetric form can be obtained by regrouping the constant terms:\nformula_30\n(exchanging the two points changes the sign of the left-hand side of the equation).\nDeterminant form.\nThe two-point form of the equation of a line can be expressed simply in terms of a determinant. There are two common ways for that.\nThe equation formula_31 is the result of expanding the determinant in the equation\nformula_32\nThe equation formula_33 can be obtained by expanding with respect to its first row the determinant in the equation\nformula_34\nBesides being very simple and mnemonic, this form has the advantage of being a special case of the more general equation of a hyperplane passing through n points in a space of dimension \"n\" \u2212 1. These equations rely on the condition of linear dependence of points in a projective space.\nMore than two variables.\nA linear equation with more than two variables may always be assumed to have the form\nformula_35\nThe coefficient b, often denoted \"a\"0 is called the \"constant term\" (sometimes the \"absolute term\" in old books). Depending on the context, the term \"coefficient\" can be reserved for the \"a\"\"i\" with \"i\" &gt; 0.\nWhen dealing with formula_36 variables, it is common to use formula_37 and formula_38 instead of indexed variables.\nA solution of such an equation is a n-tuple such that substituting each element of the tuple for the corresponding variable transforms the equation into a true equality.\nFor an equation to be meaningful, the coefficient of at least one variable must be non-zero. If every variable has a zero coefficient, then, as mentioned for one variable, the equation is either \"inconsistent\" (for \"b\" \u2260 0) as having no solution, or all are solutions.\nThe n-tuples that are solutions of a linear equation in are the Cartesian coordinates of the points of an (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional hyperplane in an Euclidean space (or affine space if the coefficients are complex numbers or belong to any field). In the case of three variables, this hyperplane is a plane.\nIf a linear equation is given with \"a\"\"j\" \u2260 0, then the equation can be solved for \"x\"\"j\", yielding \nformula_39\nIf the coefficients are real numbers, this defines a real-valued function of n real variables.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17571", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17571", "title": "Linear equations", "text": ""}
{"id": "17573", "revid": "4268808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17573", "title": "LMS", "text": "LMS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17575", "revid": "56299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17575", "title": "Limousine liberal", "text": "Pejorative political term\nLimousine liberal and latte liberal are pejorative U.S. political terms used to illustrate perceived hypocritical behavior by affluent liberals and other left-leaning people of upper-class or upper-middle class status. Related terms include \"champagne socialist\", \"silver-spoon socialist\", \"Mercedes Marxist\", and \"Rednobility\".\nFormation and early use.\nProcaccino campaign.\nDemocratic New York City mayoral hopeful Mario Procaccino coined the term \"limousine liberal\" to characterize incumbent mayor John Lindsay and his wealthy Manhattan backers during a heated 1969campaign. Historian David Callahan says that Procaccino:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...conjured up an acid image of hypocritical wealthy dogooders insulated from the negative fallout of their bad ideas. This theme has remained a staple of conservative attacks ever since.\u200d\nIt was a populist and producerist epithet, carrying an implicit accusation that the people it described were insulated from all negative consequences of their programs purported to benefit the poor and that the costs and consequences of such programs would be borne in the main by working-class or lower-middle class people who were not so poor as to be beneficiaries themselves. In particular, Procaccino criticized Lindsay for favoring unemployed minorities, e.g.blacks and Hispanics, over working-class white ethnics.\u200d\nOne Procaccino campaign memo criticized \"rich super-assimilated people who live on Fifth Avenue and maintain some choicemansions outside the city and have no feeling for the small middle class shopkeeper, homeowner, etc. They preach the politics of confrontation and condone violent upheaval in society because they are not touched by it and are protected by their courtiers\".\u200d \"The Independent\" later stated that \"Lindsay came across as all style and no substance, a 'limousine liberal' who knew nothing of the concerns of the same 'silent majority' that was carrying Richard Nixon to the WhiteHouse at the very same time.\"\u200d\nDesegregation.\nAfter the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against school integrationdelays in \"Alexanderv. HolmesCounty Boardof Education\", former Alabamagovernor George Wallace denounced the court's decision and called the Justices \"limousine hypocrites\".\u200d Wallace continued this line of attack when he ran for governor again in1970, as Steve Fraser notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLater use.\n\"The New York Observer\" applied the term to 2008Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards, who paid $400 for a haircut (\u200d) and, according to the newspaper, \"lectures about poverty while living in gated opulence\".\u200d\u200d\nCivil rights leader Al Sharpton used the term \"latteliberal\" to criticize (mostly white and high-income) left-leaning people \"sit[ing] around the Hamptons\" who advocated for the \"defundthe police\" movement and ignored the concerns of African-Americans that suffer under highcrime rates and rely on a strong police force.\u200d\u200d\u200d\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17576", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17576", "title": "LALR", "text": ""}
{"id": "17613", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17613", "title": "Lewis and Clark", "text": ""}
{"id": "17614", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17614", "title": "Louis and Clark Expedition", "text": ""}
{"id": "17615", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17615", "title": "Lewis and Clark Expedition", "text": "1804\u20131806 American expedition\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition, also known as the Corps of Discovery Expedition, was the United States expedition to cross the newly acquired western portion of the country after the Louisiana Purchase. The Corps of Discovery was a select group of U.S. Army and civilian volunteers under the command of Captain Meriwether Lewis and his close friend Second Lieutenant William Clark. Clark, along with 30 others, set out from Camp Dubois (Camp Wood), Illinois, on May 14, 1804, met Lewis and ten other members of the group in St. Charles, Missouri, then went up the Missouri River. The expedition crossed the Continental Divide of the Americas near the Lemhi Pass, eventually coming to the Columbia River, and the Pacific Ocean in 1805. The return voyage began on March 23, 1806, at Fort Clatsop, Oregon, ending six months later on September 23 of that year.\nPresident Thomas Jefferson commissioned the expedition, shortly after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, to explore and detail as much of the new territory as possible. Furthermore, he wished to find a practical travel route across the western half of the continent\u2014directly avoiding the hot and desolate desert southwest\u2014and to establish an American presence in the new lands before European powers attempted to establish claims of their own. The campaign's secondary objectives were scientific, economical and humanitarian, i.e., to document the West's biodiversity, topography and geography and to establish positive trade relations with (potentially unknown) Native American tribes. The expedition returned to St. Louis to report their findings to President Jefferson via maps, sketches, and various journals.\nMotivations.\nOne of Thomas Jefferson's goals was to find \"the most direct and practicable water communication across this continent, for the purposes of commerce.\" He also placed special importance on declaring US sovereignty over the land occupied by the many different Native American tribes along the Missouri River, and getting an accurate sense of the resources in the recently completed Louisiana Purchase. The expedition made notable contributions to science, but scientific research was not the main goal of the mission.\nPreparations.\nFor years, Thomas Jefferson read accounts about the adventures of various explorers on the western frontier, and, consequently, maintained a long-held interest in further exploring this mostly-unknown region of the continent. In the 1780s, while Minister to France, Jefferson met John Ledyard in Paris, where they discussed a possible trip to the Pacific Northwest. Jefferson had also read Captain James Cook's \"A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean\" (London, 1784), an account of Cook's third voyage, and Le Page du Pratz's \"The History of Louisiana\" (London, 1763), all of which greatly influenced his decision to send an expedition. Like Captain Cook, he wished to discover a practical route through the Northwest to the Pacific coast. Alexander Mackenzie had already charted a route in his quest for the Pacific, following Canada's Mackenzie River to the Arctic Ocean in 1789. Mackenzie and his party were the first non-indigenous people to cross mainland North America, north of Mexico, reaching the Pacific coast of British Columbia in 1793\u2013twelve years earlier than Lewis and Clark. Mackenzie's accounts in \"Voyages from Montreal\" (1801) informed Jefferson of Britain's intent to establish control over the lucrative fur trade of the Columbia River, convincing him of the importance of securing the territory posthaste. In Philadelphia, Israel Whelen, purveyor of public supplies, purchased necessities for the expedition with a list provided by Lewis; among the items found were 193 pounds of portable soup, 130 rolls of pigtail tobacco, 30 gallons of strong spirit of wine, a wide assortment of Native American presents, medical and surgical supplies, mosquito netting, and oilskin bags.\nTwo years into his presidency, Jefferson asked Congress to fund an expedition through the Louisiana territory to the Pacific Ocean. He did not attempt to make a secret of the Lewis and Clark expedition from Spanish, French, and British officials, but rather claimed different reasons for the venture; he used a secret message to ask for funding, due to poor relations with the opposition Federalist Party in Congress. Congress subsequently appropriated $2,324 for supplies and food, the appropriation of which was left in Lewis's charge.\nIn 1803, Jefferson commissioned the Corps of Discovery and named Army Captain Meriwether Lewis its leader, who then invited William Clark to co-lead the expedition with him. Lewis demonstrated remarkable skills and potential as a frontiersman, and Jefferson made efforts to prepare him for the long journey ahead as the expedition was gaining approval and funding. Jefferson explained his choice of Lewis:\nIt was impossible to find a character who to a complete science in botany, natural history, mineralogy &amp; astronomy, joined the firmness of constitution &amp; character, prudence, habits adapted to the woods &amp; a familiarity with the Indian manners and character, requisite for this undertaking. All the latter qualifications Capt. Lewis has.\nIn 1803, Jefferson sent Lewis to Philadelphia to study medicinal cures under Benjamin Rush, a physician and former leader in the American Revolution. He also arranged for Lewis to be further educated by Andrew Ellicott, an astronomer who instructed him in the use of a sextant, among other navigational instruments. From Benjamin Smith Barton, Lewis learned how to describe and preserve plant and animal specimens; from Robert Patterson, refinements in computing latitude and longitude, and Caspar Wistar covered fossils, and the search for possible living remnants. Lewis, however, was not ignorant of science, having demonstrated a marked capacity to learn, especially with Jefferson as his teacher. At Monticello, Jefferson possessed an enormous library on the subject of North American geography, to which Lewis had full access. He spent time consulting maps and books, as well as conferring with Jefferson.\nThe keelboat used for the first year of the journey was built near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in the summer of 1803, to Lewis's specifications, and was completed on August 31. The vessel was immediately loaded with equipment and provisions. While in Pittsburgh, Lewis bought a Newfoundland dog, Seaman, to accompany them. Newfoundlands are amicable, large working dogs and good swimmers, lovers of water and commonly found on fishing boats, as they can assist in water rescues. Seaman proved a valuable member of the party, aiding with hunting and protection from bears and other potential predators. He was the only animal to complete the entire trip.\nLewis and his crew set-sail that afternoon, traveling down the Ohio River to meet up with Clark near Louisville, Kentucky, in October 1803, at the Falls of the Ohio. Their goals were to explore the vast territory acquired by the Louisiana Purchase and to establish trade and US sovereignty over the Native Americans along the Missouri River. Jefferson also wanted to establish a US claim of \"discovery\" to the Pacific Northwest and Oregon Territory by documenting an American presence there before European nations could claim the land. According to some historians, Jefferson understood that he would have a better claim of ownership to the Pacific Northwest if the team gathered scientific data on animals and plants. However, his main objectives were centered around finding an all-water route to the Pacific coast and commerce. His instructions to the expedition stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The object of your mission is to explore the Missouri River, &amp; such principle stream of it, as, by its course and communication with the waters of the Pacific ocean, whether the Columbia, Oregon, Colorado or any other river may offer the most direct &amp; practicable water communication across this continent for the purpose of commerce.\nThe US mint prepared special silver medals with a portrait of Jefferson and inscribed with a message of friendship and peace, called Indian Peace Medals. The soldiers were to distribute them to the tribes that they met. The expedition also prepared advanced weapons to display their military firepower. Among these was an Austrian-made .46 caliber Girandoni air rifle, a repeating rifle with a 20-round tubular magazine that was powerful enough to kill a deer. The expedition was prepared with flintlock firearms, knives, blacksmithing supplies, and cartography equipment. They also carried flags, gift bundles, medicine, and other items that they would need for their journey.\nThe route of Lewis and Clark's expedition took them up the Missouri River to its headwaters, then on to the Pacific Ocean via the Columbia River, and it may have been influenced by the purported transcontinental journey of Moncacht-Ap\u00e9 by the same route about a century before. Jefferson had a copy of Le Page's book in his library detailing Moncacht-Ap\u00e9's itinerary, and Lewis carried a copy with him during the expedition. Le Page's description of Moncacht-Ap\u00e9's route across the continent neglects to mention the need to cross the Rocky Mountains, and it might be the source of Lewis and Clark's mistaken belief that they could easily carry boats from the Missouri's headwaters to the westward-flowing Columbia.\nJourney.\nDeparture.\nThe Corps of Discovery departed from Camp Dubois (Camp Wood) at 4pm on May 14, 1804. Under Clark's command, they traveled up the Missouri River in their keelboat and two pirogues to St. Charles, Missouri, where Lewis joined them six days later. The expedition set out the next afternoon, May 21. While accounts vary, it is believed the Corps had as many as 45 members, including the officers, enlisted military personnel, civilian volunteers, and York, an African American man enslaved by Clark.\nFrom St. Charles, the expedition followed the Missouri through what is now Kansas City, Missouri, and Omaha, Nebraska. On August 20, 1804, Sergeant Charles Floyd died, apparently from acute appendicitis. He had been among the first to sign up with the Corps of Discovery and was the only member to die during the expedition. He was buried at a bluff by the river, now named after him, in what is now Sioux City, Iowa. His burial site was marked with a cedar post on which was inscribed his name and day of death. up the river, the expedition camped at a small river which they named Floyd's River. During the final week of August, Lewis and Clark reached the edge of the Great Plains, a place abounding with elk, deer, bison, pronghorn, and beavers.\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition established relations with two dozen Native American nations, without whose help the group would have risked starvation during the harsh winters and/or become hopelessly lost in the vast ranges of the Rocky Mountains.\nThe Americans and the Lakota nation (whom the Americans called Sioux or \"Teton-wan Sioux\") had problems when they met, and there was a concern the two sides might clash. According to Harry W. Fritz, \"All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha tribe, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.\" The expedition held talks with the Lakota near the confluence of the Missouri and Bad Rivers in what is now Fort Pierre, South Dakota.\nOne of their horses disappeared, and they believed the Sioux were responsible. Afterward, the two sides met and there was a disagreement, and the Sioux asked the men to stay or to give more gifts (or tribute) instead, before being allowed to pass through their territory. Clark wrote they were \"warlike\" and were the \"vilest miscreants of the savage race\". They came close to blows several times, until the Lakota chief, Black Buffalo, persuaded Lewis to distribute more tobacco to the assembled warriors. Lewis complied and the expedition was allowed to continue upstream to the Arikara villages. \nIn the winter of 1804\u20131805, the party built Fort Mandan, near present-day Washburn, North Dakota. Just before departing on April 7, 1805, the expedition sent the keelboat back to St. Louis with a sample of specimens, some never-before-seen east of the Mississippi. One chief asked Lewis and Clark to provide a boat for passage through their national territory. The Americans quickly continued westward (upriver), and camped for the winter in the Mandan nation's territory.\nAfter the expedition had set-up camp, nearby tribal members came to visit in fair numbers, some staying all night. For several days, Lewis and Clark met in council with Mandan chiefs. Here they met a French-Canadian fur trapper named Toussaint Charbonneau, and his young Shoshone wife, Sacagawea. Charbonneau, at this time, began to serve as the expedition's translator. Peace was established between the expedition and the Mandan chiefs with the sharing of a Mandan ceremonial pipe. By April 25, Captain Lewis wrote his progress report of the expedition's activities and observations of the Native American nations they had encountered to-date in \"A Statistical view of the Indian nations inhabiting the Territory of Louisiana\", which outlined the names of various tribes, their locations, trading practices and water routes used, among other points. President Jefferson would later present this report to Congress.\nThey followed the Missouri to its headwaters, and over the Continental Divide at Lemhi Pass, then north to Traveler's Rest, and crossed the Bitteroots at Lolo Pass. They descended on foot, then proceeded in canoes down the Clearwater, Snake, and Columbia rivers, past Celilo Falls and present-day Portland, at the confluence of the Willamette and Columbia rivers. Lewis and Clark used William Robert Broughton's 1792 notes and maps to orient themselves once they reached the lower Columbia River. The sighting of Mount Hood and other stratovolcanos confirmed that the expedition had almost reached the Pacific Ocean.\nPacific Ocean.\nThe expedition sighted the Pacific Ocean for the first time on November 7, 1805, arriving two weeks later. The expedition faced the beginning of its second bitter winter camped on the north side of the Columbia River, in a storm-wracked area Clark called Dismal Nitch. Lack of food was a major factor. The elk, the party's main source of food, had retreated from their usual haunts into the mountains, and the party was now too poor to purchase enough food from neighboring tribes. On November 24, 1805, the majority of the party voted to move their camp to the south side of the Columbia River near modern Astoria, Oregon. Both Sacagawea and the enslaved York participated in the vote.\nOn the south side of the Columbia River, upstream on the west side of the Netul River (now Lewis and Clark River), they constructed Fort Clatsop. They did this not just for shelter and protection, but also to officially establish the American presence there, with the American flag flying over the fort. During the winter at Fort Clatsop, Lewis committed himself to writing. He filled many pages of his journals with valuable knowledge, mostly about botany, because of the abundant growth and forests that covered that part of the continent. The health of the men also became a problem, with many suffering from colds and influenza.\nKnowing that maritime fur traders sometimes visited the lower Columbia River, Lewis and Clark repeatedly asked the local Chinooks about trading ships. They learned that Captain Samuel Hill had been there in early 1805. Miscommunication caused Clark to record the name as \"Haley\". Captain Hill returned in November 1805, and anchored about from Fort Clatsop. The Chinook told Hill about Lewis and Clark, but no direct contact was made.\nA Russian maritime expedition under statesman Nikolai Rezanov arrived at the mouth of the Columbia River while Lewis and Clark were still there. Neither Rezanov nor Lewis and Clark knew about each other. Rezanov had come from \"Novo-Arkhangelsk\" (today Sitka, Alaska), intending to establish a Russian agricultural colony to help with the perennial food shortages in Russian America, and made plans for a relocation of the capital of Russian America from Sitka to the lower Columbia River. But his ship, \"Juno\", was unable to cross the Columbia Bar. So Rezanov went to California instead, setting in motion a process that eventually led to the founding of Fort Ross, California.\nReturn trip.\nLewis was determined to remain at the fort until April 1, but was still anxious to move out at the earliest opportunity. By March 22, the stormy weather had subsided and the following morning, on March 23, 1806, the journey home began. The Corps began their journey homeward using canoes to ascend the Columbia River, and later by trekking over land.\nBefore leaving, Clark gave the Chinook a letter to give to the next ship captain to visit, which was the same Captain Hill who had been nearby during the winter. Hill took the letter to Canton and had it forwarded to Thomas Jefferson, who thus received it before Lewis and Clark returned.\nThey made their way to Camp Chopunnish in Idaho, along the north bank of the Clearwater River, where the members of the expedition collected 65 horses in preparation to cross the Bitterroot Mountains, lying between modern-day Idaho and western Montana. However, the range was still covered in snow, which prevented the expedition from making the crossing. On April 11, while the Corps was waiting for the snow to diminish, Lewis's dog, Seaman, was stolen by Native Americans, but was retrieved shortly. Worried that other such acts might follow, Lewis warned the chief that any other wrongdoing or mischievous acts would result in instant death.\nOn July 3, before crossing the Continental Divide, the Corps split into two teams so Lewis could explore the Marias River. Lewis's group of four met some men from the Blackfeet nation. During the night, the Blackfeet tried to steal their weapons. In the struggle, the soldiers killed two Blackfeet men. Lewis, George Drouillard, and the Field brothers fled over in a day before they camped again.\nMeanwhile, Clark had entered the Crow tribe's territory. In the night, half of Clark's horses disappeared, but not a single Crow had been seen. Lewis and Clark stayed separated until they reached the confluence of the Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers on August 11. As the groups reunited, one of Clark's hunters, Pierre Cruzatte, mistook Lewis for an elk and fired, injuring Lewis in the thigh. Once together, the Corps was able to return home quickly via the Missouri River. They reached St. Louis on September 23, 1806.\nSpanish interference.\nIn March 1804, before the expedition began in May, the Spanish in New Mexico learned from General James Wilkinson that the Americans were encroaching on territory claimed by Spain. After the Lewis and Clark expedition set off in May, the Spanish sent four armed expeditions of 52 soldiers, mercenaries, and Native Americans on August 1, 1804, from Santa Fe, New Mexico, northward under Pedro Vial and Jos\u00e9 Jarvet to intercept Lewis and Clark and imprison the entire expedition. They reached the Pawnee settlement on the Platte River in central Nebraska and learned that the expedition had been there many days before. Vial's attempt to intercept them was unsuccessful.\nGeography and science.\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition gained an understanding of the geography of the Northwest and produced the first accurate maps of the area. During the journey, Lewis and Clark drew about 140 maps. Stephen Ambrose says the expedition \"filled in the main outlines\" of the area.\nThe expedition documented natural resources and plants that had been previously unknown to European Americans, though not to the indigenous peoples. Lewis and Clark were the first Americans to cross the Continental Divide, and the first Americans to see Yellowstone, enter into Montana, and produce an official description of these different regions. Their visit to the Pacific Northwest, maps, and proclamations of sovereignty with medals and flags were legal steps needed to claim title to each indigenous nation's lands under the discovery doctrine.\nThe expedition was sponsored by the American Philosophical Society (APS). Lewis and Clark received some instruction in astronomy, botany, climatology, ethnology, geography, meteorology, mineralogy, ornithology, and zoology. During the expedition, they made contact with over 70 Native American tribes and described more than 200 new plant and animal species.\nJefferson had the expedition declare \"sovereignty\" and demonstrate their military strength to ensure native tribes would be subordinate to the U.S., as European colonizers did elsewhere. After the expedition, the maps that were produced allowed the further discovery and settlement of this vast territory in the years that followed.\nIn 1807, Patrick Gass, a private in the U.S. Army, published an account of the journey. He was promoted to sergeant during the course of the expedition. Paul Allen edited a two-volume history of the Lewis and Clark expedition that was published in 1814, in Philadelphia, but without mention of the actual author, banker Nicholas Biddle. Even then, the complete report was not made public until more recently. The earliest authorized edition of the Lewis and Clark journals resides in the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library at the University of Montana.\nEncounters with Native Americans.\nOne of the expedition's primary objectives as directed by President Jefferson was to be a surveillance mission that would report back the whereabouts, military strength, lives, activities, and cultures of the various Native American tribes that inhabited the territory newly acquired by the United States as part of the Louisiana Purchase and the northwest in general. The expedition was to make native people understand that their lands now belonged to the United States and that \"their great father\" in Washington was now their sovereign. The expedition encountered many different native nations and tribes along the way, many of whom offered their assistance, providing the expedition with their knowledge of the wilderness and with the acquisition of food. The expedition had blank leather-bound journals and ink for the purpose of recording such encounters, as well as for scientific and geological information. They were also provided with various gifts of medals, ribbons, needles, mirrors, and other articles which were intended to ease any tensions when negotiating their passage with the various Native American chiefs whom they would encounter along their way.\nMany of the tribes had friendly experiences with British and French fur traders in various isolated encounters along the Missouri and Columbia Rivers, and for the most part the expedition did not encounter hostilities. However, there was a tense confrontation on September 25, 1804, with the Teton-Sioux tribe (also known as the Lakota people, one of the three tribes that comprise the Great Sioux Nation), under chiefs that included Black Buffalo and the Partisan. These chiefs confronted the expedition and demanded tribute from the expedition for their passage over the river. The seven native tribes that comprised the Lakota people controlled a vast inland empire and expected gifts from strangers who wished to navigate their rivers or to pass through their lands. According to Harry W. Fritz, \"All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha tribe, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners.\"\nCaptain Lewis made his first mistake by offering the Sioux chief gifts first, which insulted and angered the Partisan chief. Communication was difficult, since the expedition's only Sioux language interpreter was Pierre Dorion who had stayed behind with the other party and was also involved with diplomatic affairs with another tribe. Consequently, both chiefs were offered a few gifts, but neither was satisfied and they wanted some gifts for their warriors and tribe. At that point, some of the warriors from the Partisan tribe took hold of their boat and one of the oars. Lewis took a firm stand, ordering a display of force and presenting arms; Captain Clark brandished his sword and threatened violent reprisal. Just before the situation erupted into a violent confrontation, Black Buffalo ordered his warriors to back off.\nThe captains were able to negotiate their passage without further incident with the aid of better gifts and a bottle of whiskey. During the next two days, the expedition made camp not far from Black Buffalo's tribe. Similar incidents occurred when they tried to leave, but trouble was averted with gifts of tobacco.\nObservations.\nAs the expedition encountered the various Native American tribes during the course of their journey, they observed and recorded information regarding their lifestyles, customs and the social codes they lived by, as directed by President Jefferson. By European standards, the Native American way of life seemed harsh and unforgiving as witnessed by members of the expedition. After many encounters and camping in close proximity to the Native American nations for extended periods of time during the winter months, they soon learned first hand of their customs and social orders.\nOne of the primary customs that distinguished Native American cultures from those of the West was that it was customary for the men to take on two or more wives if they were able to provide for them and often took on a wife or wives who were members of the immediate family circle, e.g. men in the Minnetaree and Mandan tribes would often take on a sister for a wife. Chastity among women was not held in high regard. Infant daughters were often sold by the father to men who were grown, usually for horses or mules. Women in Sioux nations were often bartered away for horses or other supplies; yet this was not practiced among the Shoshone nation, who held their women in higher regard.\nThey witnessed that many of the Native American nations were constantly at war with other tribes, especially the Sioux, who, while remaining generally friendly to the white fur traders, had proudly boasted of and justified the almost complete destruction of the once great Cahokia nation, along with the Missouris, Illinois, Kaskaskia, and Piorias tribes that lived about the countryside adjacent to the upper Mississippi and Missouri rivers.\nSacagawea.\nSacagawea, sometimes spelled Sakajawea or Sakagawea (c. 1788\u00a0\u2013\u00a0December 20, 1812), was a Shoshone Native American woman who arrived with her husband and owner Toussaint Charbonneau on the expedition to the Pacific Ocean.\nOn February 11, 1805, a few weeks after her first contact with the expedition, Sacagawea went into labor which was slow and painful, so the Frenchman Charbonneau suggested she be given a potion of rattlesnake's rattle to aid in her delivery. Lewis happened to have some snake's rattle with him. A short time after administering the potion, she delivered a healthy boy who was given the name Jean Baptiste Charbonneau.\nWhen the expedition reached Marias River, on June 16, 1805, Sacagawea became dangerously ill. She was able to find some relief by drinking mineral water from the sulphur spring that fed into the river.\nThough she has been discussed in literature frequently, much of the information is exaggeration or fiction. Scholars say she did notice some geographical features, but \"Sacagawea ... was not the guide for the Expedition, she was important to them as an interpreter and in other ways.\" The sight of a woman and her infant son would have been reassuring to some indigenous nations, and she played an important role in diplomatic relations by talking to chiefs, easing tensions, and giving the impression of a peaceful mission.\nIn his writings, Meriwether Lewis presented a somewhat negative view of her, though Clark had a higher regard for her, and provided some support for her children in subsequent years. In the journals, they used the terms \"squar\" (squaw) and \"savages\" to refer to Sacagawea and other indigenous peoples.\nYork.\nAn enslaved Black man known only as York took part in the expedition as personal servant to William Clark, his enslaver. York did much to help the expedition succeed. He proved popular with the Native Americans, who had never seen a Black man. He also helped with hunting and the heavy labor of pulling boats upstream. Despite his contributions to the Corps of Discovery, Clark refused to release York from bondage upon returning east. While all the other explorers enjoyed rewards of double pay and hundreds of acres of land, York received nothing. After the end of the expedition, Clark allowed York only a brief visit to Kentucky to see his wife before forcing him to return to Missouri. It is unlikely that he ever saw his wife again: \"ten years after the expedition's end, York was still enslaved, working as a wagoner for the Clark family\". The last years of York's life are disputed. In the 1830s, a Black man who said he had first come with Lewis and Clark was living as a chief with Native Americans they met on the expedition, in modern Wyoming.\nAccomplishments.\nThe Corps met their objective of reaching the Pacific, mapping and establishing their presence for a legal claim to the land. They established diplomatic relations and trade with at least two dozen indigenous nations. They did not find a continuous waterway to the Pacific Ocean but located a Native American trail that led from the upper end of the Missouri River to the Columbia River which ran to the Pacific Ocean. They gained information about the natural habitat, flora and fauna, bringing back various plant, seed and mineral specimens. They mapped the topography of the land, designating the location of mountain ranges, rivers and the many Native American tribes during the course of their journey. They also learned and recorded much about the language and customs of the Native American tribes they encountered, and brought back many of their artifacts, including bows, clothing and ceremonial robes.\nAftermath.\nTwo months passed after the expedition's end before Jefferson made his first public statement to Congress and others, giving a one-sentence summary about the success of the expedition before getting into the justification for the expenses involved. In the course of their journey, they acquired a knowledge of numerous tribes of Native Americans hitherto unknown; they informed themselves of the trade which may be carried on with them, the best channels and positions for it, and they are enabled to give with accuracy the geography of the line they pursued. Back east, the botanical and zoological discoveries drew the intense interest of the American Philosophical Society who requested specimens, various artifacts traded with the Native Americans, and reports on plants and wildlife along with various seeds obtained. Jefferson used seeds from \"Missouri hominy corn\" along with a number of other unidentified seeds to plant at Monticello which he cultivated and studied. He later reported on the \"Indian corn\" he had grown as being an \"excellent\" food source. The expedition helped establish the U.S. presence in the newly acquired territory and beyond and opened the door to further exploration, trade and scientific discoveries.\nLewis and Clark returned from their expedition, bringing with them the Mandan Native American Chief Shehaka from the Upper Missouri to visit the \"Great Father\" in Washington. After Chief Shehaka's visit, it required multiple attempts and multiple military expeditions to safely return Shehaka to his nation.\nUpon the return from their expedition, Lewis and Clark struggled to prepare their manuscripts for publication. Clark managed to persuade Nicholas Biddle to edit the journals, which were then published in 1814 as the \"History of the Expedition Under the Commands of Captains Lewis and Clark\". However, Biddle's narrative account omitted much of the material related to their discoveries in flora and fauna. Since Biddle's account was the only printed account of the original journals for the next 90 years, many of Lewis and Clark's discoveries were later unknowingly rediscovered and given new names. It wasn't until 1904\u20131905, through the publication of \"Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition\" by Reuben Gold Thwaites, that the general public became aware of the full extent of the scientific discoveries made by the expedition.381\nDuring the 19th century, references to Lewis and Clark \"scarcely appeared\" in history books, even during the United States Centennial in 1876, and the expedition was largely forgotten. Lewis and Clark began to gain attention around the start of the 20th century. Both the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis and the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition in Portland, Oregon, showcased them as American pioneers. However, the story remained relatively shallow until mid-century as a celebration of US conquest and personal adventures, but more recently the expedition has been more thoroughly researched.\nAs of 1984, no US exploration party was more famous, and no American expedition leaders are more recognizable by name.\nIn 2004, a complete and reliable set of the expedition's journals was compiled by Gary E. Moulton. Circa 2004, the bicentennial of the expedition further elevated popular interest in Lewis and Clark.\nLegacy and honors.\nIn the 1970s, the federal government memorialized the winter assembly encampment, Camp Dubois, as the start of the Lewis and Clark voyage of discovery and in 2019 it recognized Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania as the start of the expedition.\nSince the expedition, Lewis and Clark have been commemorated and honored over the years on various coins, currency, and commemorative postage stamps, as well as in a number of other capacities. In 2004, the American elm cultivar \"Ulmus americana\" 'Lewis &amp; Clark' (selling name Prairie Expedition) was released by North Dakota State University Research Foundation in commemoration of the expedition's bicentenary; the tree has a resistance to Dutch elm disease.\nLewis and Clark County, in Montana, as well as the Lewis and Clark River in Oregon are both named after the expedition's leaders.\nThe Lewis and Clark Public School District in North Dakota is named after the pair.\nNorth Dakota state Highways 1804 and 1806 are named to reflect the years of Lewis and Clark's travels through the area, and together constitute the portion of the Lewis and Clark Trail that runs through the state.\nCampsite Lewis and Clark in Camp Sandy Beach at Yawgoog Scout Reservation in Rockville, Rhode Island also honors both explorers.\nPrior discoveries.\nIn 1682, Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle traveled down the Mississippi from the Great Lakes to the Gulf. The French then established a chain of posts along the Mississippi from New Orleans to the Great Lakes. There followed a number of French explorers including Pedro Vial and Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet, among others. Vial may have preceded Lewis and Clark to Montana. In 1787, he gave a map of the upper Missouri River and locations of \"territories transited by Pedro Vial\" to Spanish authorities.\nEarly in 1792, the American explorer Robert Gray, sailing in the \"Columbia Rediviva\", discovered the yet to be named Columbia River, named it after his ship and claimed it for the United States. Later in 1792, the Vancouver Expedition had learned of Gray's discovery and used his maps. Vancouver's expedition explored over up the Columbia, into the Columbia River Gorge. Lewis and Clark used the maps produced by these expeditions when they descended the lower Columbia to the Pacific coast.\nFrom 1792 to 1793, Alexander Mackenzie had crossed North America from Quebec to the Pacific.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17616", "revid": "8183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17616", "title": "Latitude", "text": "Geographic coordinate specifying north-south position\nIn geography, latitude is a geographic coordinate that specifies the north-south position of a point on the surface of the Earth or another celestial body. Latitude is given as an angle that ranges from \u221290\u00b0 at the south pole to 90\u00b0 at the north pole, with 0\u00b0 at the Equator. Lines of constant latitude, or \"parallels\", run east-west as circles parallel to the equator. Latitude and longitude are used together as a coordinate pair to specify a location on the surface of the Earth.\nOn its own, the term \"latitude\" normally refers to the \"geodetic latitude\" as defined below. Briefly, the geodetic latitude of a point is the angle formed between the vector perpendicular (or \"normal\") to the ellipsoidal surface from the point, and the plane of the equator.\nBackground.\nTwo levels of abstraction are employed in the definitions of latitude and longitude. In the first step the physical surface is modeled by the geoid, a surface which approximates the mean sea level over the oceans and its continuation under the land masses. The second step is to approximate the geoid by a mathematically simpler reference surface. The simplest choice for the reference surface is a sphere, but the geoid is more accurately modeled by an ellipsoid of revolution. The definitions of latitude and longitude on such reference surfaces are detailed in the following sections. Lines of constant latitude and longitude together constitute a graticule on the reference surface. The latitude of a point on the \"actual\" surface is that of the corresponding point on the reference surface, the correspondence being along the normal to the reference surface, which passes through the point on the physical surface. Latitude and longitude together with some specification of height constitute a geographic coordinate system as defined in the specification of the ISO 19111 standard.\nSince there are many different reference ellipsoids, the precise latitude of a feature on the surface is not unique: this is stressed in the ISO standard which states that \"without the full specification of the coordinate reference system, coordinates (that is latitude and longitude) are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst\". This is of great importance in accurate applications, such as a Global Positioning System (GPS), but in common usage, where high accuracy is not required, the reference ellipsoid is not usually stated.\nIn English texts, the latitude angle, defined below, is usually denoted by the Greek lower-case letter phi (\u03d5 or \u03c6). It is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds, or decimal degrees, north or south of the equator. For navigational purposes positions are given in degrees and decimal minutes. For instance, The Needles lighthouse is at 50\u00b039.734\u2032 N 001\u00b035.500\u2032 W.\nThis article relates to coordinate systems for the Earth: it may be adapted to cover the Moon, planets and other celestial objects (planetographic latitude).\nFor a brief history, see History of latitude.\nDetermination.\nIn celestial navigation, latitude is determined with the meridian altitude method.\nMore precise measurement of latitude requires an understanding of the gravitational field of the Earth, either to set up theodolites or to determine GPS satellite orbits. The study of the figure of the Earth together with its gravitational field is the science of geodesy.\nLatitude on the sphere.\nThe graticule on the sphere.\nThe graticule is formed by the lines of constant latitude and constant longitude, which are constructed with reference to the rotation axis of the Earth. The primary reference points are the poles where the axis of rotation of the Earth intersects the reference surface. Planes which contain the rotation axis intersect the surface at the meridians; and the angle between any one meridian plane and that through the Prime Meridian defines the longitude: meridians are lines of constant longitude. The plane through the centre of the Earth and perpendicular to the rotation axis intersects the surface at a great circle called the Equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The Equator has a latitude of 0\u00b0, the North Pole has a latitude of 90\u00b0 North (written 90\u00b0\u00a0N or +90\u00b0), and the South Pole has a latitude of 90\u00b0 South (written 90\u00b0\u00a0S or \u221290\u00b0). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal to the surface at that point: the normal to the surface of the sphere is along the radial vector.\nThe latitude, as defined in this way for the sphere, is often termed the spherical latitude, to avoid ambiguity with the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes defined in subsequent sections of this article.\nNamed latitudes on the Earth.\nBesides the equator, four other parallels are of significance:\nThe plane of the Earth's orbit about the Sun is called the ecliptic, and the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the Earth is the equatorial plane. The angle between the ecliptic and the equatorial plane is called variously the axial tilt, the obliquity, or the inclination of the ecliptic, and it is conventionally denoted by i. The latitude of the tropical circles is equal to i and the latitude of the polar circles is its complement (90\u00b0 - \"i\"). The axis of rotation varies slowly over time and the values given here are those for the current epoch. The time variation is discussed more fully in the article on axial tilt.\nThe figure shows the geometry of a cross-section of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and through the centres of the Earth and the Sun at the December solstice when the Sun is overhead at some point of the Tropic of Capricorn. The south polar latitudes below the Antarctic Circle are in daylight, whilst the north polar latitudes above the Arctic Circle are in night. The situation is reversed at the June solstice, when the Sun is overhead at the Tropic of Cancer. Only at latitudes in between the two tropics is it possible for the Sun to be directly overhead (at the zenith).\nOn map projections there is no universal rule as to how meridians and parallels should appear. The examples below show the named parallels (as red lines) on the commonly used Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. On the former the parallels are horizontal and the meridians are vertical, whereas on the latter there is no exact relationship of parallels and meridians with horizontal and vertical: both are complicated curves.\nLatitude on the ellipsoid.\nEllipsoids.\nIn 1687 Isaac Newton published the \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\", in which he proved that a rotating self-gravitating fluid body in equilibrium takes the form of an oblate ellipsoid. (This article uses the term \"ellipsoid\" in preference to the older term \"spheroid\".) Newton's result was confirmed by geodetic measurements in the 18th century. (See Meridian arc.) An oblate ellipsoid is the three-dimensional surface generated by the rotation of an ellipse about its shorter axis (minor axis). \"Oblate ellipsoid of revolution\" is abbreviated to 'ellipsoid' in the remainder of this article. (Ellipsoids which do not have an axis of symmetry are termed triaxial.)\nMany different reference ellipsoids have been used in the history of geodesy. In pre-satellite days they were devised to give a good fit to the geoid over the limited area of a survey but, with the advent of GPS, it has become natural to use reference ellipsoids (such as WGS84) with centre at the centre of mass of the Earth and minor axis aligned to the rotation axis of the Earth. These geocentric ellipsoids are usually within of the geoid. Since latitude is defined with respect to an ellipsoid, the position of a given point is different on each ellipsoid: one cannot exactly specify the latitude and longitude of a geographical feature without specifying the ellipsoid used. Many maps maintained by national agencies are based on older ellipsoids, so one must know how the latitude and longitude values are transformed from one ellipsoid to another. GPS handsets include software to carry out datum transformations which link WGS84 to the local reference ellipsoid with its associated grid.\nThe geometry of the ellipsoid.\nThe shape of an ellipsoid of revolution is determined by the shape of the ellipse which is rotated about its minor (shorter) axis. Two parameters are required. One is invariably the equatorial radius, which is the semi-major axis, a. The other parameter is usually (1)\u00a0the polar radius or semi-minor axis, b; or (2)\u00a0the (first) flattening, f; or (3)\u00a0the eccentricity, e. These parameters are not independent: they are related by\nformula_1\nMany other parameters (see ellipse, ellipsoid) appear in the study of geodesy, geophysics and map projections but they can all be expressed in terms of one or two members of the set a, b, f and e. Both f and e are small and often appear in series expansions in calculations; they are of the order and 0.0818 respectively. Values for a number of ellipsoids are given in Figure of the Earth. Reference ellipsoids are usually defined by the semi-major axis and the \"inverse\" flattening, . For example, the defining values for the WGS84 ellipsoid, used by all GPS devices, are\nfrom which are derived\nThe difference between the semi-major and semi-minor axes is about and as fraction of the semi-major axis it equals the flattening; on a computer monitor the ellipsoid could be sized as 300 by 299 pixels. This would barely be distinguishable from a 300-by-300-pixel sphere, so illustrations usually exaggerate the flattening.\nGeodetic and geocentric latitudes.\nThe graticule on the ellipsoid is constructed in exactly the same way as on the sphere. The normal at a point on the surface of an ellipsoid does not pass through the centre, except for points on the equator or at the poles, but the definition of latitude remains unchanged as the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The terminology for latitude must be made more precise by distinguishing:\nGeographic latitude must be used with care, as some authors use it as a synonym for geodetic latitude whilst others use it as an alternative to the astronomical latitude.\n\"Latitude\" (unqualified) should normally refer to the geodetic latitude.\nThe importance of specifying the reference datum may be illustrated by a simple example. On the reference ellipsoid for WGS84, the centre of the Eiffel Tower has a geodetic latitude of 48\u00b0\u00a051\u2032\u00a029\u2033\u00a0N, or 48.8583\u00b0\u00a0N and longitude of 2\u00b0\u00a017\u2032\u00a040\u2033\u00a0E or 2.2944\u00b0E. The same coordinates on the datum ED50 define a point on the ground which is distant from the tower. A web search may produce several different values for the latitude of the tower; the reference ellipsoid is rarely specified.\nMeridian distance.\nThe length of a degree of latitude depends on the figure of the Earth assumed.\nMeridian distance on the sphere.\nOn the sphere the normal passes through the centre and the latitude (\u03d5) is\ntherefore equal to the angle subtended at the centre by the meridian arc from the equator to the point concerned. If the meridian distance is denoted by \"m\"(\"\u03d5\") then\nformula_2\nwhere R denotes the mean radius of the Earth. R is equal to . No higher accuracy is appropriate for R since higher-precision results necessitate an ellipsoid model. With this value for R the meridian length of 1 degree of latitude on the sphere is (60.0 nautical miles). The length of one minute of latitude is (1.00 nautical miles), while the length of 1 second of latitude is (see nautical mile).\nMeridian distance on the ellipsoid.\nIn Meridian arc and standard texts it is shown that the distance along a meridian from latitude \u03d5 to the equator is given by (\u03d5 in radians)\nformula_3\nwhere \"M\"(\"\u03d5\") is the meridional radius of curvature.\nThe \"quarter meridian\" distance from the equator to the pole is\nformula_4\nFor WGS84 this distance is .\nThe evaluation of the meridian distance integral is central to many studies in geodesy and map projection. It can be evaluated by expanding the integral by the binomial series and integrating term by term: see Meridian arc for details. The length of the meridian arc between two given latitudes is given by replacing the limits of the integral by the latitudes concerned. The length of a \"small\" meridian arc is given by\nformula_5\nWhen the latitude difference is 1 degree, corresponding to radians, the arc distance is about\nformula_6\nThe distance in metres (correct to 0.01 metre) between latitudes formula_7\u00a0\u2212\u00a00.5 degrees and formula_7\u00a0+\u00a00.5 degrees on the WGS84 spheroid is\nformula_9\nThe variation of this distance with latitude (on WGS84) is shown in the table along with the length of a degree of longitude (east-west distance):\nformula_10\nA calculator for any latitude is provided by the U.S. Government's National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA).\nAuxiliary latitudes.\nThere are six auxiliary latitudes that have applications to special problems in geodesy, geophysics and the theory of map projections:\nThe definitions given in this section all relate to locations on the reference ellipsoid but the first two auxiliary latitudes, like the geodetic latitude, can be extended to define a three-dimensional geographic coordinate system as discussed below. The remaining latitudes are not used in this way; they are used \"only\" as intermediate constructs in map projections of the reference ellipsoid to the plane or in calculations of geodesics on the ellipsoid. Their numerical values are not of interest. For example, no one would need to calculate the authalic latitude of the Eiffel Tower.\nThe expressions below give the auxiliary latitudes in terms of the geodetic latitude, the semi-major axis, a, and the eccentricity, e. (For inverses see below.) The forms given are, apart from notational variants, those in the standard reference for map projections, namely \"Map projections: a working manual\" by J. P. Snyder. Derivations of these expressions may be found in Adams and online publications by Osborne and Rapp.\nGeocentric latitude.\nThe geocentric latitude is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius from the centre to a point of interest.\nWhen the point is on the surface of the ellipsoid, the relation between the geocentric latitude (\u03b8) and the geodetic latitude (\u03d5) is:\nformula_11\nFor points not on the surface of the ellipsoid, the relationship involves additionally the ellipsoidal height \"h\":\n formula_12\nwhere N is the prime vertical radius of curvature. The geodetic and geocentric latitudes are equal at the equator and at the poles but at other latitudes they differ by a few minutes of arc. Taking the value of the squared eccentricity as 0.0067 (it depends on the choice of ellipsoid) the maximum difference of formula_13 may be shown to be about 11.5 minutes of arc at a geodetic latitude of approximately 45\u00b0\u00a06\u2032.\nParametric latitude (or reduced latitude).\nThe parametric latitude or reduced latitude, \u03b2, is defined by the radius drawn from the centre of the ellipsoid to that point Q on the surrounding sphere (of radius a) which is the projection parallel to the Earth's axis of a point P on the ellipsoid at latitude \u03d5. It was introduced by Legendre and Bessel who solved problems for geodesics on the ellipsoid by transforming them to an equivalent problem for spherical geodesics by using this smaller latitude. Bessel's notation, \"u\"(\"\u03d5\"), is also used in the current literature. The parametric latitude is related to the geodetic latitude by:\nformula_14\nThe alternative name arises from the parameterization of the equation of the ellipse describing a meridian section. In terms of Cartesian coordinates p, the distance from the minor axis, and z, the distance above the equatorial plane, the equation of the ellipse is:\nformula_15\nThe Cartesian coordinates of the point are parameterized by\nformula_16\nCayley suggested the term \"parametric latitude\" because of the form of these equations.\nThe parametric latitude is not used in the theory of map projections. Its most important application is in the theory of ellipsoid geodesics, (Vincenty, Karney).\nRectifying latitude.\nThe rectifying latitude, \u03bc, is the meridian distance scaled so that its value at the poles is equal to 90 degrees or radians:\nformula_17\nwhere the meridian distance from the equator to a latitude \u03d5 is (see Meridian arc)\nformula_18\nand the length of the meridian quadrant from the equator to the pole (the polar distance) is\nformula_19\nUsing the rectifying latitude to define a latitude on a sphere of radius\nformula_20\ndefines a projection from the ellipsoid to the sphere such that all meridians have true length and uniform scale. The sphere may then be projected to the plane with an equirectangular projection to give a double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane such that all meridians have true length and uniform meridian scale. An example of the use of the rectifying latitude is the equidistant conic projection. (Snyder, Section 16). The rectifying latitude is also of great importance in the construction of the Transverse Mercator projection.\nAuthalic latitude.\nThe authalic latitude (after the Greek for \"same area\"), \u03be, gives an equal-area projection to a sphere.\nformula_21\nwhere\nformula_22\nand\nformula_23\nand the radius of the sphere is taken as\nformula_24\nAn example of the use of the authalic latitude is the Albers equal-area conic projection.\nConformal latitude.\nThe conformal latitude, \u03c7, gives an angle-preserving (conformal) transformation to the sphere.\nformula_25\nwhere gd(\"x\") is the Gudermannian function. (See also Mercator projection.)\nThe conformal latitude defines a transformation from the ellipsoid to a sphere of \"arbitrary\" radius such that the angle of intersection between any two lines on the ellipsoid is the same as the corresponding angle on the sphere (so that the shape of \"small\" elements is well preserved). A further conformal transformation from the sphere to the plane gives a conformal double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane. This is not the only way of generating such a conformal projection. For example, the 'exact' version of the Transverse Mercator projection on the ellipsoid is not a double projection. (It does, however, involve a generalisation of the conformal latitude to the complex plane).\nIsometric latitude.\nThe isometric latitude, \u03c8, is used in the development of the ellipsoidal versions of the normal Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. The name \"isometric\" arises from the fact that at any point on the ellipsoid equal increments of \u03c8 and longitude \u03bb give rise to equal distance displacements along the meridians and parallels respectively. The graticule defined by the lines of constant \u03c8 and constant \u03bb, divides the surface of the ellipsoid into a mesh of squares (of varying size). The isometric latitude is zero at the equator but rapidly diverges from the geodetic latitude, tending to infinity at the poles. The conventional notation is given in Snyder (page 15):\nformula_26\nFor the \"normal\" Mercator projection (on the ellipsoid) this function defines the spacing of the parallels: if the length of the equator on the projection is E (units of length or pixels) then the distance, y, of a parallel of latitude \u03d5 from the equator is\nformula_27\nThe isometric latitude \u03c8 is closely related to the conformal latitude \u03c7:\nformula_28\nInverse formulae and series.\nThe formulae in the previous sections give the auxiliary latitude in terms of the geodetic latitude. The expressions for the geocentric and parametric latitudes may be inverted directly but this is impossible in the four remaining cases: the rectifying, authalic, conformal, and isometric latitudes. There are two methods of proceeding.\n (\"a\" - \"b\")/(\"a\" + \"b\"). Karney establishes that the truncation errors for such series are consistently smaller that the equivalent series in terms of the eccentricity. The series method is not applicable to the isometric latitude and one must find the conformal latitude in an intermediate step.\nNumerical comparison of auxiliary latitudes.\nThe plot to the right shows the difference between the geodetic latitude and the auxiliary latitudes other than the isometric latitude (which diverges to infinity at the poles) for the case of the WGS84 ellipsoid. The differences shown on the plot are in arc minutes. \nIn the Northern hemisphere (positive latitudes), \"\u03b8\" \u2264 \"\u03c7\" \u2264 \"\u03bc\" \u2264 \"\u03be\" \u2264 \"\u03b2\" \u2264 \"\u03d5\"; in the Southern hemisphere (negative latitudes), the inequalities are reversed, with equality at the equator and the poles. Although the graph appears symmetric about 45\u00b0, the minima of the curves actually lie between 45\u00b0 2\u2032 and 45\u00b0 6\u2032. Some representative data points are given in the table below. The conformal and geocentric latitudes are nearly indistinguishable, a fact that was exploited in the days of hand calculators to expedite the construction of map projections.\nTo first order in the flattening \"f\", the auxiliary latitudes can be expressed as\n\"\u03b6\" = \"\u03d5\" \u2212 \"Cf\" sin 2\"\u03d5\"\nwhere the constant \"C\" takes on the values\n[&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444, 1, 1]\nfor\n\"\u03b6\" = [\"\u03b2\", \"\u03be\", \"\u03bc\", \"\u03c7\", \"\u03b8\"].\nLatitude and coordinate systems.\nThe geodetic latitude, or any of the auxiliary latitudes defined on the reference ellipsoid, constitutes with longitude a two-dimensional coordinate system on that ellipsoid. To define the position of an arbitrary point it is necessary to extend such a coordinate system into three dimensions. Three latitudes are used in this way: the geodetic, geocentric and parametric latitudes are used in geodetic coordinates, spherical polar coordinates and ellipsoidal coordinates respectively.\nGeodetic coordinates.\nAt an arbitrary point P consider the line PN which is normal to the reference ellipsoid. The geodetic coordinates P(\"\u0278\",\"\u03bb\",\"h\") are the latitude and longitude of the point N on the ellipsoid and the distance PN. This height differs from the height above the geoid or a reference height such as that above mean sea level at a specified location. The direction of PN will also differ from the direction of a vertical plumb line. The relation of these different heights requires knowledge of the shape of the geoid and also the gravity field of the Earth.\nSpherical polar coordinates.\nThe geocentric latitude \u03b8 is the complement of the \"polar angle\" or \"colatitude\" \u03b8\u2032 in conventional spherical polar coordinates in which the coordinates of a point are P(\"r\",\"\u03b8\"\u2032,\"\u03bb\") where r is the distance of P from the centre O, \u03b8\u2032 is the angle between the radius vector and the polar axis and \u03bb is longitude. Since the normal at a general point on the ellipsoid does not pass through the centre it is clear that points P' on the normal, which all have the same geodetic latitude, will have differing geocentric latitudes. Spherical polar coordinate systems are used in the analysis of the gravity field.\nEllipsoidal-harmonic coordinates.\nThe parametric latitude can also be extended to a three-dimensional coordinate system. For a point P not on the reference ellipsoid (semi-axes OA and OB) construct an auxiliary ellipsoid which is confocal (same foci F, F\u2032) with the reference ellipsoid: the necessary condition is that the product ae of semi-major axis and eccentricity is the same for both ellipsoids. Let u be the semi-minor axis (OD) of the auxiliary ellipsoid. Further let \u03b2 be the parametric latitude of P on the auxiliary ellipsoid. The set (\"u\",\"\u03b2\",\"\u03bb\") define the ellipsoidal-harmonic coordinates or simply \"ellipsoidal coordinates\" (although that term is also used to refer to geodetic coordinate). These coordinates are the natural choice in models of the gravity field for a rotating ellipsoidal body.\nThe above applies to a biaxial ellipsoid (a spheroid, as in oblate spheroidal coordinates); for a generalization, see triaxial ellipsoidal coordinates.\nCoordinate conversions.\nThe relations between the above coordinate systems, and also Cartesian coordinates are not presented here. The transformation between geodetic and Cartesian coordinates may be found in geographic coordinate conversion. The relation of Cartesian and spherical polars is given in spherical coordinate system. The relation of Cartesian and ellipsoidal coordinates is discussed in Torge.\nAstronomical latitude.\nAstronomical latitude (\u03a6) is the angle between the equatorial plane and the true vertical direction at a point on the surface. The true vertical, the direction of a plumb line, is also the gravity direction (the resultant of the gravitational acceleration (mass-based) and the centrifugal acceleration) at that latitude. Astronomic latitude is calculated from angles measured between the zenith and stars whose declination is accurately known.\nIn general the true vertical at a point on the surface does not exactly coincide with either the normal to the reference ellipsoid or the normal to the geoid. The geoid is an idealized, theoretical shape \"at mean sea level\". Points on land do not lie precisely on the geoid, and the vertical at a point at a specific time is influenced by tidal forces which the theoretical geoid averages out. The angle between the astronomic and geodetic normals is called \"vertical deflection\" and is usually a few seconds of arc but it is important in geodesy.\nAstronomical latitude is not to be confused with declination, the coordinate astronomers use in a similar way to specify the angular position of stars north-south of the celestial equator (see equatorial coordinates), nor with ecliptic latitude, the coordinate that astronomers use to specify the angular position of stars north-south of the ecliptic (see ecliptic coordinates).\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17617", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17617", "title": "Longitude", "text": "Geographic coordinate that specifies the east-west position of a point on the Earth's surface\nLongitude (, AU and UK also ) is a geographic coordinate that specifies the east-west position of a point on the surface of the Earth, or another celestial body. It is an angular measurement, usually expressed in degrees and denoted by the Greek letter lambda (\u03bb). Meridians are imaginary semicircular lines running from pole to pole that connect points with the same longitude. The prime meridian defines 0\u00b0 longitude; by convention the International Reference Meridian for the Earth passes near the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, south-east London on the island of Great Britain. Positive longitudes are east of the prime meridian, and negative ones are west.\nBecause of the Earth's rotation, there is a close connection between longitude and time measurement. Scientifically precise local time varies with longitude: a difference of 15\u00b0 longitude corresponds to a one-hour difference in local time, due to the differing position in relation to the Sun. Comparing local time to an absolute measure of time allows longitude to be determined. Depending on the era, the absolute time might be obtained from a celestial event visible from both locations, such as a lunar eclipse, or from a time signal transmitted by telegraph or radio. The principle is straightforward, but in practice finding a reliable method of determining longitude took centuries and required the effort of some of the greatest scientific minds.\nA location's north-south position along a meridian is given by its \"latitude\", which is approximately the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal from the ground at that location.\nLongitude is generally given using the geodetic normal or the gravity direction. The astronomical longitude can differ slightly from the ordinary longitude because of \"vertical deflection\", small variations in Earth's gravitational field (see astronomical latitude).\nHistory.\nThe concept of longitude was first developed by ancient Greek astronomers. Hipparchus (2nd century BC) used a coordinate system that assumed a spherical Earth, and divided it into 360\u00b0 as is still done today. His prime meridian passed through Alexandria. He also proposed a method of determining longitude by comparing the local time of a lunar eclipse at two different places, thus demonstrating an understanding of the relationship between longitude and time.11 Claudius Ptolemy (2nd century AD) developed a mapping system using curved parallels that reduced distortion. He also collected data for many locations, from Britain to the Middle East. He used a prime meridian through the Canary Islands, so that all longitude values would be positive. While Ptolemy's system was sound, the data he used were often poor, leading to a gross over-estimate (by about 70%) of the length of the Mediterranean.\nAfter the fall of the Roman Empire, interest in geography greatly declined in Europe. Hindu and Muslim astronomers continued to develop these ideas, adding many new locations and often improving on Ptolemy's data. For example, al-Batt\u0101n\u012b used simultaneous observations of two lunar eclipses to determine the difference in longitude between Antakya and Raqqa with an error of less than 1\u00b0. This is considered to be the best that can be achieved with the methods then available: observation of the eclipse with the naked eye, and determination of local time using an astrolabe to measure the altitude of a suitable \"clock star\".\nIn the later Middle Ages, interest in geography revived in the west, as travel increased, and Arab scholarship began to be known through contact with Spain and North Africa. In the 12th century, astronomical tables were prepared for a number of European cities, based on the work of al-Zarq\u0101l\u012b in Toledo. The lunar eclipse of September 12, 1178 was used to establish the longitude differences between Toledo, Marseilles, and Hereford.\nChristopher Columbus made two attempts to use lunar eclipses to discover his longitude, the first in Saona Island, on 14 September 1494 (second voyage), and the second in Jamaica on 29 February 1504 (fourth voyage). It is assumed that he used astronomical tables for reference. His determinations of longitude showed large errors of 13\u00b0 and 38\u00b0 W respectively. Randles (1985) documents longitude measurement by the Portuguese and Spanish between 1514 and 1627 both in the Americas and Asia. Errors ranged from 2\u00b0 to 25\u00b0.\nThe telescope was invented in the early 17th century. Initially an observation device, developments over the next half century transformed it into an accurate measurement tool. The pendulum clock was patented by Christiaan Huygens in 1657 and gave an increase in accuracy of about 30 fold over previous mechanical clocks. These two inventions would revolutionise observational astronomy and cartography.\nOn land, the period from the development of telescopes and pendulum clocks until the mid-18th century saw a steady increase in the number of places whose longitude had been determined with reasonable accuracy, often with errors of less than a degree, and nearly always within 2\u00b0 to 3\u00b0. By the 1720s errors were consistently less than 1\u00b0. At sea during the same period, the situation was very different. Two problems proved intractable; the first was the need of a navigator for immediate results, and the second was the marine environment. Making accurate observations in an ocean swell is much harder than on land, and pendulum clocks do not work well in these conditions.\nThe Chronometer.\nIn response to the problems of navigation, a number of European maritime powers offered prizes for a method to determine longitude at sea. The best-known of these is the Longitude Act passed by the British parliament in 1714. It offered two levels of rewards, for solutions within 1\u00b0 and 0.5\u00b0. Rewards were given for two solutions: lunar distances, made practicable by the tables of Tobias Mayer developed into a nautical almanac by the Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne; and for the chronometers developed by the Yorkshire carpenter and clock-maker John Harrison. Harrison built five chronometers over more than three decades. This work was supported and rewarded with thousands of pounds from the Board of Longitude, but he fought to receive money up to the top reward of \u00a320,000, finally receiving an additional payment in 1773 after the intervention of Parliament.26 It was some while before either method became widely used in navigation. In the early years, chronometers were very expensive, and the calculations required for lunar distances were still complex and time-consuming. Lunar distances came into general use after 1790. Chronometers had the advantages that both the observations and the calculations were simpler, and as they became cheaper in the early 19th century they started to replace lunars, which were seldom used after 1850.\nThe first working telegraphs were established in Britain by Wheatstone and Cooke in 1839, and in the US by Morse in 1844. It was quickly realised that the telegraph could be used to transmit a time signal for longitude determination. The method was soon in practical use for longitude determination, especially in North America, and over longer and longer distances as the telegraph network expanded, including western Europe with the completion of transatlantic cables. The United States Coast Survey, renamed the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in 1878, was particularly active in this development, and not just in the United States. The Survey established chains of mapped locations through Central and South America, and the West Indies, and as far as Japan and China in the years 1874\u201390. This contributed greatly to the accurate mapping of these areas.\nWhile mariners benefited from the accurate charts, they could not receive telegraph signals while under way, and so could not use the method for navigation. This changed when wireless telegraphy (radio) became available in the early 20th century. Wireless time signals for the use of ships were transmitted from Halifax, Nova Scotia, starting in 1907 and from the Eiffel Tower in Paris from 1910. These signals allowed navigators to check and adjust their chronometers frequently.\nRadio navigation systems came into general use after World War II. The systems all depended on transmissions from fixed navigational beacons. A ship-board receiver calculated the vessel's position from these transmissions. They allowed accurate navigation when poor visibility prevented astronomical observations, and became the established method for commercial shipping until replaced by GPS in the early 1990s.\nDetermination.\nThe main conventional methods for determining longitude are listed below. With one exception (magnetic declination), they all depend on a common principle, which is to determine the time for an event or measurement and to compare it with the time at a different location. Longitude, being up to 180\u00b0 east or west of a prime meridian, is mathematically related to time differences up to 12 hours by a factor of 15. Thus, a time differential (in hours) between two points is multiplied by 15 to obtain a longitudinal difference (in degrees).\nHistorically, times used for calculating longitude have included apparent solar time, local mean time, and ephemeris time, with mean time being the one most used for navigation of the sea. See also the equation of time for details on the differences.\nWith the exception of magnetic declination, all proved practicable methods. Developments on land and sea, however, were very different.\nSeveral newer methods for navigation, location finding, and the determination of longitude exist. Radio navigation, satellite navigation, and Inertial navigation systems, along with celestial navigation, are a few of the more prevalent ones.\nValues.\nLongitude is given as an angular measurement with 0\u00b0 at the Prime Meridian, ranging from \u2212180\u00b0 westward to +180\u00b0 eastward. The Greek letter \u03bb (lambda) is used to denote the location of a place on Earth east or west of the Prime Meridian.\nEach degree of longitude is sub-divided into 60 minutes, each of which is divided into 60 seconds. A longitude is thus specified in sexagesimal notation as, for example, 23\u00b0\u00a027\u2032\u00a030\u2033\u00a0E. For higher precision, the seconds are specified with a decimal fraction. An alternative representation uses degrees and minutes, and parts of a minute are expressed in decimal notation, thus: 23\u00b0\u00a027.5\u2032\u00a0E. Degrees may also be expressed as a decimal fraction: 23.45833\u00b0\u00a0E. For calculations, the angular measure may be converted to radians, so longitude may also be expressed in this manner as a signed fraction of \u03c0 (pi), or an unsigned fraction of 2\u03c0.\nFor calculations, the west/east suffix is replaced by a negative sign in the Western Hemisphere. The international standard convention (ISO 6709)\u2014that east is positive\u2014is consistent with a right-handed Cartesian coordinate system, with the North Pole up. A specific longitude may then be combined with a specific latitude (positive in the Northern Hemisphere) to give a precise position on the Earth's surface. Confusingly, the convention of negative for east is also sometimes seen, most commonly in the United States; the Earth System Research Laboratories used it on an older version of one of their pages, in order \"to make coordinate entry less awkward\" for applications confined to the Western Hemisphere. They have since shifted to the standard approach.\nThe longitude is singular at the Poles and calculations that are sufficiently accurate for other positions may be inaccurate at or near the Poles. Also the discontinuity at the \u00b1180\u00b0 meridian must be handled with care in calculations. An example is a calculation of east displacement by subtracting two longitudes, which gives the wrong answer if the two positions are on either side of this meridian. To avoid these complexities, some applications use another horizontal position representation.\nLength of a degree of longitude.\nThe length of a degree of longitude (east\u2013west distance) depends only on the radius of a circle of latitude. For a sphere of radius a that radius at latitude \u03c6 is \"a\" cos \"\u03c6\", and the length of a one-degree (or radian) arc along a circle of latitude is\nformula_1\nWhen the Earth is modelled by an ellipsoid this arc length becomes\nformula_2\nwhere e, the eccentricity of the ellipsoid, is related to the major and minor axes (the equatorial and polar radii respectively) by\nformula_3\nAn alternative formula is\nformula_4\nHere formula_5 is the so-called \"parametric\" or \"reduced\" latitude.\ncos \u03c6 decreases from 1 at the equator to 0 at the poles, which measures how circles of latitude shrink from the equator to a point at the pole, so the length of a degree of longitude decreases likewise. This contrasts with the small (1%) increase in the length of a degree of latitude (north\u2013south distance), equator to pole. The table shows both for the WGS84 ellipsoid with a = and b = . The distance between two points 1 degree apart on the same circle of latitude, measured along that circle of latitude, is slightly more than the shortest (geodesic) distance between those points (unless on the equator, where these are equal); the difference is less than .\nA geographical mile is defined as the length of one minute of arc along the equator (one equatorial minute of longitude) therefore a degree of longitude along the equator is exactly 60 geographical miles or 111.3 kilometers, as there are 60 minutes in a degree. The length of 1 minute of longitude along the equator is 1 geographical mile or , while the length of 1 second of it is 0.016 geographical mile or .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17618", "revid": "44555953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17618", "title": "Linus Torvalds", "text": "Finnish and American software engineer\nLinus Benedict Torvalds (born 28 December 1969) is a Finnish and American software engineer who is the creator and lead developer of the Linux kernel. He also created the distributed version control system Git.\nHe was one of the recipients of the 2012 Millennium Technology Prize \"in recognition of his creation of a new open source operating system for computers leading to the widely used Linux kernel\". He is also the recipient of the 2014 IEEE Computer Society Computer Pioneer Award and the 2018 IEEE Masaru Ibuka Consumer Electronics Award.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nTorvalds was born in Helsinki, Finland, on 28 December 1969, the son of journalists Anna and Nils Torvalds, the grandson of statistician Leo T\u00f6rnqvist and of poet Ole Torvalds, and the great-grandson of journalist and soldier Toivo Karanko. His parents were campus radicals at the University of Helsinki in the 1960s. His family belongs to the Swedish-speaking minority in Finland. He was named after Linus Pauling, the Nobel Prize\u2013winning American chemist, although in the book \"Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution\", he is quoted as saying, \"I think I was named equally for Linus the \"Peanuts\" cartoon character\", noting that this made him \"half Nobel Prize\u2013winning chemist and half blanket-carrying cartoon character\".\nHis interest in computers began with a VIC-20 at the age of 11 in 1981. He started programming for it in BASIC, then later by directly accessing the 6502 CPU in machine code (he did not utilize assembly language). He then purchased a Sinclair QL, which he modified extensively, especially its operating system. \"Because it was so hard to get software for it in Finland\", he wrote his own assembler and \"(in addition to Pac-Man graphics libraries)\" for the QL, and a few games. He wrote a \"Pac-Man\" clone, \"Cool Man\".\nTorvalds attended the University of Helsinki from 1988 to 1996, graduating with a master's degree in computer science from the NODES research group. His academic career was interrupted after his first year of study when he joined the Finnish Navy Nyland Brigade in the summer of 1989, selecting the 11-month officer training program to fulfill the mandatory military service of Finland. He gained the rank of second lieutenant, with the role of an artillery observer.\nIn 1990, Torvalds resumed his university studies, and was exposed to Unix for the first time in the form of a DEC MicroVAX running ULTRIX. Later, he bought computer science professor Andrew Tanenbaum's book \"\", in which Tanenbaum describes MINIX, an educational stripped-down version of Unix.\nOn 5 January 1991 he purchased an Intel 80386-based IBM PC clone before receiving a copy of MINIX, which in turn enabled him to begin work on Linux.\nLinux.\nThe first Linux prototypes were publicly released on the Internet in late 1991 from an FTP server at his university. Version 1.0 was released on 14 March 1994.\nTorvalds first encountered the GNU Project in the autumn of 1991 when another Swedish-speaking computer science student, Lars Wirzenius, took him to the University of Technology to listen to free-software guru Richard Stallman's speech. Because of the talk and pressure from other contributors, Torvalds would ultimately switch his original license (which forbade commercial use) to Stallman's GNU General Public License version 2 (GPLv2) for his Linux kernel.\nAfter a visit to Transmeta in late 1996, Torvalds accepted a position at the company in California, where he worked from February 1997 to June 2003. He then moved to the Open Source Development Labs, which has since merged with the Free Standards Group to become the Linux Foundation, under whose auspices he continues to work. In June 2004, Torvalds and his family moved to Dunthorpe, Oregon to be closer to the OSDL's headquarters in Beaverton.\nFrom 1997 to 1999, he was involved in 86open, helping select the standard binary format for Linux and Unix. In 1999, he was named by the \"MIT Technology Review\" TR100 as one of the world's top 100 innovators under age 35.\nIn 1999, Red Hat and VA Linux, both leading developers of Linux-based software, presented Torvalds with stock options in gratitude for his creation. That year both companies went public and Torvalds's share value briefly shot up to about US$20\u00a0million.\nHis personal mascot is a penguin nicknamed Tux, which has been widely adopted by the Linux community as the Linux kernel's mascot.\nAlthough Torvalds believes \"open source is the only right way to do software\", he also has said that he uses the \"best tool for the job\", even if that includes proprietary software. He was criticized for his use and alleged advocacy of the proprietary BitKeeper software for version control in the Linux kernel. He subsequently wrote a free-software replacement for it called Git.\nIn 2008, Torvalds stated that he used the Fedora Linux distribution because it had fairly good support for the PowerPC processor architecture, which he favored at the time. He confirmed this in a 2012 interview. Torvalds abandoned GNOME for a while after the release of GNOME 3.0, saying, \"The developers have apparently decided that it's 'too complicated' to actually do real work on your desktop, and have decided to make it really annoying to do\". He then switched to Xfce. In 2013, Torvalds resumed using GNOME, noting that \"they have extensions now that are still much too hard to find; but with extensions you can make your desktop look almost as good as it used to look two years ago\".\nThe Linux Foundation currently sponsors Torvalds so he can work full-time on improving Linux.\nIn 2012, while giving a talk at Aalto University, Torvalds said \"fuck you\" and raised his middle finger after criticizing the company Nvidia, which specializes in GPU technology. He said Nvidia was, at the time, the single worst company he has dealt with in the development of the kernel. In the talk, he also discussed other elements of computing.\nTorvalds is known for vocally disagreeing with other developers on the Linux kernel mailing list. Calling himself a \"really unpleasant person\", he explained, \"I'd like to be a nice person and curse less and encourage people to grow rather than telling them they are idiots. I'm sorry\u2014I tried, it's just not in me.\" His attitude, which he considers necessary for making his points clear, has drawn criticism from Intel programmer Sage Sharp and systemd developer Lennart Poettering, among others.\nOn Sunday, 16 September 2018, the Linux kernel \"Code of Conflict\" was suddenly replaced by a new \"Code of Conduct\" based on the Contributor Covenant. Shortly thereafter, in the release notes for Linux 4.19-rc4, Torvalds apologized for his behavior, calling his personal attacks of the past \"unprofessional and uncalled for\" and announced a period of \"time off\" to \"get some assistance on how to understand people's emotions and respond appropriately\". It soon transpired that these events followed \"The New Yorker\" approaching Torvalds with a series of questions critical of his conduct. Following the release of Linux 4.19 on 22 October 2018, Torvalds returned to maintaining the kernel.\nIn 2024, amidst the Russian invasion of Ukraine, some developers were excluded from the list of Linux kernel maintainers, seemingly over being Russian or using Russian email addresses. Torvalds commented: \"I'm Finnish. Did you think I'd be supporting Russian aggression?\". Some developers, along with a part of Linux users, noted the lack of public clarity about that move. Later Torvalds claimed that he acted according to government compliance requirements and due to legal issues around Russia.\nThe Linus/Linux connection.\nInitially, Torvalds wanted to call the kernel he developed \"Freax\" (a combination of \"free\", \"freak\", and the letter X to indicate that it was a Unix-like system), but his friend Ari Lemmke, who administered the FTP server where the kernel was first hosted, named Torvalds' directory \"linux\".\nAuthority and trademark.\nAs of 2006, approximately 2% of the Linux kernel was written by Torvalds. Despite the thousands who have contributed to it, his percentage is still one of the largest. However, he said in 2012 that his own personal contribution is now mostly merging code written by others, with little programming. He retains the highest authority to decide which new code is incorporated into the standard Linux kernel.\nTorvalds holds the \"Linux\" trademark and monitors its use, chiefly through the Linux Mark Institute.\nOther software.\nGit.\nOn 3 April 2005, Torvalds began development on Git, version control software that later became widely used. \nSubsurface.\nSubsurface is software for logging and planning scuba dives, which Torvalds began developing in late 2011. It is free and open-source software distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2. Dirk Hohndel became its head maintainer in late 2012.\nSparse.\nSparse is a static analysis tool that flags constructs that are likely to be of interest to kernel developers, such as the mixing of pointers to user and kernel address spaces.\nPersonal life.\nLinus Torvalds is married to Tove Torvalds (n\u00e9e Monni), a six-time Finnish national karate champion, whom he met in late 1993. He was running introductory computer laboratory exercises for students and instructed the course attendees to send him an e-mail as a test, to which Tove responded with an e-mail asking for a date. They were later married and have three daughters, two of whom were born in the United States. The Linux kernel's \"reboot\" system call accepts their dates of birth (written in hexadecimal) as magic values.\nTorvalds has described himself as \"completely a-religious\u2014atheist\", adding, \"I find that people seem to think religion brings morals and appreciation of nature. I actually think it detracts from both. It gives people the excuse to say, 'Oh, nature was just created,' and so the act of creation is seen to be something miraculous. I appreciate the fact that, 'Wow, it's incredible that something like this could have happened in the first place.'\" He later added that while in Europe religion is mostly a personal issue, in the United States it has become very politicized. When discussing the issue of church and state separation, he said, \"Yeah, it's kind of ironic that in many European countries, there is actually a kind of legal binding between the state and the state religion.\" In \"Linus the Liberator\", a story about the March LinuxWorld Conference, Torvalds says: \"There are like two golden rules in life. One is 'Do unto others as you would want them to do unto you.' For some reason, people associate this with Christianity. I'm not a Christian. I'm agnostic. The other rule is 'Be proud of what you do.'\"\nIn 2004, Torvalds moved with his family from Silicon Valley to Portland, Oregon.\nIn 2010, Torvalds became a United States citizen and registered to vote in the United States. As of that year, he was unaffiliated with any U.S. political party, saying, \"I have way too much personal pride to want to be associated with any of them, quite frankly.\"\nLinus developed an interest in scuba diving in the early 2000s and has achieved numerous certifications, leading him to create the Subsurface project.\nMedia recognition.\n\"Time\" magazine has recognized Torvalds multiple times:\n\"InfoWorld\" presented him with the 2000 Award for Industry Achievement. In 2005, Torvalds appeared as one of \"the best managers\" in a survey by \"BusinessWeek\". In 2006, \"Business 2.0\" magazine named him one of \"10 people who don't matter\" because the growth of Linux has shrunk Torvalds's individual impact.\nIn summer 2004, viewers of YLE (the Finnish Broadcasting Company) placed Torvalds 16th in the network's 100 Greatest Finns. In 2010, as part of a series called \"The Britannica Guide to the World's Most Influential People\", Torvalds was listed among \"The 100 Most Influential Inventors of All Time\" ().\nOn 11 October 2017, the Linux company SUSE made a song titled \"Linus Said\" about the origin of the Linux kernel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17625", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17625", "title": "Lahaina", "text": ""}
{"id": "17626", "revid": "50943235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17626", "title": "Trade union", "text": "Organisation of workers with common goals\nA trade union (British English) or labor union (American English), often simply referred to as a union, is an organization of workers whose purpose is to maintain or improve the conditions of their employment, such as attaining better wages and benefits, improving working conditions and safety standards, establishing complaint procedures, developing rules governing the status of employees (including rules on promotions and just-cause conditions for termination), and protecting and increasing the bargaining power of workers.\nTrade unions typically fund their head office and legal team functions through regularly imposed fees called \"union dues\". The union representatives in the workforce are usually made up of workplace volunteers who are often appointed by members through internal democratic elections. The trade union, through an elected leadership and bargaining committee, bargains with the employer on behalf of its members, known as the rank and file, and negotiates labour contracts (collective bargaining agreements) with employers.\nUnions may organize a particular section of skilled or unskilled workers (craft unionism), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism), or an attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism). The agreements negotiated by a union are binding on the rank-and-file members and the employer, and in some cases on other non-member workers. Trade unions traditionally have a constitution which details the governance of their bargaining unit and also have governance at various levels of government depending on the industry that binds them legally to their negotiations and functioning.\nOriginating in the United Kingdom, trade unions became popular in many countries during the Industrial Revolution when employment (rather than subsistence farming) became the primary mode of earning a living. Trade unions may be composed of individual workers, professionals, past workers, students, apprentices or the unemployed. Trade union density, or the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union, is highest in the Nordic countries.\nDefinition.\nSince the publication of the \"History of Trade Unionism\" (1894) by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, the predominant historical view is that a trade union \"is a continuous association of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment\". Karl Marx described trade unions thus: \"The value of labour-power constitutes the conscious and explicit foundation of the trade unions, whose importance for the ... working class can scarcely be overestimated. The trade unions aim at nothing less than to prevent the reduction of wages below the level that is traditionally maintained in the various branches of industry. That is to say, they wish to prevent the price of labour-power from falling below its value\" (\"Capital\" V1, 1867, p.\u00a01069). Early socialists also saw trade unions as a way to democratize the workplace, in order to obtain political power.\nA modern definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics states that a trade union is \"an organisation consisting predominantly of employees, the principal activities of which include the negotiation of rates of pay and conditions of employment for its members\".\nRecent historical research by Bob James puts forward the view that trade unions are part of a broader movement of benefit societies, which includes medieval guilds, Freemasons, Oddfellows, friendly societies, and other fraternal organizations.\nHistory.\nTrade guilds.\nA \"collegium\" was any association in ancient Rome that acted as a legal entity. Following the passage of the \"Lex Julia\" during the reign of Julius Caesar (49\u201344 BC), and their reaffirmation during the reign of Caesar Augustus (27 BC\u201314 AD), \"collegia\" required the approval of the Roman Senate or the Roman emperor in order to be authorized as legal bodies. Ruins at Lambaesis date the formation of burial societies among Roman Army soldiers and Roman Navy mariners to the reign of Septimius Severus (193\u2013211) in 198 AD. In September 2011, archaeological investigations done at the site of the artificial harbor Portus in Rome revealed inscriptions in a shipyard constructed during the reign of Trajan (98\u2013117) indicating the existence of a shipbuilders guild. Rome's La Ostia port was home to a guildhall for a \"corpus naviculariorum\", a \"collegium\" of merchant mariners. \"Collegium\" also included fraternities of Roman priests overseeing Sacrificium Romanam (ritual sacrifices), practising augury, keeping scriptures, arranging festivals, and maintaining specific religious cults.\nModern trade unions.\nWhile a commonly held mistaken view holds modern trade unionism to be a product of Marxism, the earliest modern trade unions predate Marx's \"Communist Manifesto\" (1848) by almost a century (and Marx's writings themselves frequently address the prior existence of the workers' movements of his time.) The first recorded labour strike in the United States was by Philadelphia printers in 1786, who opposed a wage reduction and demanded $6 per week in wages. The origins of modern trade unions can be traced back to 18th-century Britain, where the Industrial Revolution drew masses of people, including dependents, peasants and immigrants, into cities. Britain had ended the practice of serfdom in 1574, but the vast majority of people remained as tenant-farmers on estates owned by the landed aristocracy. This transition was not merely one of relocation from rural to urban environs; rather, the nature of industrial work created a new class of \"worker\". A farmer worked the land, raised animals and grew crops, and either owned the land or paid rent, but ultimately sold a \"product\" and had control over his life and work. As industrial workers, however, the workers sold their work as labour and took directions from employers, giving up part of their freedom and self-agency in the service of a master. The critics of the new arrangement would call this \"wage slavery\", but the term that persisted was a new form of human relations: employment. Unlike farmers, workers often had less control over their jobs; without job security or a promise of an on-going relationship with their employers, they lacked some control over the work they performed or how it impacted their health and life. It is in this context that modern trade unions emerge.\nIn the cities, trade unions encountered much hostility from employers and government groups. In the United States, unions and unionists were regularly prosecuted under various restraint of trade and conspiracy laws, such as the Sherman Antitrust Act. This pool of unskilled and semi-skilled labour spontaneously organized in fits and starts throughout its beginnings, and would later be an important arena for the development of trade unions. Trade unions have sometimes been seen as successors to the guilds of medieval Europe, though the relationship between the two is disputed, as the masters of the guilds employed workers (apprentices and journeymen) who were not allowed to organize.\nTrade unions and collective bargaining were outlawed from no later than the middle of the 14th century, when the Ordinance of Labourers was enacted in the Kingdom of England, but their way of thinking was the one that endured down the centuries, inspiring evolutions and advances in thinking which eventually gave workers more power. As collective bargaining and early worker unions grew with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the government began to clamp down on what it saw as the danger of popular unrest at the time of the Napoleonic Wars. In 1799, the \"Combination Act\" was passed, which banned trade unions and collective bargaining by British workers. Although the unions were subject to often severe repression until 1824, they were already widespread in cities such as London. Workplace militancy had also manifested itself as Luddism and had been prominent in struggles such as the 1820 Rising in Scotland, in which 60,000 workers went on a general strike, which was soon crushed. Sympathy for the plight of the workers brought repeal of the acts in 1824, although the Combination Act 1825 restricted their activity to bargaining for wage increases and changes in working hours.\nBy the 1810s, the first labour organizations to bring together workers of divergent occupations were formed. Possibly the first such union was the General Union of Trades, also known as the Philanthropic Society, founded in 1818 in Manchester. The latter name was to hide the organization's real purpose in a time when trade unions were still illegal.\nNational general unions.\nThe first attempts at forming a national general union in the United Kingdom were made in the 1820s and 30s. The National Association for the Protection of Labour was established in 1830 by John Doherty, after an apparently unsuccessful attempt to create a similar national presence with the National Union of Cotton-spinners. The Association quickly enrolled approximately 150 unions, consisting mostly of Textile and clothing trade unions|textile related unions, but also including mechanics, blacksmiths, and various others. Membership rose to between 10,000 and 20,000 individuals spread across the five counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire within a year. To establish awareness and legitimacy, the union started the weekly \"Voice of the People\" publication, having the declared intention \"to unite the productive classes of the community in one common bond of union.\"\nIn 1834, the Welsh socialist Robert Owen established the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union. The organization attracted a range of socialists from Owenites to revolutionaries and played a part in the protests after the Tolpuddle Martyrs' case, but soon collapsed.\nMore permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s, better resourced but often less radical. The London Trades Council was founded in 1860, and the Sheffield Outrages spurred the establishment of the Trades Union Congress in 1868, the first long-lived national trade union center. By this time, the existence and the demands of the trade unions were becoming accepted by liberal middle-class opinion. In \"Principles of Political Economy\" (1871) John Stuart Mill wrote:\nIf it were possible for the working classes, by combining among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits.Beyond this claim, Mill also argued that, because individual workers had no basis for assessing the wages for a particular task, labour unions would lead to greater efficiency of the market system.\nLegalization, expansion and recognition.\nBritish trade unions were finally legalized in 1872, after a \"Royal Commission on Trade Unions\" in 1867 agreed that the establishment of the organizations was to the advantage of both employers and employees.\nThis period also saw the growth of trade unions in other industrializing countries, especially the United States, Germany and France.\nIn the United States, the first effective nationwide labour organization was the Knights of Labor, in 1869, which began to grow after 1880. Legalization occurred slowly as a result of a series of court decisions. The Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions began in 1881 as a federation of different unions that did not directly enrol workers. In 1886, it became known as the American Federation of Labor or AFL.\nIn Germany, the Free Association of German Trade Unions was formed in 1897 after the conservative Anti-Socialist Laws of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were repealed.\nIn France, labour organisation was illegal until the 1884 Waldeck Rousseau laws. The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration des bourses du travail was founded in 1887 and merged with the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration nationale des syndicats (National Federation of Trade Unions) in 1895 to form the General Confederation of Labour.\nIn a number of countries during the 20th century, including in Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom, legislation was passed to provide for the voluntary or statutory recognition of a union by an employer.\nPrevalence worldwide.\nUnion density has been steadily declining from the OECD average of 35.9% in 1998 to 27.9% in the year 2018. The main reasons for these developments are a decline in manufacturing, increased globalization, and governmental policies.\nThe decline in manufacturing is the most direct influence, as unions were historically beneficial and prevalent in the sector; for this reason, there may be an increase in developing nations as OECD nations continue to export manufacturing industries to these markets. The second reason is globalization, which makes it harder for unions to maintain standards across countries. The last reason is governmental policies. These come from both sides of the political spectrum. In the UK and US, it has been mostly right-wing proposals that make it harder for unions to form or that limit their power. On the other side, there are many social policies such as minimum wage, paid vacation, parental leave, etc., that decrease the need to be in a union.\nThe prevalence of labour unions can be measured by \"union density\", which is expressed as a percentage of the total number of workers in a given location who are trade union members. The table below shows the percentage across OECD members.\nSource: OECD\nStructure and politics.\nUnions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, the UK and the US), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism, found in Australia, Canada, Germany, Finland, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the US). These unions are often divided into \"locals\", and united in national federations. These federations themselves will affiliate with Internationals, such as the International Trade Union Confederation. However, in Japan, union organisation is slightly different due to the presence of enterprise unions, i.e. unions that are specific to a plant or company. These enterprise unions, however, join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of Rengo, the Japanese national trade union confederation.\nIn Western Europe, professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union. In these cases, they may be negotiating for white-collar or professional workers, such as physicians, engineers or teachers. In Sweden the white-collar unions have a strong position in collective bargaining where they cooperate with blue-colar unions in setting the \"mark\" (the industry norm) in negotiations with the employers' association in manufacturing industry.\nA union may acquire the status of a \"juristic person\" (an artificial legal entity), with a mandate to negotiate with employers for the workers it represents. In such cases, unions have certain legal rights, most importantly the right to engage in collective bargaining with the employer (or employers) over wages, working hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. The inability of the parties to reach an agreement may lead to industrial action, culminating in either strike action or management lockout, or binding arbitration. In extreme cases, violent or illegal activities may develop around these events.\nIn some regions, unions may face active repression, either by governments or by extralegal organizations, with many cases of violence, some having led to deaths, having been recorded historically.\nUnions may also engage in broader political or social struggle. Social Unionism encompasses many unions that use their organizational strength to advocate for social policies and legislation favourable to their members or to workers in general. As well, unions in some countries are closely aligned with political parties. Many Labour parties were founded as the electoral arms of trade unions.\nUnions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model. The service model union focuses more on maintaining worker rights, providing services, and resolving disputes. Alternately, the organizing model typically involves full-time union organizers, who work by building up confidence, strong networks, and leaders within the workforce; and confrontational campaigns involving large numbers of union members. Many unions are a blend of these two philosophies, and the definitions of the models themselves are still debated. Informal workers often face unique challenges when trying to participate in trade union movements as formal trade union organizations recognized by the state and employers may not accommodate for the employment categories common in the informal economy. Simultaneously, the lack of regular work locations and loopholes relating to false self-employment add barriers and costs for the trade unions when trying to organize the informal economy. This has been a significant threshold to labour organizing in low-income countries, where the labour force mostly works in the informal economy.\nIn the United Kingdom, the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions (and their historical close alignment with the Labour Party) has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called Solidarity which is supported by the far-right BNP. In Denmark, there are some newer apolitical \"discount\" unions who offer a very basic level of services, as opposed to the dominating Danish pattern of extensive services and organizing.\nIn contrast, in several European countries (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands and Switzerland), religious unions have existed for decades. These unions typically distanced themselves from some of the doctrines of orthodox Marxism, such as the preference of atheism and from rhetoric suggesting that employees' interests always are in conflict with those of employers. Some of these Christian unions have had some ties to centrist or conservative political movements, and some do not regard strikes as acceptable political means for achieving employees' goals. In Poland, the biggest trade union Solidarity emerged as an anti-communist movement with religious nationalist overtones and today it supports the right-wing Law and Justice party.\nAlthough their political structure and autonomy varies widely, union leaderships are usually formed through democratic elections. Some research, such as that conducted by the Australian Centre for Industrial Relations Research and Training, argues that unionized workers enjoy better conditions and wages than those who are not unionized.\nInternational unions.\nThe oldest global trade union organizations include the World Federation of Trade Unions created in 1945. The largest trade union federation in the world is the Brussels-based International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), created in 2006, which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories, with a combined membership of 166\u00a0million. National and regional trade unions organizing in specific industry sectors or occupational groups also form global union federations, such as UNI Global, IndustriALL, the International Transport Workers' Federation, the International Federation of Journalists, the International Arts and Entertainment Alliance and Public Services International.\nLabour law.\nUnion law varies from country to country, as does the function of unions. For example, German and Dutch unions have played a greater role in management decisions through participation in supervisory boards and co-determination than other countries. Moreover, in the United States, collective bargaining is most commonly undertaken by unions directly with employers, whereas in Austria, Denmark, Germany or Sweden, unions most often negotiate with employers associations, a form of sectoral bargaining.\nConcerning labour market regulation in the EU, Gold (1993) and Hall (1994) have identified three distinct systems of labour market regulation, which also influence the role that unions play:\nThe United States takes a more laissez-faire approach, setting some minimum standards but leaving most workers' wages and benefits to collective bargaining and market forces. Thus, it comes closest to the above Anglo-Saxon model. Also, the Eastern European countries that have recently entered into the EU come closest to the Anglo-Saxon model.\nIn contrast, in Germany, the relation between individual employees and employers is considered to be asymmetrical. In consequence, many working conditions are not negotiable due to a strong legal protection of individuals. However, the German flavor or works legislation has as its main objective to create a balance of power between employees organized in unions and employers organized in employers' associations. This allows much wider legal boundaries for collective bargaining, compared to the narrow boundaries for individual negotiations. As a condition to obtain the legal status of a trade union, employee associations need to prove that their leverage is strong enough to serve as a counterforce in negotiations with employers. If such an employee's association is competing against another union, its leverage may be questioned by unions and then evaluated in labour court. In Germany, only very few professional associations obtained the right to negotiate salaries and working conditions for their members, notably the medical doctor's association Marburger Bund and the pilots association Vereinigung Cockpit. The engineer's association Verein Deutscher Ingenieure does not strive to act as a union, as it also represents the interests of engineering businesses.\nBeyond the classification listed above, unions' relations with political parties vary. In many countries unions are tightly bonded, or even share leadership, with a political party intended to represent the interests of the working class. Typically, this is a left-wing, socialist, or social democratic party, but many exceptions exist, including some of the aforementioned Christian unions. In the United States, trade unions are almost always aligned with the Democratic Party with a few exceptions. For example, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has supported Republican Party candidates on a number of occasions and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) endorsed Ronald Reagan in 1980. \nIn the United Kingdom, the trade union movement's relationship with the Labour Party frayed as the party leadership embarked on privatization plans at odds with what unions see as the worker's interests. However, it strengthened after the Labour party's election of Ed Miliband, who defeated his brother David Miliband to become leader of the party. Additionally, in the past, there was a group known as the Conservative Trade Unionists, or CTU, formed of people who sympathized with right-wing Conservative policy but were Trade Unionists.\nShop types.\nCompanies that employ workers with a union generally operate on one of several models:\nAn EU case concerning Italy stated that, \"The principle of trade union freedom in the Italian system implies recognition of the right of the individual not to belong to any trade union (\"negative\" freedom of association/trade union freedom), and the unlawfulness of discrimination liable to cause harm to non-unionized employees.\"\nIn the United Kingdom, previous to this EU jurisprudence, a series of laws introduced during the 1980s by Margaret Thatcher's government restricted closed and union shops. All agreements requiring a worker to join a union are now illegal. In the United States, the Taft\u2013Hartley Act of 1947 outlawed the closed shop.\nIn 2006, the European Court of Human Rights found Danish closed-shop agreements to be in breach of Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It was stressed that Denmark and Iceland were among a limited number of contracting states that continue to permit the conclusion of closed-shop agreements.\nImpact.\nEconomics.\nThe academic literature shows substantial evidence that trade unions reduce economic inequality. The economist Joseph Stiglitz has asserted that, \"Strong unions have helped to reduce inequality, whereas weaker unions have made it easier for CEOs, sometimes working with market forces that they have helped shape, to increase it.\" Evidence indicates that those who are \"not\" members of unions also see higher wages. Researchers suggest that unions set industrial norms as firms try to stop further unionization or losing workers to better-paying competitors. The decline in unionization since the 1960s in the United States has been associated with a pronounced rise in income and wealth inequality and, since 1967, with loss of middle class income. Right-to-work laws have been linked to greater economic inequality in the United States.\nResearch from Norway has found that high unionization rates lead to substantial increases in firm productivity, as well as increases in workers' wages. Research from Belgium also found productivity gains, although smaller. However, other research in the United States has found that unions can harm profitability, employment and business growth rates. UK research on employment, wages, productivity, and investment found union density improved all metrics - but only until a limit. Forming U-shaped curves, after an optimal density, more unionisation \"worsened\" employment, wages, etc. Research from the Anglosphere indicates that unions can provide wage premiums and reduce inequality while reducing employment growth and restricting employment flexibility. Some trade unions oppose approaches which increase productivity, such as automation.\nIn the United States, the outsourcing of labour to Asia, Latin America, and Africa has been partially driven by increasing costs of union partnership, which gives other countries a comparative advantage in labour, making it more efficient to perform labour-intensive work there. Trade unions have been accused of benefiting insider workers and those with secure jobs at the cost of outsider workers, consumers of the goods or services produced, and the shareholders of the unionized business. Economist Milton Friedman sought to show that unionization produces higher wages (for the union members) at the expense of fewer jobs, and that, if some industries are unionized while others are not, wages will tend to decline in non-unionized industries. Friedrich Hayek criticized unions in chapter 18 of his publication \"The Constitution of Liberty\".\nTrade unions frequently advocate for seniority-based compensation and against meritocracy.\nPolitics.\nIn the United States, the weakening of unions has been linked to more favourable electoral outcomes for the Republican Party. Legislators in areas with high unionization rates are more responsive to the interests of the poor, whereas areas with lower unionization rates are more responsive to the interests of the rich. Higher unionization rates increase the likelihood of parental leave policies being adopted. Republican-controlled states are less likely to adopt more restrictive labour policies when unions are strong in the state.\nResearch in the United States found that American congressional representatives were more responsive to the interests of the poor in districts with higher unionization rates. Another 2020 American study found an association between US state level adoption of parental leave legislation and trade union strength.\nIn the United States, unions have been linked to lower racial resentment among whites. Membership in unions increases political knowledge, in particular among those with less formal education.\nPublic-sector trade unions have been associated with increased cost of government.\nHealth.\nIn the United States, higher union density has been associated with lower suicide/overdose deaths. Decreased unionization rates in the United States have been linked to an increase in occupational fatalities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBritain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEurope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnited States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17627", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17627", "title": "Liberal", "text": "Liberal or liberalism may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17628", "revid": "313197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17628", "title": "Louisiana Purchase", "text": "1803 acquisition of region of Middle America land by the U.S. from France\nThe Louisiana Purchase () was the acquisition of the territory of Louisiana by the United States from the French First Republic in 1803. This consisted of most of the land in the Mississippi River's drainage basin west of the river. In return for fifteen million dollars, or approximately eighteen dollars per square mile ($7/km2), the United States nominally acquired a total of now in the Central United States. However, France only controlled a small fraction of this area, most of which was inhabited by Native Americans; effectively, for the majority of the area, the United States bought the preemptive right to obtain Indian lands by treaty or by conquest, to the exclusion of other colonial powers.\nThe Kingdom of France had controlled the Louisiana territory from 1682 until it was ceded to Spain in 1762. In 1800, Napoleon Bonaparte, the First Consul of the French Republic, regained ownership of Louisiana in exchange for territories in Tuscany as part of a broader effort to re-establish a French colonial empire in North America. However, France's failure to suppress a revolt in Saint-Domingue in the Caribbean, coupled with the prospect of renewed warfare with the United Kingdom, prompted Napoleon to consider selling Louisiana to the United States. \nAcquisition of Louisiana was a long-term goal of President Thomas Jefferson, who was especially eager to gain control of the crucial Mississippi River port of New Orleans. Jefferson tasked James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston with purchasing New Orleans. Negotiating with French Treasury Minister Fran\u00e7ois Barb\u00e9-Marbois, the U.S. representatives quickly agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana after it was offered. Overcoming the opposition of the Federalist Party, Jefferson and Secretary of State James Madison persuaded Congress to ratify and fund the Louisiana Purchase.\nThe Louisiana Purchase extended United States sovereignty across the Mississippi River, nearly doubling the nominal size of the country. The purchase included land from fifteen present U.S. states and two Canadian provinces, including the entirety of Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska; large portions of North Dakota and South Dakota; the area of Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado east of the Continental Divide; the portion of Minnesota west of the Mississippi River; the northeastern section of New Mexico; northern portions of Texas; New Orleans and the portions of the present state of Louisiana west of the Mississippi River; and small portions of land within Alberta and Saskatchewan. At the time of the purchase, the territory of Louisiana's non-native population was around 60,000 inhabitants, of whom half were enslaved Africans. The western borders of the purchase were later settled by the 1819 Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty with Spain, while the northern borders of the purchase were adjusted by the Treaty of 1818 with the British.\nThe Louisiana Purchase corresponds, nowadays, to more than 26% of the present area of the contiguous United States, which is .\nBackground.\nThroughout the second half of the 18th century, the French colony of Louisiana became a pawn for European political intrigue. The colony was the most substantial presence of France's overseas empire, with other possessions consisting of a few small settlements along the Mississippi and other main rivers. France ceded the territory to Spain in 1762 in the secret Treaty of Fontainebleau. Following French defeat in the Seven Years' War, Spain gained control of the territory west of the Mississippi, and the British received the territory to the east of the river.\nFollowing the establishment of the United States, the Americans controlled the area east of the Mississippi and north of New Orleans. The main issue for the Americans was free transit of the Mississippi out to sea. As the lands were being gradually settled by American migrants, many Americans, including Jefferson, assumed that the territory would be acquired \"piece by piece\". The risk of another power taking it from a weakened Spain made a \"profound reconsideration\" of this policy necessary. \nNew Orleans was already important for shipping agricultural goods to and from the areas of the United States west of the Appalachian Mountains. Pinckney's Treaty, signed with Spain on October 27, 1795, gave American merchants \"right of deposit\" in New Orleans, granting them use of the port to store goods for export. The treaty also recognized American rights to navigate the entire Mississippi, which had become vital to the growing trade of the western territories.\nIn 1798, Spain revoked the treaty allowing American use of New Orleans, greatly upsetting the Americans. In 1801, Spanish Governor Don Juan Manuel de Salcedo took over from the Marquess of Casa Calvo, and restored the American right to deposit goods. However, in 1800, Spain had ceded the Louisiana territory back to France as part of Napoleon's secret Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. The subsequent 1801 Treaty of Aranjuez established that Spain's cession of Louisiana was a \"restoration\" of the territory to France, not a retrocession. The territory nominally remained under Spanish control, until a transfer of power to France on November 30, 1803, just three weeks before the formal cession of the territory to the United States on December 20, 1803.\nNegotiation.\nWhile the treaty between Spain and France went largely unnoticed in 1800, fear of an eventual French invasion spread across America when, in 1801, Napoleon sent a military force to nearby Saint-Domingue. Though Jefferson urged moderation, Federalists sought to use this against Jefferson and called for hostilities against France. Undercutting them, Jefferson threatened an alliance with Britain, although relations were uneasy in that direction. In 1801, Jefferson supported France in its plan to take back Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti), which was then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion. However, there was a growing concern in the U.S. that Napoleon would send troops to New Orleans after quelling the rebellion. In hopes of securing control of the mouth of the Mississippi, Jefferson sent Livingston to Paris in 1801 with the authorization to purchase New Orleans.\nIn December 1801, France sent General Charles Leclerc, Napoleon's brother-in-law, on an expedition to Saint-Domingue to reassert French control over the colony, which had become essentially autonomous under Louverture. Louverture, as a French general, had fended off incursions from other European powers, but had also begun to consolidate power for himself on the island. Before the revolution, France had derived enormous wealth from Saint-Domingue at the cost of the lives and freedom of the enslaved. Napoleon wanted the territory's revenues and productivity for France restored. Alarmed over the French actions and its intention to re-establish an empire in North America, Jefferson declared neutrality in relation to the Caribbean, refusing credit and other assistance to the French, but allowing war contraband to get through to the rebels to prevent France from regaining a foothold.\nIn 1803, Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, a French nobleman, began to help negotiate with France at the request of Jefferson. Du Pont was living in the United States at the time and had close ties to Jefferson as well as the prominent politicians in France. He engaged in back-channel diplomacy with Napoleon on Jefferson's behalf during a visit to France and introduced the idea of the much larger Louisiana Purchase as a way to defuse potential conflict between the United States and Napoleon over North America.\nThroughout this time, Jefferson had up-to-date intelligence on Napoleon's military activities and intentions in North America. Part of his evolving strategy involved giving du Pont some information that was withheld from Livingston. Intent on avoiding possible war with France, Jefferson sent James Monroe to Paris in 1803 to negotiate a settlement, with instructions to go to London to negotiate an alliance if the talks in Paris failed. Spain procrastinated until late 1802 in executing the treaty to transfer Louisiana to France, which allowed American hostility to build. Also, Spain's refusal to cede Florida to France meant that Louisiana would be indefensible.\nNapoleon needed peace with Britain to take possession of Louisiana. Otherwise, Louisiana would be an easy prey for a potential invasion from Britain or the U.S. But in early 1803, continuing war between France and Britain seemed unavoidable. On March 11, 1803, Napoleon began planning an invasion of Great Britain.\nIn Saint-Domingue, Leclerc's forces took Louverture prisoner, but their expedition soon faltered in the face of fierce resistance and disease. By early 1803, Napoleon decided to abandon his plans to rebuild France's New World empire. Without sufficient revenues from sugar colonies in the Caribbean, Louisiana had little value to him. Spain had not yet completed the transfer of Louisiana to France, and war between France and the UK was imminent. Out of anger towards Spain and the unique opportunity to sell something that was useless and not truly his yet, Napoleon decided to sell the entire territory.\nAlthough the foreign minister Talleyrand opposed the plan, on April 10, 1803, Napoleon told the Treasury Minister Fran\u00e7ois Barb\u00e9-Marbois that he was considering selling the Louisiana Territory to the United States. On April 11, 1803, just days before Monroe's arrival, Barb\u00e9-Marbois offered Livingston all of Louisiana for $15\u00a0million, which averages to less than three cents per acre (7\u00a2/ha). The total of $15\u00a0million is equivalent to about $\u00a0million in 2024 dollars, or cents per acre. The American representatives were prepared to pay up to $10\u00a0million for New Orleans and its environs but were dumbfounded when the vastly larger territory was offered for $15\u00a0million. Jefferson had authorized Livingston only to purchase New Orleans. However, Livingston was certain that the United States would accept the offer.\nThe Americans thought that Napoleon might withdraw the offer at any time, preventing the United States from acquiring New Orleans, so they agreed and signed the Louisiana Purchase Treaty on April 30, 1803 (10 Flor\u00e9al XI in the French Republican calendar) at the H\u00f4tel Tubeuf in Paris. The signers were Robert Livingston, James Monroe, and Fran\u00e7ois Barb\u00e9-Marbois. After the signing Livingston famously stated, \"We have lived long, but this is the noblest work of our whole lives\u00a0... From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank.\" On July 4, 1803, the treaty was announced, but the documents did not arrive in Washington, D.C. until July 14. The Louisiana Territory was vast, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico in the south to Rupert's Land in the north, and from the Mississippi River in the east to the Rocky Mountains in the west. Acquiring the territory nearly doubled the size of the United States.\nIn November 1803, France withdrew its 7,000 surviving troops from Saint-Domingue (more than two-thirds of its troops died there) and gave up its ambitions in the Western Hemisphere. In 1804, Haiti declared its independence; but fearing a slave revolt at home, Jefferson and the rest of Congress refused to recognize the new republic, the second in the Western Hemisphere, and imposed a trade embargo against it. This, together with the successful French demand for an indemnity of 150 million francs in 1825, severely hampered Haiti's ability to repair its economy after decades of war.\nDomestic opposition and constitutionality.\nAfter Monroe and Livingston had returned from France with news of the purchase, an official announcement of the purchase was made on July 4, 1803. This gave Jefferson and his cabinet until October, when the treaty had to be ratified, to discuss the constitutionality of the purchase. Jefferson considered a constitutional amendment to justify the purchase; however, his cabinet convinced him otherwise. Jefferson justified the purchase by rationalizing, \"it is the case of a guardian, investing the money of his ward in purchasing an important adjacent territory; &amp; saying to him when of age, I did this for your good.\" Jefferson ultimately came to the conclusion before the ratification of the treaty that the purchase was to protect the citizens of the United States therefore making it constitutional.\nHenry Adams and other historians have argued that Jefferson acted hypocritically with the Louisiana Purchase, because of his position as a strict constructionist regarding the Constitution, by stretching the intent of that document to justify his purchase. The American purchase of the Louisiana territory was not accomplished without domestic opposition. Jefferson's philosophical consistency was in question and many people believed he and others, including James Madison, were doing something they surely would have argued against with Alexander Hamilton. The Federalists strongly opposed the purchase, because of the cost involved, their belief that France would not have been able to resist U.S. and British encroachment into Louisiana, and Jefferson's perceived hypocrisy.\nBoth Federalists and Jeffersonians were concerned over the purchase's constitutionality. Many members of the House of Representatives opposed the purchase. Majority Leader John Randolph led the opposition. The House called for a vote to deny the request for the purchase, but it failed by two votes, 59\u201357. The Federalists even tried to prove the land belonged to Spain, not France, but available records proved otherwise. The Federalists also feared that the power of the Atlantic seaboard states would be threatened by the new citizens in the West, whose political and economic priorities were bound to conflict with those of the merchants and bankers of New England. There was also concern that an increase in the number of slave-holding states created out of the new territory would exacerbate divisions between North and South. A group of Northern Federalists led by Senator Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts went so far as to explore the idea of a separate northern confederacy.\nThe opposition of New England Federalists to the Louisiana Purchase was primarily economic self-interest, not any legitimate concern over constitutionality or whether France indeed owned Louisiana or was required to sell it back to Spain should it desire to dispose of the territory. The Northerners were not enthusiastic about Western farmers gaining another outlet for their crops that did not require the use of New England ports. Also, many Federalists were speculators in lands in upstate New York and New England and were hoping to sell these lands to farmers, who might go west instead if the Louisiana Purchase went through. They also feared that this would lead to Western states being formed, which would likely be Republican, and dilute the political power of New England Federalists.\nAnother concern was whether it was proper to grant citizenship to the French, Spanish, and free black people living in New Orleans, as the treaty would dictate. Critics in Congress worried whether these \"foreigners\", unacquainted with democracy, could or should become citizens.\nSpain protested the transfer on two grounds: First, France had previously promised in a note not to alienate Louisiana to a third party and, second, France had not fulfilled the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso by having the King of Etruria recognized by all European powers. The French government replied that these objections were baseless as the promise not to alienate Louisiana was not in the treaty of San Ildefonso itself and therefore had no legal force, and the Spanish government had ordered Louisiana to be transferred in October 1802 despite knowing for months that Britain had not recognized the King of Etruria in the Treaty of Amiens. Madison, in response to Spain's objections, noted that the United States had first approached Spain about purchasing the property, but had been told by Spain itself that the U.S. would have to deal with France for the territory.\nHenry Adams claimed \"The sale of Louisiana to the United States was trebly invalid; if it were French property, Bonaparte could not constitutionally alienate it without the consent of the French Chambers; if it were Spanish property, he could not alienate it at all; if Spain had a right of reclamation, his sale was worthless.\" The sale, of course, was not \"worthless\"\u2014the U.S. actually did take possession. Furthermore, the Spanish prime minister had authorized the U.S. to negotiate with the French government regarding \"the acquisition of territories which may suit their interests.\" Spain turned the territory over to France in a ceremony in New Orleans on November 30, a month before France turned the city over to American officials.\nOther historians counter the above arguments regarding Jefferson's alleged hypocrisy by asserting that countries change their borders in two ways: (1) conquest, or (2) an agreement between nations, otherwise known as a treaty. The Louisiana Purchase was the latter, a treaty. Article II, Section 2, of the Constitution specifically grants the president the power to negotiate treaties, which is what Jefferson did.\nMadison (the \"Father of the Constitution\") assured Jefferson that the Louisiana Purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution. Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin added that because the power to negotiate treaties was specifically granted to the president, the only way extending the country's territory by treaty could \"not\" be a presidential power would be if it were specifically excluded by the Constitution (which it was not). Jefferson, as a strict constructionist, was right to be concerned about staying within the bounds of the Constitution, but felt the power of these arguments and was willing to \"acquiesce with satisfaction\" if the Congress approved the treaty. The Senate quickly ratified the treaty, and the House, with equal readiness, authorized the required funding. The fledgling United States did not have $15 million in its treasury; instead, it borrowed the sum from British and Dutch banks, at an annual interest rate of six percent. (See below.)\nThe United States Senate consented to ratification of the treaty with a vote of 24 to seven on October 20. On the following day, October 21, 1803, the Senate authorized Jefferson to take possession of the territory and establish a temporary military government. In legislation enacted on October 31, Congress made temporary provisions for local civil government to continue as it had under French and Spanish rule and authorized the president to use military forces to maintain order. Plans were also set forth for several missions to explore and chart the territory, the most famous being the Lewis and Clark Expedition.\nFormal transfers and initial organization.\nFrance turned over New Orleans, the historic colonial capital, on December 20, 1803, at the Cabildo, with a flag-raising ceremony in the Plaza de Armas, now Jackson Square. Just three weeks earlier, on November 30, 1803, Spanish officials had formally conveyed the colonial lands and their administration to France.\nOn March 9 and 10, 1804, another ceremony, commemorated as Three Flags Day, was conducted in St. Louis, to transfer ownership of Upper Louisiana from Spain to France, and then from France to the United States. From March 10 to September 30, 1804, Upper Louisiana was supervised as a military district, under its first civil commandant, Amos Stoddard, who was appointed by the War Department.\nEffective October 1, 1804, the purchased territory was organized into the Territory of Orleans (most of which would become the state of Louisiana) and the District of Louisiana, which was temporarily under control of the governor and judicial system of the Indiana Territory. The following year, the District of Louisiana was renamed the Territory of Louisiana. New Orleans was the administrative capital of the Orleans Territory, and St. Louis was the capital of the Louisiana Territory.\nFinancing.\nTo pay for the land, the American government used a mix of sovereign bonds and the assumption of French debts. Earlier in 1803, Francis Baring and Company of London had become the U.S. government's official banking agent in London following the failure of Bird, Savage &amp; Bird. Because of this favored position, the U.S. asked Barings to handle the transaction. Barings had a close relationship with Hope &amp; Co. of Amsterdam, and the two banking houses worked together to facilitate and underwrite the purchase. Hopes brought to the transaction experience with issuing sovereign bonds and Barings brought its American connections.\nFrancis Baring's son Alexander and Pierre Labouch\u00e8re from Hopes arrived in Paris in April 1803 to assist with the negotiations. With the bankers' help, the French and American negotiators settled on a price of 80 million francs ($15 million), down from an initial price of 100 million francs, a sum the Americans could not afford and the financers could not provide. In the final agreement, the value of the U.S. currency was set at francs per U.S. dollar. In 2024 dollars, the $15 million purchase price is equivalent to about $\u00a0million.\nAs part of the deal, the U.S. assumed responsibility for up to 20 million francs ($3.75 million) of French debts owed to U.S. citizens. The remaining 60 million francs ($11.25 million) were financed through U.S. government bonds carrying 6% interest, redeemable between 1819 and 1822. In October 1803, the U.S. Treasury had some $5.86 million in specie on hand, $2 million of which would be used to pay a portion of the debts assumed from France as part of the purchase.\nBecause Napoleon wanted to receive his money as quickly as possible, Barings and Hopes purchased the bonds for 52 million francs, agreeing to an initial 6 million franc payment upon issuance of the bonds followed by 23 monthly payments of 2 million francs each. The first group of bonds were issued on January 16, 1804, but the banks had already provided a 10 million franc advance to France in July 1803.\nIn need of funds, Napoleon pressed the banks to complete their purchase of the bonds as quickly as possible. In April 1804, the banks transferred an additional 40.35 million francs to fully discharge their obligations to France. In the end, Barings and Hopes acquired the $11.25 million in bonds for just $9.44 million. The last of the bonds were paid off by the United States Treasury in 1823. With interest, the total cost of the Louisiana Purchase bonds amounted to $23,313,567.73.\nAlthough the War of the Third Coalition, which brought France into a war with the United Kingdom, began before the purchase was completed, the British government initially allowed the deal to proceed as it was better for the neutral Americans to own the territory than the hostile French. In December 1803, the British directed Barings to halt future payments to France. Barings relayed the order to Hopes, which agreed but under the condition that Baring bear the costs of the change and that its Louisiana stock be reallocated to Hopes. Hopes also required Baring to refrain from trading in Louisiana stock without its consent. In April 1804, the final payments were made to France.\nBoundaries.\nA dispute soon arose between Spain and the United States regarding the extent of Louisiana. The territory's boundaries had not been defined in the 1762 Treaty of Fontainebleau that ceded it from France to Spain, nor in the 1801 Third Treaty of San Ildefonso ceding it back to France, nor the 1803 Louisiana Purchase agreement ceding it to the United States.\nThe U.S. claimed that Louisiana included the entire western portion of the Mississippi River drainage basin to the crest of the Rocky Mountains and land extending to the Rio Grande and West Florida. Spain insisted that Louisiana comprised no more than the western bank of the Mississippi River and the cities of New Orleans and St. Louis. The dispute was ultimately resolved by the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty of 1819, with the United States gaining most of what it had claimed in the west.\nThe relatively narrow Louisiana of New Spain had been a special province under the jurisdiction of the Captaincy General of Cuba, while the vast region to the west was in 1803 still considered part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas. Louisiana had never been considered one of New Spain's internal provinces. If the territory included all the tributaries of the Mississippi on its western bank, the northern reaches of the purchase extended into the equally ill-defined British possession\u2014Rupert's Land of British North America, now part of Canada. The purchase originally extended just beyond the 50th parallel. However, the territory north of the 49th parallel (including the Milk River and Poplar River watersheds) was ceded to the UK in exchange for parts of the Red River Basin south of 49th parallel in the Anglo-American Convention of 1818.\nThe eastern boundary of the Louisiana purchase was the Mississippi River, from its source to the 31st parallel, though the source of the Mississippi was, at the time, unknown. The eastern boundary below the 31st parallel was unclear. The U.S. claimed the land as far as the Perdido River, and Spain claimed that the border of its Florida Colony remained the Mississippi River. The Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty with Spain resolved the issue upon ratification in 1821. Today, the 31st parallel is the northern boundary of the western half of the Florida Panhandle, and the Perdido is the western boundary of Florida.\nBecause the western boundary was contested at the time of the purchase, President Jefferson immediately began to organize four missions to explore and map the new territory. All four started from the Mississippi River. The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804) traveled up the Missouri River; the Red River Expedition (1806) explored the Red River basin; the Pike Expedition (1806) also started up the Missouri but turned south to explore the Arkansas River watershed. In addition, the Dunbar and Hunter Expedition (1804\u20131805) explored the Ouachita River watershed. \nThe maps and journals of the explorers helped to define the boundaries during the negotiations leading to the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, which set the western boundary as follows: north up the Sabine River from the Gulf of Mexico to its intersection with the 32nd parallel, due north to the Red River, up the Red River to the 100th meridian, north to the Arkansas River, up the Arkansas River to its headwaters, due north to the 42nd parallel and due west to its previous boundary.\nSlavery.\nGoverning the Louisiana Territory was more difficult than acquiring it. Its European peoples primarily of ethnic French, Spanish and Mexican descent were largely Catholic; in addition, there was a large population of enslaved Africans, as Spain had continued the transatlantic slave trade. This was particularly true in the area of the present-day state of Louisiana, which also contained a large number of free people of color. Both present-day Arkansas and Missouri already had some slaveholders in the 18th and early 19th century.\nDuring this period, south Louisiana received a large influx of French-speaking refugees fleeing the large slave revolt in Saint-Domingue, including planters who brought their slaves with them. Many Southern slaveholders feared that acquisition of the new territory might inspire American-held slaves to follow the example of those in Saint-Domingue and revolt. They wanted the U.S. government to establish laws allowing slavery in the newly acquired territory so they could be supported in taking their slaves there to undertake new agricultural enterprises, as well as to reduce the threat of future slave rebellions.\nThe Louisiana Territory was broken into smaller portions for administration, and the territories passed slavery laws similar to those in the southern states but incorporating provisions from the preceding French and Spanish rule (for instance, Spain had prohibited slavery of Native Americans in 1769, but some slaves of mixed African\u2013Native American descent were still being held in St. Louis in Upper Louisiana when the U.S. took over). In a freedom suit that went from Missouri to the U.S. Supreme Court, slavery of Native Americans was finally ended in 1836. The institutionalization of slavery under U.S. law in the Louisiana Territory contributed to the American Civil War a half century later. As states organized within the territory, the status of slavery in each state became a matter of contention in Congress, as southern states wanted slavery extended to the west, and northern states just as strongly opposed new states being admitted as \"slave states\". The Missouri Compromise of 1820 was a temporary solution.\nAsserting U.S. possession.\nAfter the early explorations, the U.S. government sought to establish control of the region, since trade along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers was still dominated by British and French traders from Canada and allied Indians, especially the Sauk and Fox. The U.S. adapted the former Spanish facility at Fort Bellefontaine as a fur trading post near St. Louis in 1804 for business with the Sauk and Fox. In 1808, two military forts with trading factories were built, Fort Osage along the Missouri River in western present-day Missouri and Fort Madison along the Upper Mississippi River in eastern present-day Iowa. With tensions increasing with Great Britain, in 1809 Fort Bellefontaine was converted to a U.S. military fort and was used for that purpose until 1826.\nDuring the War of 1812, aided by their Indian allies, the British defeated U.S. forces in the Upper Mississippi; the U.S. abandoned Forts Osage and Madison, as well as several other U.S. forts built during the war, including Fort Johnson and Fort Shelby. U.S. ownership of the whole Louisiana Purchase region was confirmed in the Treaty of Ghent (ratified in February 1815). The U.S. later built or expanded forts along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, including adding to Fort Bellefontaine, and constructing Fort Armstrong (1816) and Fort Edwards (1816) in Illinois, Fort Crawford (1816) in Wisconsin, Fort Snelling (1819) in Minnesota, and Fort Atkinson (1819) in Nebraska.\nImpact on Native Americans.\nThe Louisiana Purchase was negotiated between France and the United States, without consulting the various Indian tribes who lived on the land and who had not ceded the land to any colonial power. The four decades following the Louisiana Purchase was an era of court decisions removing many tribes from their lands east of the Mississippi for resettlement in the new territory, culminating in the Trail of Tears.\nThe purchase of the Louisiana Territory led to debates over the idea of indigenous land rights that persisted into the mid 20th century. The many court cases and tribal suits in the 1930s for historical damages flowing from the Louisiana Purchase led to the Indian Claims Commission Act (ICCA) in 1946. Felix S. Cohen, Interior Department lawyer who helped pass ICCA, is often quoted as saying, \"practically all of the real estate acquired by the United States since 1776 was purchased not from Napoleon or any other emperor or czar but from its original Indian owners\". \nIn 2017, the total cost to the U.S. government of all subsequent treaties and financial settlements up to the year 2012 for the land acquired in the Louisiana Purchase was estimated to be around $2.6 billion, or $ billion in 2024 dollars. This is equivalent to $418 million in 1803 dollars, so the $15 million originally paid to France was roughly 3.5 percent of the total amount paid for this land, to both France and the Indians.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17629", "revid": "1317141684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17629", "title": "Labor theory of value", "text": "Economic hypothesis\nThe labor theory of value (LTV) is a theory of value that argues that the exchange value of a good or service is determined by the total amount of \"socially necessary labor\" required to produce it. The contrasting system is typically known as the subjective theory of value.\nThe LTV is usually associated with Marxian economics, although it originally appeared in the theories of earlier classical economists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo, and later in anarchist economics. Smith saw the price of a commodity as a reflection of how much labor it can \"save\" the purchaser. The LTV is central to Marxist theory, which holds that capitalists' expropriation of the surplus value produced by the working class is exploitative. Modern mainstream economics rejects the LTV and uses a theory of value based on subjective preferences.\nDefinitions of value and labor.\nAccording to the LTV, value refers to the amount of socially necessary labor to produce a marketable commodity; According to Ricardo and Marx, this includes the labor components necessary to develop any real capital (i.e., physical assets used to produce other assets). Including these indirect labor components, sometimes described as \"dead labor,\" provides the \"real price,\" or \"natural price\" of a commodity. However, Adam Smith's version of labor value does not implicate the role of past labor in the commodity itself or in the tools (capital) required to produce it.\nDistinctions of economically pertinent labor.\n\"Value in use\" is the usefulness or utility of a commodity. A classical paradox often comes up when considering this type of value.\nIn a passage of Adam Smith's \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\", he discusses the concepts of value in use and value in exchange, and notices how they tend to differ:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Value \"in exchange\" is the relative proportion with which this commodity exchanges for another commodity (in other words, its price in the case of money). It is relative to labor as explained by Adam Smith: The value of any commodity, [...] to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities (\"Wealth of Nations\" Book 1, chapter V).\nAccording to the classical economists, value is the labor embodied in a commodity under a given structure of production. Marx called this the \"socially necessary labor\" but it is sometimes also called the \"real cost\" or \"absolute value\".\nRelation between values and prices.\nWhile the LTV posits that value is primarily determined by labor, it recognizes that the actual price of a commodity is influenced in the short-term by the profit motive and market conditions, including supply and demand and the extent of monopolization. Adherents to the LTV conceptualize value (i.e., socially necessary labor time) as a \"center of gravity\" for price over the long-term.\nIn Book 1, chapter VI, Adam Smith writes:\nThe real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.\nThe final sentence explains how Smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command, and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit.\nThe demonstration of the relation between commodities' unit values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation, then the relation between values (proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution.\nLTV does not deny the role of supply and demand influencing price, but suggests that value and price are equivalent when supply-demand equilibrium is met. In \"Value, Price and Profit\" (1865), Karl Marx paraphrases Adam Smith:\nIt suffices to say that if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say, with their values as determined by the respective quantities of labor required for their production.\nThe LTV seeks to explain the level of this equilibrium. This could be explained by a \"cost of production\" argument\u2014pointing out that all costs are ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices. Marx later called this \"Smith's adding up theory of value\".\nSmith argues that labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like hunters and fishermen. Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy, arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element or substance by which to measure them, and that labor is a common substance of what Marx eventually calls \"commodity-values\".\nLabor process.\nSince the term \"value\" is understood in the LTV as denoting something created by labor, and its \"magnitude\" as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates.\nThe value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the LTV means by \"socially necessary\" is that the value only increases in proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the finished commodity. Each unit still bears the same value as all the others of the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, unskilled workers may drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price (as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other workers producing the same kind of commodities.\nHowever, production not only involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants and so on. These means of labor\u2014also known as means of production\u2014are often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight, air, uncultivated land, unextracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital.\nConsider for example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that compose the material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of constant capital\u2014the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup\u2014to the value of the final cup of coffee. Again, on average, the worker can transfer no more than the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of coffee. So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the value of the means of labor\u2014this constant capital\u2014and the value newly added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.\nOften this is expressed mathematically as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwhere\nNote: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value of the period's product can be divided by the total number of items (use-values or formula_5) produced to derive the unit value of each item. formula_6 where formula_7 is the total items produced.\nThe LTV further divides the value added during the period of production, formula_2, into two parts. The first part is the portion of the process when the workers add value equivalent to the wages they are paid. For example, if the period in question is one week and these workers collectively are paid $1,000, then the time necessary to add $1,000 to\u2014while preserving the value of\u2014constant capital is considered the necessary labor portion of the period (or week): denoted formula_9. The remaining period is considered the surplus labor portion of the week: or formula_10. The value used to purchase labor-power, for example, the $1,000 paid in wages to these workers for the week, is called variable capital (formula_11). This is because in contrast to the constant capital expended on means of production, variable capital can add value in the labor process. The amount it adds depends on the duration, intensity, productivity and skill of the labor-power purchased: in this sense, the buyer of labor-power has purchased a commodity of variable use. Finally, the value added during the portion of the period when surplus labor is performed is called surplus value (formula_12). From the variables defined above, we find two other common expressions for the value produced during a given period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe first form of the equation expresses the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs formula_13 and the surplus value appropriated in the process of production, formula_12. The second form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the values added by the labor performed during the process formula_15.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe labor theory of value has developed over many centuries. It had no single originator, but rather many different thinkers arrived at the same conclusion independently. Aristotle is claimed to hold to this view. Some writers trace its origin to Thomas Aquinas. In his \"Summa Theologiae\" (1265\u20131274) he expresses the view that \"value can, does and should increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the improvement of commodities.\" Scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter have cited Ibn Khaldun, who in his \"Muqaddimah\" (1377), described labor as the source of value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation. He argued that even if earning \"results from something other than a craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also) include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it would not have been acquired.\" Scholars have also pointed to Sir William Petty's \"Treatise of Taxes\" of 1662 and to John Locke's labor theory of property, set out in the \"Second Treatise on Government\" (1689), which sees labor as the ultimate source of economic value. Karl Marx himself credited Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled \"A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency\" as being \"one of the first\" to advance the theory.\nAdam Smith accepted the theory for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to contemporary capitalism. He pointed out that if the \"labor embodied\" in a product equaled the \"labor commanded\" (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it), then profit was impossible. David Ricardo (seconded by Marx) responded to this paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. \"Labor commanded\", he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself (wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages (what Marx called the value of labor power), but the value of the entire product created by labor.\nRicardo's theory was a predecessor of the modern theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs associated with Neo-Ricardianism.\nBased on the discrepancy between the wages of labor and the value of the product, the \"Ricardian socialists\"\u2014Charles Hall, Thomas Hodgskin, John Gray, and John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone\u2014applied Ricardo's theory to develop theories of exploitation.\nMarx expanded on these ideas, arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of exploitation became central to his economic thought.\n19th century American individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their particular interpretation of it being called \"Cost the limit of price\". They, as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor.\nAdam Smith and David Ricardo.\nAdam Smith held that, in a primitive society, the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning, in this case, the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of production: \"The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which employs him.\" According to Whitaker, Smith is claiming that the 'real value' of such a commodity produced in advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in exchange but \"[Smith] disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was Ricardo's, and really his alone.\"\nClassical economist David Ricardo's labor theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw materials and machinery used in the process. David Ricardo stated it as, \"The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not on the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour.\" In this connection Ricardo seeks to differentiate the quantity of labor necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the laborers for its production. Therefore, wages did not always increase with the price of a commodity. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them. For example, he said \"I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine, which is kept in the cellar for three or four years [i.e., while constantly increasing in exchange value], or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth \u00a3100.\" (Quoted in Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy stabilizes this discrepancy until the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage. If anyone can hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that would make it hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.\nThe labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective theory of value, which says that value of a good is not determined by how much labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its scarcity. Ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is \"immoral\" for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces.\nIt is arguable to what extent these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly defined. For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not account. In a letter, he wrote: \"I am not satisfied with the explanation I have given of the principles which regulate value.\" Adam Smith theorized that the labor theory of value holds true only in the \"early and rude state of society\" but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit. As a result, \"Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value.\"\nAnarchism.\nPierre-Joseph Proudhon's mutualism and American individualist anarchists such as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker adopted the labor theory of value of classical economics and used it to criticize capitalism while favoring a non-capitalist market system.\nWarren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, \"The Peaceful Revolutionist\", was the first anarchist periodical published. Cost the limit of price was a maxim coined by Warren, indicating a (prescriptive) version of the labor theory of value. Warren maintained that the just compensation for labor (or for its product) could only be an equivalent amount of labor (or a product embodying an equivalent amount). Thus, profit, rent, and interest were considered unjust economic arrangements. In keeping with the tradition of Adam Smith's \"The Wealth of Nations\", the \"cost\" of labor is considered to be the subjective cost; i.e., the amount of suffering involved in it. He put his theories to the test by establishing an experimental \"labor for labor store\" called the Cincinnati Time Store at the corner of 5th and Elm Streets in what is now downtown Cincinnati, where trade was facilitated by notes backed by a promise to perform labor. \"All the goods offered for sale in Warren's store were offered at the same price the merchant himself had paid for them, plus a small surcharge, in the neighborhood of 4 to 7 percent, to cover store overhead.\" The store stayed open for three years; after it closed, Warren could pursue establishing colonies based on Mutualism. These included \"Utopia\" and \"Modern Times\". Warren said that Stephen Pearl Andrews' \"The Science of Society\", published in 1852, was the most lucid and complete exposition of Warren's own theories.\nMutualism is an economic theory and anarchist school of thought that advocates a society where each person might possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration. Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying \"the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility\". Mutualism originated from the writings of philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon.\nCollectivist anarchism as defended by Mikhail Bakunin defended a form of labor theory of value when it advocated a system where \"all necessaries for production are owned in common by the labor groups and the free communes\u00a0... based on the distribution of goods according to the labor contributed\".\nKarl Marx.\nContrary to popular belief, Marx never used the term \"labor theory of value\" in any of his works, but used the term law of value; Marx opposed \"ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor\", arguing as such:\nLabor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is just as much a source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth consists!) as labor, which is itself only the manifestation of a force of nature, human labor power.\nHere, Marx was distinguishing between exchange value (the subject of the LTV) and use value. Marx used the concept of \"socially necessary labor time\" to introduce a social perspective distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics. Whereas most economists start with the individual's perspective, Marx started with the perspective of society \"as a whole\". \"Social production\" involves a complicated and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on each other for their survival and prosperity. \"Abstract\" labor refers to a characteristic of commodity-producing labor that is shared by all different kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept abstracts from the \"particular\" characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor.\n\"Socially necessary\" labor refers to the quantity required to produce a commodity \"in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labor employed.\" That is, the value of a product is determined more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se that creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists. Another distinction is between productive and unproductive labor. Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value. According to Marx an increase in productiveness of the laborer does not affect the value of a commodity, but rather, increases the surplus value realized by the capitalist. Therefore, decreasing the cost of production does not decrease the value of a commodity, but allows the capitalist to produce more and increases the opportunity to earn a greater profit or surplus value, as long as there is demand for the additional units of production.\nCriticism of the Marxist labor theory of value.\nThe Marxist labor theory of value has been criticized on several counts. Some argue that it predicts that profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive industries, which would be contradicted by measured empirical data inherent in quantitative analysis. This is sometimes referred to as the \"Great Contradiction\". In volume 3 of \"Capital\", Marx explains why profits are not distributed according to which industries are the most labor-intensive and why this is consistent with his theory. Whether or not this is consistent with the labor theory of value as presented in volume 1 has been a topic of debate. According to Marx, surplus value is extracted by the capitalist class as a whole and then distributed according to the amount of total capital, not just the variable component. In the example given earlier, of making a cup of coffee, the constant capital involved in production is the coffee beans themselves, and the variable capital is the value added by the coffee maker. The value added by the coffee maker is dependent on its technological capabilities, and the coffee maker can only add so much total value to cups of coffee over its lifespan. The amount of value added to the product is thus the amortization of the value of the coffeemaker. We can also note that not all products have equal proportions of value added by amortized capital. Capital intensive industries such as finance may have a large contribution of capital, while labor-intensive industries like traditional agriculture would have a relatively small one. Critics argue that this turns the LTV into a macroeconomic theory, when it was supposed to explain the exchange ratios of individual commodities in terms of their relation to their labor ratios (making it a microeconomic theory), yet Marx was now maintaining that these ratios must diverge from their labor ratios. Critics thus held that Marx's proposed solution to the \"great contradiction\" was not so much a solution as it was sidestepping the issue.\nSteve Keen argues that Marx's idea that only labor can produce value rests on the idea that as capital depreciates over its use, then this is transferring its exchange-value to the product. Keen argues that it is not clear why the value of the machine should depreciate at the same rate it is lost. Keen uses an analogy with labor: If workers receive a subsistence wage and the working day exhausts the capacity to labor, it could be argued that the worker has \"depreciated\" by the amount equivalent to the subsistence wage. However this depreciation is not the limit of value a worker can add in a day (indeed this is critical to Marx's idea that labor is fundamentally exploited). If it were, then the production of a surplus would be impossible. According to Keen, a machine could have a use-value greater than its exchange-value, meaning it could, along with labor, be a source of surplus. Keen claims that Marx almost reached such a conclusion in the \"Grundrisse\" but never developed it any further. Keen further observes that while Marx insisted that the contribution of machines to production is solely their use-value and not their exchange-value, he routinely treated the use-value and exchange-value of a machine as identical, despite the fact that this would contradict his claim that the two were unrelated. Marxists respond by arguing that use-value and exchange-value are incommensurable magnitudes; to claim that a machine can add \"more use-value\" than it is worth in value-terms is a category error. According to Marx, a machine by definition cannot be a source of \"human\" labor. Keen responds by arguing that the labor theory of value only works if the use-value and exchange-value of a machine are identical, as Marx argued that machines cannot create surplus value since as their use-value depreciates along with their exchange-value; they simply transfer it to the new product but create no new value in the process. Keen's machinery argument can also be applied to slavery based modes of production, which also profit from extracting more use value from the laborers than they return to laborers.\nIn their work \"Capital as Power\", Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that while Marxists have claimed to produce empirical evidence of the labor theory of value via numerous studies which show consistent correlations between values and prices, these studies do not actually provide evidence for it and are inadequate. According to the authors, these studies attempt to prove the LTV by showing that there is a positive correlation between market prices and labor values. However, the authors argue that these studies measure prices by looking at the price of total output (the unit price of a commodity multiplied by its total quantity) and do these for several sectors of the economy, estimate their total price and value from official statistics and measured for several years. However, Bichler and Nitzan argue that this method has statistical implications as correlations measured this way also reflect the co-variations of the associated quantities of unit values and prices. This means that the unit price and unit value of each sector are multiplied by the same value, which means that the greater the variability of output across different sectors, the tighter the correlation. This means that the overall correlation is substantially larger than the underlying correlation between unit values and unit prices; when sectors are controlled for their size, the correlations often drop to insignificant levels. Furthermore, the authors argue that the studies do not seem to actually attempt to measure the correlation between value and price. The authors argue that, according to Marx, the value of a commodity indicates the abstract labor time required for its production; however Marxists have been unable to identify a way to measure a unit (elementary particle) of abstract labor (indeed the authors argue that most have given up and little progress has been made beyond Marx's original work) due to numerous difficulties. This means assumptions must be made and according to the authors, these involve circular reasoning:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most important of these assumptions are that the value of labour power is proportionate to the actual wage rate, that the ratio of variable capital to surplus value is given by the price ratio of wages to profit, and occasionally also that the value of the depreciated constant capital is equal to a fraction of the capital\u2019s money price. In other words, the researcher assumes precisely what the labour theory of value is supposed to \"demonstrate\".\nBichler and Nitzan argue that this amounts to converting prices into values and then determining if they correlate, which the authors argue proves nothing since the studies are simply correlating prices with themselves. Paul Cockshott disagreed with Bichler and Nitzan's arguments, arguing that it was possible to measure abstract labor time using wage bills and data on working hours, while also arguing Bichler and Nitzan's claims that the true value-price correlations should be much lower actually relied on poor statistical analysis itself. Most Marxists, however, reject Bichler and Nitzan's interpretation of Marx, arguing that their assertion that individual commodities can have values, rather than prices of production, misunderstands Marx's work. For example, Fred Moseley argues Marx understood \"value\" to be a \"macro-monetary\" variable (the total amount of labor added in a given year plus the depreciation of fixed capital in that year), which is then concretized at the level of individual prices of production, meaning that \"individual values\" of commodities do not exist.\nThe theory can also be sometimes found in non-Marxist traditions. For instance, mutualist theorist Kevin Carson's \"Studies in Mutualist Political Economy\" opens with an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value.\nAdditionally, economist Joseph Schumpeter pointed out a couple of issues he believed undermined the validity of the labor theory of value. Firstly he wrote that labor theory of value failed to take into account the intrinsic differences in labor quality between individuals (a difference that, he believed, could not be properly encapsulated through the use of a value multiplier). Furthermore, he claims that labor theory of value, both in its Marxist and Ricardian formulations, would entail that labor be the sole input in an economy alongside all labor being homogenous in nature, a thesis which Schumpeter dismisses as unrealistic and one that could be resolved by Marginalism anyway. Schumpeter goes on to divert his attention towards the supposed self-contradictory nature of how labor theory of value allows for the justification of the Marxian exploitation thesis, highlighting that labor itself could not be valued since it was not itself produced by any labor and that the accumulation of surplus value described by Marx could not occur in a static, perfectly competitive market. Thus, although giving Marx the credit for seeing the need for change inherent in capitalist markets, Schumpeter nonetheless concludes that labor theory of value and its consequences remain problematic theories.\nSome post-Keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value. Joan Robinson, who herself was considered an expert on the writings of Karl Marx, wrote that the labor theory of value was largely a tautology and \"a typical example of the way metaphysical ideas operate\".\nIn ecological economics, the labor theory of value has been criticized, where it is argued that labor is in fact energy over time. Such arguments generally fail to recognize that Marx is inquiring into social relations among human beings, which cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy, just as democracy cannot be reduced to the expenditure of energy that a voter makes in getting to the polling place. However, echoing Joan Robinson, Alf Hornborg, an environmental historian, argues that both the reliance on \"energy theory of value\" and \"labor theory of value\" are problematic as they propose that use-values (or material wealth) are more \"real\" than exchange-values (or cultural wealth)\u2014yet, use-values are culturally determined. For Hornborg, any Marxist argument that claims uneven wealth is due to the \"exploitation\" or \"underpayment\" of use-values is actually a tautological contradiction, since it must necessarily quantify \"underpayment\" in terms of exchange-value. The alternative would be to conceptualize unequal exchange as \"an asymmetric net transfer of material inputs in production (e.g., embodied labor, energy, land, and water), rather than in terms of an underpayment of material inputs or an asymmetric transfer of 'value'\". In other words, uneven exchange is characterized by incommensurability, namely: the unequal transfer of material inputs; competing value-judgements of the worth of labor, fuel, and raw materials; differing availability of industrial technologies; and the off-loading of environmental burdens on those with less resources.\nAnalytical Marxism.\nMeanwhile, analytical Marxists argued that the core concepts of Marxian economics could be explained logically without relying on the labor theory of value. In the process of reinterpreting the key concepts of Marxian economics, they tend to apply theoretical frameworks from modern social sciences, such as neoclassical economics and game theory or rational choice theory, instead of the labor theory of value.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCompeting theories\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17630", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17630", "title": "Lunar Society of Birmingham", "text": "British dinner club and learned society, 1755\u20131813\nThe Lunar Society of Birmingham was a British dinner club and informal learned society of prominent figures in the Midlands Enlightenment, including industrialists, natural philosophers and intellectuals, who met regularly between 1765 and 1813 in Birmingham. At first called the Lunar Circle, \"Lunar Society\" became the formal name by 1775. The name arose because the society would meet during the full moon, as the extra light made the journey home easier and safer in the absence of street lighting. The members cheerfully referred to themselves as \"lunaticks\", a contemporary spelling of lunatics. Venues included Erasmus Darwin's home in Lichfield, Matthew Boulton's home, Soho House, Bowbridge House in Derbyshire, and Great Barr Hall.\nMembership and status.\nThe Lunar Society evolved through various degrees of organisation over a period of up to fifty years, but was only ever an informal group. No constitution, minutes, publications or membership lists survive from any period, and evidence of its existence and activities is found only in the correspondence and notes of those associated with it. Historians therefore disagree on what qualifies as membership of the Lunar Society, who can be considered to have been members, and even when the society can be said to have existed. Josiah Wedgwood, for example, is described by some commentators as being one of five \"principal members\" of the society, while others consider that he \"cannot be recognized as [a] full member\" at all. Dates given for the establishment of the society range from \"sometime before 1760\" to 1775. Some historians argue that it had ceased to exist by 1791; others that it was still operating as late as 1813.\nDespite this uncertainty, fourteen individuals have been identified as having verifiably attended Lunar Society meetings regularly over a long period during its most productive eras: these are Matthew Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, Samuel Galton, Jr., Robert Augustus Johnson, James Keir, Joseph Priestley, William Small, Jonathan Stokes, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, John Whitehurst and William Withering.\nWhile the society's meetings provided its name and social focus, however, they were relatively unimportant in its activities, and far more activity and communication took place outside the meetings themselves \u2013 members local to Birmingham were in almost daily contact, more distant ones in correspondence at least weekly. A more loosely defined group has therefore been identified over a wider geographical area and longer time period, who attended meetings occasionally and who corresponded or co-operated regularly with multiple other members on group activities. These include Joseph Pickford, Richard Kirwan, John Smeaton, Henry Moyes, John Michell, Pieter Camper, R. E. Raspe, John Baskerville, Thomas Beddoes, John Wyatt, William Thomson, Cyril Jackson, Jean-Andr\u00e9 Deluc, John Wilkinson, John Ash, Samuel More, Robert Bage, James Brindley, Ralph Griffiths, John Roebuck, Thomas Percival, Joseph Black, James Hutton, Benjamin Franklin, Joseph Banks, James Lind, William Herschel, Daniel Solander, John Warltire, George Fordyce, Alexander Blair, Samuel Parr, Louis Joseph d'Albert d'Ailly, William Emes, the seventh Duke of Chaulnes, Barth\u00e9lemy Faujas de Saint-Fond, Grossart de Virly, Johann Gottling. and Joseph Wright.\nThis lack of a defined membership has led some historians to criticise a Lunar Society \"legend\", leading people to \"confuse it and its efforts with the general growth of intellectual and economic activities in the provinces of eighteenth century Britain\". Others have seen this both as real and as one of the society's main strengths: a paper read at the Science Museum in London in 1963 claimed that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDevelopment.\nOrigins 1755\u20131765.\nThe origins of the Lunar Society lie in a pattern of friendships that emerged in the late 1750s. Matthew Boulton and Erasmus Darwin met at some time during 1757 or 1758, possibly through family connections, as Boulton's mother's family were patients of Darwin; or possibly though shared friendships, as both were admirers of the printer John Baskerville and friends of the astronomer and geologist John Michell, a regular visitor to Darwin's house in Lichfield. Darwin was a physician and poet who had studied at Cambridge and Edinburgh; Boulton had left school at fourteen and started work in his father's business making metal goods in Birmingham at the age of 21. Despite their different backgrounds they shared a common interest in experiment and invention, and their activities would show Darwin's theoretical understanding and Boulton's practical experience to be complementary. Soon they were visiting each other regularly and conducting investigations into scientific subjects such as electricity, meteorology and geology.\nAround the same time the Derby-based clockmaker John Whitehurst became a friend, first of Boulton and subsequently of Darwin, through his business supplying clock movements to Boulton's ormolu manufacturing operation. Although older than both Boulton and Darwin, by 1758 Whitehurst was writing to Boulton telling excitedly of a pyrometer he had built, and looking forward to visiting Birmingham \"to spend one day with you in trying all necessary experiments\".\nBoulton, Darwin and Whitehurst were in turn introduced by Michell to Benjamin Franklin when he travelled to Birmingham in July 1758 \"to improve and increase Acquaintance among Persons of Influence\", and Franklin returned in 1760 to conduct experiments with Boulton on electricity and sound. Although Michell seems to have withdrawn slightly from the group when he moved to Thornhill (near Dewsbury) in 1767, Franklin was to remain a common link among many of the early members.\nThe Lunar Circle 1765\u20131775.\nThe nature of the group was to change significantly with the move to Birmingham in 1765 of the Scottish physician William Small, who had been Professor of Natural Philosophy at The College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. There he had taught and been a major influence over Thomas Jefferson, and had formed the focus of a local group of intellectuals. His arrival with a letter of introduction to Matthew Boulton from Benjamin Franklin was to have a galvanising effect on the existing circle, which began to explicitly identify itself as a group and actively started to attract new members.\nThe first of these was Josiah Wedgwood, who became a close friend of Darwin in 1765 while campaigning for the building of the Trent and Mersey Canal and subsequently closely modelled his large new pottery factory at Etruria, Staffordshire on Boulton's Soho Manufactory. Another new recruit, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, met Darwin, Small and Boulton in 1766 through a shared interest in carriage design, and he in turn introduced his friend and fellow Rousseau-admirer Thomas Day, with whom he had studied at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. In 1767 James Keir visited Darwin in Lichfield, where he was introduced to Boulton, Small, Wedgwood and Whitehurst and subsequently decided to move to Birmingham.\nThe Lunar Circle also attracted more distant involvement. Joseph Priestley, then living in Leeds and a close friend of John Michell, became associated with the Society in 1767 when Darwin and Wedgwood became involved with his work on electricity. In the same year James Watt visited Birmingham on the recommendation of his business patron John Roebuck, being shown around the Soho Manufactory by Small and Darwin in Boulton's absence. Although neither Priestley nor Watt were to move to Birmingham for several years, both were to be in constant communication with the Birmingham members and central to the circle's activities from 1767.\nBy 1768 the core group of nine individuals who would form the nucleus of the Lunar Society had come together with Small at their heart. The group at this time is sometimes referred to as the \"Lunar circle\", though this is a later description used by historians, and the group themselves used a variety of less specific descriptions, including \"Birmingham Philosophers\" or simply \"fellow-schemers\".\nThe Lunar Society 1775\u20131780.\nIf William Small's arrival in 1765 had been the catalyst to the development of the Lunar Circle as a cohesive group, his death \u2013 probably from malaria \u2013 in 1775 was to mark another change in its structure. Small had been the key link between the members, and in his absence those remaining moved to place the group on a more organised footing. Meetings were to be held on the Sunday nearest the full moon, lasting from two o'clock in the afternoon until eight o'clock in the evening. The first was probably that held on 31 December 1775, and the \"Lunar\" name is first recorded in 1776.\nThe era also saw significant changes in membership. William Withering \u2013 like Small, a physician \u2013 was already an acquaintance of Darwin, Boulton and Wedgwood when he moved from Stafford to Birmingham and became a member of the Society in 1776. John Whitehurst's move to London in 1775 had a less dramatic effect: he kept in regular contact with other members of the society and remained an occasional attender of meetings.\nThe leading figure behind the establishment of the society as a more organised body during this early period seems to have been Matthew Boulton: his home at Soho House in Handsworth was the principal venue for meetings, and in 1776 he is recorded as planning \"to make many Motions to the Members respecting new Laws, and regulations, such as will tend to prevent the decline of a society which I hope will be lasting.\" This reliance on Boulton was also to prove a weakness, however, as the period coincided with the peak of his work building up his steam engine business and he was frequently absent. Although the 1770s was one of the society's richest eras in terms of its collaborative achievements, the society's meetings declined from regular occurrences in 1775 to infrequent ones by the end of the decade.\nHeyday of the Society 1780\u20131789.\nIn late 1780 the nature of the society was to change again with the move to Birmingham of Joseph Priestley. Priestley had been closely associated with the group's activities for over a decade and was a strong advocate of the benefits of scientific societies. Shortly after his arrival Lunar meetings moved from Sunday afternoons to Mondays to accommodate Priestley's duties as a clergyman, while the society's dependence on Matthew Boulton was lessened by holding meetings at other members' houses in addition to Soho House. The result was to be the society's most productive era.\nSeveral other major new figures became associated with the society during this period. Samuel Galton, Jr., unusual as a Quaker who was also a gun-manufacturer, appears in the letters of other Lunar members as attending meetings from July 1781, and his daughter Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck was to provide one of the few first-hand accounts of the Lunar Society's activities. The botanist and physician Jonathan Stokes, who had known William Withering as a child, moved to Stourbridge and started attending Lunar Society meetings from 1783. His contribution to the society was significant but short-lived: after collaborating with Withering on his \"Botanical Arrangement of British Plants\" the two quarrelled bitterly and Stokes severed his relations with the main Lunar members by 1788.\nThe society also lost several major figures over the period: Richard Lovell Edgeworth ceased regular involvement in the society's activities when he returned to Ireland in 1782, John Whitehurst died in London in 1788, and Thomas Day died the following year. Most significantly, Erasmus Darwin moved to Derby in 1781, but although he complained of being \"cut off from the milk of science\", he continued to attend Lunar Society meetings at least until 1788.\nDecline 1789\u20131813.\nThe outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 caused political strains between members of the society, but it was the Priestley riots of 1791 in Birmingham itself that saw a decisive falling off of the society's spirit and activities. Joseph Priestley himself was driven from the town, leaving England entirely for the United States in 1794, William Withering's house was invaded by rioters and Matthew Boulton and James Watt had to arm their employees to protect the Soho Manufactory. Lunar meetings were continued by the younger generation of the families of earlier Lunar members, including Gregory Watt, Matthew Robinson Boulton, Thomas Wedgwood and James Watt junior, and possibly Samuel Tertius Galton. Regular meetings are recorded into the nineteenth century \u2013 eight in 1800, five or six before August 1801 and at least one in 1802, while as late as 1809 Leonard Horner was describing \"the remnant of the Lunar Society\" as being \"very interesting\". While individual members continued to produce work of importance, however, the collaborative activity that marked the heyday of the society was noticeably absent.\nThe society had definitely collapsed by 1813, however: in August of that year Samuel Galton, Jr. is recorded as having won a ballot for possession of the scientific books from the society's library.\nModern Lunar Societies.\nAmong memorials to the Society and its members are the Moonstones; two statues of Watt and a statue of \"Boulton, Watt and Murdoch\" by William Bloye; and the museum at Soho House \u2013 all in Birmingham.\nA new Lunar Society was formed in Birmingham by a group led by Dame Rachel Waterhouse. Its aim was to play a leading part in the development of the city and the wider region. Clive Stone was elected as Chair of the Lunar Society in July 2023. The society was still in operation in 2024.\nOutside Birmingham\nIn Australia, The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle was formed by leading digital entrepreneurs, software developers, educators, film producers, creatives, investors to encourage creative thinking and new ideas in a digital age.\nUniversity of Birmingham Lunar Society.\nIn the latter part of the 20th century, the University of Birmingham Lunar Society met every Thursday to debate and discuss all manner of topics in the Guild bar. In 2011, steps were undertaken to reform the discussion society as an alternative to the more regulated debate options available at the university. This was agreed by the University's Guild of Students in autumn 2012. The society now hosts symposiums every two weeks. Any member has always been welcome to suggest a topic for discussion. These meetings occur in a variety of environments from University rooms to local bars. In 2013 the society attempted to change the name of one of the rooms in the Guild of Students to 'The Lunar Room' in honour of the original Birmingham Lunar Society. Like the Oxford Union, the society has always traditionally put a huge emphasis on freedom of speech. The society has similar aims to The Speculative Society of Edinburgh University. In 2019, the society was rebranded as the Devil's Advocate Society, and retained the goals of the Lunar Society whilst changing much of its branding.\nToday, the society is an informal academic association open to both undergraduate and graduate students, as well as professional academics, from the University of Birmingham.\nArchives.\nHistorical material related to the Lunar Society is held in multiple collections. The University of Birmingham's Cadbury Research Library holds a series of portraits of the original Lunar Society members. The Library of Birmingham holds a large collection of Joseph Priestley's publications. Both archives also hold various letters of society members.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17633", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17633", "title": "Libya", "text": "Country in North Africa\nLibya, officially the State of Libya, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It borders the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Egypt to the east, Sudan to the southeast, Chad to the south, Niger to the southwest, Algeria to the west, and Tunisia to the northwest. With an area of almost , Libya is the fourth-largest country in Africa and the Arab world, and the 16th-largest in the world. The country claims 32,000 square kilometres of southeastern Algeria, south of the Libyan town of Ghat. The capital and largest city is Tripoli, located in the northwest and containing over a million of Libya's 7 million people.\nLibya has been inhabited by Berbers since the late Bronze Age as descendants from Iberomaurusian and Capsian cultures. In classical antiquity, the Phoenicians established city-states and trading posts in western Libya, while several Greek cities were established in the East. Parts of Libya were variously ruled by Carthaginians, Numidians, Persians, and Greeks before the entire region became a part of the Roman Empire. Libya was an early centre of Christianity. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the area of Libya was mostly occupied by the Vandals until the 7th century when invasions brought Islam to the region. From then on, centuries of Arab migration to the Maghreb shifted the demographic scope of Libya in favour of Arabs. In the 16th century, the Spanish Empire and the Knights Hospitaller occupied Tripoli until Ottoman rule began in 1551. Libya was involved in the Barbary Wars of the 18th and 19th centuries. Ottoman rule continued until the Italo-Turkish War in 1911, which resulted in Italy occupying Libya and establishing two colonies: Italian Tripolitania and Italian Cyrenaica, later unified in the Italian Libya colony from 1934 to 1943.\nDuring World War II, Libya was an area of warfare in the North African Campaign. The Italian population then went into decline and Libya became independent as a kingdom in 1951. A bloodless military coup in 1969, initiated by a coalition led by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, overthrew King Idris I and created a republic. Gaddafi was often described by critics as a dictator, and was one of the world's longest serving non-royal leaders. He ruled for 42 years until being overthrown and killed in the 2011 civil war, which was part of the wider Arab Spring, with authority transferred to the National Transitional Council then to the elected General National Congress.\nSince 2011, Libya has been involved in a political and humanitarian crisis, and by 2014, two rival authorities claimed to govern Libya, which led to a second civil war, with parts of Libya split between separate governments, based in Tripoli and Tobruk, as well as various tribal and Islamist militias. The two main warring sides signed a permanent ceasefire in 2020, and a unity government took authority to plan for democratic elections, though political rivalries continue to delay this. In March 2022, the House of Representatives ceased recognising the Government of National Unity and proclaimed an alternative government, the Government of National Stability (GNS). Both governments have been functioning simultaneously since then, which has led to dual power in Libya. The international community continues to recognise the unity government as the legitimate government of the country.\nLibya is a developing country ranking 115th by HDI, and has the 10th-largest proven oil reserves in the world. Libya has the highest level of greenhouse gas emissions per person in Africa, but has made little progress toward developing climate commitments. Libya is a member of the United Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, the African Union, the Arab League, the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, and OPEC. The country's official religion is Islam, with 96.6% of the Libyan population being Sunni Muslims. The official language of Libya is Arabic, with vernacular Libyan Arabic being spoken most widely. The majority of Libya's population is Arab.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the name \"Libya\" first appeared in an inscription of Ramesses II, written as \"rbw\" in hieroglyphic. The name derives from a generalised identity given to a large confederacy of ancient east \"Libyan\" Berbers, North African people(s) and tribes who lived around the lush regions of Cyrenaica and Marmarica. An army of 40,000 men and a confederacy of tribes known as \"Great Chiefs of the Libu\" were led by King Meryey who fought a war against pharaoh Merneptah in year 5 (1208 BCE). This conflict was mentioned in the Great Karnak Inscription in the western delta during the 5th and 6th years of his reign and resulted in a defeat for Meryey. According to the Great Karnak Inscription, the military alliance comprised the Meshwesh, the Lukka, and the \"Sea Peoples\" known as the Ekwesh, Teresh, Shekelesh, and the Sherden.\nThe Great Karnak Inscription reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"... the third season, saying: 'The wretched, fallen chief of Libya, Meryey, son of Ded, has fallen upon the country of Tehenu with his bowmen \u2014 Sherden, Shekelesh, Ekwesh, Lukka, Teresh. Taking the best of every warrior and every man of war of his country. He has brought his wife and his children \u2014 leaders of the camp, and he has reached the western boundary in the fields of Perire.\"\nThe name \"Libya\" was brought back into use in 1903 by Italian geographer Federico Minutilli. It was intended to supplant terms applied to Ottoman Tripolitania, the coastal region of what is today Libya, having been ruled by the Ottoman Empire from 1551 to 1911 as the Eyalet of Tripolitania.\nLibya gained independence in 1951 as the United Libyan Kingdom ( '), changing its name to the Kingdom of Libya ( '), literally \"Libyan Kingdom\", in 1963. Following a coup d'\u00e9tat led by Muammar Gaddafi in 1969, the name of the state was changed to the Libyan Arab Republic ( '). The official name was \"Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\" from 1977 to 1986 (), and \"Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\" (, ' ) from 1986 to 2011.\nThe National Transitional Council, established in 2011, referred to the state as simply \"Libya\". The United Nations (UN) formally recognised the country as \"Libya\" in September 2011 based on a request from the Permanent Mission of Libya citing the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration of 3 August 2011. In November 2011, the ISO 3166-1 was altered to reflect the new country name \"Libya\" in English, \"Libye (la)\" in French.\nIn December 2017, the Permanent Mission of Libya to the United Nations informed the UN that the country's official name was henceforth the \"State of Libya\"; \"Libya\" remained the official short form, and the country continued to be listed under \"L\" in alphabetical lists.\nHistory.\nAncient Libya.\nThe coastal plain of Libya was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC. The Afroasiatic ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe was the Garamantes, based in Germa. The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya. By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilisation, known as Punic, came into being.\nIn 630 BC, the ancient Greeks colonised the area around Barca in Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica. The area was home to the renowned philosophy school of the Cyrenaics. In 525 BC the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander the Great ended Persian rule in 331 BC and received tribute from Cyrenaica. Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom.\nAfter the fall of Carthage the Romans did not immediately occupy Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it instead under control of the kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height.\nOn the eastern side, Cyrenaica's first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius. It was heavily devastated during the Kitos War and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike. Although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decline. Libya was early to convert to Nicene Christianity and was the home of Pope Victor I; however, Libya was also home to many non-Nicene varieties of early Christianity, such as Arianism and Donatism.\nIslamic Libya: 647\u20131556.\nUnder the command of Amr ibn al-As, the Rashidun army conquered Cyrenaica. In 647 an army led by Abdullah ibn Saad took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. The Fezzan was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule. For the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Umayyad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. By the 10th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya, and ruled the entire region in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor.\nIbn Ziri's Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognised the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from mainly two Arab Qaisi tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region.\nZirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles among Ayyubids, the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of the Tunisian Hafsid Kingdom independent from the Almohads. In the 14th century, the Banu Thabit dynasty ruled Tripolitania before reverting to direct Hafsid control. By the 16th century, the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire.\nAfter Abbasid control was weakened, Cyrenaica was under Egypt-based states such as the Tulunids, Ikhshidids, Ayyubids, and Mamluks before Ottoman conquest in 1517. Fezzan acquired independence under Awlad Muhammad dynasty after Kanem rule. Ottomans finally conquered Fezzan between 1556 and 1577.\nOttoman Tripolitania: 1556\u20131911.\nAfter a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights Hospitaller, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha took control of Libya in 1551. His successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a \"pasha\" appointed directly by the \"sultan\" in Constantinople/Istanbul. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a \"bey\" was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved Blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli. In 1551, Turgut Reis enslaved almost the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo, some 5,000 people, sending them to Libya.\nIn time, real power came to rest with the pasha's corps of janissaries. In 1611 the \"deys\" staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of \"deys\" effectively ruled Tripolitania. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 1631\u201349) and Osman Saqizli (r. 1649\u201372), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica.\nLacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1835 mainly in Tripolitania, and had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid-18th century. Ahmed's successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region's delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli. The 1793\u201395 Tripolitanian civil war occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Pasha deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. Hamet's brother Yusuf (r. 1795\u20131832) re-established Tripolitania's independence. In 1816, Yusuf ordered the massacre of the al-Jawazi tribe. \nIn the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania's economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons. Civil war soon resulted.\nOttoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and G\u00fbma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858. The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya. Ottoman rule finally reasserted to Fezzan between 1850 and 1875 for earning income from Saharan commerce.\nItalian colonisation and Allied occupation (1911\u20131951).\nAfter the Italo-Turkish War (1911\u20131912), Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies. From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population.\nOmar Mukhtar rose to prominence as a resistance leader against Italian colonisation and became a national hero despite his capture and execution on 16 September 1931. His face is currently printed on the Libyan ten dinar note in memory and recognition of his patriotism. Another prominent resistance leader, Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, continued to lead the Libyan resistance until the outbreak of the Second World War.\nThe so-called \"pacification of Libya\" by the Italians resulted in mass deaths of the indigenous people in Cyrenaica, killing approximately one quarter of Cyrenaica's population of 225,000. Ilan Papp\u00e9 estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military \"killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in Italian concentration camps in Libya).\"\nIn 1934, Italy combined Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan and adopted the name \"Libya\" (used by the Ancient Greeks for all of North Africa except Egypt) for the unified colony, with Tripoli as its capital. The Italians emphasised infrastructure improvements and public works. In particular, they greatly expanded Libyan railway and road networks from 1934 to 1940, building hundreds of kilometres of new roads and railways and encouraging the establishment of new industries and dozens of new agricultural villages.\nIn June 1940, Italy entered World War II. Libya became the setting for the hard-fought North African Campaign that ultimately ended in defeat for Italy and its German ally in 1943. From 1943 to 1951, Libya was under Allied occupation. The British military administered the two former Italian Libyan provinces of Tripolitana and Cyrena\u00efca, while the French administered the province of Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya.\nIndependent Kingdom (1951\u20131969).\nA national assembly crafted a constitution that established a monarchy and extended an offer for the throne to Sayyid Idris, the Emir of Cyrenaica. Sayyid Idris held the esteemed position as the leader of the influential Senussi religious brotherhood, which was founded by his grandfather in the preceding century as a response to Western influence in the Arab world. This devout Islamic movement garnered significant support from the desert Bedouin and became a major political force in Libya. During the declining years of the Ottoman Empire, it effectively governed the Libyan interior.\nBorn in an oasis in Cyrenaica in 1890, Sayyid Idris assumed leadership of the Senussi at a young age. He spent a considerable period of exile in Egypt under Italian rule and returned to Libya after the Axis powers were ousted in 1943. On 24 December 1951, as King Idris I, he addressed the nation via radio from Benghazi. On 21 November 1949, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution stating that Libya should become independent before 1 January 1952. Idris represented Libya in the subsequent UN negotiations. By 24 December 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris.\nHowever, the new kingdom faced challenging prospects. It lacked significant industry and agricultural resources. The kingdom's primary exports consisted of hides, wool, horses, and ostrich feathers. Despite having one of the lowest income per capita figures globally, it also suffered from one of the highest illiteracy rates. King Idris I, already in his sixties, had no direct heir to succeed him. His cousin, whom he had married in 1932, reportedly experienced numerous miscarriages, and their son, born in 1953, tragically died shortly after birth. Crown Prince Rida, Idris's brother, was the designated heir, but the royal family was riddled with incessant disputes. King Idris's devout Muslim piety, which solidified his support among the Bedouin population, clashed with the modernising and urban intellectual currents in Libya. To address the rivalry between Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, Benghazi and Tripoli alternated as the capital every two years.\nThe swift emergence of a large number of bureaucrats resulted in a costly royal government. The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world's poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state. Although oil drastically improved the Libyan government's finances, popular resentment began to build over the increased concentration of the nation's wealth in the hands of King Idris and the national elite. This discontent continued to mount with the rise of Nasserism and Arab nationalism throughout North Africa and the Middle East, that inspire many anti-royal coups across the Arab world.\nRepublic of Libya under Gaddafi (1969\u20132011).\nOn 1 September 1969, a group of rebel military officers led by Muammar Gaddafi launched a coup d'\u00e9tat against King Idris, which became known as the Al Fateh Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the \"Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution\" in government statements and the official Libyan press. He began dominating history and politics of Libya for the next four decades. Moving to reduce Italian influence, in October 1970 all Italian-owned assets were expropriated and the 12,000-strong Italian community was expelled from Libya alongside the smaller community of Italian Libyan Jews. The day became a national holiday known as \"Day of Revenge\"; it was later renamed the \"Day of Friendship\" because of an improvement in Italy\u2013Libya relations.\nLibya's increase in prosperity was accompanied by increased internal political repression, and political dissent was made illegal under Law 75 of 1973. Widespread surveillance of the population was carried out through Gaddafi's Revolutionary Committees. Gaddafi also wanted to ease the strict social restrictions imposed on women by the previous regime, establishing the Revolutionary Women's Formation to encourage reform. In 1970, a law was introduced affirming equality of the sexes and wage parity. In 1971, Gaddafi sponsored the creation of a Libyan General Women's Federation. In 1972, a law was passed criminalising the marriage of girls under the age of sixteen and making the woman's consent a necessary prerequisite for a marriage.\nOn 25 October 1975, a coup attempt was launched by a group of 20 military officers, mostly from the city of Misrata. This resulted in the arrest and executions of the coup plotters. In March 1977, Libya officially became the \"Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya\". Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People's Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead. The new \"jamahiriya\" (Arab for \"republic\") governance structure he established was officially referred to as \"direct democracy\". Gaddafi, in his vision of democratic government and political philosophy, published \"The Green Book\" in 1975. His short book inscribed a representative mix of utopian socialism and Arab nationalism with a streak of Bedouin supremacy.In February 1977, Libya started delivering military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People's Armed Forces in Chad. The Chadian\u2013Libyan War began in earnest when Libya's support of rebel forces in northern Chad escalated into an invasion. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Egyptian\u2013Libyan War. Both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boum\u00e9di\u00e8ne. Hundreds of Libyans lost their lives in the country's support for Idi Amin's Uganda in its war against Tanzania. Gaddafi financed various other groups from anti-nuclear movements to Australian trade unions. On 2 March 1977, Libya officially became the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.\nLibya adopted its plain green national flag on 19 November 1977. The country had the only plain-coloured flag in the world until 2011, when Libya adopted its current flag. From 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US$11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs. Much of Libya's income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world.\nAn American airstrike led by then U.S. president Ronald Reagan intended to kill Gaddafi failed in 1986. Libya was finally put under sanctions by the United Nations after the bombing of a commercial flight at Lockerbie in 1988 killed 270 people. In the 1990s, the government's rule was threatened by militant Islamism and an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Gaddafi. The government responded with repressive measures. Riots and Islamic activisim were crushed by Revolutionary Guard Corps. Nevertheless, Cyrenaica between 1995 and 1998 was politically unstable, due to the tribal allegiances of the local troops. In 2003, Gaddafi announced that all of his regime's weapons of mass destruction were disassembled, and that Libya was transitioning toward nuclear power.\nFirst Libyan Civil War and the fall of Gaddafi (2011).\nThe first civil war came during the Arab Spring movements which overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt. Libya first experienced protests against Gaddafi's regime on 15 February 2011, with a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February. Libya's authoritarian regime led by Muammar Gaddafi put up much more of a resistance compared to the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia. While overthrowing the regimes in Egypt and Tunisia was a relatively quick process, Gaddafi's campaign posed significant stalls on the uprising in Libya. The first announcement of a competing political authority appeared online and declared the Interim Transitional National Council as an alternative government. One of Gaddafi's senior advisors responded by posting a tweet, wherein he resigned, defected, and advised Gaddafi to flee. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. On 10 March 2011, the United States and many other nations recognised the council headed by Mahmoud Jibril as acting prime minister and as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people and withdrawing the recognition of Gaddafi's regime.\nPro-Gaddafi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the \"de facto\" centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, \"exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict.\" Organizations of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action. On 17 March 2011, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973, with a 10\u20130 vote and five abstentions including Russia, China, India, Brazil and Germany. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of \"all means necessary\" to protect civilians within Libya. On 19 March, the first act of NATO allies to secure the no-fly zone began by destroying Libyan air defences when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets.\nIn the weeks that followed, U.S. American forces were in the forefront of NATO operations against Libya. More than 8,000 US personnel in warships and aircraft were deployed in the area. At least 3,000 targets were struck in 14,202 strike sorties, 716 of them in Tripoli and 492 in Brega. The U.S. air offensive included flights of B-2 stealth bombers, each bomber armed with sixteen 2000-pound bombs, flying out of and returning to their base in Missouri. The support provided by the NATO air forces contributed to the ultimate success of the revolution. By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs' Square in honour of those killed since 17 February 2011. On 20 October 2011, the last heavy fighting of the uprising came to an end in the city of Sirte. The Battle of Sirte was both the last decisive battle and the last one in general of the First Libyan Civil War where Gaddafi was captured and killed by NATO-backed forces on 20 October 2011. Sirte was the last Gaddafi loyalist stronghold and his place of birth. The defeat of loyalist forces was celebrated on 23 October 2011, three days after the fall of Sirte. At least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war. In addition, the National Transitional Council estimated 50,000 wounded.\nInterwar period and the Second Libyan Civil War (2011\u20132020).\nFollowing the defeat of loyalist forces, Libya was torn among numerous rival, armed militias affiliated with distinct regions, cities and tribes, while the central government had been weak and unable to effectively exert its authority over the country. Competing militias pitted themselves against each other in a political struggle between Islamist politicians and their opponents. On 7 July 2012, Libyans held their first parliamentary elections since the end of the former regime. On 8 August, the National Transitional Council officially handed power over to the wholly elected General National Congress, which was then tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum. On 25 August 2012, in what Reuters reported as \"the most blatant sectarian attack\" since the end of the civil war, unnamed organised assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves in the centre of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days. Numerous acts of vandalism and destruction of heritage were carried out by suspected Islamist militias, including the removal of the Nude Gazelle Statue and the destruction and desecration of World War II-era British grave sites near Benghazi. Many other cases of heritage vandalism were reported to be carried out by Islamist-related radical militias and mobs that either destroyed, robbed, or looted a number of historic sites.\nOn 11 September 2012, Islamist militants mounted an attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, killing the U.S. ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens, and three others. The incident generated outrage in the United States and Libya. On 7 October 2012, Libya's Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur was ousted after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate. Zeidan was sworn in after his cabinet was approved by the GNC. On 11 March 2014, after having been ousted by the GNC for his inability to halt a rogue oil shipment, Prime Minister Zeidan stepped down, and was replaced by Prime Minister Abdullah al-Thani.\nThe Second Civil War began in May 2014 following fighting between rival parliaments with tribal militias and jihadist groups soon taking advantage of the power vacuum. Most notably, radical Islamist fighters seized Derna in 2014 and Sirte in 2015 in the name of the Islamic State. In February 2015, neighbouring Egypt launched airstrikes against IS in support of the Tobruk government. In June 2014, elections were held to the House of Representatives, a new legislative body intended to take over from the General National Congress. The elections were marred by violence and low turnout, with voting stations closed in some areas. Secularists and liberals did well in the elections, to the consternation of Islamist lawmakers in the GNC, who reconvened and declared a continuing mandate for the GNC, refusing to recognise the new House of Representatives. Armed supporters of the General National Congress occupied Tripoli, forcing the newly elected parliament to flee to Tobruk.\nIn January 2015, meetings were held with the aim to find a peaceful agreement between the rival parties in Libya. The so-called Geneva-Ghadames talks were supposed to bring the GNC and the Tobruk government together at one table to find a solution of the internal conflict. However, the GNC actually never participated, a sign that internal division not only affected the \"Tobruk Camp\", but also the \"Tripoli Camp\". Meanwhile, terrorism within Libya steadily increased, also affecting neighbouring countries. The terrorist attack against the Bardo Museum in Tunisia on 18 March 2015 was reportedly carried out by two Libyan-trained militants. During 2015 an extended series of diplomatic meetings and peace negotiations were supported by the United Nations, as conducted by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG), Spanish diplomat Bernardino Le\u00f3n. UN support for the SRSG-led process of dialogue carried on in addition to the usual work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). In July 2015 SRSG Leon reported to the UN Security Council on the progress of the negotiations, which at that point had just achieved a political agreement on 11 July setting out \"a comprehensive framework... includ[ing] guiding principles... institutions and decision-making mechanisms to guide the transition until the adoption of a permanent constitution.\"\nTalks, negotiations and dialogue continued on during mid-2015 at various international locations, culminating at Skhirat in Morocco in early September.\nAlso in 2015, as part of the ongoing support from the international community, the UN Human Rights Council requested a report about the Libyan situation and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, established an investigative body (OIOL) to report on human rights and rebuilding the Libyan justice system. Chaos-ridden Libya emerged as a major transit point for people trying to reach Europe. Between 2013 and 2018, nearly 700,000 migrants reached Italy by boat, many of them from Libya. In May 2018 Libya's rival leaders agreed to hold parliamentary and presidential elections following a meeting in Paris. In April 2019, Khalifa Haftar launched Operation Flood of Dignity, in an offensive by the Libyan National Army aimed to seize Western territories from the Government of National Accord (GNA). In June 2019, forces allied to Libya's UN-recognised Government of National Accord successfully captured Gharyan, a strategic town where military commander Khalifa Haftar and his fighters were based. According to a spokesman for GNA forces, Mustafa al-Mejii, dozens of LNA fighters under Haftar were killed, while at least 18 were taken prisoner.\nIn March 2020, Prime Minister of the GNA Fayez Al-Sarraj commenced Operation Peace Storm. The government initiated the bid in response to the state of assaults carried by Field Marshal Haftar's LNA. \"We are a legitimate, civilian government that respects its obligations to the international community, but is committed primarily to its people and has an obligation to protect its citizens,\" Sarraj said in line with his decision. On 28 August 2020, the \"BBC Africa Eye\" and \"BBC Arabic Documentaries\" revealed that a drone operated by the United Arab Emirates (UAE) killed 26 young cadets at a military academy in Tripoli, on 4 January. Most of the cadets were teenagers and none of them were armed. The Chinese-made drone Wing Loong II fired Blue Arrow 7 missile, which was operated from UAE-run Al-Khadim Libyan air base. In February, these drones stationed in Libya were moved to an air base near Siwa in the western Egyptian desert. \"The Guardian\" probed and discovered the blatant violation of UN arms embargo by the UAE and Turkey on 7 October 2020. As per the reporting, both the nations sent large-scale military cargo planes to Libya in support of their respective parties. On 23 October 2020, a permanent ceasefire was signed to end the war.\nPost-civil war years (2020\u2013present).\nIn December 2021, the country's first presidential election was scheduled, but was delayed to June 2022 and later postponed further.\nFathi Bashagha was appointed prime minister by the parliament in February 2022 to lead a transitional administration, but standing prime minister Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh refused to hand over power as of April 2022. In protest against the Dbeibah government, tribal leaders from the desert town of Ubari shut down the El Sharara oil field, Libya's largest oil field, on 18 April 2022. The shut down threatened to cause oil shortages domestically in Libya, and preclude the state-run National Oil Corp. from exploiting the high oil prices on the international market resulting from the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 2 July, the House of Representatives was burned down by protesters.\nOn 10 September 2023, catastrophic floods due to dam failures generated by Storm Daniel devastated the port city of Derna, killing more than 5,900 and possibly as many as 24,000. The floods were the worst natural disaster in Libya's modern history.\nIn November 2024, the Government of National Unity announced it would instate a morality police to crack-down on \"weird haircuts\", enforce \"modest\" clothing, and require male guardians for women.\nGeography.\nLibya extends over , making it the 16th-largest nation in the world by size. Libya is bounded to the north by the Mediterranean Sea, the northwest by Tunisia, the west by Algeria, the southwest by Niger, the south by Chad, the southeast by Sudan, and the east by Egypt, as well as maritime borders with Greece, Italy and Malta to the north. Libya lies between latitudes 19\u00b0 and 34\u00b0N, and longitudes 9\u00b0 and 26\u00b0E. Libya comprises three historical regions: Tripolitania, Fezzan, and Cyrenaica. \nAt , Libya's coastline is the longest of any African country bordering the Mediterranean. The portion of the Mediterranean Sea north of Libya is often called the Libyan Sea. The climate is mostly extremely dry and desertlike in nature. However, the northern regions enjoy a milder Mediterranean climate.\nSix ecoregions lie within Libya's borders: Saharan halophytics, Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe, Mediterranean woodlands and forests, North Saharan steppe and woodlands, Tibesti-Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands, and West Saharan montane xeric woodlands.\nNatural hazards come in the form of hot, dry, dust-laden sirocco (known in Libya as the \"gibli\"). This is a southern wind blowing from one to four days in spring and autumn. There are also dust storms and sandstorms. Oases can also be found scattered throughout Libya, the most important of which are Ghadames and Kufra.\nLibya is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change and underprepared to deal with them. The effects of climate change in Libya, such as desertification, sea level rise, flooding, and irregular weather patterns are already noticeable and are expected to increase. These pose significant threats to Libya's agriculture, food and water security and economic development and sustainability.\nLibya was a pioneer state in North Africa in species protection, with the creation in 1975 of the El Kouf protected area. The fall of Muammar Gaddafi's regime favoured intense poaching: \"Before the fall of Gaddafi even hunting rifles were forbidden. But since 2011, poaching has been carried out with weapons of war and sophisticated vehicles in which one can find up to 200 gazelle heads killed by militiamen who hunt to pass the time. We are also witnessing the emergence of hunters with no connection to the tribes that traditionally practice hunting. They shoot everything they find, even during the breeding season. More than 500,000 birds are killed in this way each year, when protected areas have been seized by tribal chiefs who have appropriated them. The animals that used to live there have all disappeared, hunted when they are edible or released when they are not,\" explains zoologist Khaled Ettaieb.\nLibyan Desert.\nThe Libyan Desert, which covers most of Libya, is one of the most arid and sun-baked places on Earth. In places, decades may pass without seeing any rainfall at all, and even in the highlands rainfall seldom happens, once every 5\u201310 years. At Uweinat, as of 2006[ [update]] the last recorded rainfall was in September 1998.\nLikewise, the temperature in the Libyan Desert can be extreme; on 13 September 1922, the town of 'Aziziya, which is located southwest of Tripoli, recorded an air temperature of , considered to be a world record. In September 2012, however, the world record figure of 58\u00a0\u00b0C was determined to be invalid by the World Meteorological Organization.\nThere are a few scattered uninhabited small oases, usually linked to the major depressions, where water can be found by digging to a few feet in depth. In the west there is a widely dispersed group of oases in unconnected shallow depressions, the Kufra group, consisting of Tazerbo, Rebianae and Kufra. Aside from the scarps, the general flatness is only interrupted by a series of plateaus and massifs near the centre of the Libyan Desert, around the convergence of the Egyptian-Sudanese-Libyan borders.\nSlightly further to the south are the massifs of Arkenu, Uweinat, and Kissu. These granite mountains are ancient, having formed long before the sandstones surrounding them. Arkenu and Western Uweinat are ring complexes very similar to those in the A\u00efr Mountains. Eastern Uweinat (the highest point in the Libyan Desert) is a raised sandstone plateau adjacent to the granite part further west.\nThe plain to the north of Uweinat is dotted with eroded volcanic features. With the discovery of oil in the 1950s also came the discovery of a massive aquifer underneath much of Libya. The water in the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System pre-dates the last ice ages and the Sahara Desert itself. This area also contains the Arkenu structures, which were once thought to be two impact craters.\nPolitics and elections.\nThe politics of Libya has been in a tumultuous state since the start of the Arab Spring and the NATO intervention related Libyan crisis in 2011. The crisis resulted in the collapse of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the killing of Muammar Gaddafi, amidst the First Libyan Civil War and 2011 foreign military intervention. The crisis was deepened by factional violence in the aftermath of the First Civil War, resulting in the outbreak of the Second Libyan Civil War in 2014. The control over the country is currently split between the House of Representatives (HoR) in Tobruk and the Government of National Unity (GNU) in Tripoli and their respective supporters, as well as various and tribal elements controlling different parts of the country.\nThe former legislature was the General National Congress, which had 200 seats. The General National Congress (2014), a largely unrecognised rival parliament based in the \"de jure\" capital of Tripoli, claims to be a legal continuation of the GNC. On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in parliamentary elections, the first free elections in almost 40 years. Around thirty women were elected to become members of parliament. Early results of the vote showed the National Forces Alliance, led by former interim prime minister Mahmoud Jibril, as front runner. The Justice and Construction Party, affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood, has done less well in Libya than similar parties in Egypt and Tunisia. It won 17 out of 80 seats that were contested by parties; about 60 independents had joined its caucus by 2013. As of January 2013, there was mounting public pressure on the National Congress to set up a constitution-drafting body. Congress had not yet decided whether the members of the body would be elected or appointed. On 30 March 2014, the General National Congress voted to replace itself with a new House of Representatives. The new legislature allocated 30 seats for women, would have 200 seats overall (with individuals able to run as members of political parties), and allowed Libyans of other nationalities to run for office.\nFollowing the 2012 elections, Freedom House improved Libya's rating from Not Free to Partly Free and considered the country an electoral democracy. Gaddafi merged civil and sharia courts in 1973. As of 2013, civil courts employed sharia judges in regular courts of appeal as specialists in sharia appellate cases. Laws regarding personal status are derived from Islamic law as of 2011. At a meeting of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs on 2 December 2014, UN Special Representative Bernardino Le\u00f3n described Libya as a non-state. An agreement to form a national unity government was signed on 17 December 2015. Under the terms of the agreement, a nine-member Presidency Council and a seventeen-member interim Government of National Accord would be formed, with a view to holding new elections within two years. The House of Representatives would continue to exist as a legislature, and an advisory body called the State Council would have members nominated by the General National Congress (2014). The formation of an interim unity government was announced on 5 February 2021, after its members were elected by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum (LPDF). 74 members of the LPDF cast ballots for four-member slates, which would fill positions including prime minister and the head of the Presidential Council. After no slates reached a 60% vote threshold, the two leading groups competed in a run-off election. Mohamed al-Menfi, a former ambassador to Greece, became head of the Presidential Council.\nMeanwhile, the LPDF confirmed that Abdul Hamid Dbeibeh, a businessman, would be the transitional prime minister. All of the candidates who ran in the election, including the members of the winning slate, promised to appoint women to 30% of all senior government positions. The politicians elected to lead the interim government initially agreed not to stand in the national elections scheduled for 24 December 2021. However, Dbeibeh announced his candidacy for president despite the ban in November 2021. The appeals court in Tripoli rejected appeals for his disqualification and allowed Dbeibeh back on the candidates' list, along with a number of other previously disqualified candidates, for the election originally scheduled for 24 December. Even more controversially, the court also reinstated Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, a son of the former dictator, as a presidential candidate. On 22 December 2021, Libya's Election Commission called for the postponement of the election until 24 January 2022. Earlier, a parliamentary commission said it would be \"impossible\" to hold the election on 24 December 2021. The UN called on Libya's interim leaders to \"expeditiously address all legal and political obstacles to hold elections, including finalising the list of presidential candidates\". However, at the last minute, the election was postponed indefinitely and the international community agreed to continue its support and recognition of the interim government headed by Dbeibeh. According to new election rules, a new prime minister has 21 days to form a cabinet that must be endorsed by the various governing bodies within Libya. After this cabinet is agreed upon, the unity government will replace all \"parallel authorities\" within Libya, including the Government of National Accord in Tripoli and the administration led by General Haftar.\nForeign relations.\nLibya's foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951. As a kingdom, Libya maintained a definitively pro-Western stance and was recognised as belonging to the conservative traditionalist bloc in the League of Arab States (the present-day Arab League), of which it became a member in 1953. The government was also friendly towards Western countries such as the United Kingdom, United States, France, Italy, and Greece, and established full diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1955. Although the government supported Arab causes, including the Moroccan and Algerian independence movements, it took little active part in the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict or the tumultuous inter-Arab politics of the 1950s and early 1960s. The kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home.\nAfter the 1969 coup d'\u00e9tat, Muammar Gaddafi closed American and British bases and partly nationalised foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya. Gaddafi was known for backing a number of leaders viewed as anathema to Westernisation and political liberalism, including Ugandan president Idi Amin, Central African emperor Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa, Ethiopian strongman Haile Mariam Mengistu, Liberian president Charles Taylor, and Yugoslav president Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107.\nRelations with the West were strained for most of Gaddafi's rule, with incidents including the killing of London policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, the bombing of a West Berlin nightclub frequented by U.S. servicemen, and the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 leading to UN sanctions in the 1990s; by the late 2000s, the United States and other Western powers had normalised relations with Libya. Gaddafi's decision to abandon the pursuit of weapons of mass destruction after the Iraq War saw Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein overthrown and put on trial led to Libya being hailed as a success for Western soft power initiatives in the war on terror. In October 2010, Gaddafi apologised to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the trans-Saharan slave trade.\nLibya is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer. Libyan authorities rejected European Union's plans aimed at stopping migration from Libya. In 2017, Libya signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nMilitary.\nLibya's previous national army was defeated in the First Libyan Civil War and disbanded. The Tobruk-based House of Representatives, which claims to be the legitimate government of Libya, has attempted to reestablish a military known as the Libyan National Army. Led by Khalifa Haftar, it controls much of eastern Libya. In May 2012, an estimated 35,000 personnel had joined its ranks. The internationally recognised Government of National Accord established in 2015 had its own army that replaced the LNA, consisting largely of undisciplined and disorganised militia groups.\nAs of November 2012, it was deemed to be still in the embryonic stage of development. President Mohammed Magariaf promised that empowering the army and police force was the government's biggest priority in 2012. President Megarif also ordered that all of the country's militias to come under government authority or disband.\nMilitias had refused to be integrated into a central security force by February 2013. Many of the militias were disciplined, but the most powerful of them answered only to the executive councils of various Libyan cities. The militias made up the so-called Libya Shield Force, a parallel national force, which operated at the request, rather than at the order, of the defence ministry.\nAdministrative divisions.\nHistorically, the area of Libya was considered three provinces (or states), Tripolitania in the northwest, Barka (Cyrenaica) in the east, and Fezzan in the southwest. The conquest by Italy in the Italo-Turkish War united them into a single political unit.\nSince 2007, Libya has been divided into 22 districts (Shabiyat):\nIn 2022, 18 provinces were declared by the Libyan Government of National Unity (https://): the eastern coast, Jabal Al-Akhdar, Al-Hizam, Benghazi, Al-Wahat, Al-Kufra, Al-Khaleej, Al-Margab, Tripoli, Al-Jafara, Al-Zawiya, West Coast, Gheryan, Zintan, Nalut, Sabha, Al-Wadi, and Murzuq Basin.\nHuman rights.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch annual report 2016, journalists are still being targeted by the armed groups in Libya. The organisation added that Libya ranked very low in the 2015 Press Freedom Index, 154th out of 180 countries. For the 2021 Press Freedom Index its score dropped to 165th out of 180 countries. Homosexuality is illegal in Libya.\nEconomy.\nThe Libyan economy depends primarily upon revenues from the oil sector, which account for over half of GDP and 97% of exports. Libya holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is an important contributor to the global supply of light, sweet crude. During 2010, when oil averaged at $80 a barrel, oil production accounted for 54% of GDP. Apart from petroleum, the other natural resources are natural gas and gypsum. The International Monetary Fund estimated Libya's real GDP growth at 122% in 2012 and 16.7% in 2013, after a 60% plunge in 2011.\nIn 2023 Libya emitted around 23.77 million tonnes of greenhouse gases, about 0.17% of the world's total emissions. However, the nation ranked as the 21st highest emitter per capita globally and the highest in Africa, at just over 13 tonnes per person. Libya was slow to join climate efforts, signing the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2016 and the Paris Climate Agreement in 2021. However, as of 2024, Libya has not ratified the Paris Agreement and submitted its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), and has made little progress toward the development of climate change adaptation plans.\nThe World Bank defines Libya as an 'Upper Middle Income Economy', along with only seven other African countries. Substantial revenues from the energy sector, coupled with a small population, give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in Africa. Although the government supported Arab causes, including the Moroccan and Algerian independence movements, it took little active part in the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict or the tumultuous inter-Arab politics of the 1950s and early 1960s. The kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home. This allowed the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya state to provide an extensive level of social security, particularly in the fields of housing and education.\nLibya faces many structural problems including a lack of institutions, weak governance, and chronic structural unemployment. The economy displays a lack of economic diversification and significant reliance on immigrant labour. Libya has traditionally relied on unsustainably high levels of public sector hiring to create employment. In the mid-2000s, the government employed about 70% of all national employees.\nUnemployment rose from 8% in 2008 to 21% in 2009, according to the census figures. According to an Arab League report, based on data from 2010, unemployment for women stands at 18% while for the figure for men is 21%, making Libya the only Arab country where there are more unemployed men than women. Libya has high levels of social inequality, high rates of youth unemployment and regional economic disparities. Water supply is also a problem, with some 28% of the population not having access to safe drinking water in 2000.\nTwo trans-African automobile routes pass through Libya, the Cairo-Dakar Highway and Tripoli-Cape Town Highway. These routes have further contributed in the economic development of Libya.\nLibya imports up to 90% of its cereal consumption requirements, and imports of wheat in 2012/13 was estimated at 1 million tonnes. The 2012 wheat production was estimated at 200,000 tonnes. The government hopes to increase food production to 800,000 tonnes of cereals by 2020. However, natural and environmental conditions limit Libya's agricultural production potential. Before 1958, agriculture was the country's main source of revenue, making up about 30% of GDP. With the discovery of oil in 1958, the size of the agriculture sector declined rapidly, accounting for less than 5% GDP by 2005.\nThe country joined OPEC in 1962. Libya is not a WTO member, but negotiations for its accession started in 2004. In the early 1980s, Libya was one of the wealthiest countries in the world; its GDP per capita was higher than some developed countries.\nUN sanctions were lifted in September 2003, and Libya announced in December 2003 that it would abandon programs to build weapons of mass destruction. Other steps have included applying for membership of the World Trade Organization, reducing subsidies, and announcing plans for privatisation.\nAuthorities privatised more than 100 government-owned companies after 2003 in industries including oil refining, tourism and real estate, of which 29 were 100% foreign owned. Many international oil companies returned to the country, including oil giants Shell and ExxonMobil. After sanctions were lifted there was a gradual increase of air traffic, and by 2005 there were 1.5\u00a0million yearly air travellers. Libya had long been a notoriously difficult country for Western tourists to visit due to stringent visa requirements.\nIn 2007, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the second-eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, was involved in a green development project called the Green Mountain Sustainable Development Area, which sought to bring tourism to Cyrene and to preserve Greek ruins in the area. In August 2011, it was estimated that it would take at least 10 years to rebuild Libya's infrastructure. Even before the 2011 war, Libya's infrastructure was in a poor state due to \"utter neglect\" by Gaddafi's administration, according to the NTC. By October 2012, the economy had recovered from the 2011 conflict, with oil production returning to near normal levels. Oil production was more than 1.6\u00a0million barrels per day before the war. By October 2012, the average oil production has surpassed 1.4\u00a0million bpd. The resumption of production was made possible due to the quick return of major Western companies, like TotalEnergies, Eni, Repsol, Wintershall and Occidental. In 2016, an announcement from the company said the company aims 900,000 barrel per day in the next year. Oil production has fallen from 1.6\u00a0million barrel per day to 900,000 in four years of war.\nThe Great Man-Made River is the world's largest irrigation project. The project utilises a pipeline system that pumps fossil water from the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System from down south in Libya to cities in the populous Libyan northern Mediterranean coast including Tripoli and Benghazi. The water provides 70% of all freshwater used in Libya. During the second Libyan civil war, lasting from 2014 to 2020, the water infrastructure suffered neglect and occasional breakdowns. By 2017, 60% of the Libyan population were malnourished. Since then, 1.3 million people are waiting for emergency humanitarian aid, out of a total population of 7.1 million.\nAs of March 2024, Libya was actively promoting business development and encouraging both domestic and foreign investment. This strategic initiative is aimed at securing long-term economic stability and prosperity for Libya by diversifying its economic foundation. Embracing green industries like renewable energy, energy efficiency, sustainable agriculture, and eco-tourism holds the potential to generate fresh employment prospects across a spectrum of sectors, thereby addressing unemployment challenges, particularly among the youth demographic.\nDemographics.\nLibya is a large country with a relatively small population concentrated very narrowly along the coast. Its population density is about in the two northern regions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, but falls to less than elsewhere. 90% of the people live along the coast in less than 10% of the area.\nAbout 88% of the population is urban, mostly concentrated in the three largest cities, Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata. Libya has a population of about million, 27.7% of whom are under the age of 15. In 1984 the population was 3.6\u00a0million, an increase from the 1.54\u00a0million reported in 1964.\nThe population of Libya is primarily of Arab ancestry. Arabs account for 92% of the population, while Berbers account for 5%, though other estimates put this percentage at 10%, representing approximately 600,000 people. Among the Berber groups are the minority Berber populations of Zuwarah and the Nafusa Mountains. Southern Libya, primarily Sebha, Kufra, Ghat, Ghadamis and Murzuk, is also inhabited by two other ethnic groups; the Tuareg and Toubou. Libya is one of the world's most tribal countries. There are about 140 tribes and clans in Libya. Also living in Libya are an estimated 750,000 Egyptian workers, down from more than 2 million prior to the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi in 2011.\nFamily life is important for Libyan families, the majority of whom live in apartment blocks and other independent housing units, with modes of housing depending on their income and wealth. Although the Arab Libyans traditionally lived nomadic Bedouin lifestyles in tents, they have predominately settled in towns and cities. Old ways of life are gradually fading out. A small number of Libyans still live in the desert as their families have done for centuries. Most of the population has occupations in industry and services, and a small percentage is in agriculture.\nAccording to the UNHCR, there were around 8,000 registered refugees, 5,500 unregistered refugees, and 7,000 asylum seekers of various origins in Libya in January 2013. Additionally, 47,000 Libyan nationals were internally displaced and 46,570 were internally displaced returnees.\nHealth.\nIn 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.88% of the country's GDP. In 2009, there were 18.71 physicians and 66.95 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 74.95 years in 2011, or 72.44 years for males and 77.59 years for females.\nIn 2023, the Libyan health ministry announced the launch of the National Strategy for Primary Healthcare 2023\u20132028 to improve services provided by group clinics and health centres. A unique health number allotted to each citizen will facilitate access to medical records. Before Storm Daniel, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimated that around 60,000 people were in need of humanitarian aid in Derna and environs. Since the storm many of the hospitals and primary health facilities in Derna and eastern Libya have been rendered partially or completely nonfunctional.\nLibya's 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI) score is 19.2, which indicates a moderate level of hunger. Libya ranks 83rd out of 127 countries.\nEducation.\nLibya's population includes 1.7\u00a0million students, over 270,000 of whom study at the tertiary level. Basic education in Libya is free for all citizens, and is compulsory up to the secondary level. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was 89.2%.\nAfter Libya's independence in 1951, its first university, the University of Libya, was established in Benghazi by royal decree. In the 1975\u201376 academic year the number of university students was estimated to be 13,418. As of 2004[ [update]], this number has increased to more than 200,000, with another 70,000 enrolled in the higher technical and vocational sector. The rapid increase in the number of students in the higher education sector has been mirrored by an increase in the number of institutions of higher education.\nSince 1975 the number of public universities has grown from two to twelve and since their introduction in 1980, the number of higher technical and vocational institutes has grown to 84. Since 2007 some new private universities such as the Libyan International Medical University have been established. Although before 2011 a small number of private institutions were given accreditation, the majority of Libya's higher education has always been financed by the public budget. In 1998 the budget allocation for education represented 38.2% of Libya's national budget.\nIn 2024, the Ministry of Education announced the launch of the Full-Day School Project in which 12 schools in different parts of the country will have longer school days. The project aims to provide 800 hours of instruction per year to 3,300 elementary school students.\nEthnicity.\nThe original inhabitants of Libya belonged predominantly to Berber ethnic groups; however, the long series of foreign invasions and migrations\u00a0\u2013 particularly by Arabs\u00a0\u2013 had a profound and lasting ethnic, linguistic, and cultural influence on Libyan demographics. Centuries of large-scale Arab migration to the Maghreb since the 7th century shifted the demographics of Libya in favour of Arabs. Some Turks settled in Libya during the rule of the Ottoman Empire.\nMost of Libya's inhabitants are Arab, with many tracing their ancestry to Bedouin Arab tribes like Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal, plus Turkish and Berber minorities. The Turkish minority are often called \"Kouloughlis\" and are concentrated in and around villages and towns. There are some ethnic minorities, such as the Berber Tuareg and the Black African Tebou.\nMost Italian settlers, at their height numbering over half a million, left after Italian Libya's independence in 1947. More repatriated in 1970 after the accession of Muammar Gaddafi, but a few hundred returned in the 2000s.\nForeign labour.\nAs of 2023, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) estimates that approximately 10% of Libya's population (upwards of 700,000 people) constituted foreign labour. Prior to the 2011 revolution, official and unofficial figures of migrant labour ranged from 25% to 40% of the population (between 1.5 and 2.4\u00a0million people). Historically, Libya hosted millions of low- and high-skilled Egyptian migrants, in particular.\nIt is difficult to estimate the total number of immigrants in Libya because the census figures, official counts and typically more accurate unofficial estimates all differ. In the 2006 census, around 359,540 foreign nationals were resident in Libya out of a population of over 5.5\u00a0million (6.35% of the population). Almost half of these were Egyptians, followed by Sudanese and Palestinian immigrants.\nDuring the 2011 revolution, 768,362 immigrants fled Libya as calculated by the IOM, around 13% of the population at the time, although many more stayed on in the country.\nIf consular records prior to the revolution are used to estimate the immigrant population, as many as 2 million Egyptian migrants were recorded by the Egyptian embassy in Tripoli in 2009, followed by 87,200 Tunisians, and 68,200 Moroccans by their respective embassies. Turkey recorded the evacuation of 25,000 workers during the 2011 uprising. The number of Asian migrants before the revolution were just over 100,000 (60,000 Bangladeshis, 20,000 Filipinos, 18,000 Indians, 10,000 Pakistanis, as well as Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, Thai and other workers). This would put the immigrant population at almost 40% before the revolution and is a figure more consistent with government estimates in 2004 which put the regular and irregular migrant numbers at 1.35 to 1.8\u00a0million (25\u201333% of the population at the time).\nLibya's native population of Arabs-Berbers as well as Arab migrants of various nationalities collectively make up 97% of the population as of 2014[ [update]].\nLanguages.\nAccording to the CIA, the official language of Libya is Arabic. The local Libyan Arabic variety is spoken alongside Modern Standard Arabic. Various Berber languages are also spoken, including Tamasheq, Ghadamis, Nafusi, Suknah and Awjilah. The Libyan Amazigh High Council (LAHC) has declared the Amazigh (Berber or Tamazight) language to be official in the cities and districts inhabited by the Berbers in Libya.\nIn addition, English is widely understood in the major cities, while the former colonial language of Italian is also used in commerce and by the remaining Italian population.\nReligion.\nAbout 97% of the population in Libya are Muslims, most of whom belong to the Sunni branch. Small numbers of Ibadi Muslims live in the country.\nBefore the 1930s, the Senussi Sunni Sufi movement was the primary Islamic movement in Libya. This was a religious revival adapted to desert life. Its \"zawaaya\" (lodges) were found in Tripolitania and Fezzan, but Senussi influence was strongest in Cyrenaica. Rescuing the region from unrest and anarchy, the Senussi movement gave the Cyrenaican tribal people a religious attachment and feelings of unity and purpose. This Islamic movement was eventually destroyed by the Italian invasion. Gaddafi asserted that he was a devout Muslim, and his government was taking a role in supporting Islamic institutions and in worldwide proselytising on behalf of Islam.\nThe International Religious Freedom Report 2004 noted that \"bishops, priests and nuns wear religious dress freely in public and report virtually no discrimination,\" while also \"enjoying good relations with the Government\". The report also indicated that members of minority religions said \"they do not face harassment by authorities or the Muslim majority on the basis of their religious practices\". The International Christian Concern does not list Libya as a country where there is \"persecution or severe discrimination against Christians\". Since the fall of Gaddafi, ultra-conservative strains of Islam have reasserted themselves in places. Derna in eastern Libya, historically a hotbed of jihad thought, came under the control of militants aligned with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in 2014. Jihadist elements have also spread to Sirte and Benghazi, among other areas, as a result of the Second Libyan Civil War.\nPrior to independence, Libya was home to more than 140,000 Christians (mostly of Italian and Maltese ancestry). Many Christian settlers left to Italy or Malta after the independence. Small foreign communities of Christians remained. Coptic Orthodox Christianity, the predominant Christian church of Egypt, is the largest and most historic Christian denomination in Libya. There are about 60,000 Egyptian Copts in Libya. There are three Coptic Churches in Libya, one in Tripoli, one in Benghazi, and one in Misurata.\nThe Coptic Church has grown in recent years in Libya, due to the growing immigration of Egyptian Copts to Libya. There are an estimated 40,000 Roman Catholics in Libya who are served by two bishops, one in Tripoli (serving the Italian community) and one in Benghazi (serving the Maltese community). There is also a small Anglican community, made up mostly of African immigrant workers in Tripoli which is part of the Anglican Diocese of Egypt. People have been arrested on suspicion of being Christian missionaries, as proselytising is illegal. Christians have also faced the threat of violence from radical Islamists in some parts of the country, with a well-publicised video released by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in February 2015 depicting the mass beheading of Christian Copts. Libya was ranked fourth on Open Doors' 2022 World Watch List, an annual ranking of the 50 countries where Christians face the most extreme persecution.\nLibya was once the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BC. In 1942, the Italian Fascist authorities set up forced labour camps south of Tripoli for the Jews, including Giado (about 3,000 Jews), Gharyan, Jeren, and Tigrinna. In Giado, some 500 Jews died of weakness, hunger, and disease. In 1942, Jews who were not in the concentration camps were heavily restricted in their economic activity and all men between 18 and 45 years were drafted for forced labour. In August 1942, Jews from Tripolitania were interned in a concentration camp at Sidi Azaz. In the three years after November 1945, more than 140 Jews were murdered, and hundreds more wounded, in a series of pogroms. By 1948, about 38,000 Jews remained in the country. Upon Libyan independence in 1951, most of the Jewish community emigrated.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCulture.\nMany Arabic speaking Libyans consider themselves as part of a wider Arab community. This was strengthened by the spread of Pan-Arabism in the mid-20th century, and their reach to power in Libya where they instituted Arabic as the only official language of the state. Under Gaddafi's rule, the teaching and even use of indigenous Berber language was strictly forbidden. In addition to banning foreign languages previously taught in academic institutions, leaving entire generations of Libyans with limitations in their comprehension of the English language. Both the spoken Arabic dialects and Berber, still retain words from Italian, that were acquired before and during the \"Libia Italiana\" period.\nLibyans have a heritage in the traditions of the previously nomadic Bedouin Arabic speakers and sedentary Berber tribes. Most Libyans associate themselves with a particular family name originating from tribal or conquest based heritage.\nReflecting the \"nature of giving\" ( \"\", Berber languages: \u2d30\u2d4f\u2d30\u2d3d\u2d3d\u2d30\u2d3c Anakkaf), amongst the Libyan people as well as the sense of hospitality, the state of Libya made it to the top 20 on Charities Aid Foundation's World Giving Index in 2013. According to Charities Aid Foundation (CAF), in a typical month, almost three-quarters (72%) of all Libyans helped somebody they did not know\u00a0\u2013 the third highest level across all 135 countries surveyed.\nThere are few theatres or art galleries due to the decades of cultural repression under the Gaddafi regime and lack of infrastructure development under the regime of dictatorship. For many years there have been no public theatres, and only very few cinemas showing foreign films. The tradition of folk culture is still alive and well, with troupes performing music and dance at frequent festivals, both in Libya and abroad.\nA large number of Libyan television stations are devoted to political review, Islamic topics and cultural phenomena. A number of TV stations air various styles of traditional Libyan music. Tuareg music and dance are popular in Ghadames and the south. Libyan television broadcasts air programs mostly in Arabic though usually have time slots for English and French programs. A 1996 analysis by the Committee to Protect Journalists found Libya's media was the most tightly controlled in the Arab world during the country's dictatorship. As of 2012[ [update]] hundreds of TV stations have begun to air due to the collapse of censorship from the old regime and the initiation of \"free media\".\nMany Libyans frequent the country's beach and they also visit Libya's archaeological sites\u2014especially Leptis Magna, which is widely considered to be one of the best preserved Roman archaeological sites in the world. The most common form of public transport between cities is the bus, though many people travel by automobile. There are no railway services in Libya, but these are planned for construction in the near future (see rail transport in Libya).\nLibya's capital, Tripoli, has many museums and archives. These include the Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum, the National Archives, the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum. The Red Castle Museum located in the capital near the coast and right in the city centre, built in consultation with UNESCO, may be the country's most famous.\nCuisine.\nLibyan cuisine is a mixture of the different Italian, Bedouin and traditional Arab culinary influences. Pasta is the staple food in the Western side of Libya, whereas rice is generally the staple food in the east.\nCommon Libyan foods include several variations of red tomato sauce based pasta dishes (similar to the Italian Sugo all'arrabbiata dish), rice, usually served with lamb or chicken (typically stewed, fried, grilled, or boiled in-sauce), and couscous, which is steam cooked whilst held over boiling red tomato sauce and meat (sometimes also containing zucchini/courgettes and chickpeas), and typically served along with cucumber slices, lettuce and olives.\nBazeen, a dish made from barley flour and served with red tomato sauce, is customarily eaten communally, with several people sharing the same dish, usually by hand. This dish is commonly served at traditional weddings or festivities. Asida is a sweet version of Bazeen, made from white flour and served with a mix of honey, ghee or butter. Another popular way to serve Asida is with rub (fresh date syrup) and olive oil. Usban is animal tripe stitched and stuffed with rice and vegetables cooked in tomato based soup or steamed. Shurba is a red tomato sauce-based soup, usually served with small grains of pasta.\nA very common snack eaten by Libyans is known as \"khubs bi' tun\", literally meaning \"bread with tuna fish\", usually served as a baked baguette or pita bread stuffed with tuna fish that has been mixed with harissa (chili sauce) and olive oil. Many snack vendors prepare these sandwiches and they can be found all over Libya. Libyan restaurants may serve international cuisine, or may serve simpler fare such as lamb, chicken, vegetable stew, potatoes and macaroni. Due to severe lack of infrastructure, many under-developed areas and small towns do not have restaurants and instead food stores may be the only source to obtain food products. Alcohol consumption is illegal.\nThere are four main ingredients of traditional Libyan food: olives (and olive oil), dates, grains and milk. Grains are roasted, ground, sieved and used for making bread, cakes, soups and Bazeen. Dates are harvested, dried and can be eaten as they are, made into syrup or slightly fried and eaten with bsisa and milk. After eating, Libyans often drink black tea. This is normally repeated a second time (for the second glass of tea), and in the third round of tea, it is served with roasted peanuts or roasted almonds known as \"shay bi'l-luz\" (mixed with the tea in the same glass).\nSport.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Libya. The country hosted the 1982 African Cup of Nations and almost qualified for the 1986 FIFA World Cup. The national team almost won the 1982 AFCON; they lost to Ghana on penalties 7\u20136. In 2014, Libya won the African Nations Championship after beating Ghana in the finals. Although the national team has never won a major competition or qualified for a World Cup, there is still lots of passion for the sport and the quality of football is improving. It also participated in many Summer Olympics, such as the 2016 Summer Olympics, the 2008 Summer Olympics and more.\nHorse racing is also a popular sport in Libya. It is a tradition of many special occasions and holidays.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17636", "revid": "47651240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17636", "title": "Law of noncontradiction", "text": "Logic theorem\nIn logic, the law of noncontradiction (LNC; also known as the law of contradiction, principle of non-contradiction (PNC), or the principle of contradiction) states that for any given proposition, the proposition and its negation cannot both be simultaneously true, e.g., the proposition \"\"the house is white\" and its negation \"the house is not white\"\" are mutually exclusive. \nTo express the fact that the law is tenseless and to avoid equivocation, sometimes the law is amended to say \"contradictory propositions cannot both be true 'at the same time and in the same sense'\". \nFormally, the law is expressed as the tautology \u00ac(p \u2227 \u00acp). One reason to have this law is the principle of explosion, which states that anything follows from a contradiction, resulting in trivialism. The law is employed in a \"reductio ad absurdum\" proof. Paraconsistent logics are those logics which deny explosion.\nHistory.\nEarly in philosophy, it is hard to distinguish between different conceptions of the law of non-contradiction. One can interpret a logical law ontologically, e. g. to say nothing in reality is contradictory; one can interpret it psychologically, to say one cannot \"believe\" in a contradiction, and one can interpret it more strictly logically, that contradictory propositions cannot be true.\nEast.\nIndian philosophy.\nThe Buddhist Tripitaka attributes to Niga\u1e47\u1e6dha N\u0101taputta, who lived in the 6th century BCE, the implicit formulation of the law of noncontradiction, \u201c\u2018See how upright, honest and sincere Citta, the householder, is\u2019; and, a little later, he also says: \u2018See how Citta, the householder, is not upright, honest or sincere.\u2019 To this, Citta replies: \u2018if your former statement is true, your latter statement is false and if your latter statement is true, your former statement is false.\u2019\u201d Early explicit formulations of the law of noncontradiction were ontic, with later 2nd century Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna stating \u201cwhen something is a single thing, it cannot be both existent and non-existent\u201d similar to Aristotle\u2019s own ontic formulation that \u201cthat a thing cannot at the same time be and not be\u201d.\nIt is found in ancient Indian logic as a meta-rule in the \"Shrauta Sutras\", the grammar of P\u0101\u1e47ini, and the \"Brahma Sutras\" attributed to Vyasa. It was later elaborated on by medieval commentators such as Madhvacharya.\nWest.\nPre-Socratics.\nAccording to both Plato and Aristotle, Heraclitus was \"said\" to have denied the law of non-contradiction, stating \"one cannot step into the same river twice.\" So was the sophist Protagoras whose most famous saying is: \"Man is the measure of all things: of things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not\".\nParmenides seemed to deploy an ontological version of the law of non-contradiction in saying what is not cannot be, and thereby to deny the void, change, and motion.\nSocrates.\nThe earlier dialogues of Plato (424\u2013348 BCE), relating the discourses of Socrates, raised the use of arguments to a formal dialectical method (), also called the Socratic method.\nPlato.\nWilliam Hamilton wrote a history of the so called laws of thought. For the law non contradiction, he states \"this law Plato frequently employs, but the most remarkable passages are found in the Ph\u0153do, in the Sophista, and in the fourth and seventh books of the Republic.\" Plato states \"The same thing clearly cannot act or be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing at the same time, in contrary ways\"\nAristotle.\nAristotle calls it \"the most certain of all principles\" in \"Metaphysics\" Book IV. Ever since, the law of non-contradiction has been high orthodoxy. However, note for Aristotle this seems a principle of \"metaphysics\" rather than one of logic. Aristotle notes his logic would still work even if the law of non contradiction were false. This seems to mean Aristotle's logic denies explosion and so is paraconsistent.\nThomas Aquinas.\nThomas Aquinas argued that the principle of non-contradiction is essential to the reasoning of human beings (\"One cannot reasonably hold two mutually exclusive beliefs at the same time\") (\"Met.\" IV, lect. 6). He argued that human reasoning without the principle of non-contradiction is utterly impossible because reason itself can't function with two contradictory ideas. Aquinas argued that this is the same both for moral arguments as well as theological arguments and even machinery (\u201cthe parts must work together, the machine can\u2019t work if two parts are incompatible\u201d).\nDuns Scotus (\"Quaest. sup. Met.\" IV, Q. 3) and writer Francisco Su\u00e1rez (\"Disp. Met.\" III, \u00a7 3) also follow the Aristotelian view about the law of non-contradiction.\nLeibniz and Kant.\nLeibniz and Kant both used the law of non-contradiction to define the difference between analytic and synthetic propositions. For Leibniz, analytic statements follow from the law of non-contradiction, and synthetic ones from the principle of sufficient reason.\nRussell.\nThe principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in \"Principia Mathematica\" as:\n formula_1\nDialetheism.\nGraham Priest advocates the view that \"under some conditions\", some statements can be both true and false simultaneously, or may be true and false at different times. Dialetheism arises from formal logical paradoxes, such as the Liar's paradox and Russell's paradox, even though it isn't the only solution to them. Priori to Priest, Nicholas of Cusa and Hegel were both dialetheists.\nAlleged impossibility of its proof or denial.\nThe law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable, on the ground that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion. In other words, in order to verify or falsify such a principle of logic, one must resort to using it in the verification, an act that is argued to be self-defeating (rather like trying to bite one's own teeth). Aristotle said trying to prove the law of non-contradiction shows \"want of education.\" \nSince the early 20th century, certain logicians have proposed logics that deny the law. Logics known as \"paraconsistent\" are inconsistency-tolerant logics in that there, from P together with \u00acP, it does not imply that any proposition follows. Paraconsistent logics deny explosion. Nevertheless, not all paraconsistent logics deny the law of non-contradiction and some such logics even prove it. \nSome, such as David Lewis, have objected to paraconsistent logic on the ground that it is simply impossible for a statement and its negation to be jointly true. A related objection is that \"negation\" in paraconsistent logic is not really \"negation\"; it is merely a subcontrary-forming operator. Those who (like the dialetheists) claim that the Law of Non-Contradiction can be violated are in fact using a different definition of negation, and therefore talking about something else other than the Law of Non-Contradiction which is based on a particular definition of negation and therefore cannot be violated.\nIn popular culture.\nThe \"Fargo\" episode \"The Law of Non-Contradiction\", which takes its name from the law, was noted for its several elements relating to the law of non-contradiction, as the episode's main character faces several paradoxes. For example, she is still the acting chief of police while having been demoted from the position, and tries to investigate a man that both was and was not named Ennis Stussy, and who both was and was not her stepfather. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17637", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17637", "title": "Law of excluded middle", "text": "Logical principle\nIn logic, the law of excluded middle or the principle of excluded middle states that for every proposition, either this proposition or its negation is true. Symbolically expressed, the law is (\"p\" \u2228 ~\"p\").\nThe law of the excluded middle is also known as the law/principle of the excluded third, in Latin principium tertii exclusi. Another Latin designation for the law is tertium non datur or \"no third [possibility] is given\".\nIn classical logic, the law of the excluded middle is taken as a tautology. Intuitionistic logic, by contrast, does not affirm the law.\nHistory.\nAristotle.\nWilliam Hamilton writes in a history of the so-called laws of thought:\n The law of Excluded Middle between two contradictories remounts, as I have said, also to Plato, though the Second Alcibiades, the dialogue in which it is most clearly expressed, must be admitted to be spurious. It is also in the fragments of Pseudo-Archytas, to be found in Stob\u00e6us. [Hamilton LECT. V. LOGIC. 65]\n Hamilton further observes that \"It is explicitly and emphatically enounced by Aristotle in many passages both of his Metaphysics (l. iii. (iv.) c.7.) and of his Analytics, both Prior (l. i. c. 2) and Posterior (1. i. c. 4). In the first of these, he says: \"It is impossible that there should exist any medium between contradictory opposites, but it is necessary either to affirm or to deny everything of everything.\" [Hamilton LECT. V. LOGIC. 65]\nThe Sea Battle.\nYet in \"On Interpretation,\" Book 9, Aristotle seems to deny the law of excluded middle in the case of future contingents, in his discussion on the sea battle. It would seem to entail fatalism or logical determinism; and for this reason, the Stoics like Chrysippus affirmed it and embraced fatalism. Epicureans denied the law of excluded middle for this reason.\nSome also take it to be a denial of the semantical principle of bivalence, which states that every proposition is either true or false. The principle of bivalence always implies the law of excluded middle, while the converse is not always true.\nLeibniz.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Its usual form, \"Every judgment is either true or false\" [footnote 9] \u2026\"(from Kolmogorov in van Heijenoort, p. 421) footnote 9: \"This is Leibniz's very simple formulation (see \"Nouveaux Essais\", IV,2)\" (ibid p 421)\nRussell and Whitehead.\nThe principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in \"Principia Mathematica\" as:\n\u27382.1 ~\"p\" \u2228 \"p\"\nFormalists versus Intuitionists.\nFrom the late 1800s through the 1930s, a bitter, persistent debate raged between Hilbert and his followers versus Hermann Weyl and L. E. J. Brouwer. Brouwer's philosophy, called intuitionism, started in earnest with Leopold Kronecker in the late 1800s.\nHilbert intensely disliked Kronecker's ideas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Kronecker insisted that there could be no existence without construction. For him, as for Paul Gordan [another elderly mathematician], Hilbert's proof of the finiteness of the basis of the invariant system was simply not mathematics. Hilbert, on the other hand, throughout his life was to insist that if one can prove that the attributes assigned to a concept will never lead to a contradiction, the mathematical existence of the concept is thereby established (Reid p. 34)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was his [Kronecker's] contention that nothing could be said to have mathematical existence unless it could actually be constructed with a finite number of positive integers (Reid p. 26)\nThe debate had a profound effect on Hilbert. Reid indicates that Hilbert's second problem (one of Hilbert's problems from the Second International Conference in Paris in 1900) evolved from this debate (italics in the original):\nIn his second problem, [Hilbert] had asked for a \"mathematical proof\" of the consistency of the axioms of the arithmetic of real numbers.\nTo show the significance of this problem, he added the following observation:\n\"If contradictory attributes be assigned to a concept, I say that \"mathematically the concept does not exist\"\" (Reid p. 71)\nThus, Hilbert was saying: \"If \"p\" and ~\"p\" are both shown to be true, then \"p\" does not exist\", and was thereby invoking the law of excluded middle cast into the form of the law of contradiction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And finally constructivists \u2026 restricted mathematics to the study of concrete operations on finite or potentially (but not actually) infinite structures; completed infinite totalities \u2026 were rejected, as were indirect proof based on the Law of Excluded Middle. Most radical among the constructivists were the intuitionists, led by the erstwhile topologist L. E. J. Brouwer (Dawson p. 49)\nThe rancorous debate continued through the early 1900s into the 1920s; in 1927 Brouwer complained about \"polemicizing against it [intuitionism] in sneering tones\" (Brouwer in van Heijenoort, p.\u00a0492). But the debate was fertile: it resulted in \"Principia Mathematica\" (1910\u20131913), and that work gave a precise definition to the law of excluded middle, and all this provided an intellectual setting and the tools necessary for the mathematicians of the early 20th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Out of the rancor, and spawned in part by it, there arose several important logical developments; Zermelo's axiomatization of set theory (1908a), that was followed two years later by the first volume of \"Principia Mathematica\", in which Russell and Whitehead showed how, via the theory of types: much of arithmetic could be developed by logicist means (Dawson p. 49)\nBrouwer reduced the debate to the use of proofs designed from \"negative\" or \"non-existence\" versus \"constructive\" proof:\nAccording to Brouwer, a statement that an object exists having a given property means that, and is only proved, when a method is known which in principle at least will enable such an object to be found or constructed \u2026\nHilbert naturally disagreed.\n\"pure existence proofs have been the most important landmarks in the historical development of our science,\" he maintained. (Reid p. 155)\nBrouwer refused to accept the logical principle of the excluded middle, His argument was the following:\n\"Suppose that A is the statement \"There exists a member of the set \"S\" having the property \"P\".\" If the set is finite, it is possible\u2014in principle\u2014to examine each member of \"S\" and determine whether there is a member of \"S\" with the property \"P\" or that every member of \"S\" lacks the property \"P\".\" For finite sets, therefore, Brouwer accepted the principle of the excluded middle as valid. He refused to accept it for infinite sets because if the set \"S\" is infinite, we cannot\u2014even in principle\u2014examine each member of the set. If, during the course of our examination, we find a member of the set with the property \"P\", the first alternative is substantiated; but if we never find such a member, the second alternative is still not substantiated.\nSince mathematical theorems are often proved by establishing that the negation would involve us in a contradiction, this third possibility which Brouwer suggested would throw into question many of the mathematical statements currently accepted.\n\"Taking the Principle of the Excluded Middle from the mathematician,\" Hilbert said, \"is the same as \u2026 prohibiting the boxer the use of his fists.\"\n\"The possible loss did not seem to bother Weyl \u2026 Brouwer's program was the coming thing, he insisted to his friends in Z\u00fcrich.\" (Reid, p. 149)\nIn his lecture in 1941 at Yale and the subsequent paper, G\u00f6del proposed a solution: \"that the negation of a universal proposition was to be understood as asserting the existence \u2026 of a counterexample\" (Dawson, p.\u00a0157)\nG\u00f6del's approach to the law of excluded middle was to assert that objections against \"the use of 'impredicative definitions'\" had \"carried more weight\" than \"the law of excluded middle and related theorems of the propositional calculus\" (Dawson p.\u00a0156). He proposed his \"system \u03a3 \u2026 and he concluded by mentioning several applications of his interpretation. Among them were a proof of the consistency with intuitionistic logic of the principle ~ (\u2200A: (A \u2228 ~A)) (despite the inconsistency of the assumption \u2203 A: ~ (A \u2228 ~A))\" (Dawson, p.\u00a0157)\nThe debate seemed to weaken: mathematicians, logicians and engineers continue to use the law of excluded middle (and double negation) in their daily work.\nIntuitionist definitions of the law (principle) of excluded middle.\nThe following highlights the deep mathematical and philosophic problem behind what it means to \"know\", and also helps elucidate what the \"law\" implies (i.e. what the law really means). Their difficulties with the law emerge: that they do not want to accept as true implications drawn from that which is unverifiable (untestable, unknowable) or from the impossible or the false. (All quotes are from van Heijenoort, italics added).\n\"Brouwer\" offers his definition of \"principle of excluded middle\"; we see here also the issue of \"testability\":\nOn the basis of the testability just mentioned, there hold, for properties conceived within a specific finite main system, the \"principle of excluded middle\", that is, \"the principle that for every system every property is either correct [richtig] or impossible\", and in particular the principle of the reciprocity of the complementary species, that is, the principle that for every system the correctness of a property follows from the impossibility of the impossibility of this property. (335)\n\"Kolmogorov\"'s definition cites Hilbert's two axioms of negation\nHilbert's first axiom of negation, \"anything follows from the false\", made its appearance only with the rise of symbolic logic, as did the first axiom of implication \u2026 while \u2026 the axiom under consideration [axiom 5] asserts something about the consequences of something impossible: we have to accept \"B\" if the true judgment \"A\" is regarded as false \u2026\nHilbert's second axiom of negation expresses the principle of excluded middle. The principle is expressed here in the form in which is it used for derivations: if \"B\" follows from \"A\" as well as from ~\"A\", then \"B\" is true. Its usual form, \"every judgment is either true or false\" is equivalent to that given above\".\nFrom the first interpretation of negation, that is, the interdiction from regarding the judgment as true, it is impossible to obtain the certitude that the principle of excluded middle is true \u2026 Brouwer showed that in the case of such transfinite judgments the principle of excluded middle cannot be considered obvious\nfootnote 9: \"This is Leibniz's very simple formulation (see \"Nouveaux Essais\", IV,2). The formulation \"\"A\" is either \"B\" or not-\"B\"\" has nothing to do with the logic of judgments.\nfootnote 10: \"Symbolically the second form is expressed thus\n\"A\" \u2228 ~\"A\"\nwhere \u2228 means \"or\". The equivalence of the two forms is easily proved (p.\u00a0421)\nExamples.\nFor example, if \"P\" is the proposition:\n\"Socrates is mortal.\"\nthen the law of excluded middle holds that the logical disjunction:\n\"Either Socrates is mortal, or it is not the case that Socrates is mortal.\"\nis true by virtue of its form alone. That is, the \"middle\" position, that Socrates is neither mortal nor not-mortal, is excluded by logic, and therefore either the first possibility (\"Socrates is mortal\") or its negation (\"it is not the case that Socrates is mortal\") must be true.\nAn example of an argument that depends on the law of excluded middle is a proof by cases such as follows. We seek to prove that\nthere exist two irrational numbers formula_1 and formula_2 such that formula_3 is rational.\nIt is known that formula_4 is irrational (see proof). Consider the number\nformula_5.\nClearly (excluded middle) this number is either rational or irrational. If it is rational, the proof is complete, and\nformula_6 and formula_7.\nBut if formula_5 is irrational, then let\nformula_9 and formula_7.\nThen\nformula_11,\nand 2 is certainly rational. This concludes the proof.\nIn the above argument, the assertion \"this number is either rational or irrational\" invokes the law of excluded middle. An intuitionist, for example, would not accept this argument without further support for that statement. This might come in the form of a proof that the number in question is in fact irrational (or rational, as the case may be); or a finite algorithm that could determine whether the number is rational.\nNon-constructive proofs over the infinite.\nThe above proof is an example of a \"non-constructive\" proof disallowed by intuitionists:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The proof is non-constructive because it doesn't give specific numbers formula_1 and formula_2 that satisfy the theorem but only two separate possibilities, one of which must work. (Actually formula_14 is irrational but there is no known easy proof of that fact.) (Davis 2000:220)}} (Constructive proofs of the specific example above are not hard to produce; for example formula_6 and formula_16 are both easily shown to be irrational, and formula_17; a proof allowed by intuitionists).\nBy \"non-constructive\" Davis means that \"a proof that there actually are mathematic entities satisfying certain conditions would not have to provide a method to exhibit explicitly the entities in question.\" (p.\u00a085). Such proofs presume the existence of a totality that is complete, a notion disallowed by intuitionists when extended to the \"infinite\"\u2014for them the infinite can never be completed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In classical mathematics there occur \"non-constructive\" or \"indirect\" existence proofs, which intuitionists do not accept. For example, to prove \"there exists an n such that P\"(\"n\"), the classical mathematician may deduce a contradiction from the assumption for all \"n\", not \"P\"(\"n\"). Under both the classical and the intuitionistic logic, by reductio ad absurdum this gives \"not for all n, not P\"(\"n\"). The classical logic allows this result to be transformed into \"there exists an n such that P\"(\"n\"), but not in general the intuitionistic \u2026 the classical meaning, that somewhere in the completed infinite totality of the natural numbers there occurs an \"n\" such that \"P\"(\"n\"), is not available to him, since he does not conceive the natural numbers as a completed totality. (Kleene 1952:49\u201350)\nDavid Hilbert and Luitzen E. J. Brouwer both give examples of the law of excluded middle extended to the infinite. Hilbert's example: \"the assertion that either there are only finitely many prime numbers or there are infinitely many\" (quoted in Davis 2000:97); and Brouwer's: \"Every mathematical species is either finite or infinite.\" (Brouwer 1923 in van Heijenoort 1967:336). In general, intuitionists allow the use of the law of excluded middle when it is confined to discourse over finite collections (sets), but not when it is used in discourse over infinite sets (e.g. the natural numbers). Thus intuitionists absolutely disallow the blanket assertion: \"For all propositions \"P\" concerning infinite sets \"D\": \"P\" or ~\"P\"\" (Kleene 1952:48).\nPutative counterexamples to the law of excluded middle include the liar paradox or Quine's paradox. Certain resolutions of these paradoxes, particularly Graham Priest's dialetheism as formalised in LP, have the law of excluded middle as a theorem, but resolve out the Liar as both true and false. In this way, the law of excluded middle is true, but because truth itself, and therefore disjunction, is not exclusive, it says next to nothing if one of the disjuncts is paradoxical, or both true and false.\nCriticisms.\nThe Catu\u1e63ko\u1e6di (tetralemma) is an ancient alternative to the law of excluded middle, which examines all four possible assignments of truth values to a proposition and its negation. It has been important in Indian logic and Buddhist logic as well as the ancient Greek philosophical school known as Pyrrhonism.\nMany modern logic systems replace the law of excluded middle with the concept of negation as failure. Instead of a proposition's being either true or false, a proposition is either true or not able to be proved true. These two dichotomies only differ in logical systems that are not complete. The principle of negation as failure is used as a foundation for autoepistemic logic, and is widely used in logic programming. In these systems, the programmer is free to assert the law of excluded middle as a true fact, but it is not built-in \"a priori\" into these systems.\nMathematicians such as L.\u00a0E.\u00a0J. Brouwer and Arend Heyting have also contested the usefulness of the law of excluded middle in the context of modern mathematics.\nIn mathematical logic.\nIn modern mathematical logic, the excluded middle has been argued to result in possible self-contradiction. It is possible in logic to make well-constructed propositions that can be neither true nor false; a common example of this is the \"Liar's paradox\", the statement \"this statement is false\", which is argued to itself be neither true nor false. Arthur Prior has argued that the Paradox is not an example of a statement that cannot be true or false. The law of excluded middle still holds here as the negation of this statement \"This statement is not false\", can be assigned true. In set theory, such a self-referential paradox can be constructed by examining the set \"the set of all sets that do not contain themselves\". This set is unambiguously defined, but leads to a Russell's paradox: does the set contain, as one of its elements, itself? However, in the modern Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, this type of contradiction is no longer admitted. Furthermore, paradoxes of self reference can be constructed without even invoking negation at all, as in Curry's paradox.\nAnalogous laws.\nSome systems of logic have different but analogous laws. For some finite \"n\"-valued logics, there is an analogous law called the \"law of excluded \"n\"+1th\". If negation is cyclic and \"\u2228\" is a \"max operator\", then the law can be expressed in the object language by (P \u2228 ~P \u2228 ~~P \u2228 ... \u2228 ~...~P), where \"~...~\" represents \"n\"\u22121 negation signs and \"\u2228 ... \u2228\" \"n\"\u22121 disjunction signs. It is easy to check that the sentence must receive at least one of the \"n\" truth values (and not a value that is not one of the \"n\").\nOther systems reject the law entirely.\nLaw of the weak excluded middle.\nA particularly well-studied intermediate logic is given by De Morgan logic, which adds the axiom formula_18 to intuitionistic logic, which is sometimes called the law of the weak excluded middle.\nThis is equivalent to a few other statements:\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17639", "revid": "24247980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17639", "title": "Lowball", "text": "Lowball can refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17640", "revid": "38173590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17640", "title": "Line of scrimmage", "text": "Transverse line in American football\nIn gridiron football, a line of scrimmage is an invisible transverse line (across the width of the field) beyond which a team cannot cross until the next play has begun. Its location is based on the spot where the ball is placed after the end of the most recent play and following the assessment of any penalty yards.\nHistory.\nThe line of scrimmage first came into use in 1880. Developed by Walter Camp (who introduced many innovations that are part of the modern game of American football), it replaced a contested scrimmage that had descended from the game's rugby roots. This uncontested line of scrimmage would set into motion many more rules that led to the formation of the modern form of gridiron football (although the Canadian rules were developed independently of the American game, despite their similarities).\nDimensions.\nA line of scrimmage is parallel to the goal lines and touches one edge of the ball where it sits on the ground before the snap. In American football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage between the offense and defense is , the length of the ball. In Canadian football, the set distance of the line of scrimmage is , more than three times as long as the American line.\nUnder NCAA, and NFHS rules, there are two lines of scrimmage at the outset of each play: one that restricts the offense and one that restricts the defense. The area between the two lines (representing the length of the ball as extended to both sidelines) is called the \"neutral zone\".\nPresentation during broadcasts.\nModern video techniques enable broadcasts of American football to display a visible line on the screen representing the line of scrimmage. The line is tapered according to the camera angle and gets occluded by players and other objects as if the line were painted on the field. The line may represent the line of scrimmage or the minimum distance that the ball must be moved for the offensive team to achieve a first down.\nMisnomers.\nMany fans and commentators refer colloquially to the entire neutral zone as the \"line of scrimmage\", although this is technically incorrect. In the NFL rulebook, only the defensive-side restraining line is officially considered a line of scrimmage.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17641", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17641", "title": "Lateral pass", "text": "Type of short pass in football\nIn gridiron football, a lateral pass or lateral (officially backward pass in American football and onside pass in Canadian football), also called a pitch or a flip, occurs when the ball carrier throws or hands the football to a teammate in a direction parallel to or away from the opponents' goal line. A lateral pass is distinguished from a forward pass, in which the ball is thrown forward, towards the opposition's end zone. In a lateral pass the ball is not advanced, but unlike a forward pass a lateral may be attempted from anywhere on the field by any player to any player at any time.\nWhile the forward pass is an invention of the North American games, the lateral and backward pass is also a part of rugby union and rugby league, where such passes are the only type allowed. Compared to its use in rugby, laterals and backward passes are less common in North American football, due to a much greater focus on ball control in American football strategy; they are most commonly used by the quarterback, after taking the snap, to quickly transfer (\"pitch\") the ball a short distance to a nearby running back (or, rarely, wide receiver) on a rushing play. Laterals are also often seen as part of a last-minute desperation strategy or as part of a trick play. Examples of plays utilizing the lateral pass are the toss, flea flicker, hook and lateral, and buck-lateral.\nRules.\nWhile a forward pass may only be thrown once per down by the team on offense from within or behind the neutral zone, there are no restrictions on the use of lateral passes; any player legally carrying the ball may throw a lateral pass from any position on the field at any time, any player may receive such a pass, and any number of lateral passes may be thrown on a single play. Additionally, a player receiving a lateral pass may throw a forward pass if he is still behind the neutral zone, subject to the forward pass rules. A lateral is the only type of pass that can be legally thrown following a change of possession during a play.\nUnlike a forward pass, if a backward pass hits the ground or an official, play continues and, as with a fumble, a backward pass that has hit the ground may be recovered and advanced by either team. Backward passes can also be intercepted. A lateral may be underhand or overhand as long as the ball is not advanced in the pass.\nA ball that is passed exactly sideways is considered a backwards pass. If it hits the ground, the person throwing or \"pitching\" the lateral pass will be subjected to the fumble designation in the statistics in the NFL, even if the ball is dropped or muffed by a teammate, although in college football this can be credited to whichever player the statistician feels is most responsible. If the ball hits the ground after traveling even slightly forward, however, it is then incomplete instead of a fumble.\nThe snap is legally considered to be a backward pass, although a blown snap is not scored as a fumble.\nAlternate uses.\nThe \"forward lateral\" is used to describe an attempted \"lateral\" (backward pass) that actually goes forward. In most cases, it is illegal.\nA variant, the hook and lateral, where a forward pass is immediately passed backward to a second receiver to fool the defense, is used on occasion. Another variant is called the flea flicker, where a player laterals the ball back to the quarterback before crossing the line of scrimmage.\nFamous plays in history.\nThe lateral pass rule, or rather the lack of restrictions contained therein, has given rise to some of the most memorable and incredible walk-off touchdowns in football history. Both collegiate and NFL football have certain examples of football lore which involve laterals. This is not a complete list. This is only the most known plays with lateral passes.\nOne lateral pass.\nA well-known and controversial NFL lateral pass occurred during the Music City Miracle play at the end of the 2000 playoff game between the Tennessee Titans and the Buffalo Bills. The play was a true lateral (the ball did not move forward or backward in the pass), but the receiver was a step ahead of the passer and reached back to catch the ball, so it gave the appearance of an illegal forward pass.\nIn October 2003, the Minnesota Vikings faced the Denver Broncos with the scores tied at 7\u20137 as the first half came to a close. With 12 seconds left in the half and the Vikings on their own 41-yard line facing a 3rd-and-24, Daunte Culpepper threw a long pass to Randy Moss, who caught the ball at the Denver 10-yard line. As Moss was being tackled and driven backwards by two Broncos defenders, he tossed the ball over his head for a blind lateral to running back Moe Williams at the 15, and Williams ran it into the end zone for a touchdown to give the Vikings a 14\u20137 lead at halftime. This play was later named the 68th greatest play in the first 100 years of the NFL.\nAnother well known play was executed in a college football game by Presbyterian against Wake Forest in 2010. In this trick play, three lateral pass rules were used in combination. First the quarterback passed the ball sideways while intentionally bouncing the ball on the ground (a so-called \"fake fumble pass\"). The pass-receiver faked the end of the play, suggesting that it was an incomplete pass, but then passed the ball forward to a wide-receiver, who successfully ran for a touchdown. Wake Forest coach Jim Grobe described the play \"as well executed as anything I\u2019ve ever seen\". \nMultiple lateral passes.\nIn a college football game in 1982, the famous walk-off touchdown simply called The Play happened with five backward passes. In the Big Game between Stanford and California, with four seconds left and trailing by one point, Cal ran the kickoff all the way for the walk-off touchdown using five backward passes, eventually running through the Stanford Band, who had already taken the field (believing the game was over after Stanford players appeared to have tackled a Cal ball-carrier). The game remains controversial because of Stanford's contention that the Cal player's knee was down before he passed the ball during the third lateral and that the fifth lateral was an illegal forward pass.\nIn an NFL game in 2003, there was a well known play called the River City Relay with three lateral passes. The game was between the New Orleans Saints and the Jacksonville Jaguars. The game was held on December 21, 2003. With time running out, the Saints threw backward passes and brought the ball down the length of the field for a touchdown. However, kicker John Carney missed the extra point, which would have tied the game, so the Saints lost by one point, 20\u201319.\nIn a Division III college football game in 2007 there was a walk-off touchdown play with 15 lateral passes. On October 27, 2007, Trinity University was trailing by two points with two seconds left in a game against conference rival Millsaps College. Starting from their own 39-yard line, Trinity called a play for a short pass across the middle. The receiver pitched the ball backward, with a sequence of additional backward passes as players were in danger of being tackled. The \"Mississippi Miracle\" ultimately included 15 backward passes as it covered 61 yards for the walk-off touchdown. \nOn October 31, 2015, the Miami Hurricanes college football team threw eight lateral passes over the course of 45 seconds to score a touchdown and upset the 22nd-ranked Duke Blue Devils 30\u201327. The play stirred controversy amid a number of missed calls by the Atlantic Coast Conference officiating crew, which subsequently resulted in a two game suspension for both the on-field crew along with the replay officials.\nOn December 9, 2018, there was a play with two lateral passes for a walk-off touchdown in an NFL game. The Miami Dolphins pulled off the only walk-off touchdown to involve multiple lateral passes in NFL history, completing two laterals for a 69-yard touchdown to beat the New England Patriots 34\u201333. Miami had almost lost a game against the Pittsburgh Steelers five years prior via laterals, but managed to win when Antonio Brown stepped out of bounds at the thirteen-yard line.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17643", "revid": "90173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17643", "title": "Lavandula", "text": "Genus of plants\nLavandula (common name lavender) is a genus of 47 known species of perennial flowering plants in the sage family, Lamiaceae. It is native to the Old World, primarily found across the drier, warmer regions of the Mediterranean, with an affinity for maritime breezes.\nLavender is found on the Iberian Peninsula and around the entirety of the Mediterranean coastline (including the Adriatic coast, the Balkans, the Levant, and coastal North Africa), in parts of Eastern and Southern Africa and the Middle East, as well as in South Asia and on the Indian subcontinent.\nMany members of the genus are cultivated extensively in temperate climates as ornamental plants for garden and landscape use, for use as culinary herbs, and also commercially for the extraction of essential oils. Lavender is used in traditional medicine and as an ingredient in cosmetics.\nDescription.\nThe genus includes annual or short-lived herbaceous perennial plants and shrub-like perennials, subshrubs or small shrubs.\nLeaf shape is diverse across the genus. They are simple in some commonly cultivated species; in other species, they are pinnately toothed, or pinnate, sometimes multiple pinnate and dissected. In most species, the leaves are covered in fine hairs or indumentum, which normally contain essential oils.\nFlowers are contained in whorls, held on spikes rising above the foliage, with the spikes being branched in some species. Some species produce colored bracts at the tips of the inflorescences. The flowers may be blue, violet, or lilac in the wild species, occasionally blackish purple or yellowish. The sepal calyx is tubular. The corolla is also tubular, usually with five lobes (the upper lip often cleft, and the lower lip has two clefts).\nPhytochemicals.\nAround 93 individual phytochemicals have been identified in lavender oil, including major contents of linalyl acetate (30\u201355%), linalool (20\u201335%), tannins (5\u201310%), and caryophyllene (8%), with lesser amounts of sesquiterpenoids, perillyl alcohols, esters, oxides, ketones, cineole, camphor, beta-ocimene, limonene, caproic acid, and caryophyllene oxide. The relative amounts of these compounds vary considerably among lavender species.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Lavandula stoechas\", \"L.\u00a0pedunculata\", and \"L.\u00a0dentata\" were known in Roman times. From the Middle Ages onwards, the European species were considered two separate groups or genera, \"Stoechas\" (\"L.\u00a0stoechas\", \"L.\u00a0pedunculata\", \"L.\u00a0dentata\") and \"Lavandula\" (\"L.\u00a0spica\" and \"L.\u00a0latifolia\"), until Carl Linnaeus combined them. He recognised only five species in \"Species Plantarum\" (1753), \"L.\u00a0multifida\" and \"L.\u00a0dentata\" (Spain) and \"L.\u00a0stoechas\" and \"L.\u00a0spica\" from Southern Europe. \"L.\u00a0pedunculata\" was included within \"L.\u00a0stoechas\".\nBy 1790, \"L.\u00a0pinnata\" and \"L.\u00a0carnosa\" were recognised. The latter was subsequently transferred to \"Anisochilus\". By 1826, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz listed 12 species in three sections, and by 1848 eighteen species were known.\nOne of the first modern major classifications was that of Dorothy Chaytor in 1937 at Kew. The six sections she proposed for 28 species still left many intermediates that could not easily be assigned. Her sections included \"Stoechas\", \"Spica\", \"Subnudae\", \"Pterostoechas\", \"Chaetostachys\", and \"Dentatae\". However, all the major cultivated and commercial forms resided in the \"Stoechas\" and \"Spica\" sections. There were four species within \"Stoechas\" (\"Lavandula stoechas\", \"L.\u00a0dentata\", \"L.\u00a0viridis\", and \"L.\u00a0pedunculata\") while \"Spica\" had three (\"L.\u00a0officinalis\" (now \"L.\u00a0angustifolia\"), \"L.\u00a0latifolia\" and \"L.\u00a0lanata\"). She believed that the garden varieties were hybrids between true lavender \"L.\u00a0angustifolia\" and spike lavender (\"L.\u00a0latifolia\").\n\"Lavandula\" has three subgenera: \nIn addition, there are numerous hybrids and cultivars in commercial and horticultural usage.\nThe first major clade corresponds to subgenus \"Lavandula\", and the second \"Fabricia\". The \"Sabaudia\" group is less clearly defined. Within the \"Lavandula\" clade, the subclades correspond to the existing sections but place \"Dentatae\" separately from \"Stoechas\", not within it. Within the \"Fabricia\" clade, the subclades correspond to \"Pterostoechas\", \"Subnudae\", and \"Chaetostachys\".\nThus the current classification includes 39 species distributed across 8 sections (the original 6 of Chaytor and the two new sections of Upson and Andrews), in three subgenera (see table below). However, since lavender cross-pollinates easily, countless variations present difficulties in classification.\nTaxonomic table.\nThis is based on the classification of Upson and Andrews, 2004.\nEtymology.\nThe English word lavender came into use in the 13th century, and is generally thought to derive from Old French , ultimately from Latin from (to wash), referring to the use of blue infusions of the plants for bathing. The botanic name \"Lavandula\" as used by Linnaeus is considered to be derived from this and other European vernacular names for the plants.\nThe names widely used for some of the species, \"English lavender\", \"French lavender\" and \"Spanish lavender\" are all imprecisely applied. \"English lavender\" is commonly used for \"L.\u00a0angustifolia\", though some references say the proper term is \"Old English lavender\". The name \"French lavender\" may refer to either \"L.\u00a0stoechas\" or to \"L.\u00a0dentata\". \"Spanish lavender\" may refer to \"L.\u00a0pedunculata\", \"L.\u00a0stoechas\", or \"L.\u00a0lanata.\"\nCultivation.\nThe most common form in cultivation is the common or English lavender \"Lavandula angustifolia\" (formerly named \"L.\u00a0officinalis\"). A wide range of cultivars can be found. Other commonly grown ornamental species are \"L.\u00a0stoechas\", \"L.\u00a0dentata\", and \"L.\u00a0multifida\" (Egyptian lavender).\nBecause the cultivated forms are planted in gardens worldwide, they are occasionally found growing wild as garden escapes, well beyond their natural range. Such spontaneous growth is usually harmless, but in some cases, \"Lavandula\" species have become invasive. For example, in Australia, \"L.\u00a0stoechas\" has become a cause for concern; it occurs widely throughout the continent and has been declared a noxious weed in Victoria since 1920. It is regarded as a weed in parts of Spain.\nLavenders flourish best in dry, well-drained, sandy or gravelly soils in full sun. English lavender has a long germination process (14\u201328 days) and matures within 100\u2013110 days. All types need little or no fertilizer and good air circulation. In areas of high humidity, root rot due to fungus infection can be a problem. Organic mulches can trap moisture around the plants' bases, encouraging root rot. Gravelly materials such as crushed rocks give better results. It grows best in soils with a pH between 6 and 8. Most lavender is hand-harvested, and harvest times vary depending on intended use.\nHealth risks.\nThe U.S. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) states that lavender is considered likely safe in food amounts, and that topical uses may cause allergic reactions. The NCCIH does not recommend the use of lavender while pregnant or breastfeeding because of lack of knowledge of its effects. It recommends caution if young boys use lavender oil because of possible hormonal effects leading to gynecomastia.\nA 2007 study examined the relationship between various fragrances and photosensitivity, stating that lavender is known \"to elicit cutaneous photo-toxic reactions\", but does not induce photohaemolysis.\nSome people experience contact dermatitis, allergic eczema, or facial dermatitis from the use of lavender oil on skin.\nUses.\nLavender oil.\nCommercially, the plant is grown mainly for the production of lavender essential oil. English lavender (\"Lavandula angustifolia\") yields an oil with sweet overtones and can be used in balms, salves, perfumes, cosmetics, and topical applications.\n\"Lavandula \"\u00d7\" intermedia\", also known as \"lavandin\" or \"Dutch lavender\", hybrids of \"L.\u00a0angustifolia\" and \"L.\u00a0latifolia\". are widely cultivated for commercial use since their flowers tend to be bigger than those of English lavender and the plants tend to be easier to harvest. They yield a similar essential oil, but with higher levels of terpenes, including camphor, which add a sharper overtone to the fragrance, regarded by some as of lower quality than that of English lavender.\nThe US Food and Drug Administration considers lavender as generally recognized as safe for human consumption. The essential oil was used in hospitals during World War I.\nCulinary.\nCulinary lavender is usually English lavender, the most commonly used species in cooking (\"L.\u00a0angustifolia\" 'Munstead'). As an aromatic, it has a sweet fragrance with lemon or citrus notes. It is used as a spice or condiment in pastas, salads and dressings, and desserts. Their buds and greens are used in teas, and their buds, processed by bees, are the essential ingredient of a monofloral honey.\nCulinary history.\nSpanish nard (), referring to \"L.\u00a0stoechas\", is listed as an ingredient in making a spiced wine, namely hippocras, in \"The Forme of Cury\".\nLavender was introduced into England in the 1600s. It is said that Queen Elizabeth I of England prized a lavender conserve (jam) at her table, so lavender was produced as a jam at that time, as well as used in teas both medicinally and for its taste.\nLavender was not used in traditional southern French cooking at the turn of the 20th century. It does not appear at all in the best-known compendium of Proven\u00e7al cooking, J.-B. Reboul's \"Cuisini\u00e8re Proven\u00e7ale\". French lambs have been allowed to graze on lavender as it is alleged to make their meat more tender and fragrant. In the 1970s, a blend of herbs called \"herbes de Provence\" was invented by spice wholesalers. Culinary lavender is added to the mixture in the North American version.\nIn the 21st century, lavender is used in many world regions to flavor tea, vinegar, jellies, baked goods, and beverages.\nBuds.\nFor most cooking applications, the dried buds (also called flowers) are used.\nThe potency of the lavender buds increases with drying which necessitates more sparing use to avoid a heavy, soapy aftertaste. Chefs note to reduce by two-thirds the dry amount in recipes that call for fresh lavender buds.\nLavender buds can amplify both sweet and savory flavors in dishes and are sometimes paired with sheep's milk and goat's milk cheeses. Lavender flowers are occasionally blended with black, green, or herbal teas. Lavender flavors baked goods and desserts, pairing especially well with chocolate. In the United States, both lavender syrup and dried lavender buds are used to make lavender scones and marshmallows.\nLavender buds are put into sugar for two weeks to allow the essential oils and fragrance to transfer; then the sugar itself is used in baking. Lavender can be used in breads where recipes call for rosemary. Lavender can be used decoratively in dishes or spirits, or as a decorative and aromatic in a glass of champagne. Lavender is used in savory dishes, giving stews and reduced sauces aromatic flair. It is also used to scent flans, custards, and sorbets.\nIn honey.\nThe flowers yield abundant nectar, from which bees make a high-quality honey. Monofloral honey is produced primarily around the Mediterranean Sea, and is marketed worldwide as a premium product. Flowers can be candied and are sometimes used as cake decorations. It is also used to make \"lavender sugar\".\nHerbalism.\nThe German scientific committee on traditional medicine, Commission\u00a0E, reported uses of lavender flower in practices of herbalism, including its use for restlessness or insomnia, Roemheld syndrome, intestinal discomfort, and cardiovascular diseases, among others.\nOther uses.\nFlower spikes are used for dried flower arrangements. The fragrant, pale purple flowers and flower buds are used in potpourris. Lavender is also used as herbal filler inside sachets used to freshen linens. Dried and sealed in pouches, lavender flowers are placed among stored items of clothing to give a fresh fragrance and to deter moths. Dried lavender flowers may be used for wedding confetti. Lavender is also used in scented waters, soaps, and sachets.\nIn culture.\nThe ancient Greeks called the lavender herb \u03bd\u03ac\u03c1\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2: n\u00e1rdos, Latinized as \"nardus\", after the Syrian city of Naarda (possibly the modern town of Duhok, Iraq). It was also commonly called \"nard\". The species originally grown was \"L.\u00a0stoechas\".\nDuring Roman times, flowers were sold for 100 \"denarii\" per pound, which was about the same as a month's wages for a farm laborer, or fifty haircuts from the local barber. Its late Latin name was \"lavand\u0101rius\", from \"lavanda\" (things to be washed), from \"lav\u0101re\" from the verb \"lavo\" (to wash).\nThe plant and its color are used to represent the LGBTQ community in such events as the Lavender Scare and lavender marriage, among other community symbols since the 19th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17644", "revid": "1318271614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17644", "title": "Lemon balm", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLemon balm (Melissa officinalis) is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family. It has lemon-scented leaves, white or pale pink flowers, and contains essential oils and compounds like geranial and neral. It grows to a maximum height of . The species is native to south-central Europe, the Mediterranean, Central Asia, and Iran, is now naturalized worldwide and grows easily from seed in rich, moist soil.\nThe name \"Melissa officinalis\" comes from the Greek word for \"honey bee,\" due to the plant's bee-attracting flowers, and the Latin \"officinalis\", referring to its traditional use in apothecaries. It has been cultivated (and used to attract honey bees) since at least the 16th century. Lemon balm grows vigorously from seed or vegetative fragments in temperate zones, with key producers like Hungary, Egypt, and Italy cultivating various cultivars for hand-harvested leaves and low-yield essential oil, notably in Ireland. Lemon balm is used in Carmelite Water, as an ornamental plant, in perfumes and toothpaste, as a raw or cooked herb in various foods and teas, and is valued for its bee-attracting properties and aromatic essential oils.\nDescription.\nLemon balm (\"Melissa officinalis\") is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family, Lamiaceae.\nLemon balm plants grow bushy and upright to a maximum height of . The heart-shaped leaves are long, and have a rough, veined surface. They are soft and hairy with scalloped edges, and have a mild lemon scent. During summer, small white or pale pink flowers appear. The plants live for ten years; the crop plant is replaced after five years to allow the ground to rejuvenate.\nChemistry.\nLemon balm contains eugenol, tannins, and terpenes.\nEtymology.\nThe white flowers attract bees, hence the genus \"Melissa\" (Greek for \"honey bee\"). It is not to be confused with bee balm (genus \"Monarda\").\nThe second name, \"officinalis\" (Latin, 'of the shop'), originates from the use of the herb by apothecaries, who sold herbal remedies directly to their customers.\nDistribution and habitat.\n\"Melissa officinalis\" is native to south-central Europe, the Mediterranean Basin, Central Asia and Iran, but is now naturalized in the Americas and elsewhere around the world. It grows easily from seed, preferring rich, moist soil.\nCultivation.\nLemon balm seeds require light and a minimum temperature of to germinate. The plant grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively (a\u00a0new plant growing from a fragment of its parent), as well as by seed. In mild temperate zones, the plant stems die off at the start of the winter, but shoot up again in spring. Lemon balm grows vigorously.\nAs of 1992[ [update]], Hungary, Egypt, and Italy are the major producing countries of lemon balm. The leaves are harvested by hand in June and August in the northern hemisphere, on a day when the weather is dry, to prevent the crop from turning black if damp.\nThe cultivars of \"M. officinalis\" include:\nEssential oil production.\nIreland is a major producer of lemon balm essential oil, which has a pale yellow colour and a lemon scent. The essential oil is commonly co-distilled with lemon oil, citronella oil or other essential oils. Yields are low; 0.014% for fresh leaves and 0.112% for dried leaves.\nUses.\nLemon balm is the main ingredient of Carmelite Water, which is sold in German pharmacies.\nThe plant is grown and sold as an ornamental plant, and for attracting bees. The essential oil is used as a perfume ingredient and in toothpaste. The young leaves can be eaten raw.\nLemon balm is used as a flavouring in ice cream and herbal teas, often in combination with other herbs such as spearmint. The leaves can be dried when used for tea. It is a common addition to peppermint tea, mostly because of its complementing flavor. Lemon balm is also used with fruit dishes or candies. It can be used in fish dishes and is the main ingredient in lemon balm pesto. Its flavour comes from geraniol (3\u201340%), neral (3\u201335%), geranial (4\u201385%) (both isomers of citral), (E)-caryophyllene (0\u201314%), and citronellal (1\u201344%). It is also one of the ingredients in Spreewald gherkins.\nIn history.\nThe use of lemon balm can be dated to over 2,000 years ago through the Greeks and the Romans. It is mentioned by the Greek polymath Theophrastus in his \"Historia Plantarum\", written in c.300 BC, as \"bee-leaf\" (\u03bc\u03b5\u03bb\u03b9\u03c3\u03c3\u03cc\u03c6\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03bd). Lemon balm was formally introduced into Europe in the 7th century, from which its use and domestication spread. Its use in the Middle Ages is noted by herbalists, writers, philosophers, and scientists.\nLemon balm was a favourite plant of the Tudors, who scattered the leaves across their floors. It was in the herbal garden of the English botanist John Gerard in the 1590s, who considered it especially good for feeding and attracting honey bees. Especially cultivated for honey production, according to the authors Janet Dampney and Elizabeth Pomeroy, \"bees were thought never to leave a garden in which it was grown\". It was introduced to North America by the first colonists from Europe; it was cultivated in the Gardens of Monticello, designed by the American statesman Thomas Jefferson.\nThe English botanist Nicholas Culpeper considered lemon balm to be ruled by the planet Jupiter in Cancer, and suggested it to be used for \"weak stomachs\", to cause the heart to become \"merry\", to help digestion, to open \"obstructions of the brain\", and to expel \"melancholy vapors\" from the heart and arteries. 'Balm water' or 'Aqua Melissa' was used as a healthy beverage from the 18th century.\nIn traditional Austrian medicine, \"M.\u00a0officinalis\" leaves have been prescribed as an herbal tea, or as an external application in the form of an essential oil.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17646", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17646", "title": "Liliales", "text": "Order of monocot flowering plants, including lilies\nLiliales is an order of monocotyledonous flowering plants in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and Angiosperm Phylogeny Web system, within the lilioid monocots. This order of necessity includes the family Liliaceae. The APG III system (2009) places this order in the monocot clade. In APG III, the family Luzuriagaceae is combined with the family Alstroemeriaceae and the family Petermanniaceae is recognized. Both the order Lililiales and the family Liliaceae have had a widely disputed history, with the circumscription varying greatly from one taxonomist to another. Previous members of this order, which at one stage included most monocots with conspicuous tepals and lacking starch in the endosperm are now distributed over three orders, Liliales, Dioscoreales and Asparagales, using predominantly molecular phylogenetics. The newly delimited Liliales is monophyletic, with ten families. Well known plants from the order include \"Lilium\" (lily), tulip, the North American wildflower \"Trillium\", and greenbrier.\nThus circumscribed, this order consists mostly of herbaceous plants, but lianas and shrubs also occur. They are mostly perennial plants, with food storage organs such as corms or rhizomes. The family Corsiaceae is notable for being heterotrophic.\nThe order has worldwide distribution. The larger families (with more than 100 species) are roughly confined to the Northern Hemisphere, or are distributed worldwide, centering on the north. On the other hand, the smaller families (with up to 10 species) are confined to the Southern Hemisphere, or sometimes just to Australia or South America. The total number of species in the order is now about 1768.\nAs with any herbaceous group, the fossil record of the Liliales is rather scarce. There are several species from the Eocene, such as \"Petermanniopsis anglesaensis\" or \"Smilax\", but their identification is not definite. Another known fossil is \"Ripogonum scandens\" from the Miocene. Due to the scarcity of data, it seems impossible to determine precisely the age and the initial distribution of the order. It is assumed that the Liliales originate from the Lower Cretaceous, over 100 million years ago. Fossil aquatic plants from the Cretaceous of northeastern Brazil and a new terrestrial species placed in the new genus \"Cratosmilax\" suggest that the first species have appeared around 120 million years ago when the continents formed Pangea, before dispersing as Asia, Africa and America. The initial diversification to the current families took place between 82 and 48 million years ago. The order consists of 10 families, 67 genera and about 1,768 species.\nDescription.\nThe Liliales are a diverse order of predominantly perennial erect or twining herbaceous and climbing plants. Climbers, such as the herbaceous \"Gloriosa\" (Colchicaceae) and \"Bomarea\" (Alstroemeriaceae), are common in the Americas in temperate and tropical zones, while most species of the subtropical and tropical genus \"Smilax\" (Smilacaceae) are herbaceous or woody climbers and comprise much of the vegetation within the Liliales range. They also include woody shrubs, which have fleshy stems and underground storage or perennating organs, mainly bulbous geophytes, sometimes rhizomatous or cormous. Leaves are elliptical and straplike with parallel venation or ovate with palmate veins and reticulate minor venation (Smilacaceae). In \"Alstroemeria\" and \"Bomarea\" (Alstroemeriaceae) the leaves are resupinate (twisted). \nThe flowers are highly variable, ranging in size from the small green actinomorphic (radially symmetric) blooms of \"Smilax\" to the large showy ones found in \"Lilium\", \"Tulipa\" and \"Calochortus\" (Liliaceae) and \"Lapageria\" (Philesiaceae). Sepals and petals are undifferentiated from each other, and known as tepals, forming a perianth. They are usually large and pointed and may be variegated in \"Fritillaria\" (Liliaceae). Nectaries may be perigonal (at base of tepals) but not septal (on ovaries). Perigonal nectaries may be a simple secretory epidermal region at the tepal bases (\"Lapageria\") or small, depressed regions fringed with hairs, often with glandular surface protuberances, at the bases of the inner tepals (\"Calochortus\"), while in \"Tricyrtis\" the tepals become bulbous or spur-like at the base, forming a nectar-containing sac. Ovaries may be inferior or superior, the style often long and stigma capitate (pin headed). In a number of taxa there are three separate styles, particularly some Melanthiaceae \"s.l.\" (e.g. \"Helonias\", \"Trillium\", \"Veratrum\") and \"Chionographis\". The outer integument epidermis of the seed coat is cellular, and the phytomelanin pigment is lacking. The inner integument is also cellular and these features are plesiomorphic.\nThe Liliales are characterised by (synapomorphies) the presence of nectaries at the base of the tepals (perigonal nectaries) or stamen filaments (\"Colchicum\", \"Androcymbium\") most taxa but the absence of septal nectaries, together with extrorse (outward opening) anthers. This distinguishes them from the septal nectaries and introrse anthers that are the features of most other monocots. Exceptions are some Melanthiaceae in which nectaries are absent or septal and anthers that are introrse (dehiscence directed inwards) in Campynemataceae, Colchicaceae, and some Alstroemeriaceae, Melanthiaceae, Philesiaceae, Ripogonaceae and Smilacaceae. Tepals are largely three-traced in net-veined taxa of Liliales (e.g. \"Clintonia\", \"Disporum\"), distinguishing them from the single-traced Asparagales, and is associated with the presence of tepal nectaries, presumably to supply them. The presence of separate styles is also a distinguishing feature from Asparagales, where it is rare. Phytomelan is completely absent in Liliales seed coats, unlike Asparagales, which nearly all contain it.\nPhytochemistry.\nThe stems contain fructans, the plants also contain chelidonic acid, saponins, while some species contain velamen. The epicuticular wax is of the Convallaria type, consisting of parallel orientated platelets.\nGenome.\nThe order includes taxa with some of the largest genomes among Angiosperms, particularly Melanthiaceae, Alstroemeriaceae and Liliaceae.\nTaxonomy.\nWith 11 families, about 67 genera and about 1,558 species, Liliales is a relatively small angiosperm order, but a large group within the monocotyledons.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe botanical authority for Liliales is given to Perleb (1826), who grouped eleven families (Asparageae, Pontederiaceae, Asphodeleae, Coronariae, Colchicaceae, Dioscoreaceae, Hypoxideae, Amaryllideae, Haemodoraceae, Burmanniaceae, Irideae) into an order he called Liliaceae. In Perleb's system, he divided the vascular plants into seven classes, of which the Phanerogamicae or seed plants he called his class IV, or Ternariae. The latter, he divided into five orders (\"ordo\"), including the Liliaceae.\nA number of later taxonomists, such as Endlicher (1836) substitituted the term Coronarieae for this higher order, including six subordinate taxa. Endlicher divided the Cormophyta into five sections, of which Amphibrya contained eleven classes, including Coronarieae. The term Liliales was introduced by Lindley (1853), referring to these higher orders as alliances. Lindley included four families in this alliance. Lindley called the monocots class Endogenae, with eleven alliances including Liliales. Although Bentham (1877) restored Coronariae as one of seven Series making up the monocotyledons, it was replaced by Liliiflorae and then Liliales in subsequent publications (\"see Table for history\").\nPhyletic systems.\nSubsequent authors, now adopting a phylogenetic (phyletic) or evolutionary approach over the natural method, did not follow Bentham's nomenclature. Eichler (1886) used Liliiflorae for the higher order including Liliaceae, placing it as the first order (\"Reihe\") in his class monocotyledons, as did Engler (1903), Lotsy (1911), and Wettstein in 1924, in class Monocotyledones, subdivision Angiospermae.\nHutchinson (1973) restored Liliales for the higher rank, an approach that has been adopted by most major classification systems onwards, reserving Liliiflorae for higher ranks. These include Cronquist (1981), Dahlgren (1985), Takhtajan (1997) as well as Thorne and Reveal (2007).\nHutchinson (1973) derived a more elaborate hierarchy, placing order Liliales as one of 14 in division Corolliferae, one of three divisions of subphylum monocotyledons. Cronquist (1981) placed the order Liliales as one of two in subclass Liliidae, one of five in the class Liliopsida (monocotyledons) of division Magnoliophyta (angiosperms). Dahlgren (1985) made Liliales one of six orders in Superorder Liliiflorae, one of ten divisions of the monocots. Takhtajan (1997) had a more complex system of higher taxonomic ranks, placing Liliales as one of 15 orders within superorder Lilianae, one of four within subclass Liliidae. Liliidae in turn was one of four subclasses in class Liliopsida (monocots). In contrast Thorne and Reveal (2007) abandoned the use of monocotyledons as a distinct taxon, replacing it with 3 separate subclasses of Magnoliopsida (angiosperms), of which Liliidae consists of 3 superorders, placing Liliales in superorder Lilianae.\nIn all these systems, Liliales (or Liliiflorae) were visualised as either a direct division of the monocots (or equivalent) or were placed in an intermediate division of the monocots, such as superorder Lilianae.\nMolecular phylogenetic systems.\nThe development of molecular phylogenetic methods for determining taxonomic circumscription and phylogeny led to considerable revision of angiosperm classification, and establishment of Liliales as a monophyletic group. It was clear by 1996, that the most useful system to date, that of Dahlgren, required urgent revision. The new classification was formalised with the creation of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) system (1998\u20132016), based on monophyletic clades, which continued the use of Liliales as the name for the taxon.\nThe Angiosperm Phylogeny Group APG system (1998) established a structure of monocot classification with ten orders. Notable was the separation of asparagids, as suggested by Dahlgren, into Asparagales, with other taxa placed in Dioscoreales, resulting in a much reduced order.\nPhylogeny.\nThe position of Liliales within the monocots (Lilianae) is shown in the following cladogram. The monocot orders form three grades, the alismatid monocots, lilioid monocots and the commelinid monocots by order of branching, from early to late. These have alternatively been referred to as Alismatanae, Lilianae and Commelinanae. The alismatid monocots form the basal group, while the remaining grades (lilioid and commelinid monocots) have been referred to as the \"core monocots\". The relationship between the orders (with the exception of the two sister orders) is pectinate, that is diverging in succession from the line that leads to the commelinids. The lilioid monocot orders constitute a paraphyletic assemblage, that is groups with a common ancestor that do not include all direct descendants (in this case commelinids which are a sister group to Asparagales); to form a clade, all the groups joined by thick lines would need to be included. In the cladogram the numbers indicate crown group (most recent common ancestor of the sampled species of the clade of interest) divergence times in mya (million years ago).\nBiogeography and evolution.\nThe crown group of Liliales has been dated to ca. 117\u00a0Myr (million years ago) in the Early Cretaceous period of the Mesozoic era.\nSubdivision.\nThe circumscription of Liliales has varied greatly since Perleb's original construction with 11 families in 1826. Many of these families are now considered to be in Asparagales, with the remainder in commelinids and Dioscoreales, as shown in this table.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Liliales families in progressive taxonomic schemes\nThe availability of molecular phylogenetic methods suggested four main lineages within Liliales, and seven families; \nThe first Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification (APG I) in 1998 had the following circumscription, with 9 families, having separated Philesiaceae and Ripogonaceae from Smilacaceae:\nThe APG II system (2003) added Corsiaceae to the Liliales, while APG III (2009) added Petermanniaceae and merged Luzuriagaceae into Alstroemeriaceae. The subsequent revision of APG IV (2016) left this unchanged, with 10 families.\nThe exact phylogenetic relationship between the families of Liliales has been subject to revision. This cladogram shows that of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website (2020):\nThe bulk of the Liliales species are found in the family Liliaceae (16 genera, 610 species). Of the remaining nine families, three are referred to as the vine families (Ripogonaceae, Philesiaceae and Smilacaceae) and form a cluster.\nDistribution and habitat.\nWidely distributed but most commonly found in subtropical and temperate regions, especially herbaceous taxa in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere, and subtropical regions of the Southern hemisphere, including vines. Since many species are cultivated they have been introduced in many regions and consequently worldwide, and a number have subsequently escaped and naturalised.\nUses.\nLiliales form important sources of food and pharmaceuticals as well as playing a significant role in horticulture and floriculture as ornamental plants. Pharmaceutical products include colchicine from \"Colchicum\" and \"Gloriosa\" (Colchicaceae) and veratrine and related compounds from \"Veratrum\" (Melanthiaceae) and \"Zigadenus\" (Melanthiaceae).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17647", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17647", "title": "Laurales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nThe Laurales are an order of flowering plants. They are magnoliids, related to the Magnoliales.\nThe order includes about 2500\u20132800 species from 85 to 90 genera, which comprise seven families of trees and shrubs. Most of the species are tropical and subtropical, though a few genera reach the temperate zone. The best known species in this order are those of the Lauraceae (for example bay laurel, cinnamon, avocado, and \"Sassafras\"), and the ornamental shrub \"Calycanthus\" of the Calycanthaceae.\nThe earliest lauraceous fossils are from the early Cretaceous. It is possible that the ancient origin of this order is one of the reasons for its highly diverged morphology. Presently no single morphological property is known, which would unify all the members of Laurales. The presently accepted classification is based on molecular and genetic analysis.\nClassification.\nThe first botanist to think of the Laurales as a natural group was H. Hallier in 1905. He viewed them as being derived from the Magnoliales. During some or all of the 20th century, the Laurales generally included \"Amborella\" and the plants now classified in Austrobaileyales and Chloranthaceae. They were not removed until the advent of molecular data in the late 20th century; their previous inclusion made it harder to determine the relationships within the Laurales and between the Laurales and other groups.\nThe following families are included in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system (APG III):\nUnder the older Cronquist system, the Laurales included a slightly different set of families (current placement, where different, in brackets):\nThe extinct family Araripiaceae (containing only the genus \"Araripia\") is known from the Aptian of Brazil.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17648", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17648", "title": "Limerick (disambiguation)", "text": "Limerick is a city in Ireland.\nLimerick may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17651", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17651", "title": "Lamiales", "text": "Order of dicot flowering plants\nThe Lamiales (also known as the mint order) are an order of flowering plants in the asterids clade of the Eudicots. Under the APG IV system of flowering plant classification the order consists of 24 families, and includes about 23,810 species and 1,059 genera with representatives found all over the world. Well-known or economically important members of this order include aromatic, culinary, and medicinal herbs such as basil, mint, rosemary, sage, savory, marjoram, oregano, hyssop, thyme, lavender, perilla, lemon verbena, catnip, bee balm, wild dagga, and oriental motherwort, as well as olives, ash trees, teak, foxgloves, lilacs, jasmine, snapdragons, African violets, Jacarandas, Paulownias, butterfly bushes, sesame, and psyllium.\nDescription.\nPlant species within the order Lamiales are eudicots and are herbaceous or have woody stems. Zygomorphic flowers are common, having five petals with an upper lip of two petals and lower lip of three petals, but actinomorphic flowers are also seen. Species potentially have five stamens, but these are typically reduced to two or four. Lamiales also produce a single style attached to an ovary typically containing two carpels. The ovary is mostly observed to be superior. The inflorescence is typically seen as cyme, raceme or spike. The fruit type is usually dehiscent capsules. \u00a0Glandular hairs are present on the plants.\nA number of species of carnivorous plants are found in the families Lentibulariaceae and Byblidaceae. Protocarnivorous plant species have also been found in the order, specifically in the Martyniaceae family.\nParasitic plant species are found in the order, belonging to the family Orobanchaceae. These parasitic plants can either be hemi-parasites or holoparasites.\nTaxonomy.\nPhylogeny.\nThe APG IV system gives the following cladogram for Lamiales.\nThe Lamiales previously had a restricted circumscription (e.g., by Arthur Cronquist) that included the major families Lamiaceae (Labiatae), Verbenaceae, and Boraginaceae, plus a few smaller families. In the classification system of Dahlgren the Lamiales were in the superorder Lamiiflorae (also called Lamianae). Recent phylogenetic work has shown the Lamiales are polyphyletic with respect to order Scrophulariales and the two groups are now usually combined in a single order that also includes the former orders Hippuridales and Plantaginales. Lamiales has become the preferred name for this much larger combined group. The placement of the Boraginaceae is unclear, but phylogenetic work shows this family does not belong in Lamiales.\nAlso, the circumscription of family Scrophulariaceae, formerly a paraphyletic group defined primarily by plesiomorphic characters and from within which numerous other families of the Lamiales were derived, has been radically altered to create a number of smaller, better-defined, and putatively monophyletic families.\nDating.\nMuch research has been conducted in recent years regarding the dating the Lamiales lineage, although there still remains some ambiguity. A 2004 study, on the molecular phylogenetic dating of asterid flowering plants, estimated 106 million years (MY) for the stem lineage of Lamiales. A similar study in 2009 estimated 80 million years. Another 2009 study gives several reasons why the issue is particularly difficult to solve.\nHabitat.\nThe Lamiales order can be found in almost all kinds of habitats world-wide. These habitats include forests, valleys, grasslands, rocky terrain, rainforests, the tropics, temperate regions, marshes, coastlines, and even frozen areas.\nUses.\nThe order Lamiales has a variety of species with anthropogenic uses, the most popular belonging to the Lamiaceae and Acanthaceae families. Many of these species in the order Lamiales produce medicinal properties from alkaloids and saponins to help a variety of infections and diseases. These alkaloids and saponins may help with digestion, the common cold or flu, asthma, liver infections, pulmonary infections and contain antioxidant properties.\nSpecies within the order are also known to have properties to repel insects and help control harmful diseases from insects, such as Malaria from mosquitos. Plants of the family Acanthaceae have bioactive secondary metabolites within their mature leaves, which have been found to be toxic to insect larvae. Botanical derived insecticides are a good alternate for chemical or synthetic insecticides as it is inexpensive, abundant and safe for other plants, non-target organisms and the environment.\nMany species within the order are used as decorations, flavouring agents, cosmetics and fragrances. Natural dyes can also be extracted from Lamiales species. For example, in Sardinia culture, the most common Lamiales plant species used for natural dyes is \"Lavandula stoechas,\" where a light-green dye is extracted from the stem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
