{"id": "14358", "revid": "8603292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14358", "title": "Hammurabi", "text": "Sixth king of Babylon (r. 1792\u20131750 BC)\nHammurabi (; ; Akkadian: ; c.\u20091810\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091750 BC), also spelled Hammurapi, was the sixth Amorite king of the Old Babylonian Empire, reigning from c.\u20091792 to c.\u20091750 BC. He was preceded by his father, Sin-Muballit, who abdicated due to failing health. During his reign, he conquered the city-states of Larsa, Eshnunna, and Mari. He ousted Ishme-Dagan I, the king of Assyria, and forced his son Mut-Ashkur to pay tribute, bringing almost all of Mesopotamia under Babylonian rule.\nHammurabi is best known for having issued his eponymous code, which he claimed to have received from Shamash, the Babylonian god of justice. Unlike earlier Sumerian law codes, such as the Code of Ur-Nammu, which had focused on compensating the victim of the crime, the Law of Hammurabi was one of the first law codes to place greater emphasis on the physical punishment of the perpetrator. It prescribed specific penalties for each crime and is among the first codes to establish the presumption of innocence. They were intended to limit what a wronged person was permitted to do in retribution. The Code of Hammurabi and the Law of Moses in the Torah contain numerous similarities.\nHammurabi was seen by many as a god within his own lifetime. After his death, Hammurabi was revered as a great conqueror who spread civilization and forced all peoples to pay obeisance to Marduk, the national god of the Babylonians. Later, his military accomplishments became de-emphasized and his role as the ideal lawgiver became the primary aspect of his legacy. For later Mesopotamians, Hammurabi's reign became the frame of reference for all events occurring in the distant past. Even after the empire he built collapsed, he was still revered as a model ruler, and many kings across the Near East claimed him as an ancestor. Hammurabi was rediscovered by archaeologists in the late nineteenth century and has since been seen as an important figure in the history of law.\nLife.\nBackground and ascension.\nHammurabi ascended to the throne as the king of a minor kingdom in the midst of a complex geopolitical situation. Hammurabi was an Amorite First Dynasty king of the city-state of Babylon, and inherited the power from his father, Sin-Muballit, in c.\u20091792 BC. Babylon was one of the many largely Amorite-ruled city-states that dotted the central and southern Mesopotamian plains and waged war on each other for control of fertile agricultural land. Though many cultures co-existed in Mesopotamia, Babylonian culture gained a degree of prominence among the literate classes throughout the Middle East under Hammurabi. The kings who came before Hammurabi had founded a relatively minor city-state in 1894 BC, which controlled little territory outside of the city itself. Babylon was overshadowed by older, larger, and more powerful kingdoms, such as Elam, Assyria, Isin, Eshnunna, and Larsa for a century or so after its founding. However, his father Sin-Muballit had begun to consolidate rule of a small area of south central Mesopotamia under Babylonian rule and, by the time of his reign, had conquered the minor city-states of Borsippa, Kish, and Sippar.\nThe powerful kingdom of Eshnunna controlled the upper Tigris River, while Larsa controlled the river delta. To the east of Mesopotamia lay the powerful kingdom of Elam, which regularly invaded and forced tribute upon the small states of southern Mesopotamia. In northern Mesopotamia, the Assyrian king Shamshi-Adad I, who had already inherited centuries-old Assyrian colonies in Asia Minor, had expanded his territory into the Levant and central Mesopotamia, although his untimely death would somewhat fragment his empire.\nReign and conquests.\nThe first few years of Hammurabi's reign were quite peaceful. Hammurabi used his power to undertake a series of public works, including heightening the city walls for defensive purposes, and expanding the temples. The powerful kingdom of Elam, which straddled important trade routes across the Zagros Mountains, invaded the Mesopotamian plain. With allies among the plain states, Elam attacked and destroyed the kingdom of Eshnunna, destroying a number of cities and imposing its rule on portions of the plain for the first time.\nIn order to consolidate its position, Elam tried to start a war between Hammurabi's Babylonian kingdom and the kingdom of Larsa. Hammurabi and the king of Larsa made an alliance when they discovered this duplicity and were able to crush the Elamites, although Larsa did not contribute greatly to the military effort. Angered by Larsa's failure to come to his aid, Hammurabi turned on that southern power, thus gaining control of the entirety of the lower Mesopotamian plain by c.\u20091763 BC.\nAs Hammurabi was assisted during the war in the south by his allies from the north such as Yamhad and Mari, the absence of soldiers in the north led to unrest. Continuing his expansion, Hammurabi turned his attention northward, quelling the unrest. Soon after, he destroyed Eshnunna. Next the Babylonian armies conquered the remaining northern states, including Babylon's former ally Mari, although it is possible that the conquest of Mari was a surrender without any actual conflict.\nHammurabi entered into a protracted war with Ishme-Dagan I of Assyria for control of Mesopotamia, with both kings making alliances with minor states in order to gain the upper hand. Eventually Hammurabi prevailed, ousting Ishme-Dagan I just before his own death. Mut-Ashkur, the new king of Assyria, was forced to pay tribute to Hammurabi.\nIn just a few years, Hammurabi succeeded in uniting all of Mesopotamia under his rule. The Assyrian kingdom survived but was forced to pay tribute during his reign, and of the major city-states in the region, only Aleppo and Qatna to the west in the Levant maintained their independence. However, one stele (stone monument) of Hammurabi has been found as far north as Diyarbekir, where he claims the title \"King of the Amorites\".\nVast numbers of contract tablets, dated to the reigns of Hammurabi and his successors, have been discovered, as well as 55 of his own letters. These letters give a glimpse into the daily trials of ruling an empire, from dealing with floods and mandating changes to a flawed calendar, to taking care of Babylon's massive herds of livestock. Hammurabi died and passed the reins of the empire on to his son Samsu-iluna in c.\u20091750 BC, under whose rule the Babylonian empire quickly began to unravel.\nFamily.\nAt least three sons and one daughter of Hammurabi (\u1e2aammu-r\u0101pi) are attested with certainty:\nCode of laws.\nThe Code of Hammurabi was a collection of 282 laws dealing with a wide range of issues. It is not the earliest surviving law code but was proved more influential in world politics and international relations as instead of focusing on compensating the victim of crime, as in earlier Sumerian law codes, the Code of Hammurabi instead focused on physically punishing the perpetrator. It was also one of the first law codes to place restrictions on what a wronged person was allowed to do in retribution and one of the earliest examples of the idea of presumption of innocence, suggesting that the accused and accuser have the opportunity to provide evidence. The structure of the code is very specific, with each offense receiving a specified punishment. Many offenses resulted in death, disfigurement, or the use of the \"Lex Talionis\" philosophy (\"Eye for eye, tooth for tooth\").\nThe Code of Hammurabi was inscribed on a stele and placed in a public place so that all could see it, although it is thought that few were literate. The stele was later plundered by the Elamites and removed to their capital, Susa; it was rediscovered there in 1901 in Iran and is now in the Louvre Museum in Paris. The code of Hammurabi contains 282 laws, written by scribes on 12 tablets. Unlike earlier laws, it was written in Akkadian, the daily language of Babylon, and could therefore be read by any literate person in the city. At this time, Akkadian replaced Sumerian, and Hammurabi began language reforms that would make Akkadian the most common language at this time. A carving at the top of the stele portrays Hammurabi receiving the laws from Shamash, the Babylonian god of justice, and the preface states that Hammurabi was chosen by Shamash to bring the laws to the people.\nBecause of Hammurabi's reputation as a lawgiver, his depiction can be found in law buildings throughout the world. Hammurabi is one of the 23 lawgivers depicted in marble bas-reliefs in the chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives in the United States Capitol. A frieze by Adolph Weinman depicting the \"great lawgivers of history\", including Hammurabi, is on the south wall of the U.S. Supreme Court building.\nLegacy.\nPosthumous commemoration.\nHammurabi was honored above all other kings of the second millennium BC and he received the unique honor of being declared to be a god within his own lifetime. The personal name \"Hammurabi-ili\" meaning \"Hammurabi is my god\" became common during and after his reign. In writings from shortly after his death, Hammurabi is commemorated mainly for three achievements: bringing victory in war, bringing peace, and bringing justice. Hammurabi's conquests came to be regarded as part of a sacred mission to spread civilization to all nations. A stele from Ur glorifies him in his own voice as a mighty ruler who forces evil into submission and compels all peoples to worship Marduk. The stele declares: \"The people of Elam, Gutium, Subartu, and Tukrish, whose mountains are distant and whose languages are obscure, I placed into [Marduk's] hand. I myself continued to put straight their confused minds.\" A later hymn also written in Hammurabi's own voice extols him as a powerful, supernatural force for Marduk:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI am the king, the brace that grasps wrongdoers, that makes people of one mind,\nI am the great dragon among kings, who throws their counsel in disarray,\nI am the net that is stretched over the enemy,\nI am the fear-inspiring, who, when lifting his fierce eyes, gives the disobedient the death sentence,\nI am the great net that covers evil intent,\nI am the young lion, who breaks nets and scepters,\nI am the battle net that catches him who offends me.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAfter extolling Hammurabi's military accomplishments, the hymn finally declares: \"I am Hammurabi, the king of justice.\" In later commemorations, Hammurabi's role as a great lawgiver came to be emphasized above all his other accomplishments and his military achievements became de-emphasized. Hammurabi's reign became the point of reference for all events in the distant past. A hymn to the goddess Ishtar, whose language suggests it was written during the reign of Ammisaduqa, Hammurabi's fourth successor, declares: \"The king who first heard this song as a song of your heroism is Hammurabi. This song for you was composed in his reign. May he be given life forever!\" For centuries after his death, Hammurabi's laws continued to be copied by scribes as part of their writing exercises and they were even partially translated into Sumerian.\nPolitical legacy.\nDuring the reign of Hammurabi, Babylon usurped the position of \"most holy city\" in southern Mesopotamia from its predecessor, Nippur. Under the rule of Hammurabi's successor Samsu-iluna, the short-lived Babylonian Empire began to collapse. In northern Mesopotamia, both the Amorites and Babylonians were driven from Assyria by Puzur-Sin a native Akkadian-speaking ruler, c.\u20091740 BC. Around the same time, native Akkadian speakers threw off Amorite Babylonian rule in the far south of Mesopotamia, creating the Sealand Dynasty, in more or less the region of ancient Sumer. Hammurabi's ineffectual successors met with further defeats and loss of territory at the hands of Assyrian kings such as Adasi and Bel-ibni, as well as to the Sealand Dynasty to the south, Elam to the east, and to the Kassites from the northeast. Thus was Babylon quickly reduced to the small and minor state it had once been upon its founding.\nThe \"coup de grace\" for the Hammurabi's Amorite Dynasty occurred in 1595 BC, when Babylon was sacked and conquered by the powerful Hittite Empire, thereby ending all Amorite political presence in Mesopotamia. However, the Indo-European-speaking Hittites did not remain, turning over Babylon to their Kassite allies, a people speaking a language isolate, from the Zagros mountains region. This Kassite Dynasty ruled Babylon for over 400 years and adopted many aspects of the Babylonian culture, including Hammurabi's code of laws. Even after the fall of the Amorite Dynasty, however, Hammurabi was still remembered and revered. When the Elamite king Shutruk-Nahhunte I raided Babylon in 1158 BC and carried off many stone monuments, he had most of the inscriptions on these monuments erased and new inscriptions carved into them. On the stele containing Hammurabi's laws, however, only four or five columns were wiped out and no new inscription was ever added. Over a thousand years after Hammurabi's death, the kings of Suhu, a land along the Euphrates river, just northwest of Babylon, claimed him as their ancestor.\nA Neo-Babylonian royal inscription, which was intended for display on a stele, commemorates a royal grant of tax exemptions to nine Babylonian cities and presents the royal protagonist as a second Hammurabi.\nRelationship to Biblical figures and Mosaic law.\nIn the late nineteenth century, the Code of Hammurabi became a major center of debate in the heated \"Babel und Bibel\" (\"Babylon and Bible\") controversy in Germany over the relationship between the Bible and ancient Babylonian texts. In January 1902, the German Assyriologist Friedrich Delitzsch gave a lecture at the Sing-Akademie zu Berlin in front of the Kaiser and his wife, in which he argued that the Mosaic Laws of the Old Testament were directly copied off the Code of Hammurabi. Delitzsch's lecture was so controversial that, by September 1903, he had managed to collect 1,350 short articles from newspapers and journals, over 300 longer ones, and twenty-eight pamphlets, all written in response to this lecture, as well as the preceding one about the Flood story in the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\". These articles were overwhelmingly critical of Delitzsch, though a few were sympathetic. The Kaiser distanced himself from Delitzsch and his radical views and, in fall of 1904, Delitzsch was forced to give his third lecture in Cologne and Frankfurt am Main rather than in Berlin. The putative relationship between the Mosaic Law and the Code of Hammurabi later became a major part of Delitzsch's argument in his 1920\u201321 book \"Die gro\u00dfe T\u00e4uschung\" (\"The Great Deception\") that the Hebrew Bible was irredeemably contaminated by Babylonian influence and that only by eliminating the human Old Testament entirely could Christians finally believe in the true, Aryan message of the New Testament. In the early twentieth century, many scholars believed that Hammurabi was Amraphel, the King of Shinar in the Book of Genesis 14:1. This view has now been largely rejected, and Amraphel's existence is not attested in any writings from outside the Bible.\nParallels between this narrative and the giving of the Covenant Code to Moses by Yahweh atop Mount Sinai in the Biblical Book of Exodus and similarities between the two legal codes suggest a common ancestor in the Semitic background of the two. Nonetheless, fragments of previous law codes have been found and it is unlikely that the Mosaic laws were directly inspired by the Code of Hammurabi. Some scholars have disputed this; David P. Wright argues that the Jewish Covenant Code is \"directly, primarily, and throughout\" based upon the Laws of Hammurabi. In 2010, a team of archaeologists from Hebrew University discovered a cuneiform tablet dating to the eighteenth or seventeenth century BC at Hazor in Israel containing laws clearly derived from the Code of Hammurabi.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14359", "revid": "47981152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14359", "title": "Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle", "text": "Method of analysis applied to problems wave propagation\nThe Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle (named after Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens and French physicist Augustin-Jean Fresnel) states that every point on a wavefront is itself the source of spherical wavelets and that the secondary wavelets emanating from different points mutually interfere. The sum of these spherical wavelets forms a new wavefront. As such, the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle is a method of analysis applied to problems of luminous wave propagation both in the far-field limit and in near-field diffraction as well as reflection.\nHistory.\nIn 1678, Huygens proposed that every point reached by a luminous disturbance becomes a source of a spherical wave. The sum of these secondary waves determines the form of the wave at any subsequent time; the overall procedure is referred to as Huygens' construction. He assumed that the secondary waves traveled only in the \"forward\" direction, but it is not explained in the theory why this is the case. He was able to provide a qualitative explanation of linear and spherical wave propagation, and to derive the laws of reflection and refraction using this principle, but could not explain the deviations from rectilinear propagation that occur when light encounters edges, apertures and screens, commonly known as diffraction effects. \nIn 1818, Fresnel showed that Huygens' principle, together with his own principle of interference, could explain both the rectilinear propagation of light and also diffraction effects. To obtain agreement with the experimental results, he had to include additional arbitrary assumptions about the phase and amplitude of the secondary waves, as well as an obliquity factor. These assumptions have no obvious physical foundation, but led to predictions that agreed with many experimental observations, including the Poisson spot.\nPoisson was a member of the French Academy, which reviewed Fresnel's work. He used Fresnel's theory to predict that a bright spot ought to appear in the center of the shadow of a small disc, and deduced from this that the theory was incorrect. However, Fran%C3%A7ois Arago, another member of the committee, performed the experiment and showed that the prediction was correct. This success was important evidence in favor of the wave theory of light over then predominant corpuscular theory.\nIn 1882, Gustav Kirchhoff analyzed Fresnel's theory in a rigorous mathematical formulation, as an approximate form of an integral theorem. Very few rigorous solutions to diffraction problems are known, however, and most problems in optics are adequately treated using the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle.\nIn 1939 Edward Copson, extended Huygens' original principle to consider the polarization of light, which requires a vector potential, in contrast to the scalar potential of a simple ocean wave or sound wave.\nIn antenna theory and engineering, the reformulation of the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle for radiating current sources is known as surface equivalence principle.\nIssues in Huygens\u2013Fresnel theory continue to be of interest. In 1991, David A. B. Miller suggested that treating the source as a dipole (not the monopole assumed by Huygens) will cancel waves propagating in the reverse direction, making Huygens' construction quantitatively correct. In 2021, Forrest L. Anderson showed that treating the wavelets as Dirac delta functions, summing and differentiating the summation is sufficient to cancel reverse propagating waves.\nExamples.\nRefraction.\nThe apparent change in direction of a light ray as it enters a sheet of glass at an angle can be understood by the Huygens construction. Each point on the surface of the glass gives a secondary wavelet. These wavelets propagate at a slower velocity in the glass, making less forward progress than their counterparts in air. When the wavelets are summed, the resulting wavefront propagates at an angle to the direction of the wavefront in air.\nIn an inhomogeneous medium with a variable index of refraction, different parts of the wavefront propagate at different speeds. Consequently, the wavefront bends around in the direction of the higher index. \nHuygens' principle as a microscopic model.\nThe Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle provides a reasonable basis for understanding and predicting the classical wave propagation of light. However, there are limitations to the principle, namely the same approximations made for deriving the Kirchhoff's diffraction formula and the approximations of near field due to Fresnel. These can be summarized in the fact that the wavelength of light is much smaller than the dimensions of any optical components encountered.\nKirchhoff's diffraction formula provides a rigorous mathematical foundation for diffraction, based on the wave equation. The arbitrary assumptions made by Fresnel to arrive at the Huygens\u2013Fresnel equation emerge automatically from the mathematics in this derivation.\nA simple example of the operation of the principle can be observed when an open doorway connects two rooms and a sound is produced in a remote corner of one of them. A person in the other room will hear the sound as if it originated at the doorway. As far as the second room is concerned, the vibrating air in the doorway is the source of the sound.\nMathematical expression of the principle.\nConsider the case of a point source located at a point P0, vibrating at a frequency \"f\". The disturbance may be described by a complex variable \"U\"0 known as the complex amplitude. It produces a spherical wave with wavelength \u03bb, wavenumber \"k\" \n 2\"\u03c0\"/\"\u03bb\". Within a constant of proportionality, the complex amplitude of the primary wave at the point Q located at a distance \"r\"0 from P0 is:\nformula_1\nNote that magnitude decreases in inverse proportion to the distance traveled, and the phase changes as \"k\" times the distance traveled.\nUsing Huygens' theory and the principle of superposition of waves, the complex amplitude at a further point P is found by summing the contribution from each point on the sphere of radius \"r\"0. In order to obtain agreement with experimental results, Fresnel found that the individual contributions from the secondary waves on the sphere had to be multiplied by a constant, \u2212\"i\"/\u03bb, and by an additional inclination factor, \"K\"(\u03c7). The first assumption implies that the secondary waves oscillate at a quarter of a cycle out of phase with respect to the primary wave and that the magnitude of the secondary waves is in a ratio of 1:\u03bb to the primary wave. He also assumed that \"K\"(\u03c7) had a maximum value when \u03c7 = 0, and was equal to zero when \u03c7 = \u03c0/2, where \u03c7 is the angle between the normal of the primary wavefront and the normal of the secondary wavefront. The complex amplitude at P, due to the contribution of secondary waves, is then given by:\nformula_2\nwhere \"S\" describes the surface of the sphere, and \"s\" is the distance between Q and P.\nFresnel used a zone construction method to find approximate values of \"K\" for the different zones, which enabled him to make predictions that were in agreement with experimental results. The integral theorem of Kirchhoff includes the basic idea of Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle. Kirchhoff showed that in many cases, the theorem can be approximated to a simpler form that is equivalent to the formation of Fresnel's formulation.\nFor an aperture illumination consisting of a single expanding spherical wave, if the radius of the curvature of the wave is sufficiently large, Kirchhoff gave the following expression for \"K\"(\u03c7):\nformula_3\n\"K\" has a maximum value at \u03c7 = 0 as in the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle; however, \"K\" is not equal to zero at \u03c7 = \u03c0/2, but at \u03c7 = \u03c0.\nThe above derivation of \"K\"(\u03c7) assumed that the diffracting aperture is illuminated by a single spherical wave with a sufficiently large radius of curvature. However, the principle holds for more general illuminations. An arbitrary illumination can be decomposed into a collection of point sources, and the linearity of the wave equation can be invoked to apply the principle to each point source individually. \"K\"(\u03c7) can be generally expressed as:\nformula_4\nIn this case, \"K\" satisfies the conditions stated above (maximum value at \u03c7 = 0 and zero at \u03c7 = \u03c0/2).\nGeneralized Huygens' principle.\nThe generalized Huygen's principle can be expressed for formula_5 in the form:\nformula_6\nwhere \"G\" is known as the Green's function or \"propagator\", which propagates the wave function formula_7 in time. \nThis generalized principle is the basis for Feynman's approach to quantum electrodynamics. Feynman described the generalized principle in the following way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Actually, Huygens\u2019 principle is not correct in optics. It is replaced by Kirchoff\u2019s [sic] modification which requires that both the amplitude and its derivative must be known on the adjacent surface. This is a consequence of the fact that the wave equation in optics is second order in time. The wave equation of quantum mechanics is first order in time; therefore, Huygens\u2019 principle is correct for matter waves, action replacing time.\"\nFeynman's path integral and the modern photon wave function.\nHuygens' theory served as a fundamental explanation of the wave nature of light interference and was further developed by Fresnel and Young, but did not fully resolve all observations, such as the low-intensity double-slit experiment first performed by G. I. Taylor in 1909. It was not until the early and mid-1900s that quantum theory discussions, particularly the early discussions at the 1927 Brussels Solvay Conference, where Louis de Broglie proposed his de Broglie hypothesis that the photon is guided by a wave function. \nThe wave function presents a much different explanation of the observed light and dark bands in a double slit experiment. In this conception, the photon follows a path that is a probabilistic choice of one of many possible paths in the electromagnetic field. These probable paths form the pattern: in dark areas, no photons are landing, and in bright areas, many photons are landing. The set of possible photon paths is consistent with Richard Feynman's path integral theory, the paths determined by the surroundings: the photon's originating point (atom), the slit, and the screen and by tracking and summing phases. The wave function is a solution to this geometry. The wave function approach was further supported by additional double-slit experiments in Italy and Japan in the 1970s and 1980s with electrons.\nQuantum field theory.\nHuygens' principle can be seen as a consequence of the homogeneity of space\u2014space is uniform in all locations. Any disturbance created in a sufficiently small region of homogeneous space (or in a homogeneous medium) propagates from that region in all geodesic directions. The waves produced by this disturbance, in turn, create disturbances in other regions, and so on. The superposition of all the waves results in the observed pattern of wave propagation.\nHomogeneity of space is fundamental to quantum field theory (QFT), where the wave function of any object propagates along all available unobstructed paths. When integrated along all possible paths, with a phase factor proportional to the action, the interference of the wave-functions correctly predicts observable phenomena. Every point on the wavefront acts as the source of secondary wavelets that spread out in the light cone with the same speed as the wave. The new wavefront is found by constructing the surface tangent to the secondary wavelets.\nIn other spatial dimensions.\nIn 1900, Jacques Hadamard observed that Huygens' principle was broken when the number of spatial dimensions is even. From this, he developed a set of conjectures that remain an active topic of research. In particular, it has been discovered that Huygens' principle holds on a large class of homogeneous spaces derived from the Coxeter group (so, for example, the Weyl groups of simple Lie algebras).\nThe traditional statement of Huygens' principle for the D'Alembertian gives rise to the KdV hierarchy; analogously, the Dirac operator gives rise to the AKNS hierarchy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14360", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14360", "title": "Hanko (stamp)", "text": ""}
{"id": "14361", "revid": "1788362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14361", "title": "Honey", "text": "Sweet and viscous substance made by bees\nHoney is a sweet and viscous substance made by several species of bees, the best-known of which are honey bees. Honey is made and stored to nourish bee colonies. Bees produce honey by gathering and then refining the sugary secretions of plants (primarily floral nectar) or the secretions of other insects, like the honeydew of aphids. This refinement takes place both within individual bees, through regurgitation and enzymatic activity, and during storage in the hive, through water evaporation that concentrates the honey's sugars until it is thick and viscous.\nHoney bees stockpile honey in the hive. Within the hive is a structure made from wax called honeycomb. The honeycomb is made up of hundreds or thousands of hexagonal cells, into which the bees regurgitate honey for storage. Other honey-producing species of bee store the substance in different structures, such as the pots made of wax and resin used by the stingless bee.\nHoney for human consumption is collected from wild bee colonies, or from the hives of domesticated bees. The honey produced by honey bees is the most familiar to humans, thanks to its worldwide commercial production and availability. The husbandry of bees is known as beekeeping or apiculture, with the cultivation of stingless bees usually referred to as meliponiculture.\nHoney is sweet because of its high concentrations of the monosaccharides fructose and glucose. It has about the same relative sweetness as sucrose (table sugar). One standard tablespoon (14\u00a0mL) of honey provides around of food energy. It has attractive chemical properties for baking and a distinctive flavor when used as a sweetener. Due to honey's high sugar concentration and acidic pH level many microorganisms cannot grow in it and, when properly stored, honey therefore does not spoil. Samples of honey discovered in archaeological contexts have proven edible even after millennia.\nHoney use and production has a long and varied history, with its beginnings in prehistoric times. Several cave paintings in Cuevas de la Ara\u00f1a in Spain depict humans foraging for honey at least 8,000 years ago. While \"Apis mellifera\" is an Old World insect, large-scale meliponiculture of New World stingless bees has been practiced by Mayans since pre-Columbian times.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFormation.\nBy honey bees.\nHoney is produced by bees who have collected nectar or honeydew. Bees value honey for its sugars, which they consume to support general metabolic activity, especially that of their flight muscles during foraging, and as a food for their larvae. To this end bees stockpile honey to provide for themselves during ordinary foraging as well as during lean periods, as in overwintering. During foraging bees use part of the nectar they collect to power their flight muscles. The majority of nectar collected is not used to directly nourish the insects but is instead destined for regurgitation, enzymatic digestion, and finally long-term storage as honey. During cold weather or when other food sources are scarce, adult and larval bees consume stored honey, which is many times more energy-dense as the nectar from which it is made.\nAfter leaving the hive, a foraging bee collects sugar-rich nectar or honeydew. Nectar from the flower generally has a water content of 70 to 80% and is much less viscous than finished honey, which usually has a water content around 18%. The water content of honeydew from aphids and other true bugs is generally very close to the sap on which those insects feed and is usually somewhat more dilute than nectar. One source describes the water content of honeydew as around 89%. Whether it is feeding on nectar or honeydew, the bee sucks these runny fluids through its proboscis, which delivers the liquid to the bee's honey stomach or \"honey crop\". This cavity lies just above its food stomach, the latter of which digests pollen and sugars consumed by an individual honey bee for its own nourishment.\nIn \"Apis mellifera\", the honey stomach holds about 40\u00a0mg of liquid. This is about half the weight of an unladen bee. Collecting this quantity in nectar can require visits to more than one thousand flowers. When nectar is plentiful, it can take a bee more than an hour of ceaseless work to collect enough nectar to fill its honey crop. Salivary enzymes and proteins from the bee's hypopharyngeal gland are secreted into the nectar once it is in the bee's honey stomach. These substances begin cleaving complex sugars like sucrose and starches into simpler sugars such as glucose and fructose. This process slightly raises the water content and the acidity of the partially digested nectar.\nOnce filled, the forager bees return to the hive. There they regurgitate and transfer nectar to hive bees. Once it is in their own honey stomachs, the hive bees regurgitate the nectar, repeatedly forming bubbles between their mandibles, speeding its digestion and concentration. These bubbles create a large surface area per volume and by this means the bees evaporate a portion of the nectar's water into the warm air of the hive.\nHive bees form honey-processing groups. These groups work in relay, with one bee subjecting the processed nectar to bubbling and then passing the refined liquid on to others. It can take as long as 20 minutes of continuous regurgitation, digestion and evaporation until the product reaches storage quality. The new honey is then placed in honeycomb cells, which are left uncapped. This honey still has a very high water content, up to 70%, depending on the concentration of nectar gathered. At this stage of its refinement the water content of the honey is high enough that ubiquitous yeast spores can reproduce in it, a process which, if left unchecked, would rapidly consume the new honey's sugars. To combat this, bees use an ability rare among insects: the endogenous generation of heat.\nBees are among the few insects that can create large amounts of body heat. They use this ability to produce a constant ambient temperature in their hives. Hive temperatures are usually around in the honey-storage areas. This temperature is regulated either by generating heat with their bodies or removing it through water evaporation. The evaporation removes water from the stored honey, drawing heat from the colony. The bees use their wings to govern hive cooling. Coordinated wing beating moves air across the wet honey, drawing out water and heat. Ventilation of the hive eventually expels both excess water and heat into the outside world.\nThe process of evaporating continues until the honey reaches its final water content of between 15.5% and 18%. This concentrates the sugars far beyond the saturation point of water, which is to say there is far more sugar dissolved in what little water remains in honey than ever could be dissolved in an equivalent volume of water. Honey, even at hive temperatures, is therefore a supercooled solution of various sugars in water. These concentrations of sugar can only be achieved near room temperature by evaporation of a less concentrated solution, in this case nectar. For osmotic reasons such high concentrations of sugar are extremely unfavorable to microbiological reproduction and all fermentation is consequently halted. The bees then cap the cells of finished honey with wax. This seals them from contamination and prevents further evaporation.\nSo long as its water concentration does not rise much above 18%, honey has an indefinite shelf life, both within the hive and after its removal by a beekeeper.\nBy other insects.\nHoney bees are not the only eusocial insects to produce honey. All non-parasitic bumblebees and stingless bees produce honey. Some wasp species, such as \"Brachygastra lecheguana\" and \"Brachygastra mellifica,\" found in South and Central America, are known to feed on nectar and produce honey. Other wasps, such as \"Polistes versicolor\", also consume honey. In the middle of their life cycles they alternate between feeding on protein-rich pollen and feeding on honey, which is a far denser source of food energy.\nHuman intervention.\nHumans have semi-domesticated several species of honey bee by taking advantage of their swarming stage. Swarming is the means by which new colonies are established when there is no longer space for expansion in the colony's present hive. The old queen lays eggs that will develop into new queens and then leads as many as half the colony to a site for a new hive. Bees generally swarm before a suitable location for another hive has been discovered by scouts sent out for this purpose. Until such a location is found the swarm will simply conglomerate near the former hive, often from tree branches. These swarms are unusually docile and amenable to transport by humans. When provided with a suitable nesting site, such as a commercial Langstroth hive, the swarm will readily form a new colony in artificial surroundings. These semi-domesticated colonies are then looked after by humans practicing apiculture or meliponiculture. Captured bees are encouraged to forage, often in agricultural settings such as orchards, where pollinators are highly valued. The honey, pollen, wax and resins the bees produce are all harvested by humans for a variety of uses.\nThe term \"semi-domesticated\" is preferred because all bee colonies, even those in very large agricultural apiculture operations, readily leave the protection of humans in swarms that can establish successful wild colonies. Much of the effort in commercial beekeeping is dedicated to persuading a hive that is ready to swarm to produce more honeycomb in its present location. This is usually done by adding more space to the colony with \"honey supers\", empty boxes placed on top of an existing colony. The bees can then usually be enticed to develop this empty space instead of dividing their colony through swarming.\nProduction.\nCollection.\nHoney is collected from wild bee colonies or from domesticated beehives. On average, a hive will produce about of honey per year. Wild bee nests are sometimes located by following a honeyguide bird.\nTo safely collect honey from a hive, beekeepers typically pacify the bees using a bee smoker. The smoke triggers a feeding instinct (an attempt to save the resources of the hive from a possible fire), making them less aggressive, and obscures the pheromones the bees use to communicate. The honeycomb is removed from the hive and the honey may be extracted from it either by crushing or by using a honey extractor. The honey is then usually filtered to remove beeswax and other debris.\nBefore the invention of removable frames, bee colonies were often sacrificed to conduct the harvest. The harvester would take all the available honey and replace the entire colony the next spring. Since the invention of removable frames, the principles of husbandry led most beekeepers to ensure that their bees have enough stores to survive the winter, either by leaving some honey in the beehive or by providing the colony with a honey substitute such as sugar water or crystalline sugar (often in the form of a \"candyboard\"). The amount of food necessary to survive the winter depends on the variety of bees and on the length and severity of local winters.\nMany animal species are attracted to wild or domestic sources of honey.\nPreservation.\nBecause of its composition and chemical properties, honey is suitable for long-term storage, and is easily assimilated even after long preservation. Honey, and objects immersed in honey, have been preserved for centuries. (However, no edible honey has been found in Egyptian tombs; all such cases have been proven to be other substances or only chemical traces.) The key to preservation is limiting access to humidity. In its cured state, honey has a sufficiently high sugar content to inhibit fermentation. If exposed to moist air, its hydrophilic properties pull moisture into the honey, eventually diluting it to the point that fermentation can begin.\nThe long shelf life of honey is attributed to an enzyme found in the stomach of bees. The bees mix glucose oxidase with expelled nectar they previously consumed, creating two byproducts \u2013 gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide, which are partially responsible for honey acidity and suppression of bacterial growth.\nAdulteration.\nHoney is sometimes adulterated by the addition of other sugars, syrups, or compounds to change its flavor or viscosity, reduce cost, or increase the fructose content to inhibit crystallization. Honey has been adulterated since ancient times, when honey was sometimes blended with plant syrups such as maple, birch, or sorghum and sold to customers as pure honey. Sometimes crystallized honey was mixed with flour or other fillers, hiding the adulteration from buyers until the honey was liquefied. In modern times, the most common adulterant became clear, almost-flavorless corn syrup; the adulterated mixture can be very difficult to distinguish from pure honey.\nAccording to the Codex Alimentarius of the United Nations, any product labeled as \"honey\" or \"pure honey\" must not be adulterated, although labeling laws differ between countries. In the United States, according to the National Honey Board, \"Ensuring honey authenticity is one of the great challenges facing the honey industry today. Over the past half century, a number of honey testing methods have been developed to detect food fraud. To date, there is no single universal analytical method available which is capable of detecting all types of adulteration with adequate sensitivity.\"\nIsotope ratio mass spectrometry can be used to detect addition of corn syrup and cane sugar by the carbon isotopic signature. Addition of sugars originating from corn or sugar cane (C4 plants, unlike the plants used by bees, and also sugar beet, which are predominantly C3 plants) skews the isotopic ratio of sugars present in honey, but does not influence the isotopic ratio of proteins. In an unadulterated honey, the carbon isotopic ratios of sugars and proteins should match. Levels as low as 7% of addition can be detected.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2023, world production of honey was 1.9million tonnes, led by China with 24% of the total, and Turkey, Ethiopia, and Iran as secondary producers (table).\nModern uses.\nFood.\nOver its history as a food, the main uses of honey are in cooking, baking, desserts, as a spread on bread, as an addition to various beverages such as tea, and as a sweetener in some commercial beverages.\nDue to its energy density, honey is an important food for virtually all hunter-gatherer cultures in warm climates, with the Hadza people ranking honey as their favorite food. Honey hunters in Africa have a mutualistic relationship with certain species of honeyguide birds.\nFermentation.\nPossibly the world's oldest fermented beverage, dating from 9,000 years ago, mead (\"honey wine\") is the alcoholic product made by adding yeast to honey-water must and fermenting it for weeks or months. The yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" is commonly used in modern mead production.\nMead varieties include drinks called metheglin (with spices or herbs), melomel (with fruit juices, such as grape, specifically called pyment), hippocras (with cinnamon), and sack mead (high concentration of honey), many of which have been developed as commercial products numbering in the hundreds in the United States. Honey is also used to make mead beer, called \"braggot\".\nPhysical and chemical properties.\nThe physical properties of honey vary, depending on water content, the type of flora used to produce it (pasturage), temperature, and the proportion of the specific sugars it contains. Fresh honey is a supersaturated liquid, containing more sugar than the water can typically dissolve at ambient temperatures. At room temperature, honey is a supercooled liquid, in which the glucose precipitates into solid granules. This forms a semisolid solution of precipitated glucose crystals in a solution of fructose and other ingredients.\nThe density of honey typically ranges between 1.38 and 1.45\u00a0kg/L at 20\u00a0\u00b0C.\nPhase transitions.\nThe melting point of crystallized honey is between , depending on its composition. Below this temperature, honey can be either in a metastable state, meaning that it will not crystallize until a seed crystal is added, or, more often, it is in a \"labile\" state, being saturated with enough sugars to crystallize spontaneously. The rate of crystallization is affected by many factors, but the primary factor is the ratio of the main sugars: fructose to glucose. Honeys that are supersaturated with a very high percentage of glucose, such as brassica honey, crystallize almost immediately after harvesting, while honeys with a low percentage of glucose, such as chestnut or tupelo honey, do not crystallize. Some types of honey may produce few but very large crystals, while others produce many small crystals.\nCrystallization is also affected by water content, because a high percentage of water inhibits crystallization, as does a high dextrin content. Temperature also affects the rate of crystallization, with the fastest growth occurring between . Crystal nuclei (seeds) tend to form more readily if the honey is disturbed, by stirring, shaking, or agitating, rather than if left at rest. However, the nucleation of microscopic seed-crystals is greatest between . Therefore, larger but fewer crystals tend to form at higher temperatures, while smaller but more-numerous crystals usually form at lower temperatures. Below 5\u00a0\u00b0C, the honey will not crystallize, thus the original texture and flavor can be preserved indefinitely.\nHoney is a supercooled liquid when stored below its melting point, as is normal. At very low temperatures, honey does not freeze solid; rather its viscosity increases. Like most viscous liquids, the honey becomes thick and sluggish with decreasing temperature. At , honey may appear or even feel solid, but it continues to flow at very low rates. Honey has a glass transition between . Below this temperature, honey enters a glassy state and becomes an amorphous solid (noncrystalline).\nRheology.\nThe viscosity of honey is affected greatly by both temperature and water content. The higher the water percentage, the more easily honey flows. Above its melting point, however, water has little effect on viscosity. Aside from water content, the composition of most types of honey also has little effect on viscosity. At , honey with 14% water content generally has a viscosity around 400\u00a0poise, while a honey containing 20% water has a viscosity around 20\u00a0poise. Viscosity increases very slowly with moderate cooling; a honey containing 16% water, at , has a viscosity around 2 poise, while at , the viscosity is around 70 poise. With further cooling, the increase in viscosity is more rapid, reaching 600 poise at around . However, while honey is viscous, it has low surface tension of 50\u201360 mJ/m2, making its wettability similar to water, glycerin, or most other liquids. The high viscosity and wettability of honey cause stickiness, which is a time-dependent process in supercooled liquids between the glass-transition temperature (Tg) and the crystalline-melting temperature.\nMost types of honey are Newtonian liquids, but a few types have non-Newtonian viscous properties. Honeys from heather or m\u0101nuka display thixotropic properties. These types of honey enter a gel-like state when motionless, but liquefy when stirred.\nElectrical and optical properties.\nBecause honey contains electrolytes, in the form of acids and minerals, it exhibits varying degrees of electrical conductivity. Measurements of the electrical conductivity are used to determine the quality of honey in terms of ash content.\nThe effect honey has on light is useful for determining the type and quality. Variations in its water content alter its refractive index. Water content can easily be measured with a refractometer. Typically, the refractive index for honey ranges from 1.504 at 13% water content to 1.474 at 25%. Honey also has an effect on polarized light, in that it rotates the polarization plane. The fructose gives a negative rotation, while the glucose gives a positive one. The overall rotation can be used to measure the ratio of the mixture. Honey is generally pale yellow and dark brown in color, but other colors can occur, depending on the sugar source. Bee colonies that forage on Kudzu (\"Pueraria montana\" var. \"lobata\") flowers, for example, produce honey that varies in color from red to purple.\nHygroscopy and fermentation.\nHoney has the ability to absorb moisture directly from the air, a phenomenon called hygroscopy. The amount of water the honey absorbs is dependent on the relative humidity of the air. Because honey contains yeast, this hygroscopic nature requires that honey be stored in sealed containers to prevent fermentation, which usually begins if the honey's water content rises much above 25%. Honey tends to absorb more water in this manner than the individual sugars allow on their own, which may be due to other ingredients it contains.\nFermentation of honey usually occurs after crystallization, because without the glucose, the liquid portion of the honey primarily consists of a concentrated mixture of fructose, acids, and water, providing the yeast with enough of an increase in the water percentage for growth. Honey that is to be stored at room temperature for long periods of time is often pasteurized, to kill any yeast, by heating it above .\nThermal characteristics.\nLike all sugar compounds, honey caramelizes if heated sufficiently, becoming darker in color, and eventually burns. However, honey contains fructose, which caramelizes at lower temperatures than glucose. The temperature at which caramelization begins varies, depending on the composition, but is typically between . Honey also contains acids, which act as catalysts for caramelization. The specific types of acids and their amounts play a primary role in determining the exact temperature. Of these acids, the amino acids, which occur in very small amounts, play an important role in the darkening of honey. The amino acids form darkened compounds called melanoidins, during a Maillard reaction. The Maillard reaction occurs slowly at room temperature, taking from a few to several months to show visible darkening, but speeds up dramatically with increasing temperatures. However, the reaction can also be slowed by storing the honey at colder temperatures.\nUnlike many other liquids, honey has very poor thermal conductivity of 0.5 W/(m\u22c5K) at 13% water content (compared to 401 W/(m\u22c5K) of copper), taking a long time to reach thermal equilibrium. Due to its high kinematic viscosity honey does not transfer heat through momentum diffusion (convection) but rather through thermal diffusion (more like a solid), so melting crystallized honey can easily result in localized caramelization if the heat source is too hot or not evenly distributed. However, honey takes substantially longer to liquefy when just above the melting point than at elevated temperatures. Melting of crystallized honey at can take up to 24 hours, while may take twice as long. These times can be cut nearly in half by heating at ; however, many of the minor substances in honey can be affected greatly by heating, changing the flavor, aroma, or other properties, so heating is usually done at the lowest temperature and for the shortest time possible.\nAcid content and flavor effects.\nThe average pH of honey is 3.9, but can range from 3.4 to 6.1. Honey contains many kinds of acids, both organic and amino. However, the different types and their amounts vary considerably, depending on the type of honey. These acids may be aromatic or aliphatic (nonaromatic). The aliphatic acids contribute greatly to the flavor of honey by interacting with the flavors of other ingredients.\nOrganic acids comprise most of the acids in honey, accounting for 0.17\u20131.17% of the mixture, with gluconic acid formed by the actions of glucose oxidase as the most prevalent. Minor amounts of other organic acids are present, consisting of formic, acetic, butyric, citric, lactic, malic, pyroglutamic, propionic, valeric, capronic, palmitic, and succinic, among many others.\nVolatile organic compounds.\nIndividual honeys from different plant sources contain over 100 volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which play a primary role in determining honey flavors and aromas. VOCs are carbon-based compounds that readily vaporize into the air, providing aroma, including the scents of flowers, essential oils, or ripening fruit. The typical chemical families of VOCs found in honey include hydrocarbons, aldehydes, alcohols, ketones, esters, acids, benzenes, furans, pyrans, norisoprenoids, and terpenes, among many others and their derivatives. The specific VOCs and their amounts vary considerably between different types of honey obtained by bees foraging on different plant sources. By example, when comparing the mixture of VOCs in different honeys in one review, longan honey had a higher amount of volatiles (48 VOCs), while sunflower honey had the lowest number of volatiles (8 VOCs).\nVOCs are primarily introduced into the honey from the nectar, where they are excreted by the flowers imparting individual scents. The specific types and concentrations of certain VOCs can be used to determine the type of flora used to produce monofloral honeys. The specific geography, soil composition and acidity used to grow the flora also have an effect on honey aroma properties, such as a \"fruity\" or \"grassy\" aroma from longan honey, or a \"waxy\" aroma from sunflower honey. Dominant VOCs in one study were linalool oxide, trans-linalool oxide, 2-phenylacetaldehyde, benzyl ethanol, isophorone, and methyl nonanoate.\nVOCs can also be introduced from the bodies of the bees, be produced by the enzymatic actions of digestion, or from chemical reactions that occur between different substances within the honey during storage, and therefore may change, increase, or decrease over long periods of time. VOCs may be produced, altered, or greatly affected by temperature and processing. Some VOCs are heat labile, and are destroyed at elevated temperatures, while others can be created during non-enzymatic reactions, such as the Maillard reaction. VOCs are responsible for nearly all of the aroma produced by a honey, which may be described as \"sweet\", \"flowery\", \"citrus\", \"almond\" or \"rancid\", among other terms. In addition, VOCs play a large role in determining the specific flavor of the honey, both through the aromas and flavor. VOCs from honeys in different geographic regions can be used as floral markers of those regions, and as markers of the bees that foraged the nectars.\nClassification.\nHoney is classified by its source (floral or not), and divisions are made according to the packaging and processing used. Regional honeys are also identified. In the US, honey is also graded on its color and optical density by USDA standards, graded on the Pfund scale, which ranges from 0 for \"water white\" honey to more than 114 for \"dark amber\" honey.\nPlant source.\nGenerally, honey is classified by the floral source of the nectar from which it was made. Honeys can be from specific types of flower nectars or can be blended after collection. The pollen in honey is traceable to floral source and therefore region of origin. The rheological and melissopalynological properties of honey can be used to identify the major plant nectar source used in its production.\nMonofloral.\nMonofloral honey is made primarily from the nectar of one type of flower. Monofloral honeys have distinctive flavors and colors because of differences between their principal nectar sources. To produce monofloral honey, beekeepers keep beehives in an area where the bees have access, as far as possible, to only one type of flower. In practice, a small proportion of any monofloral honey will be from other flower types. Typical examples of North American monofloral honeys are clover, orange blossom, sage, tupelo, buckwheat, fireweed, mesquite, sourwood, cherry, and blueberry. \nSome typical European examples include thyme, thistle, heather, acacia, dandelion, sunflower, lavender, honeysuckle, and varieties from lime and chestnut trees. In North Africa (e.g. Egypt), examples include clover, cotton, and citrus (mainly orange blossoms).\nThe unique flora of Australia yields a number of distinctive honeys, with some of the most popular being yellow box, blue gum, ironbark, bush mallee, Tasmanian leatherwood, and macadamia. M\u0101nuka honey, produced from the nectar of Leptospermum scoparium in New Zealand and parts of Australia, is darker in color and has an earthy, slightly bitter flavor profile compared with lighter honeys such as clover.\nPolyfloral.\nPolyfloral honey, also known as wildflower honey, is derived from the nectar of many types of flowers. The taste may vary from year to year, and the aroma and the flavor can be more or less intense, depending on which flowers are blooming.\nHoneydew honey.\nHoneydew honey is made from bees taking direct secretions from trees such as pine, fir, chestnut, and oak or primarily honeydew, the sweet secretions of aphids or other plant-sap-sucking insects, to produce honey rather than from nectar. This honey has a much larger proportion of indigestibles than light floral honeys, thus causing dysentery to the bees. Honeydew honey has a stronger and less sweet flavor than nectar-based honey, and European countries have been the primary market for honeydew honey. In Greece, pine honey, a type of honeydew honey, constitutes 60\u201365% of honey production.\nClassification by packaging and processing.\nGenerally, honey is bottled in its familiar liquid form, but it is sold in other forms, and can be subjected to a variety of processing methods.\nGrading.\nCountries have differing standards for grading honey.\nIn the US, honey grading is performed voluntarily based upon USDA standards. USDA offers inspection and grading \"as on-line (in-plant) or lot inspection...upon application, on a fee-for-service basis.\" Honey is graded based upon a number of factors, including water content, flavor and aroma, absence of defects, and clarity. Honey is also classified by color, though it is not a factor in the grading scale.\nThe USDA honey grade scale is:\nIndia certifies honey grades based on additional factors, such as the Fiehe's test, and other empirical measurements.\nIndicators of quality.\nHigh-quality honey can be distinguished by fragrance, taste, and consistency. Ripe, freshly collected, high-quality honey at should flow from a knife in a straight stream, without breaking into separate drops. After falling down, the honey should form a bead. The honey, when poured, should form small, temporary layers that disappear fairly quickly, indicating high viscosity. If not, it indicates honey with excessive water content of over 20%, not suitable for long-term preservation.\nIn jars, fresh honey should appear as a pure, consistent fluid, and should not set in layers. Within a few weeks to a few months of extraction, many varieties of honey crystallize into a cream-colored solid. Some varieties of honey, including tupelo, acacia, and sage, crystallize less regularly. Honey may be heated during bottling at temperatures of to delay or inhibit crystallization. Overheating is indicated by change in enzyme levels, for instance, diastase activity, which can be determined with the Schade or the Phadebas methods. A fluffy film on the surface of the honey (like a white foam), or marble-colored or white-spotted crystallization on a container's sides, is formed by air bubbles trapped during the bottling process.\nA 2008 Italian study determined that nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy can be used to distinguish between different honey types, and can be used to pinpoint the area where it was produced. Researchers were able to identify differences in acacia and polyfloral honeys by the differing proportions of fructose and sucrose, as well as differing levels of aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. This ability allows greater ease of selecting compatible stocks.\nNutrition.\nHoney is 17% water and 82% carbohydrates, and has negligible content of dietary fiber and protein, while containing no fat (table). Honey supplies no micronutrients in significant content (table). In a reference amount of , honey supplies 300 calories (table).\nSugar profile.\nHoney is mainly fructose (41% of sugars) and glucose (36%) (table), with remaining sugars including galactose, maltose, and sucrose, each supplying 3% or less of total sugars (table, USDA reference). \nThe glycemic index of honey has a possible range of 31\u201378, depending on the variety. \nThe specific composition, color, aroma, and flavor of any batch of honey depend on the flowers foraged by bees that produced the honey.\nMedical use and research.\nWounds and burns.\nHoney is a folk treatment for burns and other skin injuries. Preliminary evidence suggests that it aids in the healing of partial thickness burns 4\u20135 days faster than other dressings, and moderate evidence suggests that post-operative infections treated with honey heal faster and with fewer adverse events than with antiseptic and gauze. The evidence for the use of honey in various other wound treatments is of low quality, and firm conclusions cannot be drawn. Evidence does not support the use of honey-based products for the treatment of venous stasis ulcers or ingrown toenail. Several medical-grade honey products have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for use in treating minor wounds and burns.\nAntibiotic.\nHoney has long been used as a topical antibiotic by practitioners of traditional and herbal medicine. Honey's antibacterial effects were first demonstrated by the Dutch scientist Bernardus Adrianus van Ketel in 1892. Since then, numerous studies have shown that honey has broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, although potency varies widely between different honeys. Due to the proliferation of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the last few decades, there has been renewed interest in researching the antibacterial properties of honey. Components of honey under preliminary research for potential antibiotic use include methylglyoxal, hydrogen peroxide, and royalisin (also called defensin-1).\nCough.\nFor chronic and acute coughs, a Cochrane review found no strong evidence for or against the use of honey. For treating children, the systematic review concluded with moderate to low evidence that honey helps more than no treatment, diphenhydramine, and placebo at giving relief from coughing. Honey does not appear to work better than dextromethorphan at relieving coughing in children. Other reviews have also supported the use of honey for treating children.\nThe UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency recommends avoiding giving over-the-counter cough and common cold medication to children under six, and suggests \"a homemade remedy containing honey and lemon is likely to be just as useful and safer to take\", but warns that honey should not be given to babies because of the risk of infant botulism. The World Health Organization recommends honey as a treatment for coughs and sore throats, including for children, stating that no reason exists to believe it is less effective than a commercial remedy.\nOther.\nThe use of honey has been recommended as a temporary intervention for known or suspected button cell battery ingestions to reduce the risk and severity of injury to the esophagus caused by the battery prior to its removal.\nThere is no evidence that honey is beneficial for treating cancer, although honey may be useful for controlling side effects of radiation therapy or chemotherapy used to treat cancer.\nConsumption is sometimes advocated as a treatment for seasonal allergies due to pollen, but scientific evidence to support the claim is inconclusive. Honey is generally considered ineffective for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis.\nThe majority of calories in honey are from fructose. When consumed in addition to a normal diet, fructose causes significant weight gain, but when fructose was substituted for other carbohydrates of equal energy value there was no effect on body weight.\nHoney has a mild laxative effect which has been noted as being helpful in alleviating constipation and bloating.\nHealth hazards.\nHoney is generally safe when taken in typical food amounts, but it may have various, potential adverse effects or interactions in combination with excessive consumption, existing disease conditions, or drugs. Included among these are mild reactions to high intake, such as anxiety, insomnia, or hyperactivity in about 10% of children, according to one study. No symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, or hyperactivity were detected with honey consumption compared to placebo, according to another study. Honey consumption may interact adversely with existing allergies, high blood sugar levels (as in diabetes), or anticoagulants used to control bleeding, among other clinical conditions.\nPeople who have a weakened immune system may be at risk of bacterial or fungal infection from eating honey.\nBotulism.\nInfants can develop botulism after consuming honey contaminated with \"Clostridium botulinum\" endospores. While the risk honey poses to infant health is small, taking the risk is not recommended until after one year of age, and then giving honey is considered safe. Infantile botulism shows geographical variation. In the UK, only six cases were reported between 1976 and 2006, yet the US has much higher rates: 1.9 per 100,000 live births, 47.2% of which are in California.\nToxic honey.\nMad honey intoxication is a result of eating honey containing grayanotoxins. Honey produced from flowers of rhododendrons, mountain laurels, sheep laurel, and azaleas may cause honey intoxication. Symptoms include dizziness, weakness, excessive perspiration, nausea, and vomiting. Less commonly, low blood pressure, shock, heart rhythm irregularities, and convulsions may occur, with rare cases resulting in death. According to the FDA, honey intoxication is more likely when using \"natural\" unprocessed honey from farmers who may have a small number of hives because commercial processing, which pools of honey from numerous sources, dilutes the toxins.\nToxic honey may also result when bees are proximate to tutu bushes (\"Coriaria arborea\") and the vine hopper insect (\"Scolypopa australis\"). Both are found throughout New Zealand. Bees gather honeydew produced by the vine hopper insects feeding on the tutu plant. This introduces the poison tutin into honey. Only a few areas in New Zealand (the Coromandel Peninsula, Eastern Bay of Plenty Region and the Marlborough Sounds) frequently produce toxic honey. Symptoms of tutin poisoning include vomiting, delirium, giddiness, increased excitability, stupor, coma, and violent convulsions. To reduce the risk of tutin poisoning, humans should not eat honey taken from feral hives in the risk areas of New Zealand. Since December 2001, New Zealand beekeepers have been required to reduce the risk of producing toxic honey by closely monitoring tutu, vine hopper, and foraging conditions within of their apiary. Intoxication is rarely dangerous.\nFolk medicine.\nIn myths and folk medicine, honey was used both orally and topically to treat various ailments including gastric disturbances, ulcers, skin wounds, and skin burns by ancient Greeks and Egyptians, and in Ayurveda and traditional Chinese medicine.\nHistory.\nHoney collection is an ancient activity, long preceding the honey bee's domestication; this traditional practice is known as honey hunting. A Mesolithic rock painting in a cave in Valencia, Spain, dating back at least 8,000 years, depicts two honey foragers collecting honey and honeycomb from a wild bees' nest. The figures are depicted carrying baskets or gourds, and using a ladder or series of ropes to reach the nest. Humans followed the greater honeyguide bird to wild beehives; this behavior may have evolved with early hominids. The oldest known honey remains were found in Georgia during the construction of the Baku\u2013Tbilisi\u2013Ceyhan pipeline: archaeologists found honey remains on the inner surface of clay vessels unearthed in an ancient tomb, dating back between 4,700 and 5,500 years. In ancient Georgia, several types of honey were buried with a person for journeys into the afterlife, including linden, berry, and meadow-flower varieties.\nThe first written records of beekeeping are from ancient Egypt, where honey was used to sweeten cakes, biscuits, and other foods and as a base for unguents in Egyptian hieroglyphs. The dead were often buried in or with honey in Egypt, Mesopotamia and other regions. Bees were kept at temples to produce honey for temple offerings, mummification and other uses.\nIn southern Illyria (present day Albania), the Iron Age Illyrian tribe of the Abroi were known for preparing mead, a wine from honey, as documented by Hecataeus of Miletus in the 6th century BCE.\nIn ancient Greece, honey was produced from the Archaic to the Hellenistic periods. In 594\u00a0BCE, beekeeping around Athens was so widespread that Solon passed a law about it: \"He who sets up hives of bees must put them away from those already installed by another\". Greek archaeological excavations of pottery located ancient hives. According to Columella, Greek beekeepers of the Hellenistic period did not hesitate to move their hives over rather long distances to maximize production, taking advantage of the different vegetative cycles in different regions. The spiritual and supposed therapeutic use of honey in ancient India was documented in both the Vedas and the Ayurveda texts.\nReligious significance.\nIn ancient Greek religion, the food of Zeus and the twelve Gods of Olympus was honey in the form of nectar and ambrosia.\nIn the Hebrew Bible, the Promised Land (Canaan, the Land of Israel) is described 16 times as \"the land of milk and honey\" as a metaphor for its bounty. Of the 55 times the word \"honey\" appears in the Hebrew Bible, 16 are part of the expression \"the land of milk and honey\", and only twice is \"honey\" explicitly associated with bees, both being related to wild bees. Modern biblical researchers long considered that the original Hebrew word used in the Bible, (\u05d3\u05d1\u05e9, \"devash)\", refers to the sweet syrup produced from figs or dates, because the domestication of the honey bee was completely undocumented through archaeology anywhere in the ancient Near East (excluding Egypt) at the time associated with the earlier biblical narratives (books of Exodus, Judges, Kings, etc.). In 2005, however, an apiary dating from the 10th century BC was found in Tel Rehov, Israel that contained 100 hives, estimated to produce half a ton of honey annually. This was, as of 2007, the only such finding made by archaeologists in the entire ancient Near East region, and it opens the possibility that biblical honey was indeed bee honey.\nIn Jewish tradition, honey is a symbol for the new year, \"Rosh Hashanah\". At the traditional meal for that holiday, apple slices are dipped in honey and eaten to bring a sweet new year. Some \"Rosh Hashanah\" greetings show honey and an apple, symbolizing the feast. In some congregations, small straws of honey are given out to usher in the new year. Pure honey is considered kosher (permitted to be eaten by religious Jews), though it is produced by a flying insect, a non-kosher creature; eating other products of non-kosher animals is forbidden. It belongs among the \"parve\" (neutral) foods, containing neither meat nor dairy products and allowed to be eaten together with either.\nEarly Christians used honey as a symbol of spiritual perfection in christening ceremonies.\nIn Islam, an entire chapter (Surah) in the Quran is called \"an-Nahl\" (the Bees). According to his teachings (\"hadith\"), Muhammad strongly recommended honey for healing purposes.The Quran promotes honey as a nutritious and healthy food, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And thy Lord taught the Bee to build its cells in hills, on trees, and in (men's) habitations; Then to eat of all the produce (of the earth), and find with skill the spacious paths of its Lord: there issues from within their bodies a drink of varying colours, wherein is healing for men: verily in this is a Sign for those who give thought.\nIn Hinduism, honey (\"Madhu\") is one of the five elixirs of life (\"Panchamrita\"). In temples, honey is poured over the deities in a ritual called \"Madhu abhisheka\". The \"Vedas\" and other ancient literature mention the use of honey as a great medicinal and health food.\nIn Buddhism, honey plays an important role in the festival of \"Madhu Purnima\", celebrated in India and Bangladesh. The day commemorates Buddha's making peace among his disciples by retreating into the wilderness. According to legend, while he was there a monkey brought him honey to eat. On \"Madhu Purnima\", Buddhists remember this act by giving honey to monks. The monkey's gift is frequently depicted in Buddhist art.\nPopular culture.\nHoney is especially associated with Winnie-the-Pooh, and Bamse's thunder honey.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14362", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14362", "title": "Hugh McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "14363", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14363", "title": "Humperdink Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "14365", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14365", "title": "Hengist and Horsa", "text": "Legendary brothers said to have led the invasion of Britain in the 5th century\nHengist (, ) and Horsa are legendary Germanic brothers who, according to later English legends, led the Angles, Saxons and Jutes, the progenitor groups of modern English people, in their supposed invasion of Great Britain in the 5th century. Tradition lists Hengist as the first of the Jutish kings, or alternatively as the founder itself, of the Kingdom of Kent.\nModern scholarly consensus regards Hengist and Horsa as mythical figures, given their alliterative animal names, the seemingly constructed nature of their genealogy, and the unknowable quality of Bede's sources. Their later detailed representation in texts such as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle says more about ninth-century attitudes to the past than about the time in which they are said to have existed.\nAccording to early sources, Hengist and Horsa arrived in Britain at Ebbsfleet on the Isle of Thanet. For a time, they served as mercenaries for Vortigern, King of the Britons, but later they turned against him (British accounts have them betraying him in the Treachery of the Long Knives). Horsa was killed fighting the Britons, but Hengist successfully conquered Kent, becoming the forefather of its kings.\nA figure named Hengest, possibly identifiable with the leader of British legend, appears in the \"Finnesburg Fragment\" and in \"Beowulf\". J. R. R. Tolkien has theorized that this indicates Hengest/Hengist is the same person and originates as a historical person.\nHengist was historically said to have been buried at Hengistbury Head in Dorset.\nEtymology.\nThe Old English names \"Hengest\" and \"Horsa\" mean \"stallion\" and \"horse\", respectively.\nThe original Old English word for a horse was \"eoh\". \"Eoh\" derives from the Proto-Indo-European base \"*\u00e9\u1e31wos\", whence also Latin \"equus\", which gave rise to the modern English words \"equine\" and \"equestrian\". \"Hors\" is derived from the Proto-Indo-European base \"*kurs\", to run, which also gave rise to \"hurry, carry\" and \"current\" (the latter two are borrowings from French). \"Hors\" eventually replaced \"eoh\", fitting a pattern elsewhere in Germanic languages where the original names of sacred animals are abandoned in favor of adjective epithets; for example, the word \"bear\", literally meant 'the brown one'. While the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" refer to the brother as \"Horsa\", in the \"History of the Britons\" his name is simply \"Hors\". It has been suggested that \"Horsa\" may be a pet form of a compound name with the first element \"horse\".\nAttestations.\n\"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\".\nIn his 8th-century \"Ecclesiastical History\", Bede records that the first chieftains among the Angles, Saxons and Jutes in England were said to have been Hengist and Horsa. He relates that Horsa was killed in battle against the Britons and was thereafter buried in East Kent, where at the time of writing a monument still stood to him. According to Bede, Hengist and Horsa were the sons of Wictgils, son of Witta, son of Wecta, son of Woden.\n\"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\".\nThe \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", which exists in nine manuscripts and fragments compiled from the 9th to the 12th centuries, records that in the year 449, Vortigern invited Hengist and Horsa to Britain to assist his forces in fighting the Picts. The brothers landed at Eopwinesfleot (Ebbsfleet), and went on to defeat the Picts wherever they fought them. Hengist and Horsa sent word home to Germany describing \"the worthlessness of the Britons, and the richness of the land\" and asked for assistance. Their request was granted and support arrived. Afterward, more people arrived in Britain from \"the three powers of Germany; the Old Saxons, the Angles, and the Jutes\". The Saxons populated Essex, Sussex, and Wessex; the Jutes Kent, the Isle of Wight, and part of Hampshire; and the Angles East Anglia, Mercia, and Northumbria (leaving their original homeland, Angeln, deserted). The Worcester Chronicle (Chronicle D, compiled in the 11th century), and the Peterborough Chronicle (Chronicle E, compiled in the 12th century), include the detail that these forces were led by the brothers Hengist and Horsa, sons of Wihtgils, son of Witta, son of Wecta, son of Woden, but this information is not included in the A, B, C, or F versions.\nIn the entry for the year 455 the \"Chronicle\" details that Hengist and Horsa fought against Vortigern at Aylesford and that Horsa died there. Hengist took control of the kingdom with his son Esc. In 457, Hengist and Esc fought against British forces in Crayford \"and there slew four thousand men\". The Britons left the land of Kent and fled to London. In 465 Hengest and Esc fought again at the Battle of Wippedesfleot, probably near Ebbsfleet, and slew twelve British leaders. In the year 473, the final entry in the \"Chronicle\" mentioning Hengist or Horsa, Hengist and Esc are recorded as having taken \"immense booty\" and the Britons having \"fled from the English like fire\".\n\"History of the Britons\".\nThe 9th century \"History of the Britons\", attributed to the Briton Nennius, records that, during the reign of Vortigern in Britain, three vessels that had been exiled from Germany arrived in Britain, commanded by Hengist and Horsa. The narrative then gives a genealogy of the two: Hengist and Horsa were sons of Guictglis, son of Guicta, son of Guechta, son of Vouden, son of Frealof, son of Fredulf, son of Finn, son of Foleguald, son of Geta. Geta was said to be the son of a god, yet \"not of the omnipotent God and our Lord Jesus Christ\", but rather \"the offspring of one of their idols, and whom, blinded by some demon, they worshipped according to the custom of the heathen\". In 447 AD Vortigern received Hengist and Horsa \"as friends\" and gave to the brothers the Isle of Thanet.\nAfter the Saxons had lived on Thanet for \"some time\" Vortigern promised them supplies of clothing and other provisions on condition that they assist him in fighting the enemies of his country. As the Saxons increased in number the Britons became unable to keep their agreement, and so told them that their assistance was no longer needed and that they should go home.\nVortigern allowed Hengist to send for more of his countrymen to come over to fight for him. Messengers were sent to \"Scythia\", where \"a number\" of warriors were selected, and, with sixteen ships, the messengers returned. With the men came Hengist's beautiful daughter. Hengist prepared a feast, inviting Vortigern, Vortigern's officers, and Ceretic, his translator. Prior to the feast, Hengist enjoined his daughter to serve the guests plenty of wine and ale so that they would become drunk. At the feast Vortigern became enamored with her and promised Hengist whatever he liked in exchange for her betrothal. Hengist, having \"consulted with the Elders who attended him of the Angle race\", demanded Kent. Without the knowledge of the then-ruler of Kent, Vortigern agreed.\nHengist's daughter was given to Vortigern, who slept with her and deeply loved her. Hengist told Vortigern that he would now be both his father and adviser and that Vortigern would know no defeat with his counsel, \"for the people of my country are strong, warlike, and robust\". With Vortigern's approval, Hengist would send for his son and his brother to fight against the Scots and those who dwelt near the wall. Vortigern agreed and Ochta and Ebissa arrived with 40 ships, sailed around the land of the Picts, conquered \"many regions\", and assaulted the Orkney Islands. Hengist continued to send for more ships from his country, so that some islands where his people had previously dwelt are now free of inhabitants.\nVortigern had meanwhile incurred the wrath of Germanus, Bishop of Auxerre (by taking his own daughter for a wife and having a son by her) and had gone into hiding at the advice of his council. But at length his son Vortimer engaged Hengist and Horsa and their men in battle, drove them back to Thanet and there enclosed them and beset them on the western flank. The war waxed and waned; the Saxons repeatedly gained ground and were repeatedly driven back. Vortimer attacked the Saxons four times: first enclosing the Saxons in Thanet, secondly fighting at the river Derwent, the third time at Epsford, where both Horsa and Vortigern's son Catigern died, and lastly \"near the stone on the shore of the Gallic sea\", where the Saxons were defeated and fled to their ships.\nAfter a \"short interval\" Vortimer died and the Saxons became established, \"assisted by foreign pagans\". Hengist convened his forces and sent to Vortigern an offer of peace. Vortigern accepted, and Hengist prepared a feast to bring together the British and Saxon leaders. However, he instructed his men to conceal knives beneath their feet. At the right moment, Hengist shouted \"nima der sexa\" (get your knives) and his men massacred the unsuspecting Britons. However, they spared Vortigern, who ransomed himself by giving the Saxons Essex, Sussex, Middlesex and other unnamed districts.\nGermanus of Auxerre was acclaimed as commander of the British forces. By praying, singing \"hallelujah\" and crying to God, the Britons drove the Saxons to the sea. Germanus then prayed for three days and nights at Vortigern's castle and fire fell from heaven and engulfed the castle. Vortigern, Hengist's daughter, Vortigern's other wives, and all other inhabitants burned to death. Potential alternate fates for Vortigern are provided. However, the Saxons continued to increase in numbers, and after Hengist died his son Ochta succeeded him.\n\"History of the Kings of Britain\".\nIn his sometimes described as \"pseudo-historical\" twelfth-century work \"The History of the Kings of Britain\", Geoffrey of Monmouth adapted and greatly expanded the account in the \"History of the Britons\". Hengist and Horsa appear in books 6 and 8:\nBook 6.\nGeoffrey records that three brigantines or long galleys arrived in Kent, full of armed men and commanded by two brothers, Hengist and Horsa. Vortigern was then staying at Dorobernia (Canterbury), and ordered that the \"tall strangers\" be received peacefully and brought to him. When Vortigern saw the company, he immediately observed that the brothers \"excelled all the rest both in nobility and in gracefulness of person\". He asked what country they had come from and why they had come to his kingdom. Hengist (\"whose years and wisdom entitled him to precedence\") replied that they had left their homeland of Saxony to offer their services to Vortigern or some other prince, as part of a Saxon custom in which, when the country became overpopulated, able young men were chosen by lot to seek their fortunes in other lands. Hengist and Horsa were made generals over the exiles, as befitted their noble birth.\nVortigern was aggrieved when he learned that the strangers were pagans, but nonetheless rejoiced at their arrival, since he was surrounded by enemies. He asked Hengist and Horsa if they would help him in his wars, offering them land and \"other possessions\". They accepted the offer, settled on an agreement, and stayed with Vortigern at his court. Soon after, the Picts came from Alba with an immense army and attacked the northern parts of Vortigern's kingdom. In the ensuing battle \"there was little occasion for the Britons to exert themselves, for the Saxons fought so bravely, that the enemy, formerly victorious, were speedily put to flight\".\nIn gratitude Vortigern increased the rewards he had promised to the brothers. Hengist was given \"large possessions of lands in Lindsey for the subsistence of himself and his fellow-soldiers\". A \"man of experience and subtlety\", Hengist told Vortigern that his enemies assailed him from every quarter, and that his subjects wished to depose him and make Aurelius Ambrosius king. He asked the king to allow him to send word to Saxony for more soldiers. Vortigern agreed, adding that Hengist could invite over whom he pleased and that \"you shall have no refusal from me in whatever you shall desire\".\nHengist bowed low in thanks, and made a further request, that he be made a consul or prince, as befitted his birth. Vortigern responded that it was not in his power to do this, reasoning that Hengist was a foreign pagan and would not be accepted by the British lords. Hengist asked instead for leave to build a fortress on a piece of land small enough that it could be encircled by a leather thong. Vortigern granted this and ordered Hengist to invite more Saxons.\nAfter executing Vortigern's orders, Hengist took a bull's hide and made it into a single thong, which he used to encircle a carefully chosen rocky place (perhaps at Caistor in Lindsey). Here he built the castle of \"Kaercorrei\", or in Saxon \"Thancastre\": \"thong castle.\"\nThe messengers returned from Germany with eighteen ships full of the best soldiers they could get, as well as Hengist's beautiful daughter Rowena. Hengist invited Vortigern to see his new castle and the newly arrived soldiers. A banquet took place in Thancastre, at which Vortigern drunkenly asked Hengist to let him marry Rowena. Horsa and the men all agreed that Hengist should allow the marriage, on the condition that Vortigern give him Kent.\nVortigern and Rowena were immediately married and Hengist received Kent. The king, though delighted with his new wife, incurred the hatred of his nobles and of his three sons.\nAs his new father-in-law, Hengist made further demands of Vortigern:\nAs I am your father, I claim the right of being your counsellor: do not therefore slight my advice, since it is to my countrymen you must owe the conquest of all your enemies. Let us invite over my son Octa, and his brother Ebissa, who are brave soldiers, and give them the countries that are in the northern parts of Britain, by the wall, between Deira and Alba. For they will hinder the inroads of the barbarians, and so you shall enjoy peace on the other side of the Humber.\nVortigern agreed. Upon receiving the invitation, Octa, Ebissa, and another lord, Cherdich, immediately left for Britain with three hundred ships. Vortigern received them kindly, and gave them ample gifts. With their assistance, Vortigern defeated his enemies in every engagement. All the while Hengist continued inviting over yet more ships, adding to his numbers daily. Witnessing this, the Britons tried to get Vortigern to banish the Saxons, but on account of his wife he would not. Consequently, his subjects turned against him and took his son Vortimer for their king. The Saxons and the Britons, led by Vortimer, met in four battles. In the second, Horsa and Vortimer's brother, Catigern, slew one another. By the fourth battle, the Saxons had fled to Thanet, where Vortimer besieged them. When the Saxons could no longer bear the British onslaughts, they sent out Vortigern to ask his son to allow them safe passage back to Germany. While discussions were taking place, the Saxons boarded their ships and left, leaving their wives and children behind.\nRowena poisoned the victorious Vortimer, and Vortigern returned to the throne. At his wife's request he invited Hengist back to Britain, but instructed him to bring only a small retinue. Hengist, knowing Vortimer to be dead, instead raised an army of 300,000 men. When Vortigern received word of the imminent arrival of the vast Saxon fleet, he resolved to fight them. Rowena alerted her father of this, who, after considering various strategies, resolved to make a show of peace and sent ambassadors to Vortigern.\nThe ambassadors informed Vortigern that Hengist had only brought so many men because he did not know of Vortimer's death and feared further attacks from him. Now that there was no threat, Vortigern could choose from among the men the ones he wished to return to Germany. Vortigern was greatly pleased by these tidings, and arranged to meet Hengist on the first of May at the monastery of Ambrius.\nBefore the meeting, Hengist ordered his soldiers to carry long daggers beneath their clothing. At the signal \"Nemet oure Saxas\" (get your knives), the Saxons fell upon the unsuspecting Britons and massacred them, while Hengist held Vortigern by his cloak. 460 British barons and consuls were killed, as well as some Saxons whom the Britons beat to death with clubs and stones. Vortigern was held captive and threatened with death until he resigned control of Britain's chief cities to Hengist. Once free, he fled to Cambria.\nBook 8.\nIn Cambria, Merlin prophesied to Vortigern that the brothers Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon (who had fled to Armorica as children after Vortigern killed their brother Constans and their father, King Constantine) would return to have their revenge and defeat the Saxons. They arrived the next day, and, after rallying the dispersed Britons, Aurelius was proclaimed king. Aurelius marched into Cambria and burned Vortigern alive in his tower, before setting his sights upon the Saxons.\nHengist was struck by terror at the news of Vortigern's death and fled with his army beyond the Humber. He took courage at the approach of Aurelius and selected the bravest among his men to defend him. Hengist told these chosen men not to be afraid of Aurelius, for he had brought less than 10,000 Armorican Britons (the native Britons were hardly worth taking into account), while there were 200,000 Saxons. Hengist and his men advanced towards Aurelius in a field called Maisbeli (probably Ballifield, near Sheffield), intending to take the Britons by surprise, but Aurelius anticipated them.\nAs they marched to meet the Saxons, Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, told Aurelius that he greatly wished to meet Hengist in combat, noting that \"one of the two of us should die before we parted\". He explained that he had been at the Treachery of the Long Knives, but had escaped when God threw him a stake to defend himself with, making him the only Briton present to survive. Meanwhile, Hengist was placing his troops into formation, giving directions, and walking through the lines of troops, \"the more to spirit them up\".\nWith the armies in formation, battle began between the Britons and Saxons, both sides suffering \"no small loss of blood\". Eldol focused on attempting to find Hengist, but had no opportunity to fight him. \"By the especial favour of God\" the Britons took the upper hand, and the Saxons withdrew and made for Kaerconan (Conisbrough). Aurelius pursued them, killing or enslaving any Saxon he met on the way. Realizing Kaerconan would not hold against Aurelius, Hengist stopped outside the town and ordered his men to make a stand, \"for he knew that his whole security now lay in his sword\".\nAurelius reached Hengist, and a \"most furious\" fight ensued, with the Saxons maintaining their ground despite heavy losses. They came close to winning before a detachment of horses from the Armorican Britons arrived. When Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, arrived, Eldol knew the day was won and grabbed Hengist's helmet, dragging him into the British ranks. The Saxons fled. Hengist's son Octa retreated to York and his kinsman Eosa to Alclud (Dumbarton).\nThree days after the battle, Aurelius called together a council of principal officers to decide what to do with Hengist. Eldol's brother Eldad, Bishop of Gloucester, said: \nThough all should be unanimous for setting him at liberty, yet would I cut him to pieces. The prophet Samuel is my warrant, who, when he had Agag, king of Amalek, in his power, hewed him in pieces, saying, As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. Do therefore the same to Hengist, who is a second Agag.\nConsequently, Eldol drew Hengist out of the city and cut off his head. Aurelius, \"who showed moderation in all his conduct\", arranged for him to be buried and for a mound to be raised over his corpse, according to the custom of pagans. Octa and Eosa surrendered to Aurelius, who granted them the country bordering Scotland and made a firm covenant with them.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nThe Icelander Snorri Sturluson, writing in the 13th century, briefly mentions Hengist in the \"Prologue\", the first book of the \"Prose Edda\". The \"Prologue\" gives a euhemerized account of Germanic history, including the detail that Woden put three of his sons in charge of Saxony. The ruler of eastern Saxony was Veggdegg, one of whose sons was Vitrgils, the father of Vitta, the father of Hengist.\nHorse-head gables.\nOn farmhouses in Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein, horse-head gables were referred to as \"Hengst und Hors\" (Low German for \"stallion and mare\") as late as around 1875. Rudolf Simek notes that these horse-head gables can still be seen today, and says that the horse-head gables confirm that Hengist and Horsa were originally considered mythological, horse-shaped beings. Martin Litchfield West comments that the horse heads may have been remnants of pagan religious practices in the area.\nTheories.\n\"Finnesburg Fragment\" and \"Beowulf\".\nA Hengest appears in line 34 of the \"Finnesburg Fragment\", which describes the legendary Battle of Finnsburg. In \"Beowulf\", a scop recites a composition summarizing the Finnsburg events, including information not provided in the fragment. Hengest is mentioned in lines 1082 and 1091.\nSome scholars have proposed that the figure mentioned in both of these references is one and the same as the Hengist of the Hengist and Horsa accounts, though Horsa is not mentioned in either source. In his work \"Finn and Hengest\", J. R. R. Tolkien argued that Hengist was a historical figure, and that Hengist came to Britain after the events recorded in the \"Finnesburg Fragment\" and \"Beowulf\". Patrick Sims-Williams is more sceptical of the account, suggesting that Bede's Canterbury source, which he relied on for his account of Hengist and Horsa in the \"Ecclesiastical History\", had confused two separate traditions.\nGermanic twin brothers and divine Indo-European horse twins.\nSeveral sources attest that the Germanic peoples venerated a divine pair of twin brothers. The earliest reference to this practice derives from Timaeus (c. 345 \u2013 c. 250 BC). Timaeus records that the Celts of the North Sea were especially devoted to what he describes as Castor and Pollux. In his work \"Germania\", Tacitus records the veneration of the Alcis, whom he identifies with Castor and Pollux. Germanic legends mention various brothers as founding figures. The 1st- or 2nd-century historian Cassius Dio cites the brothers Raos and Raptos as the leaders of the Astings. According to Paul the Deacon's 8th-century \"History of the Lombards\", the Lombards migrated southward from Scandinavia led by Ibur and Aio, while Saxo Grammaticus records in his 12th-century \"Deeds of the Danes\" that this migration was prompted by Aggi and Ebbi. In related Indo-European cultures, similar traditions are attested, such as the Dioscuri. Scholars have theorized that these divine twins in Indo-European cultures stem from divine twins in prehistoric Proto-Indo-European culture.\nJ. P. Mallory comments on the great importance of the horse in Indo-European religion, as exemplified \"most obviously\" by various mythical brothers appearing in Indo-European legend, including Hengist and Horsa:\nSome would maintain that the \"premier\" animal of the Indo-European sacrifice and ritual was probably the horse. We have already seen how its embedment in Proto-Indo-European society lies not just in its lexical reconstruction but also in the proliferation of personal names which contain \"horse\" as an element among the various Indo-European peoples. Furthermore, we witness the importance of the horse in Indo-European rituals and mythology. One of the most obvious examples is the recurrent depiction of twins such as the Indic Asvins \"horsemen,\" the Greek horsemen Castor and Pollux, the legendary Anglo-Saxon settlers Horsa and Hengist [...] or the Irish twins of Macha, born after she had completed a horse race. All of these attest the existence of Indo-European divine twins associated with or represented by horses.\nUffington White Horse.\nIn his 17th-century work \"Monumenta Britannica\", John Aubrey ascribes the Uffington White Horse hill figure to Hengist and Horsa, stating that \"the White Horse was their Standard at the Conquest of Britain\". However, he also ascribes the origins of the horse to the Ancient Britons, reasoning that the horse resembles Celtic Iron Age coins. As a result, advocates of a Saxon origin of the figure debated with those favouring an ancient British origin for three centuries after Aubrey's findings. In 1995, using optically stimulated luminescence dating, David Miles and Simon Palmer of the Oxford Archaeology Unit assigned the Uffington White Horse to the Bronze Age.\nAschanes.\nThe Brothers Grimm identified Hengist with Aschanes, mythical first King of the Saxons, in their notes for legend number 413 of their \"German Legends\". Editor and translator Donald Ward, in his commentary on the tale, regards the identification as untenable on linguistic grounds.\nModern influence.\nHengist and Horsa have appeared in a variety of media in the modern period. Written between 1616 and 1620, Thomas Middleton's play \"Hengist, King of Kent\" features portrayals of both Hengist and Horsa (as \"Hersus\"). On 6 July 1776, the first committee for the production of the Great Seal of the United States convened. One of three members of the committee, Thomas Jefferson, proposed that one side of the seal feature Hengist and Horsa, \"the Saxon chiefs from whom we claim the honor of being descended, and whose political principles and form of government we assumed\".\n\"Hengist and Horsus\" appear as antagonists in the play \"Vortigern and Rowena\", which was touted as a newly discovered work by William Shakespeare in 1796, but was soon revealed as a hoax by William Henry Ireland. The pair have plaques in the Walhalla Temple at Regensburg, Bavaria, which honours distinguished figures of German history.\nDuring World War II, two British military gliders took their names from the brothers: the Slingsby Hengist and the Airspeed Horsa. The 20th-century American poet Robinson Jeffers composed a poem titled \"Ode to Hengist and Horsa\". Likewise, Jorge Luis Borges's poem \"Hengist Quiere Hombres (449 A.D.)\" was published in translation in \"The New Yorker\" in 1977.\nIn 1949, Prince Georg of Denmark came to Pegwell Bay in Kent to dedicate the longship \"Hugin\", commemorating the landing of Hengest and Horsa at nearby Ebbsfleet 1500 years earlier in 449 AD.\nThough Hengist and Horsa are not referenced in the medieval tales of King Arthur, some modern Arthurian tales do link them. For example, in Mary Stewart's \"Merlin Trilogy\", Hengist and Horsa are executed by Ambrosius; Hengist is given full Saxon funeral honours, cremated with his weapons on a pyre. In Alfred Duggan's \"Conscience of the King\", Hengist plays a major role in the early career of Cerdic Elesing, legendary founder of the kingdom of Wessex.\nPart of the A299 road on the Isle of Thanet is named Hengist Way.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14368", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14368", "title": "Hero System", "text": "Tabletop role-playing game system\nThe Hero System is a generic role-playing game system that was developed from the superhero RPG \"Champions\". After \"Champions\" fourth edition was released in 1989, a stripped-down version of its ruleset with no superhero or other genre elements was released as The \"Hero System Rulesbook\" in 1990. As a spinoff of \"Champions\", the \"Hero System\" is considered to have started with 4th edition (as it is mechanically identical to \"Champions\" 4th edition), rather than on its own with a 1st edition. However, the first three editions of the game are typically referred to as \"Champions\", rather than the Hero System, as the game for its first three editions was not sold as a universal toolkit, instead largely focusing on superheroes.\nThe \"Hero System\" is used as the underlying mechanics of other Hero Games role-playing games such as \"Fantasy Hero\", \"Star Hero\", and \"Pulp Hero\". It is characterized by point-based character creation and the rigor with which it measures character abilities. It uses only six-sided dice.\nSystem features.\nThe \"Hero System\" uses \"Champions\"' key system features. Tasks are resolved using three six-sided dice and power effects (especially damage) are resolved by rolling a number of dice based on the power's strength.\nLike \"Champions\", it uses a tool-kit approach to creating effects. While the system does have more typical features of many RPGs, such as a skill system, most abilities in the \"Hero System\" rules are listed as generic \"powers\". Most powers are meant to be able to model a vast number of potential effects. When creating a character, a player decides on what effect they wish to create, then constructs this effect by consulting the powers in the rulebook. Most powers have a set of modifiers that alter their base performance to more finely-tune their representation of the effect desired. Each such modifier makes the power more or less capable, and correspondingly more or less expensive to purchase with character points (the \"currency\" used to buy powers; see the section following). The result is that many effects are possible from exactly the same base power. For example, while systems such as Dungeons &amp; Dragons would list a wide variety of separate ranged attack powers that deal damage (such as a fireball, a lightning bolt, an acid spray, a magic missile, and dozens more), the vast majority of such effects in the \"Hero System\" would be constructed out of the same base two powers, \"Blast\" or \"Killing Attack\".\nThe \"Hero System\" rules only define an ability's very basic mechanical effects\u2014the player is the one who defines what the ability looks like when used. For example, if a player wishes to model the ability to project a jet of fire, they could choose the \"Blast\" power. However, the power's text has no mention of what it looks like or how it operates beyond some very base notes concerning damage and range. To make it a jet of fire, the player simply states that this Blast is a jet of fire. To some degree this is simply cosmetic. However, in the game, that power now is treated as a fire attack, with all that implies as decided by the gamemaster in each situation: it has the possibility of starting secondary fires; it looks, smells and sounds like a jet of fire; will not work in water; will terrify people with a phobia of fire; etc. The system does have mechanical effect alterations as well: a Blast could be altered by any number of power modifiers such as \"Explosion\", \"Area of Effect\", \"Megascale\", etc.: both advantages and disadvantages are available. As players are typically attempting to model something with at least a partial real-life analogue, limitations on a power are as much about making it more accurate a representation as they are making it less expensive to purchase (for example, to model a firearm, the limitation that it requires ammunition is expected, regardless of the fact that this happens to make a firearm cost fewer character points). The system also allows players to construct very exacting modifiers not specifically detailed in the base rules. For example, a player could define one or more powers as not working when the moon is full, or when it is Tuesday, or any other limitation that the player can imagine and the gamemaster feels is applicable.\nAlso like \"Champions\", the \"Hero System\" uses a point-based system for character creation. Instead of templates which define what a character is, how it performs mechanically, and the new abilities gained after a certain amount of play, a player is given a fixed number of points and allowed to create what they want. As this is a much more freeform process than in most games, the system encourages close involvement between players and gamemasters to ensure that all participants have the same understanding regarding the type of effects permitted, relative power levels, and the like.\nCharacter creation.\nEach player creates their character starting with a pool of points to buy abilities (such as \"Energy Blast\" and \"Armor\"), increase characteristics (such as \"Strength\" and \"Intelligence\") and buy skills (such as \"Computer Programming\" and \"Combat Driving\"). This pool can be increased by taking disadvantages for your character (such as being hunted by an enemy, a dependency of some sort or having people who depend on your character in some way). The initial pool, as well as the final pool size, is determined by the Game Master (GM), as well as the point limits on each individual ability.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"You build Hero System characters with Character Points. You purchase everything a character can do \u2014 from his ability to lift heavy objects, to his skill with weapons, to his ability to use magic or superpowers \u2014 with Character Points. Your GM will tell you how many points you have to build your character with \u2014 the more points, the more powerful the character, generally. You can spend most of your Character Points without any requirements, but you only get to spend some of them if you take a matching value of Complications for your character. Complications are disadvantages, hindrances, and difficulties that affect a character and thus help you to define who he is and properly simulate the concept you have in mind for him. For example, your character might be Hunted by an old enemy, or adhere to a Code Of Honor, or be missing one eye. [. . .] There are five things a character can buy with Character Points: Characteristics, Skills, Perks, Talents, and Powers.\" - excerpt from Hero System Sixth Edition Volume 1\nUnlike the d20 System and many other game systems, experience awards are in the form of character points, which have the same value as those used in character creation and can be applied directly to the character's abilities upon receipt.\nPowers.\nThe powers system are the variables players can manipulate in the characters of Hero System. The powers in the Hero System are categorized roughly as follows:\n*Adjustment Powers \u2014 Modify the Characteristics of self or another.\n*Attack Powers \u2014 Inflict physical damage or some other negative effect on an opponent.\n*Body-Affecting Powers \u2014 Change shape, size, density, etc.\n*Defense Powers \u2014 Protect against an attack or mishap.\n*Mental Powers \u2014 Detect and/or affect the mind of another.\n*Movement Powers \u2014 Employ various forms of movement.\n*Sense-Affecting Powers \u2014 Alter or hinder a character's senses.\n*Sensory Powers \u2014 Improve or expand upon the sensory abilities.\n*Size Powers \u2014 Growth and Shrinking.\n*Special Powers \u2014 Powers with some unusual quality, including ones that do not fall into the other categories.\n*Standard Powers \u2014 A \"catch-all\" for Powers that are not Adjustment, Mental, Movement, Size, or Special Powers.\nWithin each of these categories are multiple Powers that have more specialized effects. Thus for the movement category there are powers that can be used for Running, Swimming, Climbing, Leaping, Gliding, Flying, Tunneling through solid surfaces, and even Teleportation. For certain game genres there are even powers for traveling to other dimensions or moving faster than light.\nAlso, many Powers appear in at least two categories. For example, most Attack Powers are also Standard Powers, and Size Powers are basically just a subcategory of Body-Affecting Powers. Darkness is in three categories \u2014 Standard, Attack, and Sense-Affecting.\nPoint Cost.\nEach power has a base point cost for a given effect. This could be, for example, a certain number of points per six-sided-die (or \"d6\") of damage inflicted upon a foe.\nPowers can have both advantages and limitations. Both are modifiers applied at different stages in calculating cost. These modifiers are typically changes of \u00b1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, but can range up to \u00b12 or even higher.\nAfter the base cost is calculated, advantages are applied. These, which can make a power more useful, typically expand its effectiveness or make it more powerful, and thus make it more expensive. Once advantages are applied, the base cost becomes the Active Cost.\nThe Active Cost is calculated as an intermediate step as it is required to calculate certain figures, such as range, END usage, difficulty of activation rolls, and other things.\nThe formula for calculating the Active Cost is:\nActive Cost = Base Cost \u00d7 (1 + \"Advantages\")\nOnce Active Cost is calculated, limitations are applied. These represent shortcomings in the power, lessened reliability or situations in which the power can not be used. Limitations are added separately as positive numbers, even though they are listed as negative.\nThe Real Cost of the power is then determined by:\nReal Cost = Active Cost / (1 + \"Limitations\")\nThe Real Cost is the amount the character must actually pay for the Power.\nPower Frameworks.\nThe rules also include schemes for providing a larger number of powers to a character for a given cost. These power frameworks reduce the cost either by requiring the group of powers to have a common theme as in an Elemental Control Framework, or by limiting the number of powers that can be active at one time with a Multipower Framework. Powers within a framework can share common limitations, further reducing the cost. A third type of power framework, the Variable Power Pool (VPP), trades thrift for flexibility. With it, powers can be arbitrarily chosen on the fly, granting enhanced in-game flexibility. The price is a premium on points, called the Control Cost. Additionally, it is marked as potentially unbalancing, so not all GMs will permit VPP's.\nElemental Controls were eliminated in the Sixth Edition.\nPublishing history.\nAlthough several games based on what would become known as the \"Hero System\" were published in the 1980s, including \"Champions\", \"Danger International\", \"Justice, Inc.\", \"Robot Warriors\" and the original versions of \"Fantasy Hero\" and \"Star Hero\", each of the RPGs was self-contained, much as Chaosium's Basic Role-Playing games are. The \"Hero System\" itself was not released as an independent entity until 1990, as Steve Jackson Games' \"GURPS\" (\"Generic Universal Roleplaying System\") became more popular. As a joint venture between Hero Games and Iron Crown Enterprises, a stand-alone \"Hero System Rulebook\" was published alongside the fourth edition of Champions. The content was identical to the opening sections of the Champions rules, but all genre-related material was removed. Afterward, genre books such as \"Ninja Hero\" (written by Aaron Allston) and \"Fantasy Hero\" were published as sourcebooks for the \"Hero System Rulebook\" as opposed to being independent games.\nWith the collapse of the Hero-ICE alliance, the \"Hero System\" went into limbo for several years. The \"Champions\" franchise released a new version under the Fuzion system, which had been a joint development with R. Talsorian Games, called \"Champions: the New Millennium\". Although two editions were published, it was very poorly received by \"Champions\" fans. In 2001, a reconstituted Hero Games was formed under the leadership of Steven S. Long, who had written several books for the earlier version of the system. It regained the rights to the \"Hero System\" and to the \"Champions\" trademark.\nIn 2001, the Fifth Edition of the \"Hero System Rulebook\" was released, incorporating heavy revisions by Long. A large black hardcover, it was critically well received and attained a degree of commercial success. (Following problems with fragile bindings on Fourth Edition rulebooks, the planned binding for the larger Fifth Edition was tested using a clothes dryer.) The Fifth Edition is often referred to as \"FREd\", which is a backronym for \"Fifth Rules Edition\". The name actually comes from Steve S. Long's reply when asked what the standard abbreviation for the Fifth Edition would be: \"I don't care if you call it 'Fred', as long as you buy it.\" This was made the unofficial nickname by several replies on the same board affirming it after a reply from Willpower, who coined the backronym by saying, \"OK. FREd it is, \"Fifth Rules Edition\"!\"\nA revised version () was issued in 2004, along with \"Hero System Sidekick\", a condensed version of the rulebook with a cover price of under $10. Fans often call the revised Fifth Edition \"Fiver,\" ReFREd,\" or \"5ER\" (from \"Fifth Edition revised\"; \"Fiver\" also alludes to \"Watership Down\"). This rulebook is so big (592 pages) that some fans speculated that it might be bulletproof, and it did indeed stop some bullets when tested by Hero Games staffers.\nOn February 28, 2008, Cryptic Studios purchased the \"Champions\" intellectual property, and sold the rights back to Hero Games to publish the 6th edition books. One of the new features will be to allow players to adapt their \"Champions Online\" characters to the pen-and-paper game.\nIn late 2009, Hero Games released the 6th Edition of the Hero System. The game has so far had a mostly positive reception, with little in the way of 'Edition Wars'. The largest rules change was the removal of Figured Characteristics (meaning that character stats that were previously linked intrinsically\u2014such as Speed automatically increasing when sufficient amounts of Dexterity were purchased\u2014were no longer connected, and instead bought entirely separately). Other, more minor rules changes include folding Armor and Force field into Resistant Defense and reestablishing Regeneration as a separate power. The rules were released in two volumes, with the first covering character creation in depth and the second describing campaigns and the running of games. The new genre book for Champions came out shortly thereafter, and a new \"Fantasy Hero\" was released in the summer of 2010. A new version of Sidekick was released in late 2009 under the title \"The Hero System Basic Rulebook\", while an \"Advanced Player Guide\" was published that had additional options for character creation. Other recent releases included a large book of pre-constructed Powers, a set of pre-generated Martial Arts styles, abilities and skills, a large bestiary, a new grimoire for Fantasy Hero and a three-volume set of villains for \"Champions\". A new edition of \"Star Hero\" was released in 2011, along with a second \"Advanced Player Guide\".\nOn 28 November 2011, Hero Games announced a restructuring, with Darren Watts and long-time developer Steven S. Long relinquishing their full-time statuses to work freelance. In late 2012 \"Champions Complete\" was released, which contained all of the core 6th edition rules as well as enough information to play a superhero campaign in a single 240-page book. This compact presentation reflected criticism that the 6th edition rules had become too unwieldy.\nHero Games now maintains an irregular release schedule, with a minimal staff, and has successfully used Kickstarter to raise funds for new projects. One of these new products, \"Fantasy Hero Complete\", was released in early 2015.\nComputer Release.\n\"Heromaker\", an MS-DOS program, was distributed with some versions of \"Champions\". Today, \"Hero Designer\" for the Fifth and Sixth Editions is available on several platforms, and is supported by numerous character packs and other extensions linked to Hero Games book releases. In late 2008, Hero released a licensed RPG for Aaron Williams's popular comic PS238 using a simplified version of the Fifth Edition rules."}
{"id": "14369", "revid": "51040198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14369", "title": "Humphry Davy", "text": "British chemist and inventor (1778\u20131829)\nSir Humphry Davy, 1st Baronet (17 December 1778\u00a0\u2013 29 May 1829) was a British chemist and inventor who invented the Davy lamp and a very early form of arc lamp. He is also remembered for isolating, by using electricity, several elements for the first time: potassium and sodium in 1807 and calcium, strontium, barium, magnesium and boron the following year, as well as for discovering the elemental nature of chlorine and iodine. Davy also studied the forces involved in these separations, inventing the new field of electrochemistry. He is credited with discovering clathrate hydrates.\nIn 1799, he experimented with nitrous oxide and was astonished at how it made him laugh. He nicknamed it \"laughing gas\" and wrote about its potential as an anaesthetic to relieve pain during surgery. Davy was a baronet, President of the Royal Society (PRS), Member of the Royal Irish Academy (MRIA), a founder member and Fellow of the Geological Society of London, and a member of the American Philosophical Society. Berzelius called Davy's 1806 Bakerian Lecture \"On Some Chemical Agencies of Electricity\" \"one of the best memoirs which has ever enriched the theory of chemistry.\"\nEarly life: 1778\u20131798.\nEducation, apprenticeship and poetry.\nDavy was born in Penzance, Cornwall, England on 17 December 1778, the eldest of the five children of Robert Davy, a woodcarver, and his wife Grace Millett. According to his brother and fellow chemist John Davy, their hometown was characterised by \"an almost unbounded credulity respecting the supernatural and monstrous ... Amongst the middle and higher classes, there was little taste for literature, and still less for science ... Hunting, shooting, wrestling, cockfighting, generally ending in drunkenness, were what they most delighted in.\"\nEducation.\nAt the age of six, Davy was sent to the grammar school at Penzance. Three years later, his family moved to Varfell, near Ludgvan, and subsequently, in term-time, Davy boarded with John Tonkin, his godfather and later his guardian. Upon Davy's leaving grammar school in 1793, Tonkin paid for him to attend Truro Grammar School to finish his education under the Rev Dr Cardew, who, in a letter to the engineer and Fellow of the Royal Society Davies Giddy (from 1817 called Davies Gilbert), said dryly, \"I could not discern the faculties by which he was afterwards so much distinguished.\" Davy entertained his school friends by writing poetry, composing Valentines, and telling stories from \"One Thousand and One Nights\". Reflecting on his school days in a letter to his mother, Davy wrote, \"Learning naturally is a true pleasure; how unfortunate then it is that in most schools it is made a pain.\" \"I consider it fortunate\", he continued, \"I was left much to myself as a child, and put upon no particular plan of study ... What I am I made myself.\" His brother said Davy possessed a \"native vigour\" and \"the genuine quality of genius, or of that power of intellect which exalts its possessor above the crowd.\"\nApothecary's apprentice.\nAfter Davy's father died in 1794, Tonkin apprenticed him to John Bingham Borlase, a surgeon with a practice in Penzance. While becoming a chemist in the apothecary's dispensary, he began conducting his earliest experiments at home, much to the annoyance of his friends and family. His older sister, for instance, complained his corrosive substances were destroying her dresses, and at least one friend thought it likely the \"incorrigible\" Davy would eventually \"blow us all into the air.\"\nIn 1797, after he learnt French from a refugee priest, Davy read Lavoisier's \"Trait\u00e9 \u00e9l\u00e9mentaire de chimie.\" This exposure influenced much of his future work, which can be seen as reaction against Lavoisier's work and the dominance of French chemists.\nPoetry.\nAs a poet, over one hundred and sixty manuscript poems were written by Davy, the majority of which are found in his personal notebooks. Most of his written poems were not published, and he chose instead to share a few of them with his friends. Eight of his known poems were published. His poems reflected his views on both his career and also his perception of certain aspects of human life. He wrote on human endeavours and aspects of life like death, metaphysics, geology, natural theology and chemistry.\nJohn Ayrton Paris remarked that poems written by the young Davy \"bear the stamp of lofty genius\". Davy's first preserved poem entitled \"The Sons of Genius\" is dated 1795 and marked by the usual immaturity of youth. Other poems written in the following years, especially \"On the Mount's Bay\" and \"St Michael's Mount\", are descriptive verses.\nAlthough he initially started writing his poems, albeit haphazardly, as a reflection of his views on his career and on life generally, most of his final poems concentrated on immortality and death. This was after he started experiencing failing health and a decline both in health and career.\nPainting.\nThree of Davy's paintings from around 1796 have been donated to the Penlee House museum at Penzance. One is of the view from above Gulval showing the church, Mount's Bay and the Mount, while the other two depict Loch Lomond in Scotland.\nMateriality of heat.\nAt 17, he discussed the question of the materiality of heat with his Quaker friend and mentor Robert Dunkin. Dunkin remarked: 'I tell thee what, Humphry, thou art the most quibbling hand at a dispute I ever met with in my life.' One winter day he took Davy to the Lariggan River to show him that rubbing two plates of ice together developed sufficient energy by motion to melt them, and that after the motion was suspended, the pieces were united by regelation. It was a crude form of analogous experiment exhibited by Davy in the lecture-room of the Royal Institution that elicited considerable attention. As professor at the Royal Institution, Davy repeated many of the ingenious experiments he learnt from Dunkin.\nEarly career: 1798\u20131802.\nDavy's gift for chemistry is recognised.\nDavies Giddy met Davy in Penzance carelessly swinging on the half-gate of Dr Borlase's house, and interested by his talk invited him to his house at Tredrea and offered him the use of his library. This led to his introduction to Dr Edwards, who lived at Hayle Copper House. Edwards was a lecturer in chemistry in the school of St. Bartholomew's Hospital. He permitted Davy to use his laboratory and possibly directed his attention to the floodgates of the port of Hayle in Cornwall, which were rapidly decaying as a result of the contact between copper and iron under the influence of seawater. Galvanic corrosion was not understood at that time, but the phenomenon prepared Davy's mind for subsequent experiments on ships' copper sheathing. Gregory Watt, son of James Watt, visited Penzance for his health's sake, and while lodging at the Davys' house became a friend and gave him instructions in chemistry. Davy was also acquainted with the Wedgwood family, who spent a winter at Penzance.\nThomas Beddoes.\nAt this time, physician and scientific writer Thomas Beddoes and geologist John Hailstone were engaged in a geological controversy on the rival merits of the Plutonian and Neptunist hypotheses. They travelled together to examine the Cornish coast accompanied by Giddy\u2014an intimate friend of Beddoes\u2014and made Davy's acquaintance. Beddoes had established at Bristol a medical research facility called the 'Pneumatic Institution,' and needed an assistant to superintend the laboratory. Giddy recommended Davy, and in 1798 Gregory Watt showed Beddoes Davy's \"Young man's Researches on Heat and Light\", which he later published in the first volume of \"West-Country Contributions\". After prolonged negotiations, Mrs. Davy and Borlase consented to Davy's departure. Tonkin wished him to remain in his native town as a surgeon, and altered his will when Davy insisted on going to Dr Beddoes.\nPneumatic Institution.\nOn 2 October 1798, Davy joined the Pneumatic Institution at Bristol. It had been established to investigate the medical powers of factitious airs and gases (gases produced experimentally or artificially), and Davy was to superintend the various experiments. The arrangement agreed between Dr Beddoes and Davy was generous, and enabled Davy to give up all claims on his paternal property in favour of his mother. He did not intend to abandon the medical profession and was determined to study and graduate at Edinburgh, but he soon began to fill parts of the institution with voltaic batteries. While living in Bristol, Davy met the Earl of Durham, who resided in the institution for his health. \nAnna Beddoes.\nDavy threw himself energetically into the work of the laboratory and formed a long romantic friendship with Mrs Anna Beddoes, the novelist Maria Edgeworth's sister, who acted as his guide on walks and other fine sights of the locality. The critic Maurice Hindle was the first to reveal that Davy and Anna had written poems for each other. Wahida Amin has transcribed and discussed a number of poems written between 1803 and 1808 to \"Anna\" and one to her infant child. \nNon-existence of caloric.\nIn 1799, the first volume of the \"West-Country Collections\" was issued. Half consisted of Davy's essays \"On Heat, Light, and the Combinations of Light\", \"On Phos-oxygen and its Combinations\", and on the \"Theory of Respiration\". On 22 February 1799 Davy, wrote to Davies Giddy, \"I am now as much convinced of the non-existence of caloric as I am of the existence of light.\" \nNitrous oxide.\nIn 1799, Davy became increasingly well known due to his experiments with the physiological action of some gases, including laughing gas (nitrous oxide). The gas was first synthesised in 1772 by the natural philosopher and chemist Joseph Priestley, who called it \"dephlogisticated nitrous air\" (see phlogiston). Priestley described his discovery in the book \"Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air (1775)\", in which he described how to produce the preparation of \"nitrous air diminished\", by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid. In another letter to Giddy, on 10 April, Davy informs him: \"I made a discovery yesterday which proves how necessary it is to repeat experiments. The gaseous oxide of azote (the laughing gas) is perfectly respirable when pure. It is never deleterious but when it contains nitrous gas. I have found a mode of making it pure.\" He said that he breathed sixteen quarts of it for nearly seven minutes, and that it \"absolutely intoxicated me.\"\nIn addition to Davy himself, his enthusiastic experimental subjects included his poet friends Robert Southey and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, as well as Gregory Watt and James Watt, other close friends. James Watt built a portable gas chamber to facilitate Davy's experiments with the inhalation of nitrous oxide. At one point the gas was combined with wine to judge its efficacy as a cure for hangover (his laboratory notebook indicated success). The gas was popular among Davy's friends and acquaintances, and he noted that it might be useful for performing surgical operations. Anesthetics were not regularly used in medicine or dentistry until decades after Davy's death.\nCarbon monoxide.\nIn the gas experiments Davy ran considerable risks. His respiration of nitric oxide which may have combined with air in the mouth to form nitric acid (HNO3), severely injured the mucous membrane, and in Davy's attempt to inhale four quarts of \"pure hydrocarbonate\" gas in an experiment with carbon monoxide he \"seemed sinking into annihilation.\" On being removed into the open air, Davy faintly articulated, \"I do not think I shall die,\" but some hours elapsed before the painful symptoms ceased. Davy was able to take his own pulse as he staggered out of the laboratory and into the garden, and he described it in his notes as \"threadlike and beating with excessive quickness\".\nEarly publications.\nDuring 1799, Beddoes and Davy published \"Contributions to physical and medical knowledge, principally from the west of England\" and \"Essays on heat, light, and the combinations of light, with a new theory of respiration. On the generation of oxygen gas, and the causes of the colors of organic beings.\" Their experimental work was poor, and the publications were harshly criticised. In after years Davy regretted he had ever published these immature hypotheses, which he subsequently designated \"the dreams of misemployed genius which the light of experiment and observation has never conducted to truth.\" These criticisms, however, led Davy to refine and improve his experimental techniques, spending his later time at the institution increasingly in experimentation. \nIn December 1799 Davy visited London for the first time and extended his circle of friends. Davy features in the diary of William Godwin, with their first meeting recorded for 4 December 1799.\nIn 1800, Davy informed Giddy that he had been \"repeating the galvanic experiments with success\" in the intervals of the experiments on the gases, which \"almost incessantly occupied him from January to April.\" In 1800, Davy published his \"Researches, Chemical and Philosophical, chiefly concerning Nitrous Oxide and its Respiration\", and received a more positive response.\nProofreading \"Lyrical Ballads\".\nWilliam Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge moved to the Lake District in 1800, and asked Davy to deal with the Bristol publishers of the \"Lyrical Ballads\", Biggs &amp; Cottle. Coleridge asked Davy to proofread the second edition, the first to contain Wordsworth's \"Preface to the Lyrical Ballads\", in a letter dated 16 July 1800: \"Will you be so kind as just to look over the sheets of the lyrical Ballads\". Wordsworth subsequently wrote to Davy on 29 July 1800, sending him the first manuscript sheet of poems and asking him specifically to correct: \"any thing you find amiss in the punctuation a business at which I am ashamed to say I am no adept\". Wordsworth was ill in the autumn of 1800 and slow in sending poems for the second edition; the volume appeared on 26 January 1801 even though it was dated 1800. While it is impossible to know whether Davy was at fault, this edition of the Lyrical Ballads contained many errors, including the poem \"Michael\" being left incomplete. In a personal notebook marked on the front cover \"Clifton 1800 From August to Novr\", Davy wrote his own Lyrical Ballad: \"As I was walking up the street\". Wordsworth features in Davy's poem as the recorder of ordinary lives in the line: \"By poet Wordsworths Rymes\" [sic].\nRoyal Institution.\nIn 1799, Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford) had proposed the establishment in London of an 'Institution for Diffusing Knowledge', i.e. the Royal Institution. The house in Albemarle Street was bought in April 1799. Rumford became secretary to the institution, and Dr Thomas Garnett was the first lecturer.\nIn February 1801 Davy was interviewed by the committee of the Royal Institution, comprising Joseph Banks, Benjamin Thompson and Henry Cavendish. Davy wrote to Davies Giddy on 8 March 1801 about the offers made by Banks and Thompson, a possible move to London and the promise of funding for his work in galvanism. He also mentioned that he might not be collaborating further with Beddoes on therapeutic gases. The next day Davy left Bristol to take up his new post at the Royal Institution, it having been resolved 'that Humphry Davy be engaged in the service of the Royal Institution in the capacity of assistant lecturer in chemistry, director of the chemical laboratory, and assistant editor of the journals of the institution, and that he be allowed to occupy a room in the house, and be furnished with coals and candles, and that he be paid a salary of 100l. per annum.'\nOn 25 April 1801, Davy gave his first lecture on the relatively new subject of 'Galvanism'. He and his friend Coleridge had had many conversations about the nature of human knowledge and progress, and Davy's lectures gave his audience a vision of human civilisation brought forward by scientific discovery. \"It [science] has bestowed on him powers which may almost be called creative; which have enabled him to modify and change the beings surrounding him, and by his experiments to interrogate nature with power, not simply as a scholar, passive and seeking only to understand her operations, but rather as a master, active with his own instruments.\" The first lecture garnered rave reviews, and by the June lecture Davy wrote to John King that his last lecture had attendance of nearly 500 people. \"There was Respiration, Nitrous Oxide, and unbounded Applause. Amen!\" Davy revelled in his public status.\nWomen's scientific education.\nDavy's lectures included spectacular and sometimes dangerous chemical demonstrations along with scientific information, and were presented with considerable showmanship by the young and handsome man. \nDavy also included both poetic and religious commentary in his lectures, emphasizing that God's design was revealed by chemical investigations. Religious commentary was in part an attempt to appeal to women in his audiences. Davy, like many of his enlightenment contemporaries, supported female education and women's involvement in scientific pursuits, even proposing that women be admitted to evening events at the Royal Society.\nDavy acquired a large female following around London. In a satirical cartoon by Gillray, nearly half of the attendees pictured are female. His support of women caused Davy to be subjected to considerable gossip and innuendo, and to be criticised as unmanly.\nIncandescent light and arc light.\nIn 1802, Humphry Davy had what was then the most powerful electrical battery in the world at the Royal Institution. With it, Davy created the first incandescent light by passing electric current through a thin strip of platinum, chosen because the metal had an extremely high melting point. It was neither sufficiently bright nor long lasting enough to be of practical use, but demonstrated the principle. By 1806 he was able to demonstrate a much more powerful form of electric lighting to the Royal Society in London. It was an early form of arc light which produced its illumination from an electric arc created between two charcoal rods.\nFull lecturer at the Royal Institution.\nWhen Davy's lecture series on Galvanism ended, he progressed to a new series on agricultural chemistry, and his popularity continued to skyrocket. By June 1802, after just over a year at the Institution and at the age of\u00a023, Davy was nominated to full lecturer at the Royal Institution of Great Britain. Garnett, the incumbent lecturer, quietly resigned, citing health reasons.\nRoyal Society.\nIn November 1804 Davy became a Fellow of the Royal Society, over which he would later preside. He was one of the founding members of the Geological Society of London in 1807 and later became a Fellow. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and as an honorary member of the American Philosophical Society in 1810, and a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822.\nMid-career: 1802\u20131820.\nPhotographic enlargements.\nIn June 1802 Davy published in the first issue of the \"Journals of the Royal Institution of Great Britain\" his \"An Account of a Method of Copying Paintings upon Glass, and of Making Profiles, by the Agency of Light upon Nitrate of Silver. Invented by T. Wedgwood, Esq. With Observations by H. Davy\" in which he described their experiments with the photosensitivity of silver nitrate.\nHe recorded that \"images of small objects, produced by means of the solar microscope, may be copied without difficulty on prepared paper.\" Josef Maria Eder, in his \"History of Photography,\" though crediting Wedgwood, because of his application of this quality of silver nitrate to the making of images, as \"the first photographer in the world,\" proposes that it was Davy who realised the idea of photographic enlargement using a solar microscope to project images onto sensitised paper. Neither found a means of fixing their images, and Davy devoted no more of his time to furthering these early discoveries in photography.\nThe principle of image projection using solar illumination was applied to the construction of the earliest form of photographic enlarger, the \"solar camera\".\nElements.\nPotassium and sodium.\nDavy was a pioneer in the field of electrolysis using the voltaic pile to split common compounds and thus prepare many new elements. He went on to electrolyse molten salts and discovered several new metals, including sodium and potassium, highly reactive elements known as the alkali metals. Davy discovered potassium in 1807, deriving it from caustic potash (KOH). Before the 19th century, no distinction had been made between potassium and sodium. Potassium was the first metal that was isolated by electrolysis. Davy isolated sodium in the same year by passing an electric current through molten sodium hydroxide.\nBarium, calcium, strontium, magnesium, and boron.\nDuring the first half of 1808, Davy conducted a series of further electrolysis experiments on alkaline earths including lime, magnesia, strontites and barytes. At the beginning of June, Davy received a letter from the Swedish chemist Berzelius claiming that he, in conjunction with Dr. Pontin, had successfully obtained amalgams of calcium and barium by electrolysing lime and barytes using a mercury cathode. Davy managed to successfully repeat these experiments almost immediately and expanded Berzelius' method to strontites and magnesia. He noted that while these amalgams oxidised in only a few minutes when exposed to air they could be preserved for lengthy periods of time when submerged in naphtha before becoming covered with a white crust.\nOn 30 June 1808 Davy reported to the Royal Society that he had successfully isolated four new metals which he named barium, calcium, strontium and magnium (later changed to magnesium) which were subsequently published in the \"Philosophical Transactions\". Although Davy conceded magnium was an \"undoubtedly objectionable\" name he argued the more appropriate name magnesium was already being applied to metallic manganese and wished to avoid creating an equivocal term.\nThe observations gathered from these experiments also led to Davy isolating boron in 1809. Berzelius called Davy's 1806 Bakerian Lecture \"On Some Chemical Agencies of Electricity\" \"one of the best memoirs which has ever enriched the theory of chemistry.\"\nDavy performed a number of experiments aimed to isolate the metal aluminum and is credited as the person who named the element. The first name proposed for the metal to be isolated from alum was \"alumium\", which Davy suggested in an 1808 article on his electrochemical research, published in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. It appeared that the name was created from the English word \"alum\" and the Latin suffix \"-ium\"; but it was customary then to give elements names originating in Latin, so this name was not adopted universally. This name was criticized by contemporary chemists from France, Germany, and Sweden, who insisted the metal should be named for the oxide, alumina, from which it would be isolated. The English name \"alum\" does not come directly from Latin, whereas \"alumine\"/\"alumina\" comes from the Latin word \"alumen\" (upon declension, \"alumen\" changes to \"alumin-\"). The form aluminium, the modern preferred British word, was proposed by January 1811 in an account of Davy's published experiments written by William Hyde Wollaston. Davy later used aluminum (by 1812), which remains the U.S. word.\nChlorine.\nChlorine was discovered in 1774 by Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele, who called it \"dephlogisticated marine acid\" (see phlogiston theory) and mistakenly thought it contained oxygen. Davy showed that the acid of Scheele's substance, called at the time oxymuriatic acid, contained no oxygen. This discovery overturned Lavoisier's definition of acids as compounds of oxygen. In 1810, chlorine was given its current name by Humphry Davy, who insisted that chlorine was in fact an element. The name chlorine, chosen by Davy for \"one of [the substance's] obvious and characteristic properties \u2013 its colour\", comes from the Greek \u03c7\u03bb\u03c9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (chl\u014dros), meaning green-yellow.\nLaboratory incident.\nDavy seriously injured himself in a laboratory accident with nitrogen trichloride. French chemist Pierre Louis Dulong had first prepared this compound in 1811, and had lost two fingers and an eye in two separate explosions with it. In a letter to John Children, on 16 November 1812, Davy wrote: \"It must be used with great caution. It is not safe to experiment upon a globule larger than a pin's head. I have been severely wounded by a piece scarcely bigger. My sight, however, I am informed, will not be injured\". Davy's accident induced him to hire Michael Faraday as a co-worker, particularly for assistance with handwriting and record keeping. They were both injured in another explosion shortly thereafter. He had recovered from his injuries by April 1813.\nTravels.\nEuropean tour.\nIn 1812, Davy was knighted and gave up his lecturing position at the Royal Institution. He was given the title of Honorary Professor of Chemistry. He gave a farewell lecture to the Institution, and married a wealthy widow, Jane Apreece. (While Davy was generally acknowledged as being faithful to his wife, their relationship was stormy, and in later years he travelled to continental Europe alone.)\nDavy then published his \"Elements of Chemical Philosophy, part 1, volume 1\", though other parts of this title were never completed. He made notes for a second edition, but it was never required. \nIn October 1813, he and his wife, accompanied by Michael Faraday as his scientific assistant (also treated as a valet), travelled to France to collect the second edition of the \"prix du Galvanisme,\" a medal that Napoleon Bonaparte had awarded Davy for his electro-chemical work. Faraday noted \"Tis indeed a strange venture at this time, to trust ourselves in a foreign and hostile country, where so little regard is had to protestations of honour, that the slightest suspicion would be sufficient to separate us for ever from England, and perhaps from life\". Davy's party sailed from Plymouth to Morlaix by cartel, where they were searched.\nUpon reaching Paris, Davy was a guest of honour at a meeting of the First Class of the and met with Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re and other French chemists. It was later reported that Davy's wife had thrown the medal into the sea, near her Cornish home, \"as it raised bad memories\". The Royal Society of Chemistry has offered over \u00a31,800 for the recovery of the medal.\nWhile in Paris, Davy attended lectures at the Ecole Polytechnique, including those by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac on a mysterious substance isolated by Bernard Courtois. Davy wrote a paper for the Royal Society on the element, which is now called iodine. This led to a dispute between Davy and Gay-Lussac on who had the priority on the research.\nDavy's party did not meet Napoleon in person, but they did visit the Empress Jos\u00e9phine de Beauharnais at the Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison. The party left Paris in December 1813, travelling south to Italy. They sojourned in Florence, where using the burning glass of the Grand Duke of Tuscany in a series of experiments conducted with Faraday's assistance, Davy succeeded in using the sun's rays to ignite diamond, proving it is composed of pure carbon.\nDavy's party continued to Rome, where he undertook experiments on iodine and chlorine and on the colours used in ancient paintings. This was the first chemical research on the pigments used by artists.\nHe also visited Naples and Mount Vesuvius, where he collected samples of crystals. By June 1814, they were in Milan, where they met Alessandro Volta, and then continued north to Geneva. They returned to Italy via Munich and Innsbruck, and when their plans to travel to Greece and Istanbul were abandoned after Napoleon's escape from Elba, they returned to England.\nAfter the Battle of Waterloo, Davy wrote to Lord Liverpool urging that the French be treated with severity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My Lord, I need not say to Your Lordship that the capitulation of Paris not a treaty; lest everything belonging to the future state of that capital &amp; of France is open to discussion &amp; that France is a conquered country. It is the duty of the allies to give her more restricted boundaries which shall not encroach upon the natural limits of other nations. to weaken her on the side of Italy, Germany &amp; Flanders. To take back from her by contributions the wealth she has acquired by them to suffer her to retain nothing that the republican or imperial armies have stolen: This last duty is demanded no less by policy than justice.\u2014\u200a\nDavy lamp.\nAfter his return to England in 1815, Davy began experimenting with lamps that could be used safely in coal mines. The Revd Dr Robert Gray of Bishopwearmouth in Sunderland, founder of the Society for Preventing Accidents in Coalmines, had written to Davy suggesting that he might use his 'extensive stores of chemical knowledge' to address the issue of mining explosions caused by firedamp, or methane mixed with oxygen, which was often ignited by the open flames of the lamps then used by miners. Incidents such as the Felling mine disaster of 1812 near Newcastle, in which 92 men were killed, not only caused great loss of life among miners but also meant that their widows and children had to be supported by the public purse. The Revd Gray and a fellow clergyman also working in a north-east mining area, John Hodgson of Jarrow, were keen that action should be taken to improve underground lighting and especially the lamps used by miners.\nDavy conceived of using an iron gauze to enclose a lamp's flame, and so prevent the methane burning inside the lamp from passing out to the general atmosphere. Although the idea of the safety lamp had already been demonstrated by William Reid Clanny and by the then unknown (but later very famous) engineer George Stephenson, Davy's use of wire gauze to prevent the spread of flame was used by many other inventors in their later designs. George Stephenson's lamp was very popular in the north-east coalfields, and used the same principle of preventing the flame reaching the general atmosphere, but by different means. Unfortunately, although the new design of gauze lamp initially did seem to offer protection, it gave much less light, and quickly deteriorated in the wet conditions of most pits. Rusting of the gauze quickly made the lamp unsafe, and the number of deaths from firedamp explosions rose yet further.\nThere was some discussion as to whether Davy had discovered the principles behind his lamp without the help of the work of Smithson Tennant, but it was generally agreed that the work of the two men had been independent. Davy refused to patent the lamp, and its invention led to his being awarded the Rumford medal in 1816.\nAcid studies.\nIn 1815 Davy also suggested that acids were substances that contained replaceable hydrogen\u00a0ions;\u2013 hydrogen that could be partly or totally replaced by reactive metals which are placed above hydrogen in the reactivity series. When acids reacted with metals they formed salts and hydrogen gas. Bases were substances that reacted with acids to form salts and water. These definitions worked well for most of the nineteenth century.\nHerculaneum papyri.\nDavy experimented on fragments of the Herculaneum papyri before his departure to Naples in 1818. His early experiments showed hope of success. In his report to the Royal Society Davy writes that: \n'When a fragment of a brown MS. in which the layers were strongly adhered, was placed in an atmosphere of chlorine, there was an immediate action, the papyrus smoked and became yellow, and the letters appeared much more distinct; and by the application of heat the layers separated from each other, giving fumes of muriatic acid.'\nThe success of the early trials prompted Davy to travel to Naples to conduct further research on the Herculaneum papyri. Accompanied by his wife, they set off on 26 May 1818 to stay in Flanders where Davy was invited by the coal miners to speak. They then traveled to Carniola (now Slovenia) which proved to become 'his favourite Alpine retreat' before finally arriving in Italy. In Italy, they befriended Lord Byron in Rome and then went on to travel to Naples.\nInitial experiments were again promising and his work resulted in 'partially unrolling 23 MSS., from which fragments of writing were obtained' but after returning to Naples on 1 December 1819 from a summer in the Alps, Davy complained that 'the Italians at the museum [were] no longer helpful but obstructive'. Davy decided to renounce further work on the papyri because 'the labour, in itself difficult and unpleasant, been made more so, by the conduct of the persons at the head of this department in the Museum'.\nLater life: 1820\u20131829.\nPresident of the Royal Society.\nElection to the presidency.\nOn 20 October 1818, Davy was created a baronet; this was the first such honour conferred on a man of science in Britain. It was followed a year later with the presidency of the Royal Society. The Society was in transition from a club for gentlemen interested in natural philosophy, connected with the political and social elite, to an academy representing increasingly specialised sciences. The previous president, Joseph Banks, had held the post for over 40 years and had presided autocratically over what David Philip Miller calls the \"Banksian Learned Empire\", in which natural history was prominent. Banks had groomed Davies Gilbert to succeed him and preserve the status quo, but Gilbert declined to stand. Fellows who thought royal patronage was important proposed Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg (later Leopold I of Belgium), who also withdrew, as did the Whig Edward St Maur, 11th Duke of Somerset. Davy was the outstanding scientist but some fellows did not approve of his popularising work at the Royal Institution.\nElections took place on St Andrew's Day and Davy was elected on 30 November 1820. Although he was unopposed, other candidates had received initial backing. These candidates embodied the factional difficulties that beset Davy's presidency and which eventually defeated him. The strongest alternative had been William Hyde Wollaston, who was supported by the \"Cambridge Network\" of outstanding mathematicians such as Charles Babbage and John Herschel, who tried to block Davy. They were aware that Davy supported some modernisation, but thought that he would not sufficiently encourage aspiring young mathematicians, astronomers and geologists, who were beginning to form specialist societies. Davy was only 41, and reformers were fearful of another long presidency. \nIn his early years Davy was optimistic about reconciling the reformers and the Banksians. In his first speech as president he declared, \"I trust that, with these new societies, we shall always preserve the most amicable relations ... I am sure there is no desire in [the Royal Society] to exert anything like patriarchal authority in relation to these institutions\".\nProtection of ships' bottoms.\nFrom 1761 onwards, copper plating had been fitted to the undersides of Royal Navy ships to protect the wood from attack by shipworms. However, the copper bottoms were gradually corroded by exposure to the salt water. Between 1823 and 1825, Davy, assisted by Michael Faraday, attempted to protect the copper by electrochemical means. He attached to the copper sacrificial pieces of zinc or iron, which provided cathodic protection to the host metal. It was discovered, however, that protected copper became foul quickly, i.e. pieces of weed and/or marine creatures became attached to the hull, which had a detrimental effect on the handling of the ship.\nThe Navy Board approached Davy in 1823, asking for help with the corrosion. Davy conducted a number of tests in Portsmouth Dockyard, which led to the Navy Board adopting the use of Davy's \"protectors\". By 1824, it had become apparent that fouling of the copper bottoms was occurring on the majority of protected ships. By the end of 1825, the Admiralty ordered the Navy Board to cease fitting the protectors to sea-going ships, and to remove those that had already been fitted. Davy's scheme was seen as a public failure, despite success of the corrosion protection as such. As Frank A. J. L. James explains, \"[Because] the poisonous salts from [corroding] copper were no longer entering the water, there was nothing to kill the barnacles and the like in the vicinity of a ship. This meant that barnacles [and the like] could now attach themselves to the bottom of a vessel, thus impeding severely its steerage, much to the anger of the captains who wrote to the Admiralty to complain about Davy's protectors.\"\nPresidency.\nDavy spent much time juggling the factions but, as his reputation declined in the light of failures such as his research into copper-bottomed ships, he lost popularity and authority. This was compounded by a number of political errors. In 1825 his promotion of the new Zoological Society, of which he was a founding fellow, courted the landed gentry and alienated expert zoologists. He offended the mathematicians and reformers by failing to ensure that Babbage received one of the new Royal Medals (a project of his) or the vacant secretaryship of the Society in 1826. In 1826 Davy suffered a stroke from which he never fully recovered. In November 1826 the mathematician Edward Ryan recorded that: \"The Society, every member almost ... are in the greatest rage at the President's proceedings and nothing is now talked of but removing him.\"\nIn the event he was again re-elected unopposed, but he was now visibly unwell. In January 1827 he set off to Italy for reasons of his health. It did not improve and, as the 1827 election loomed, it was clear that he would not stand again. He was succeeded by Davies Gilbert.\nFinal years.\nDavy's laboratory assistant, Michael Faraday, went on to enhance Davy's work and would become the more famous and influential scientist. Davy is supposed to have even claimed Faraday as his greatest discovery. Davy later accused Faraday of plagiarism, however, causing Faraday (the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry) to cease all research in electromagnetism until his mentor's death.\nThe preceding paragraph may be unduly charitable to Davy. The accusation by Davy of plagiarism by Faraday occurred already in 1821, regarding Faraday's first major discovery independent of Davy, of electromagnetic rotation (the first electric motor). According to Geoffrey Cantor's 1991 biography of Faraday, this dubious accusation was Davy's \"final bid to dominate Faraday... Davy, resenting the success of his earnest and hardworking assistant, was trying to keep him down. Master and servant were in direct competition and their rivalry may have motivated Davy's attempt to block Faraday's membership of the Royal Society. ... Although Davy was unsuccessful in preventing Faraday's membership, this incident proved a turning point in their relationship.\" Other sources report the jibe that \"Davy's greatest discovery was Faraday\" as a cruel joke at Davy's expense, not a gracious acknowledgment by Davy himself of Faraday's greater scientific achievements.\nOf a sanguine, somewhat irritable temperament, Davy displayed characteristic enthusiasm and energy in all his pursuits. According to June Z. Fullmer, one of Davy's biographers, he was a deist. As is shown by his verses and sometimes by his prose, his mind was highly imaginative; the poet Coleridge declared that if he \"had not been the first chemist, he would have been the first poet of his age\", and Southey said that \"he had all the elements of a poet; he only wanted the art.\" In spite of his ungainly exterior and peculiar manner, his happy gifts of exposition and illustration won him extraordinary popularity as a lecturer, his experiments were ingenious and rapidly performed, and Coleridge went to hear him \"to increase his stock of metaphors.\" The dominating ambition of his life was to achieve fame; occasional petty jealousy did not diminish his concern for the \"cause of humanity\", to use a phrase often employed by him in connection with his invention of the miners' lamp. Careless about etiquette, his frankness sometimes exposed him to annoyances he might have avoided by the exercise of tact.\nDeath.\nDavy spent the last months of his life writing \"Consolations in Travel\", an immensely popular, somewhat amorphous compendium of poetry, thoughts on science and philosophy. Published posthumously, the work became a staple of both scientific and family libraries for several decades afterward. Davy spent the winter in Rome, hunting in the Campagna on his fiftieth birthday. But on 20 February 1829 he had another stroke. After spending many months attempting to recuperate, Davy died in a room at L'Hotel de la Couronne, in the Rue du Rhone, in Geneva, Switzerland, on 29 May 1829. An appendix to his will had included his last wishes; that there be no post-mortem, that he be buried where he died, and that there be an interval between the two, to ensure that he was not merely comatose. But the ordinances of the city did not allow such an interval and his funeral took place on the following Monday, 1 June, in the Plainpalais Cemetery, outside the city walls.\nSir Humphry Davy\nAbominated gravy.\nHe lived in the odium\nOf having discovered sodium.\nSir Humphrey Davy's kindly face, \nIs turned away from Market Place\nTowards St Michael's Mount\nSo, if he do want to tell the time\nHe've got to wait till the clock do chime \nThen he's forced to count.\nPublications.\nSee Fullmer's work for a full list of Davy's articles.\nHumphry Davy's books are as follows:\nDavy also contributed articles on chemistry to \"Rees's Cyclop\u00e6dia\", but the topics are not known.\nHis collected works were published in 1839\u20131840:\nReferences.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14372", "revid": "50791714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14372", "title": "Hecate", "text": "Greek goddess of magic and transitions\nHecate ( ; ) is a goddess in ancient Greek religion and mythology, most often shown holding a pair of torches, a key, or snakes, or accompanied by dogs, and in later periods depicted as three-formed or triple-bodied. She is variously associated with crossroads, night, light, magic, witchcraft, drugs, and the Moon. Her earliest appearance in literature was in Hesiod's \"Theogony\" in the 8th century BCE as a goddess of great honour with domains in sky, earth, and sea. She had popular followings amongst the witches of Thessaly, and an important sanctuary among the Carians of Asia Minor in Lagina. The earliest evidence for Hecate's cult comes from Selinunte, in Sicily.\nHecate was one of several deities worshipped in ancient Athens as a protector of the \"oikos\" (household), alongside Zeus, Hestia, Hermes, and Apollo. In the post-Christian writings of the Chaldean Oracles (2nd\u20133rd century CE) she was also regarded with (some) rulership over earth, sea, and sky, as well as a more universal role as Savior (Soteira), Mother of Angels and the Cosmic World Soul (Anima Mundi).\nRegarding the nature of her cult, it has been remarked, \"she is more at home on the fringes than in the centre of Greek polytheism. Intrinsically ambivalent and polymorphous, she straddles conventional boundaries and eludes definition.\"\nThe Romans often knew her by the epithet of Trivia, an epithet she shares with Diana, each in their roles as protector of travel and of the crossroads (trivia, \"three ways\"). Hecate was closely identified with Diana and Artemis in the Roman era.\nName.\nEtymology.\nPotential Greek source words have been suggested for the goddess's name. The word \u1f11\u03ba\u03ce\u03bd, meaning \"willing\" (thus, \"she who works her will\" or similar), may be related to the name Hecate. However, no sources suggested list will or willingness as a major attribute of Hecate, which calls this assertion into question. Another Greek word suggested as the origin of the name Hecate is \u1f19\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 \"Hekatos\", an obscure epithet of Apollo interpreted as \"the far-reaching one\" or \"the far-darter\". This has been suggested in comparison with the attributes of the goddess Artemis, strongly associated with Apollo and frequently equated with Hecate in the classical world. Supporters of this etymology suggest that Hecate was originally considered an aspect of Artemis prior to the latter's adoption into the Olympian pantheon. Artemis would have, at that point, become more strongly associated with purity and maidenhood, on the one hand, while her originally darker attributes like her association with magic, the souls of the dead, and the night would have continued to be worshipped separately under her title Hecate. Though often considered the most likely Greek origin of the name, the \u1f19\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2 theory does not account for her worship in Asia Minor, where her association with Artemis seems to have been a late development, and the competing theories that the attribution of darker aspects and magic to Hecate were themselves not originally part of her cult. R. S. P. Beekes rejected a Greek etymology and suggested a Pre-Greek origin.\nOlder English pronunciation and spelling.\nIn Early Modern English, the name was also pronounced disyllabically (as ) and sometimes spelled \"Hecat\". It remained common practice in English to pronounce her name in two syllables, even when spelled with final \"e\", well into the 19th century.\nThe spelling \"Hecat\" is due to Arthur Golding's 1567 translation of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", and this spelling without the final E later appears in plays of the Elizabethan-Jacobean period.\nWebster's Dictionary of 1866 particularly credits the influence of Shakespeare for the then-predominant disyllabic pronunciation of the name.\nPossible origins.\nAnatolian.\nEvidence suggests that Hecate originated among the Carians of Anatolia, the region where most theophoric names invoking Hecate, such as Hecataeus or Hecatomnus, the father of Mausolus, are attested, and where Hecate remained a Great Goddess into historical times, at her unrivalled cult site in Lagina. In particular, there is some evidence that she might be derived from the local sun goddesses (see also Arinna) based on similar attributes. The monuments to Hecate in Phrygia and Caria are numerous but of late date.\nIf Hecate's cult spread from Anatolia into Greece, then it possibly presented a conflict, as her role was already filled by other more prominent deities in the Greek pantheon, above all by Artemis and Selene. This line of reasoning lies behind the widely accepted hypothesis that she was a foreign deity who was incorporated into the Greek pantheon. Other than in the \"Theogony\", the Greek sources do not offer a consistent story of her parentage or of her relations in the Greek pantheon.\nEgyptian.\nA possible theory of a foreign origin for the name may be Heqet (\"\u1e25qt\"), a frog-headed Egyptian goddess of fertility and childbirth, who, like Hecate, was also associated with \"\u1e25q\ua723\", ruler. The word \"heka\" in the Egyptian language is also both the word for \"magic\" and the name of the god of magic and medicine, Heka.\nIconography.\nHecate was generally represented as three-formed or triple-bodied, though the earliest known images of the goddess are singular. Her earliest known representation is a small terracotta statue found in Athens. An inscription on the statue is a dedication to Hecate, in writing of the style of the 6th century, but it otherwise lacks any other symbols typically associated with the goddess. She is seated on a throne, with a chaplet around her head; the depiction is otherwise relatively generic. Farnell states: \"The evidence of the monuments as to the character and significance of Hecate is almost as full as that of to express her manifold and mystic nature.\" A 6th century fragment of pottery from Boetia depicts a goddess which may be Hecate in a maternal or fertility mode. Crowned with leafy branches as in later descriptions, she is depicted offering a \"maternal blessing\" to two maidens who embrace her. The figure is flanked by lions, an animal associated with Hecate both in the \"Chaldean Oracles\", coinage, and reliefs from Asia Minor. In artwork, she is often portrayed in three statues standing back to back, each with its own special attributes (torch, keys, daggers, snakes, dogs).\nThe 2nd-century travel writer Pausanias stated that Hecate was first depicted in triplicate by the sculptor Alcamenes in the Greek Classical period of the late 5th century BCE, whose sculpture was placed before the temple of the Wingless Nike in Athens. Though Alcamenes's original statue is lost, hundreds of copies exist, and the general motif of a triple Hecate situated around a central pole or column, known as a \"hekataion\", was used both at crossroads shrines as well as at the entrances to temples and private homes. These typically depict her holding a variety of items, including torches, keys, serpents, and daggers. Some \"hekataia\", including a votive sculpture from Attica of the 3rd century BCE, include additional dancing figures identified as the Charites circling the triple Hecate and her central column. It is possible that the representation of a triple Hecate surrounding a central pillar was originally derived from poles set up at three-way crossroads with masks hung on them, facing in each road direction. In the 1st century CE, Ovid wrote: \"Look at Hecate, standing guard at the crossroads, one face looking in each direction.\"\nApart from traditional \"hekataia\", Hecate's triplicity is depicted in the vast frieze of the great Pergamon Altar, now in Berlin, wherein she is shown with three bodies, taking part in the battle with the Titans. In the Argolid, near the shrine of the Dioscuri, Pausanias saw the temple of Hecate opposite the sanctuary of Eileithyia; He reported the image to be the work of Scopas, stating further, \"This one is of stone, while the bronze images opposite, also of Hecate, were made respectively by Polycleitus and his brother Naucydes, son of Mothon.\"\nWhile Greek anthropomorphic conventions of art generally represented Hecate's triple form as three separate bodies, the iconography of the triple Hecate eventually evolved into representations of the goddess with a single body, but three faces. In Egyptian-inspired Greek esoteric writings connected with Hermes Trismegistus, and in the Greek Magical Papyri of Late Antiquity, Hecate is described as having three heads: one dog, one serpent, and one horse. In other representations, her animal heads include those of a cow and a boar.\nThe east frieze of a Hellenistic temple of hers at Lagina shows her helping protect the newborn Zeus from his father Cronus; this frieze is the only evidence of Hecate's involvement in the myth of his birth.\nSacred animals.\nDogs were closely associated with Hecate in the Classical world. They were one of her most important attributes, with a fragment of Euripides describing them as her sacred animal. The sacrifice of dogs to her is attested in Thrace, Samothrace, Colophon, and Athens, and is known to have played a significant role in purification rites to her. A 4th-century\u00a0BCE marble relief from Crannon in Thessaly was dedicated by a race-horse owner. It shows Hecate, with a hound beside her, placing a wreath on the head of a mare. It has been claimed that her association with dogs is suggestive of her connection with birth, for the dog was sacred to Eileithyia, Genetyllis, and other birth goddesses. Images of her attended by a dog are also found when she is depicted alongside the god Hermes and the goddess Cybele in reliefs.\nAlthough in later times Hecate's dog came to be thought of as a manifestation of restless souls or daemons who accompanied her, its docile appearance and its accompaniment of a Hecate who looks completely friendly in many pieces of ancient art suggests that its original signification was positive and thus likelier to have arisen from the dog's connection with birth than the dog's underworld associations.\" The association with dogs, particularly female dogs, could be explained by a metamorphosis myth in Lycophron: the friendly-looking female dog accompanying Hecate was originally the Trojan Queen Hecuba, who leapt into the sea after the fall of Troy and was transformed by Hecate into her familiar.\nThe polecat is also associated with Hecate. Antoninus Liberalis used a myth to explain this association:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At Thebes Proetus had a daughter Galinthias. This maiden was playmate and companion of Alcmene, daughter of Electryon. As the birth throes for Herakles were pressing on Alcmene, the Moirai (fates) and Eileithyia (birth-goddess), as a favour to Hera, kept Alcmene in continuous birth pangs. They remained seated, each keeping their arms crossed. Galinthias, fearing that the pains of her labour would drive Alcmene mad, ran to the Moirai and Eileithyia and announced that by desire of Zeus a boy had been born to Alcmene and that their prerogatives had been abolished. At all this, consternation of course overcame the Moirai and they immediately let go their arms.\nAlcmene\u2019s pangs ceased at once and Herakles was born. The Moirai were aggrieved at this and took away the womanly parts of Galinthias since, being but a mortal, she had deceived the gods. They turned her into a deceitful weasel (or polecat), making her live in crannies and gave her a grotesque way of mating. She is mounted through the ears and gives birth by bringing forth her young through the throat. Hecate felt sorry for this transformation of her appearance and appointed her a sacred servant of herself.\nAelian told a different story of a woman transformed into a polecat:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have heard that the polecat was once a human being. It has also reached my hearing that Gale was her name then; that she was a dealer in spells and a sorceress (\"pharmakis\"); that she was extremely lascivious, and that she was afflicted with abnormal sexual desires. Nor has it escaped my notice that the anger of the goddess Hekate transformed it into this evil creature. May the goddess be gracious to me: Fables and their telling I leave to others.\nAthenaeus of Naucratis, drawing on the etymological speculation of Apollodorus of Athens, notes that the red mullet is sacred to Hecate, \"on account of the resemblance of their names; for that the goddess is \"trimorphos\", of a triple form\". The Greek word for mullet was \"trigle\" and later \"trigla\". He goes on to quote a fragment of verse:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn relation to Greek concepts of pollution, Parker observes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The fish that was most commonly banned was the red mullet (\"trigle\"), which fits neatly into the pattern. It 'delighted in polluted things', and 'would eat the corpse of a fish or a man'. Blood-coloured itself, it was sacred to the blood-eating goddess Hecate. It seems a symbolic summation of all the negative characteristics of the creatures of the deep.\nAt Athens, it is said there stood a statue of Hecate \"Triglathena\", to whom the red mullet was offered in sacrifice. After mentioning that this fish was sacred to Hecate, Alan Davidson writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cicero, Horace, Juvenal, Martial, Pliny, Seneca, and Suetonius have left abundant and interesting testimony to the red mullet fever which began to affect wealthy Romans during the last years of the Republic and really gripped them in the early Empire. The main symptoms were a preoccupation with size, the consequent rise to absurd heights of the prices of large specimens, a habit of keeping red mullet in captivity, and the enjoyment of the highly specialized aesthetic experience induced by watching the color of the dying fish change.\nIn her three-headed representations, discussed above, Hecate often has one or more animal heads, including cow, dog, boar, serpent, and horse. Lions are associated with Hecate in early artwork from Asia Minor, as well as later coins and literature, including the \"Chaldean Oracles\". The frog, which was also the symbol of the similarly named Egyptian goddess Heqet, has also become sacred to Hecate in modern pagan literature, possibly due in part to its ability to cross between two elements.\nComparative mythologist Alexander Haggerty Krappe cited that Hecate was also named \u03af\u03c0\u03c0\u03b5\u03cd\u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03b1 (\"hippeutria\" \u2013 'the equestrienne'), since the horse was \"the chthonic animal \"par excellence\"\".\nSacred plants.\nThe goddess is described as wearing oak in fragments of Sophocles's lost play \"The Root Diggers\" (or \"The Root Cutters\"), and an ancient commentary on Apollonius's Argonautica (3.1214) describes her as having a head surrounded by serpents, twining through branches of oak.\nFunctions.\nAs a goddess of boundaries.\nHecate was associated with borders, city walls, doorways, crossroads and, by extension, with realms outside or beyond the world of the living. She appears to have been particularly associated with being 'between' and hence is frequently characterized as a \"liminal\" goddess. \"Hecate mediated between regimes\u2014Olympian and Titan\u2014but also between mortal and divine spheres.\" This liminal role is reflected in a number of her cult titles: \"Apotropaia\" (that turns away/protects); \"Enodia\" (on the way); \"Propulaia\"/\"Propylaia\" (before the gate); \"Triodia\"/\"Trioditis\" (who frequents crossroads); \"Kl\u00eaidouchos\" (holding the keys), etc.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a goddess expected to avert harmful or destructive spirits from the house or city over which she stood guard and to protect the individual as she or he passed through dangerous liminal places, Hecate would naturally become known as a goddess who could also \"refuse\" to avert the demons, or even drive them on against unfortunate individuals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was probably her role as guardian of entrances that led to Hecate's identification by the mid fifth century with Enodia, a Thessalian goddess. Enodia's very name (\"In-the-Road\") suggests that she watched over entrances, for it expresses both the possibility that she stood on the main road into a city, keeping an eye on all who entered, and in the road in front of private houses, protecting their inhabitants.\nThis function would appear to have some relationship with the iconographic association of Hecate with keys, and might also relate to her appearance with two torches, which when positioned on either side of a gate or door illuminated the immediate area and allowed visitors to be identified. \"In Byzantium small temples in her honour were placed close to the gates of the city. Hecate's importance to Byzantium was above all as a deity of protection. When Philip of Macedon was about to attack the city, according to the legend she alerted the townspeople with her ever present torches, and with her pack of dogs, which served as her constant companions.\" This suggests that Hecate's close association with dogs derived in part from the use of watchdogs, who, particularly at night, raised an alarm when intruders approached. Watchdogs were used extensively by Greeks and Romans.\nCult images and altars of Hecate in her triplicate or trimorphic form were placed at three-way crossroads (though they also appeared before private homes and in front of city gates). In what appears to be a 7th-century indication of the survival of cult practices of this general sort, Saint Eligius, in his \"Sermo\" warns the sick among his recently converted flock in Flanders against putting \"devilish charms at springs or trees or crossroads\", and, according to Saint Ouen would urge them \"No Christian should make or render any devotion to the deities of the trivium, where three roads meet...\".\nAs a goddess of the underworld.\nThanks to her association with boundaries and the liminal spaces between worlds, Hecate is also recognized as a chthonic (underworld) goddess. As the holder of the keys that can unlock the gates between realms, she can unlock the gates of death, as described in a 3rd-century BCE poem by Theocritus. In the 1st century CE, Virgil described the entrance to hell as \"Hecate's Grove\", though he says that Hecate is equally \"powerful in Heaven and Hell.\" The Greek Magical Papyri describe Hecate as the holder of the keys to Tartaros. Like Hermes, Hecate takes on the role of guardian not just of roads, but of all journeys, including the journey to the afterlife. In art and myth, she is shown, along with Hermes, guiding Persephone back from the underworld with her torches.\nBy the 5th century BCE, Hecate had come to be strongly associated with ghosts, possibly due to conflation with the Thessalian goddess Enodia (meaning \"traveller\"), who travelled the earth with a retinue of ghosts and was depicted on coinage wearing a leafy crown and holding torches, iconography strongly associated with Hecate.\nAs a goddess of witchcraft.\nBy the 1st century CE, Hecate's chthonic and nocturnal character had led to her transformation into a goddess heavily associated with witchcraft, witches, magic, and sorcery. In Lucan's \"Pharsalia\", the witch Erichtho invokes Hecate as \"Persephone, who is the third and lowest aspect of Hecate, the goddess we witches revere\", and describes her as a \"rotting goddess\" with a \"pallid decaying body\", who has to \"wear a mask when [she] visit[s] the gods in heaven.\"\nLike Hecate, \"the dog is a creature of the threshold, the guardian of doors and portals, and so it is appropriately associated with the frontier between life and death, and with demons and ghosts which move across the frontier. The yawning gates of Hades were guarded by the monstrous watchdog Cerberus, whose function was to prevent the living from entering the underworld, and the dead from leaving it.\"\nPlants and herbalism.\nHecate was closely associated with plant lore and the concoction of medicines and poisons. In particular she was thought to give instruction in these closely related arts. Apollonius of Rhodes, in the \"Argonautica\", mentions that Medea was taught by Hecate: \"I have mentioned to you before a certain young girl whom Hecate, daughter of Perses, has taught to work in drugs.\"\nHecate was said to favour offerings of garlic, which was closely associated with her cult. She is also sometimes associated with cypress, a tree symbolic of death and the underworld, and hence sacred to a number of chthonic deities.\nA number of other plants (often poisonous, medicinal and/or psychoactive) are associated with Hecate. These include aconite (also called \"hecateis\"), belladonna, dittany, and mandrake. It has been suggested that the use of dogs for digging up mandrake is further corroboration of the association of this plant with Hecate; indeed, since at least as early as the 1st century CE, there are a number of attestations to the apparently widespread practice of using dogs to dig up plants associated with magic.\nThe yew in particular was sacred to Hecate.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Greeks held the yew to be sacred to Hecate\u00a0... Her attendants draped wreathes of yew around the necks of black bulls which they slaughtered in her honor and yew boughs were burned on funeral pyres. The yew was associated with the alphabet and the scientific name for yew today, \"taxus\", was probably derived from the Greek word for yew, ', which is hauntingly similar to ', their word for bow and \"\", their word for poison. It is presumed that the latter were named after the tree because of its superiority for both bows and poison.\nAs a goddess of the moon.\nHecate was seen as a triple deity, identified with the goddesses Luna (Moon) in the sky and Diana (hunting) on the earth, while she represents the Underworld. Hecate's association with Helios in literary sources and especially in cursing magic has been cited as evidence for her lunar nature, although this evidence is pretty late; no artwork before the Roman period connecting Hecate to the Moon exists. Nevertheless, the \"Homeric Hymn to Demeter\" shows Helios and Hecate informing Demeter of Persephone's abduction, a common theme found in many parts of the world where the Sun and the Moon are questioned concerning events that happen on earth based on their ability to witness everything and implies Hecate's capacity as a moon goddess in the hymn. Another work connecting Hecate to Helios possibly as a moon goddess is Sophocles's lost play \"The Root Cutters\", where Helios is described as Hecate's spear:\nO Sun our lord and sacred fire, the spear of Hecate of the\nroads, which she carries as she attends her mistress in the sky\nThis speech from the \"Root Cutters\" may or may not be an intentional association of Hecate with the Moon. In Seneca's \"Medea\", the titular Medea invokes her patron Hecate whom she addresses as \"Moon, orb of the night\" and \"triple form\". Hecate and the moon goddess Selene were frequently identified with each other and a number of Greek and non-Greek deities; the Greek Magical Papyri and other magical texts emphasize a syncretism between Selene-Hecate with Artemis and Persephone among others. In Italy, the triple unity of the lunar goddesses Diana (the huntress), Luna (the Moon) and Hecate (the underworld) became a ubiquitous feature in depictions of sacred groves, where Hecate/Trivia marked intersections and crossroads along with other liminal deities. The Romans celebrated enthusiastically the multiple identities of Diana as Hecate, Luna and Trivia.\nFrom her father Perses, Hecate is often called \"Perseis\" (meaning \"daughter of Perses\") which is also the name of one of the Oceanid nymphs, Helios\u2019 wife and Circe's mother in other versions. In one version of Hecate's parentage, she is the daughter of Perses not the son of Crius but the son of Helios, whose mother is the Oceanid Perse. Karl Kerenyi noted the similarity between the names, perhaps denoting a chthonic connection among the two and the goddess Persephone; it is possible that this epithet gives evidence of a lunar aspect of Hecate. Fowler also noted that the pairing (i. e. Helios and Perse) made sense given Hecate's association with the Moon. Mooney however notes that when it comes to the nymph Perse herself, there's no evidence of her actually being a moon goddess on her own right.\nCult.\nWorship of Hecate existed alongside other deities in major public shrines and temples in antiquity, and she had a significant role as household deity. Shrines to Hecate were often placed at doorways to homes, temples, and cities with the belief that it would protect from restless dead and other spirits. Home shrines often took the form of a small \"Hekataion\", a shrine centred on a wood or stone carving of a triple Hecate facing in three directions on three sides of a central pillar. Larger Hekataions, often enclosed within small walled areas, were sometimes placed at public crossroads near important sites \u2013 for example, there was one on the road leading to the Acropolis. Likewise, shrines to Hecate at three way crossroads were created where food offerings were left at the new Moon to protect those who did so from spirits and other evils. In Zerynthus there was a cave dedicated to Hecate.\nDogs were sacred to Hecate and associated with roads, domestic spaces, purification, and spirits of the dead. Dogs were also sacrificed to the road.\nThis can be compared to Pausanias' report that in the Ionian city of Colophon in Asia Minor a sacrifice of a black female puppy was made to Hecate as \"the wayside goddess\", and Plutarch's observation that in Boeotia dogs were killed in purificatory rites. Dogs, with puppies often mentioned, were offered to Hecate at crossroads, which were sacred to the goddess.\nHistory.\nThe earliest definitive record of Hecate's worship dates to the 6th century BCE, in the form of a small terracotta statue of a seated goddess, identified as Hecate in its inscription. This and other early depictions of Hecate lack distinctive attributes that would later be associated with her, such as a triple form or torches, and can only be identified as Hecate thanks to their inscriptions. Otherwise, they are typically generic, or Artemis-like.\nHecate's cult became established in Athens about 430\u00a0BCE. At this time, the sculptor Alcamenes made the earliest known triple-formed Hecate statue for use at her new temple. While this sculpture has not survived to the present day, numerous later copies are extant. It has been speculated that this triple image, usually situated around a pole or pillar, was derived from earlier representations of the goddess using three masks hung on actual wooden poles, possibly placed at crossroads and gateways.\nSanctuaries.\nHecate was a popular divinity, and her cult was practiced with many local variations all over Greece and Western Anatolia. Caria was a major center of worship and her most famous temple there was located in the town of Lagina. The oldest known direct evidence of Hecate's cult comes from Selinunte (near modern-day Trapani in Sicily), where she had a temple in the 6th\u20135th centuries BCE.\nThere was a Temple of Hecate in Argolis:Over against the sanctuary of Eileithyia is a temple of Hecate and the image is a work of Skopas. This one is of stone, while the bronze images opposite, also of Hecate, were made respectively by Polykleitos and his brother Naukydes. There was also a shrine to Hecate in Aigina, where she was very popular:\nOf the gods, the Aiginetans worship most Hecate, in whose honour every year they celebrate mystic rites which, they say, Orpheus the Thrakian established among them. Within the enclosure is a temple; its wooden image is the work of Myron, and it has one face and one body. It was Alkamenes, in my opinion, who first made three images of Hecate attached to one another [in Athens].\nAside from her own temples, Hecate was also worshipped in the sanctuaries of other gods, where she was apparently sometimes given her own space. A round stone altar dedicated to the goddess was found in the Delphinion (a temple dedicated to Apollo) at Miletus. Dated to the 7th century BCE, this is one of the oldest known artefacts dedicated to the worship of Hecate. In association with her worship alongside Apollo at Miletus, worshipers used a unique form of offering: they would place stone cubes, often wreathes, known as \u03b3\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9 (\"gylloi\") as protective offerings at the door or gateway. There was an area sacred to Hecate in the precincts of the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, where the priests, \"megabyzi\", officiated. This sanctuary was called \"Hecatesion\" (Shrine of Hecate). Hecate was also worshipped in the Temple of Athena in Titane: \"In Titane there is also a sanctuary of Athena, into which they bring up the image of Koronis [mother of Asklepios] ... The sanctuary is built upon a hill, at the bottom of which is an Altar of the Winds, and on it the priest sacrifices to the winds one night in every year. He also performs other secret rites [of Hecate] at four pits, taming the fierceness of the blasts [of the winds], and he is said to chant as well the charms of Medea.\" She was most commonly worshipped in nature, where she had many natural sanctuaries. An important sanctuary of Hecate was a holy cave on the island of Samothrake called Zerynthos:\nIn Samothrake there were certain initiation-rites, which they supposed efficacious as a charm against certain dangers. In that place were also the mysteries of the Korybantes [Kabeiroi] and those of Hekate and the Zerinthian cave, where they sacrificed dogs. The initiates supposed that these things save [them] from terrors and from storms.\nCult at Lagina.\nHecate's most important sanctuary was Lagina, a theocratic city-state in which the goddess was served by eunuchs.\nThe temple is mentioned by Strabo:\nStratonikeia [in Karia, Asia Minor] is a settlement of Makedonians ... There are two temples in the country of the Stratonikeians, of which the most famous, that of Hecate, is at Lagina; and it draws great festal assemblies every year.\nLagina, where the famous temple of Hecate drew great festal assemblies every year, lay close to the originally Macedonian colony of Stratonikeia, where she was the city's patron. In Thrace she played a role similar to that of lesser-Hermes, namely a ruler of liminal regions, particularly gates, and the wilderness.\nCult at Byzantium.\nHecate was greatly worshipped in Byzantium. She was said to have saved the city from Philip II of Macedon, warning the citizens of a night time attack by a light in the sky, for which she was known as \"Hecate Lampadephoros\". The tale is preserved in the Suda.\nAs Hecate Phosphorus (the 'star' Venus) she is said to have lit the sky during the Siege of Philip\u00a0II in 340\u00a0BCE, revealing the attack to its inhabitants. The Byzantines dedicated a statue to her as the \"lamp carrier\". According to Hesychius of Miletus there was once a statue of Hecate at the site of the Hippodrome in Constantinople.\nHecate's island.\nHecate's island (\u1f19\u03ba\u03ac\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2 \u03bd\u03ae\u03c3\u03bf\u03c5), also called Psamite (\u03a8\u03b1\u03bc\u03af\u03c4\u03b7), was an islet in the vicinity of Delos. It was called Psamite because Hecate was honoured with a cake, which was called psamiton (\u03c8\u03ac\u03bc\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd). The island is the modern Megalos (Great) Reumatiaris.\nDeipnon.\nThe Athenian Greeks honoured Hecate during the Deipnon. In Greek, deipnon means the evening meal, usually the largest meal of the day. Hecate's Deipnon is, at its most basic, a meal served to Hecate and the restless dead once a lunar month during the Dark Moon. On the night of the dark moon, a meal would be set outside, in a small shrine to Hecate by the front door; as the street in front of the house and the doorway create a crossroads, known to be a place Hecate dwelled. Food offerings might include cake or bread, fish, eggs and honey. The Deipnon is always followed the next day by the Noumenia, when the first sliver of the sunlit New Moon is visible, and then the Agathos Daimon the day after that.\nThe main purpose of the Deipnon was to honour Hecate and to placate the souls in her wake who \"longed for vengeance.\" A secondary purpose was to purify the household and to atone for bad deeds a household member may have committed that offended Hecate, causing her to withhold her favour from them. The Deipnon consists of three main parts: 1) the meal that was set out at a crossroads, usually in a shrine outside the entryway to the home 2) an expiation sacrifice, and 3) purification of the household.\nEpithets.\nHecate was known by a number of epithets:\nHistorical and literary sources.\nArchaic period.\nHecate has been characterized as a pre-Olympian chthonic goddess. The earliest literary source to mention Hecate is the \"Theogony\" (c.\u00a0700 BCE) of Hesiod:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And [Asteria] conceived and bore Hecate whom Zeus the son of Cronos honored above all. He gave her splendid gifts, to have a share of the earth and the unfruitful sea. She received honor also in starry heaven, and is honored exceedingly by the deathless gods. For to this day, whenever any one of men on earth offers rich sacrifices and prays for favor according to custom, he calls upon Hecate. Great honor comes full easily to him whose prayers the goddess receives favorably, and she bestows wealth upon him; for the power surely is with her. For as many as were born of Earth and Ocean amongst all these she has her due portion. The son of Cronos did her no wrong nor took anything away of all that was her portion among the former Titan gods: but she holds, as the division was at the first from the beginning, privilege both in earth, and in heaven, and in sea.\nAccording to Hesiod, she held sway over many things:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whom she will she greatly aids and advances: she sits by worshipful kings in judgement, and in the assembly whom she will is distinguished among the people. And when men arm themselves for the battle that destroys men, then the goddess is at hand to give victory and grant glory readily to whom she will. Good is she also when men contend at the games, for there too the goddess is with them and profits them: and he who by might and strength gets the victory wins the rich prize easily with joy, and brings glory to his parents. And she is good to stand by horsemen, whom she will: and to those whose business is in the grey discomfortable sea, and who pray to Hecate and the loud-crashing Earth-Shaker, easily the glorious goddess gives great catch, and easily she takes it away as soon as seen, if so she will. She is good in the byre with Hermes to increase the stock. The droves of kine and wide herds of goats and flocks of fleecy sheep, if she will, she increases from a few, or makes many to be less. So, then, albeit her mother's only child, she is honored amongst all the deathless gods. And the son of Cronos made her a nurse of the young who after that day saw with their eyes the light of all-seeing Dawn. So from the beginning she is a nurse of the young, and these are her honours.\nHesiod's inclusion and praise of Hecate in the \"Theogony\" has been troublesome for scholars, in that he seems to hold her in high regard, while the testimony of other writers, and surviving evidence, suggests that this may have been the exception. One theory is that Hesiod's original village had a substantial Hecate following and that his inclusion of her in the \"Theogony\" was a way of adding to her prestige by spreading word of her among his readers. Another theory is that Hecate was mainly a household god and humble household worship could have been more pervasive and yet not mentioned as much as temple worship. In Athens, Hecate, along with Zeus, Hermes, Athena, Hestia, and Apollo, were very important in daily life as they were the main gods of the household. However, it is clear that the special position given to Hecate by Zeus is upheld throughout her history by depictions found on coins of Hecate on the hand of Zeus as highlighted in more recent research presented by d'Este and Rankine.\nIn the Homeric Hymn to Demeter (composed c.\u00a0600 BCE), Hecate is called \"tender-hearted\", an epithet perhaps intended to emphasize her concern with the disappearance of Persephone, when she assisted Demeter with her search for Persephone following her abduction by Hades, suggesting that Demeter should speak to the god of the Sun, Helios. Subsequently, Hecate became Persephone's companion on her yearly journey to and from the realms of Hades, serving as a psychopomp. Because of this association, Hecate was one of the chief goddesses of the Eleusinian Mysteries, alongside Demeter and Persephone, and there was a temple dedicated to her near the main sanctuary at Eleusis.\nClassical period.\nVariations in interpretations of Hecate's roles can be traced in classical Athens. In two fragments of Aeschylus she appears as a great goddess. In Sophocles and Euripides she is characterized as the mistress of witchcraft and the Keres.\nOne surviving group of stories suggests how Hecate might have come to be incorporated into the Greek pantheon without affecting the privileged position of Artemis. Here, Hecate is a mortal priestess often associated with Iphigenia. She scorns and insults Artemis, who in retribution eventually brings about the mortal's suicide.\nIn the \"Argonautica\", a 3rd-century BCE Alexandrian epic based on early material, Jason placates Hecate in a ritual prescribed by Medea, her priestess: bathed at midnight in a stream of flowing water, and dressed in dark robes, Jason is to dig a round pit and over it cut the throat of a ewe, sacrificing it and then burning it whole on a pyre next to the pit as a holocaust. He is told to sweeten the offering with a libation of honey, then to retreat from the site without looking back, even if he hears the sound of footsteps or barking dogs. All these elements betoken the rites owed to a chthonic deity.\nHellenistic period to Late Antiquity.\nDuring the Gigantomachy, Hecate fought by the side of the Olympian gods, and slew the giant Clytius using her torches. Hecate is depicted fighting Clytius in the east frieze of the Gigantomachy, in the Pergamon Altar next to Artemis; she appears with a different weapon in each of her three right hands, a torch, a sword and a lance. Her fight with the Giant appears in a number of ancient vase paintings and other artwork.\nHecate is the primary feminine figure in the \"Chaldean Oracles\" (2nd\u20133rd century CE), where she is associated in fragment 194 with a \"strophalos\" (usually translated as a spinning top, or wheel, used in magic) \"Labour thou around the Strophalos of Hecate.\" This appears to refer to a variant of the device mentioned by Psellus.\nIn Hellenistic syncretism, Hecate also became closely associated with Isis. Lucius Apuleius in \"The Golden Ass\" (2nd century) equates Juno, Bellona, Hecate and Isis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some call me Juno, others Bellona of the Battles, and still others Hecate. Principally the Ethiopians which dwell in the Orient, and the Egyptians which are excellent in all kind of ancient doctrine, and by their proper ceremonies accustomed to worship me, do call me Queen Isis.\nIn the syncretism during Late Antiquity of Hellenistic and late Babylonian (\"Chaldean\") elements, Hecate was identified with Ereshkigal, the underworld counterpart of Inanna in the Babylonian cosmography. In the Michigan magical papyrus (inv. 7), dated to the late 3rd or early 4th century CE, \"Hecate Erschigal\" is invoked against fear of punishment in the afterlife. Schwemer believes that this use of Ereshkigal's name merely furnished \"the Greek Netherworld goddess with a mysterious-sounding, foreign name\".\nHecate is also referenced in the Gnostic text Pistis Sophia.\nParents, consorts and children.\nIn the earliest written source mentioning Hecate, Hesiod emphasized that she was an only child, the daughter of Perses and Asteria, the sister of Leto (the mother of Artemis and Apollo). Grandmother of the three cousins was Phoebe the ancient Titan goddess whose name was often used for the moon goddess. In various later accounts, Hecate was given different parents. She was said to be the daughter of Zeus by either Asteria, according to Musaeus, Hera, thus identified with Angelos, or Pheraea, daughter of Aeolus; the daughter of Aristaeus the son of Paion, according to Pherecydes; the daughter of Nyx, according to Bacchylides; the daughter of Perses, the son of Helios, by an unknown mother, according to Diodorus Siculus; while in Orphic literature, she was said to be the daughter of Demeter or Leto or even Tartarus.\nAs a virgin goddess, she remained unmarried and had no regular consort, though some traditions named her as the mother of Scylla through either Phorbas or Phorcys.\nSometimes she is also stated to be the mother (by Ae\u00ebtes) of the goddess Circe and the sorceress Medea, who in later accounts was herself associated with magic while initially just being a herbalist goddess, similar to how Hecate's association with Underworld and Mysteries had her later converted into a deity of witchcraft.\nOnce, Hermes chased Hecate (or Persephone) with the aim to rape her; but the goddess snored or roared in anger, frightening him off so that he desisted, hence her earning the name \"Brimo\" (\"angry\").\nLegacy.\nStrmiska (2005) claimed that Hecate, conflated with the figure of Diana, appears in late antiquity and in the Early Middle Ages as part of an \"emerging legend complex\" known as \"The Society of Diana\" associated with gatherings of women, the Moon, and witchcraft that eventually became established \"in the area of Northern Italy, southern Germany, and the western Balkans.\" This theory of the Roman origins of many European folk traditions related to Diana or Hecate was explicitly advanced at least as early as 1807 and is reflected in etymological claims by early modern lexicographers from the 17th to the 19th century, connecting \"hag, hexe\" \"witch\" to the name of Hecate. Such derivations are today proposed only by a minority\nA medieval commentator has suggested a link connecting the word \"jinx\" with Hecate: \"The Byzantine polymath Michael Psellus [...] speaks of a bullroarer, consisting of a golden sphere, decorated throughout with symbols and whirled on an oxhide thong. He adds that such an instrument is called a \"iunx\" (hence \"jinx\"), but as for the significance says only that it is ineffable and that the ritual is sacred to Hecate.\"\nShakespeare mentions Hecate both before the end of the 16th century (\"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", 1594\u20131596), and just after, in \"Macbeth\" (1605): specifically, in the title character's \"dagger\" soliloquy: \"Witchcraft celebrates pale Hecate's offerings...\"\nShakespeare mentions Hecate also in \"King Lear\". While disclaiming all his paternal care for Cordelia, Lear says, \"The mysteries of Hecate and the night,\nBy all the operations of the orbs\nFrom whom we do exist and cease to be,\nHere I disclaim all my paternal care\" (The Arden Shakespeare, King Lear, p.\u00a0165)\nModern reception.\nIn 1929, Lewis Brown, an expert on religious cults, connected the 1920s Blackburn Cult (also known as, \"The Cult of the Great Eleven,\") with Hecate worship rituals. He noted that the cult regularly practiced dog sacrifice and had secretly buried the body of one of its \"queens\" with seven dogs. Researcher Samuel Fort noted additional parallels, to include the cult's focus on mystic and typically nocturnal rites, its female dominated membership, the sacrifice of other animals (to include horses and mules), a focus on the mystical properties of roads and portals, and an emphasis on death, healing, and resurrection.\nAs a \"goddess of witchcraft\", Hecate has been incorporated in various systems of Neopagan witchcraft, Wicca, and neopaganism, in some cases associated with the Wild Hunt of Germanic tradition, in others as part of a reconstruction of specifically Greek polytheism, in English also known as \"Hellenismos\". In Wicca, Hecate has in some cases become identified with the \"crone\" aspect of the \"Triple Goddess\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14373", "revid": "156441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14373", "title": "Haematopoietic stem cell", "text": ""}
{"id": "14374", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14374", "title": "Haematopoiesis", "text": "Formation of blood cellular components\nHaematopoiesis (; from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'blood' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'to make'; also hematopoiesis in American English, sometimes h(a)emopoiesis) is the formation of blood cellular components. All cellular blood components are derived from haematopoietic stem cells.&lt;ref name=\"Birbrair n/a\u2013n/a\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In a healthy adult human, roughly ten billion (1010) to a hundred billion (1011) new blood cells are produced per day, in order to maintain steady state levels in the peripheral circulation.\nProcess.\nHaematopoietic stem cells (HSCs).\nHaematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) reside in the medulla of the bone (bone marrow) and have the unique ability to give rise to all of the different mature blood cell types and tissues. HSCs are self-renewing cells: when they differentiate, at least some of their daughter cells remain as HSCs so the pool of stem cells is not depleted. This phenomenon is called asymmetric division. The other daughters of HSCs (myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells) can follow any of the other differentiation pathways that lead to the production of one or more specific types of blood cell, but cannot renew themselves. The pool of progenitors is heterogeneous and can be divided into two groups; long-term self-renewing HSC and only transiently self-renewing HSC, also called short-terms. This is one of the main vital processes in the body.\nCell types.\nAll blood cells are divided into three lineages.\nGranulopoiesis (or granulocytopoiesis) is haematopoiesis of granulocytes, except mast cells which are granulocytes but with an extramedullar maturation.\nThrombopoiesis is haematopoiesis of thrombocytes (platelets).\nTerminology.\nBetween 1948 and 1950, the Committee for Clarification of the Nomenclature of Cells and Diseases of the Blood and Blood-forming Organs issued reports on the nomenclature of blood cells. An overview of the terminology is shown below, from earliest to final stage of development:\nThe root for erythrocyte colony-forming units (CFU-E) is \"rubri\", for granulocyte-monocyte colony-forming units (CFU-GM) is \"granulo\" or \"myelo\" and \"mono\", for lymphocyte colony-forming units (CFU-L) is \"lympho\" and for megakaryocyte colony-forming units (CFU-Meg) is \"megakaryo\". According to this terminology, the stages of red blood cell formation would be: rubriblast, prorubricyte, rubricyte, metarubricyte, and erythrocyte. However, the following nomenclature seems to be, at present, the most prevalent:\nOsteoclasts also arise from hemopoietic cells of the monocyte/neutrophil lineage, specifically CFU-GM.\nLocation.\nIn developing embryos, blood formation occurs in aggregates of blood cells in the yolk sac, called blood islands. As development progresses, blood formation occurs in the spleen, liver and lymph nodes. When bone marrow develops, it eventually assumes the task of forming most of the blood cells for the entire organism. However, maturation, activation, and some proliferation of lymphoid cells occurs in the spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes. In children, haematopoiesis occurs in the marrow of the long bones such as the femur and tibia. In adults, it occurs mainly in the pelvis, cranium, vertebrae, and sternum.\nExtramedullary.\nIn some cases, the liver, thymus, and spleen may resume their haematopoietic function, if necessary. This is called \"extramedullary haematopoiesis\". It may cause these organs to increase in size substantially. During fetal development, since bones and thus the bone marrow develop later, the liver functions as the main haematopoietic organ. Therefore, the liver is enlarged during development. Extramedullary haematopoiesis and myelopoiesis may supply leukocytes in cardiovascular disease and inflammation during adulthood. Splenic macrophages and adhesion molecules may be involved in regulation of extramedullary myeloid cell generation in cardiovascular disease.\nMaturation.\nAs a stem cell matures it undergoes changes in gene expression that limit the cell types that it can become and moves it closer to a specific cell type (cellular differentiation). These changes can often be tracked by monitoring the presence of proteins on the surface of the cell. Each successive change moves the cell closer to the final cell type and further limits its potential to become a different cell type.\nCell fate determination.\nTwo models for haematopoiesis have been proposed: determinism and stochastic theory. For the stem cells and other undifferentiated blood cells in the bone marrow, the determination is generally explained by the \"determinism\" theory of haematopoiesis, saying that colony stimulating factors and other factors of the haematopoietic microenvironment determine the cells to follow a certain path of cell differentiation. This is the classical way of describing haematopoiesis. In \"stochastic\" \"theory,\" undifferentiated blood cells differentiate to specific cell types by randomness. This theory has been supported by experiments showing that within a population of mouse haematopoietic progenitor cells, underlying stochastic variability in the distribution of Sca-1, a stem cell factor, subdivides the population into groups exhibiting variable rates of cellular differentiation. For example, under the influence of erythropoietin (an erythrocyte-differentiation factor), a subpopulation of cells (as defined by the levels of Sca-1) differentiated into erythrocytes at a sevenfold higher rate than the rest of the population. Furthermore, it was shown that if allowed to grow, this subpopulation re-established the original subpopulation of cells, supporting the theory that this is a stochastic, reversible process. Another level at which stochasticity may be important is in the process of apoptosis and self-renewal. In this case, the haematopoietic microenvironment prevails upon some of the cells to survive and some, on the other hand, to perform apoptosis and die. By regulating this balance between different cell types, the bone marrow can alter the quantity of different cells to ultimately be produced.\nGrowth factors.\nRed and white blood cell production is regulated with great precision in healthy humans, and the production of leukocytes is rapidly increased during infection. The proliferation and self-renewal of these cells depend on growth factors. One of the key players in self-renewal and development of haematopoietic cells is stem cell factor (SCF), which binds to the c-kit receptor on the HSC. Absence of SCF is lethal. There are other important glycoprotein growth factors which regulate the proliferation and maturation, such as interleukins IL-2, IL-3, IL-6, IL-7. Other factors, termed colony-stimulating factors (CSFs), specifically stimulate the production of committed cells. Three CSFs are granulocyte-macrophage CSF (GM-CSF), granulocyte CSF (G-CSF) and macrophage CSF (M-CSF). These stimulate granulocyte formation and are active on either progenitor cells or end product cells.\nErythropoietin is required for a myeloid progenitor cell to become an erythrocyte. On the other hand, thrombopoietin makes myeloid progenitor cells differentiate to megakaryocytes (thrombocyte-forming cells). The diagram to the right provides examples of cytokines and the differentiated blood cells they give rise to.\nTranscription factors.\nGrowth factors initiate signal transduction pathways, which lead to activation of transcription factors. Growth factors elicit different outcomes depending on the combination of factors and the cell's stage of differentiation. For example, long-term expression of PU.1 results in myeloid commitment, and short-term induction of PU.1 activity leads to the formation of immature eosinophils. Recently, it was reported that transcription factors such as NF-\u03baB can be regulated by microRNAs (e.g., miR-125b) in haematopoiesis.\nThe first key player of differentiation from HSC to a multipotent progenitor (MPP) is transcription factor CCAAT-enhancer binding protein \u03b1 (C/EBP\u03b1). Mutations in C/EBP\u03b1 are associated with acute myeloid leukaemia. From this point, cells can either differentiate along the Erythroid-megakaryocyte lineage or lymphoid and myeloid lineage, which have common progenitor, called lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor. There are two main transcription factors. PU.1 for Erythroid-megakaryocyte lineage and GATA-1, which leads to a lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor.\nOther transcription factors include Ikaros (B cell development), and Gfi1 (promotes Th2 development and inhibits Th1) or IRF8 (basophils and mast cells). Significantly, certain factors elicit different responses at different stages in the haematopoiesis. For example, CEBP\u03b1 in neutrophil development or PU.1 in monocytes and dendritic cell development. It is important to note that processes are not unidirectional: differentiated cells may regain attributes of progenitor cells.\nAn example is PAX5 factor, which is important in B cell development and associated with lymphomas. Surprisingly, pax5 conditional knock out mice allowed peripheral mature B cells to de-differentiate to early bone marrow progenitors. These findings show that transcription factors act as caretakers of differentiation level and not only as initiators.\nMutations in transcription factors are tightly connected to blood cancers, as acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). For example, Ikaros is known to be regulator of numerous biological events. Mice with no Ikaros lack B cells, Natural killer and T cells. Ikaros has six zinc fingers domains, four are conserved DNA-binding domain and two are for dimerization. Very important finding is, that different zinc fingers are involved in binding to different place in DNA and this is the reason for pleiotropic effect of Ikaros and different involvement in cancer, but mainly are mutations associated with BCR-Abl patients and it is bad prognostic marker.\nOther animals.\nIn some vertebrates, haematopoiesis can occur wherever there is a loose stroma of connective tissue and slow blood supply, such as the gut, spleen or kidney.\nUnlike eutherian mammals, the liver of newborn marsupials is actively haematopoietic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14375", "revid": "1318004612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14375", "title": "Hogmanay", "text": "Scottish celebration of New Year\nHogmanay ( , ) is the Scots word for the last day of the old year and is synonymous with the celebration of the New Year in the Scottish manner. It is normally followed by further celebration on the morning of New Year's Day (1 January) and, in some cases, 2 January\u2014a Scottish bank holiday. In a few contexts, the word Hogmanay is used more loosely to describe the entire period consisting of the last few days of the old year and the first few days of the new year. For instance, not all events held under the banner of Edinburgh's Hogmanay take place on 31st of December.\nCustoms vary throughout Scotland and usually include gift-giving and visiting the homes of friends and neighbours, with particular attention given to the first-foot, the first guest of the new year.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word is obscure. The earliest proposed etymology comes from the 1693 \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\", which held that the term was a corruption of a presumed () and that this meant \"holy month\". The three main modern theories derive it from a French, Norse or Gaelic root.\nThe word is first recorded in a Latin entry in 1443 in the West Riding of Yorkshire as . The first appearance in Scots language came in 1604 in the records of Elgin, as \"hagmonay\". Subsequent 17th-century spellings include \"Hagmena\" (1677), \"Hogmynae night\" (1681), and \"Hagmane\" (1693) in an entry of the \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\".\nAlthough \"Hogmanay\" is currently the predominant spelling and pronunciation, several variant spellings and pronunciations have been recorded, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nwith the first syllable variously being , , , or .\nPossible French etymologies.\nThe term may have been introduced to Middle Scots via French. The most commonly cited explanation is a derivation from the northern French dialectal word , or variants such as , and , those being derived from 16th-century Middle French meaning either a gift given at New Year, a children's cry for such a gift, or New Year's Eve itself. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" reports this theory, saying that the term is a borrowing of , a medieval French cry used to welcome the new year consisting of an unknown first element plus \"\" (\"the new year\").\nThis explanation is supported by a children's tradition, observed up to the 1960s in parts of Scotland at least, of visiting houses in their locality on New Year's Eve and requesting and receiving small treats such as sweets or fruit. The second element would appear to be ('the New Year'), with sources suggesting a druidical origin of the practice overall. Compare those to Norman and the obsolete customs in Jersey of crying , and in Guernsey of asking for an , for a New Year gift (see also ). In Qu\u00e9bec, was a door-to-door collection for people experiencing poverty.\nCompare also the apparent Spanish cognate /, with a suggested Latin derivation of \"in this year\".\nOther suggestions include (\"lead to the mistletoe\"), ('bring to the beggars'), ('at the mistletoe the new year', or ('(the) man is born').\nPossible Goidelic etymologies.\nThe word may have come from the Goidelic languages. Frazer and Kelley report a Manx new-year song that begins with the line \"To-night is New Year's Night, Hogunnaa\" but did not record the full text in Manx. Kelley himself uses the spelling whereas other sources parse this as and give the modern Manx form as \"Hob dy naa\". Manx dictionaries though give (), generally glossing it as \"Hallowe'en\", same as many of the more Manx-specific folklore collections.\nIn this context, it is also recorded that in the south of Scotland (for example Roxburghshire), there is no \u27e8m\u27e9, the word thus being \"Hunganay\", which could suggest the \u27e8m\u27e9 is intrusive.\nAnother theory occasionally encountered is a derivation from the phrase (, \"I raised the cry\"), which resembles \"Hogmanay\" in pronunciation and was part of the rhymes traditionally recited at New Year but it is unclear if this is simply a case of folk etymology.\nOverall, Gaelic consistently refers to the New Year's Eve as (\"the Night of the New Year\") and (\"the Night of the Calends\").\nPossible Norse etymologies.\nOther authors reject both the French and Goidelic theories and instead suggest that the ultimate source for this word's Norman French, Scots, and Goidelic variants have a common Norse root. It is suggested that the full forms\ninvoke the hill-men (Icelandic , compare Anglo-Saxon ) or \"elves\" and banishes the trolls into the sea (Norse 'into the sea'). Repp furthermore links \"Trollalay/Trolla-laa\" and the rhyme recorded in \"Percy's Relics\": \"Trolle on away, trolle on awaye. Synge heave and howe rombelowe trolle on away\", which he reads as a straightforward invocation of troll-banning.\nOrigins.\nIt is speculated that the roots of Hogmanay may reach back to the celebration of the winter solstice among the Norse, as well as incorporating customs from the Gaelic celebration of Samhain. The Vikings celebrated Yule, which later contributed to the Twelve Days of Christmas, or the \"Daft Days\" as they were sometimes called in Scotland. Christmas was not celebrated as a festival, and Hogmanay was the more traditional celebration in Scotland. This may have been a result of the Protestant Reformation after which Christmas was seen as \"too Papist\".\nHogmanay was also celebrated in the north of England, down to and including Richmond in North Yorkshire. It was traditionally known as 'Hagmena' in Northumberland, 'Hogmina' in Cumberland, and 'Hagman-ha' or 'Hagman-heigh' in the North Riding of Yorkshire.\nCustoms.\nThere are many customs, both national and local, associated with Hogmanay. The most widespread national custom is the practice of first-footing, which starts immediately after midnight. This involves being the first person to cross the threshold of a friend or neighbour and often involves the giving of symbolic gifts such as salt (less common today), coal, shortbread, whisky, and black bun (a rich fruit cake), intended to bring different kinds of luck to the householder. Food and drink (as the gifts) are then given to the guests. This may go on throughout the early morning hours and into the next day (although modern days see people visiting houses well into the middle of January). The first-foot is supposed to set the luck for the rest of the year. Traditionally, tall, dark-haired men are preferred as the first-foot.\nLocal customs.\nAn example of a local Hogmanay custom is the fireball swinging that takes place in Stonehaven, Aberdeenshire, in northeast Scotland. This involves local people making up \"balls\" of chicken wire filled with old newspaper, sticks, rags, and other dry flammable material up to a diameter of , each attached to about of wire, chain or nonflammable rope. As the Old Town House bell sounds to mark the new year, the balls are set alight, and the swingers set off up the High Street from the Mercat Cross to the Cannon and back, swinging the burning balls around their heads as they go.\nAt the end of the ceremony, fireballs still burning are cast into the harbour. Many people enjoy this display, and large crowds flock to see it, with 12,000 attending the 2007/2008 event. In recent years, additional attractions have been added to entertain the crowds as they wait for midnight, such as fire poi, a pipe band, street drumming, and a firework display after the last fireball is cast into the sea. The festivities are now streamed live over the Internet. \nAnother example of a fire festival is the burning the clavie in the town of Burghead in Moray.\nIn the east coast fishing communities and Dundee, first-footers once carried a decorated herring. And in Falkland in Fife, local men marched in torchlight procession to the top of the Lomond Hills as midnight approached. Bakers in St Andrews baked special cakes for their Hogmanay celebration (known as \"Cake Day\") and distributed them to local children.\nInstitutions also had their own traditions. For example, amongst the Scottish regiments, officers waited on the men at special dinners while at the bells, the Old Year is piped out of barrack gates. The sentry then challenges the new escort outside the gates: \"Who goes there?\" The answer is \"The New Year, all's well.\"\nAn old custom in the Highlands is to celebrate Hogmanay with the \"saining\" (Scots for 'protecting, blessing') of the household and livestock. Early on New Year's morning, householders drink and then sprinkle 'magic water' from 'a dead and living ford' around the house (a 'dead and living ford' refers to a river ford that is routinely crossed by both the living and the dead). After the sprinkling of the water in every room, on the beds and all the inhabitants, the house is sealed up tight and branches of juniper are set on fire and carried throughout the house and byre. The juniper smoke is allowed to thoroughly fumigate the buildings until it causes sneezing and coughing among the inhabitants. Then, all the doors and windows are flung open to let in the cold, fresh air of the new year. The woman of the house then administers 'a restorative' from the whisky bottle, and the household sits down to its New Year breakfast.\n\"Auld Lang Syne\".\nThe Hogmanay custom of singing \"Auld Lang Syne\" has become common in many countries. \"Auld Lang Syne\" is a Scots poem by Robert Burns, based on traditional and other earlier sources. It is common to sing this in a circle of linked arms crossed over one another as the clock strikes midnight for New Year's Day. However, it is only intended that participants link arms at the beginning of the final verse before rushing into the centre as a group.\nIn the media.\nBetween 1957 and 1968, a New Year's Eve television programme, \"The White Heather Club\", was presented to herald the Hogmanay celebrations.\nThe show was presented by Andy Stewart, who always began by singing, \"Come in, come in, it's nice to see you...\" The show always ended with Stewart and the cast singing, \"Haste ye Back\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Haste ye back, we loue you dearly,\nCall again you're welcome here.\nMay your days be free from sorrow,\nAnd your friends be ever near.\nMay the paths o'er which you wander,\nBe to you a joy each day.\nHaste ye back we loue you dearly,\nHaste ye back on friendship's way.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe performers were Jimmy Shand and band, Ian Powrie and his band, Scottish country dancers: Dixie Ingram and the Dixie Ingram Dancers, Joe Gordon Folk Four, James Urquhart, Ann &amp; Laura Brand, Moira Anderson &amp; Kenneth McKellar. All the male dancers and Andy Stewart wore kilts, and the female dancers wore long white dresses with tartan sashes.\nFollowing the demise of the \"White Heather Club\", Andy Stewart continued to feature regularly in TV Hogmanay shows until his retirement. His last appearance was in 1992.\nIn the 1980s, comedian Andy Cameron presented the \"Hogmanay Show\" (on STV in 1983 and 1984 and from 1985 to 1990 on BBC Scotland) while Peter Morrison presented the show \"A Highland Hogmanay\" on STV/Grampian, axed in 1993.\nFor many years, a staple of New Year's Eve television programming in Scotland was the comedy sketch show \"Scotch and Wry\", featuring the comedian Rikki Fulton, which invariably included a hilarious monologue from him as the gloomy Reverend I.M. Jolly.\nSince 1993, the programmes that have been mainstays on BBC Scotland on Hogmanay have been \"Hogmanay Live\" and Jonathan Watson's football-themed sketch comedy show, \"Only an Excuse?\".\nPresbyterian influence.\nThe 1693 \"Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence\" contained one of the first mentions of the holiday in official church records. Hogmanay was treated with general disapproval. Still, in Scotland, Hogmanay and New Year's Day are as important as Christmas Eve and Christmas Day.\nAlthough Christmas Day held its normal religious nature in Scotland amongst its Catholic and Episcopalian communities, the Presbyterian national church, the Church of Scotland, discouraged the celebration of Christmas for nearly 400 years; it only became a public holiday in Scotland in 1958. Conversely, 1 and 2 January are public holidays, and Hogmanay is still associated with as much celebration as Christmas in Scotland.\nMajor celebrations.\nAs in much of the world, the largest Scottish cities \u2013 Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen \u2013 hold all-night celebrations, as do Stirling and Inverness. The Edinburgh Hogmanay celebrations are among the largest in the world. Celebrations in Edinburgh in 1996\u201397 were recognised by the \"Guinness Book of Records\" as the world's largest New Years party, with approximately 400,000 people in attendance. Numbers were then restricted due to safety concerns.\nIn 2003-4, most organised events were cancelled at short notice due to very high winds. The Stonehaven Fireballs went ahead as planned, however, with 6,000 people braving the stormy weather to watch 42 fireball swingers process along the High Street. Similarly, the 2006\u201307 celebrations in Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Stirling were all cancelled on the day, again due to high winds and heavy rain. The Aberdeen celebration, however, went ahead and was opened by pop music group Wet Wet Wet.\nMany Hogmanay festivities were cancelled in 2020\u201321 and 2021\u201322 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Scotland.\nThe Edinburgh event was also cancelled in 2024-25 due to high winds.\nNe'erday.\nSome Scots celebrate New Year's Day with a special dinner, usually steak pie.\nHandsel Day.\nHistorically, presents were given in Scotland on the first Monday of the New Year. A roast dinner would be eaten to celebrate the festival. \"Handsel\" was a word for gift and hence \"Handsel Day\". In modern Scotland, this practice has died out.\nThe period of festivities running from Christmas to Handsel Monday, including Hogmanay and Ne'erday, is known as the Daft Days.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14376", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14376", "title": "Hamster", "text": "Subfamily of rodents (Cricetinae)\nHamsters are rodents (order Rodentia) belonging to the subfamily Cricetinae, which contains 19 species classified in seven genera. They have become established as popular small pets. The best-known species of hamster is the golden or Syrian hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\"), which is the type most commonly kept as a pet. Other hamster species commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster, Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus campbelli\"), the winter white dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus sungorus\") and the Roborovski hamster (\"Phodopus roborovskii\"), and the less common Chinese hamster (\"Cricetulus griseus\").\nHamsters feed primarily on seeds, fruits, vegetation, and occasionally burrowing insects. In the wild, they are crepuscular: they forage during the twilight hours. In captivity, however, they are known to live a conventionally nocturnal lifestyle, waking around sundown to feed and exercise. Physically, they are stout-bodied with distinguishing features that include elongated cheek pouches extending to their shoulders, which they use to carry food back to their burrows, as well as a short tail and fur-covered feet.\nClassification.\nTaxonomists generally disagree about the most appropriate placement of the subfamily Cricetinae within the superfamily Muroidea. Some place it in a family Cricetidae that also includes voles, lemmings, and New World rats and mice; others group all these into a large family called Muridae. Their evolutionary history is recorded by 15 extinct fossil genera and extends back 11.2 million to 16.4 million years to the Middle Miocene Epoch in Europe and North Africa; in Asia it extends 6 million to 11 million years. Four of the seven living genera include extinct species. One extinct hamster of \"Cricetus\", for example, lived in North Africa during the Middle Miocene, but the only extant member of that genus is the European or common hamster of Eurasia.\nRelationships among hamster species.\nNeumann \"et al.\" (2006) conducted a molecular phylogenetic analysis of 12 of the above 17 species using DNA sequence from three genes: 12S rRNA, cytochrome b, and von Willebrand factor. They uncovered the following relationships:\n\"Phodopus\" group.\nThe genus \"Phodopus\" was found to represent the earliest split among hamsters. Their analysis included both species. The results of another study suggest \"Urocricetus kamensis\" and the related \"U. alticola\" belong to either this \"Phodopus\" group or hold a similar basal position.\n\"Mesocricetus\" group.\nThe genus \"Mesocricetus\" also forms a clade. Their analysis included all four species, with \"M. auratus\" and \"M. raddei\" forming one subclade and \"M. brandti\" and \"M. newtoni\" another.\nRemaining genera.\nThe remaining genera of hamsters formed a third major clade. Two of the three sampled species within \"Cricetulus\" represent the earliest split. This clade contains \"C. barabensis\" (and presumably the related \"C. sokolovi\") and \"C. longicaudatus\".\nMiscellaneous.\nThe remaining clade contains members of \"Allocricetulus\", \"Tscherskia\", \"Cricetus\", and \"C. migratorius\". \"Allocricetulus\" and \"Cricetus\" were sister taxa. \"Cricetulus migratorius\" was their next closest relative, and \"Tscherskia\" was basal.\nHistory.\nAlthough the Syrian hamster or golden hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\") was first described scientifically by George Robert Waterhouse in 1839, researchers were not able to successfully breed and domesticate hamsters until 1939. The entire laboratory and pet populations of Syrian hamsters appear to be descendants of a single brother\u2013sister pairing. These littermates were captured and imported in 1930 from Aleppo in Syria by Israel Aharoni, a zoologist of the University of Jerusalem. In Jerusalem, the hamsters bred very successfully. Years later, animals of this original breeding colony were exported to the United States, where Syrian hamsters became a common pet and laboratory animal. Comparative studies of domestic and wild Syrian hamsters have shown reduced genetic variability in the domestic strain. However, the differences in behavioral, chronobiological, morphometrical, hematological, and biochemical parameters are relatively small and fall into the expected range of interstrain variations in other laboratory animals.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"hamster\" is a loanword from the German, which itself derives from earlier Middle High German . It is possibly related to Old Church Slavonic , which is either a blend of the root of Russian () \"hamster\" and a Baltic word (cf. \"hamster\"); or of Persian origin (cf. Avestan: \"oppressor\"). The collective noun for a group of hamsters is \"horde\". In German, the verb is derived from . It means \"to hoard\".\nDescription.\nHamsters are typically stout-bodied, with tails shorter than body length, and have small, furry ears, short, stocky legs, and wide feet. They have thick, silky fur, which can be long or short, colored black, grey, honey, white, brown, yellow, red, or a mix, depending on the species. Two species of hamster belonging to the genus \"Phodopus\", Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"P. campbelli\") and the Djungarian hamster (\"P. sungorus\"), and two of the genus \"Cricetulus\", the Chinese striped hamster (\"C. barabensis\") and the Chinese hamster (\"C. griseus\") have a dark stripe down their heads to their tails. The species of genus \"Phodopus\" are the smallest, with bodies long; the largest is the European hamster (\"Cricetus cricetus\"), measuring up to long, not including a short tail of up to .\nThe hamster tail can be difficult to see, as it is usually not very long (about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446 the length of the body), with the exception of the Chinese hamster, which has a tail the same length as the body. One rodent characteristic that can be highly visible in hamsters is their sharp incisors; they have an upper pair and lower pair which grow continuously throughout life, so must be regularly worn down. Hamsters are very flexible, but their bones are somewhat fragile. They are extremely susceptible to rapid temperature changes and drafts, as well as extreme heat or cold.\nSenses.\nHamsters have poor eyesight; they are nearsighted and colorblind. Their eyesight leads to them not having a good sense of distance or knowing where they are, but that does not stop them from climbing in (and sometimes out of) their cages or from being adventurous. Hamsters can sense movement around at all times, which helps protect them from harm in the wild. In a household, this sense helps them know when their owner is near. Hamsters have scent glands on their flanks (and abdomens in Chinese and dwarf hamsters) which they rub against the surface beneath them, leaving a scent trail. Hamsters also use their sense of smell to distinguish between the sexes and to locate food. Mother hamsters can also use their sense of smell to find their own babies and identify which ones are not theirs. Their scent glands can also be used to mark their territories, their babies, or their mate. Hamsters catch sounds by having their ears upright. They tend to learn similar noises and begin to know the sound of their food and even their owner's voice. They are also particularly sensitive to high-pitched noises and can hear and communicate in the ultrasonic range.\nDiet.\nHamsters are omnivores, which means they can eat meat and plant matter. Hamsters that live in the wild eat seeds, grass, and even insects. Although pet hamsters can survive on a diet of exclusively commercial hamster food, other items, such as vegetables, fruits, seeds, and nuts, can be given. Although store-bought food is good for hamsters, it is best if fruits and vegetables are also in their diet because it keeps them healthier. Hamsters in the Middle East have been known to hunt in packs to find insects for food. Hamsters are hindgut fermenters and often eat their own feces (coprophagy) to recover nutrients digested in the hind-gut, but not absorbed.\nBehavior.\nFeeding.\nA behavioral characteristic of hamsters is food hoarding. They carry food in their spacious cheek pouches to their underground storage chambers. When full, the cheeks can make their heads double, or even triple in size. Hamsters lose weight during the autumn months in anticipation of winter. This occurs even when hamsters are kept as pets and is related to an increase in exercise.\nSocial behavior.\nMost hamsters are strictly solitary. If housed together, acute and chronic stress might occur, and they might fight fiercely, sometimes fatally. Dwarf hamster species might tolerate siblings or same-gender unrelated hamsters if introduced at an early enough age, but this cannot be guaranteed. Hamsters communicate through body language to one another and even to their owner. They communicate by sending a specific scent using their scent glands and also show body language to express how they are feeling.\nChronobiology.\nHamsters can be described as nocturnal or crepuscular (active mostly at dawn and dusk). Khunen writes, \"Hamsters are nocturnal rodents who are active during the night\", but others have written that because hamsters live underground during most of the day, only leaving their burrows for about an hour before sundown and then returning when it gets dark, their behavior is primarily crepuscular. Fritzsche indicated although some species have been observed to show more nocturnal activity than others, they are all primarily crepuscular.\nIn the wild Syrian hamsters can hibernate and allow their body temperature to fall close to ambient temperature. This kind of thermoregulation diminishes the metabolic rate to about 5% and helps the animal to considerably reduce the need for food during the winter. Hibernation can last up to one week but more commonly last 2\u20133 days. When kept as house pets the Syrian hamster does not hibernate.\nBurrowing behavior.\nAll hamsters are excellent diggers, constructing burrows with one or more entrances, with galleries connected to chambers for nesting, food storage, and other activities. They use their fore- and hindlegs, as well as their snouts and teeth, for digging. In the wild, the burrow buffers extreme ambient temperatures, offers relatively stable climatic conditions, and protects against predators. Syrian hamsters dig their burrows generally at a depth of . A burrow includes a steep entrance pipe ( in diameter), a nesting and a hoarding chamber and a blind-ending branch for urination. Laboratory hamsters have not lost their ability to dig burrows; in fact, they will do this with great vigor and skill if they are provided with the appropriate substrate.\nWild hamsters will also appropriate tunnels made by other mammals; the Djungarian hamster, for instance, uses paths and burrows of the pika.\nReproduction.\nFertility.\nHamsters become fertile at different ages depending on their species. Both Syrian and Russian hamsters mature quickly and can begin reproducing at a young age (4\u20135 weeks), whereas Chinese hamsters will usually begin reproducing at two to three months of age, and Roborovskis at three to four months of age. The female's reproductive life lasts about 18 months, but male hamsters remain fertile much longer. Females are in estrus about every four days, which is indicated by a reddening of genital areas, a musky smell, and a hissing, squeaking vocalisation she will emit if she believes a male is nearby.\nWhen seen from above, a sexually mature female hamster has a trim tail line; a male's tail line bulges on both sides. This might not be very visible in all species. Male hamsters typically have very large testes in relation to their body size. Before sexual maturity occurs, it is more difficult to determine a young hamster's sex. When examined, female hamsters have their anal and genital openings close together, whereas males have these two holes farther apart (the penis is usually withdrawn into the coat and thus appears as a hole or pink pimple).\nGestation and fecundity.\nSyrian hamsters are seasonal breeders and will produce several litters a year with several pups in each litter. The breeding season is from April to October in the Northern Hemisphere, with two to five litters of one to 13 young being born after a gestation period of 16 to 23 days. Dwarf hamsters breed all through the year. Gestation lasts 16 to 18 days for Syrian hamsters, 18 to 21 days for Russian hamsters, 21 to 23 days for Chinese hamsters and 23 to 30 for Roborovski hamsters. The average litter size for Syrian hamsters is about seven pups, but can be as great as 24, which is the maximum number of pups that can be contained in the uterus. Campbell's dwarf hamsters tend to have four to eight pups in a litter, but can have up to 13. Winter white hamsters tend to have slightly smaller litters, as do Chinese and Roborovski hamsters.\nIntersexual aggression and cannibalism.\nFemale Chinese and Syrian hamsters are known for being aggressive toward males if kept together for too long after mating. In some cases, male hamsters can die after being attacked by a female. If breeding hamsters, separation of the pair after mating is recommended, or they will attack each other.\nFemale hamsters are also particularly sensitive to disturbances while giving birth, and may even eat their own young if they think they are in danger, although sometimes they are just carrying the pups in their cheek pouches. If captive female hamsters are left for extended periods (three weeks or more) with their litter, they may cannibalize the litter, so the litter must be removed by the time the young can feed and drink independently.\nWeaning.\nHamsters are born hairless and blind in a nest the mother will have prepared in advance. After one week, they begin to explore outside the nest. Hamsters are capable of producing litters every month. Hamsters can be bred after they are three weeks old. It may be hard for the babies to not rely on their mother for nursing during this time, so it is important that they are supplied with food to make the transition from nursing to eating on their own easier. After the hamsters reach three weeks of age they are considered mature.\nLongevity.\nSyrian hamsters typically live no more than two to three years in captivity, and less in the wild. Russian hamsters (Campbell's and Djungarian) live about two to four years in captivity, and Chinese hamsters &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442\u20133 years. The smaller Roborovski hamster often lives to three years in captivity.\nSociety and culture.\nHamsters as pets.\nThe best-known species of hamster is the golden or Syrian hamster (\"Mesocricetus auratus\"), which is the type most commonly kept as pets. There are numerous Syrian hamster variations including long-haired varieties and different colors. British zoologist Leonard Goodwin claimed most hamsters kept in the United Kingdom were descended from the colony he introduced for medical research purposes during the Second World War. Hamsters were domesticated and kept as pets in the United States at least as early as 1942.\nOther hamsters commonly kept as pets are the three species in the genus Phodopus. Campbell's dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus campbelli\") is the most common\u2014they are also sometimes called \"Russian dwarfs\"; however, many hamsters are from Russia, so this ambiguous name does not distinguish them from other species appropriately. The coat of the winter white dwarf hamster (\"Phodopus sungorus\") turns almost white during winter (when the hours of daylight decrease). The Roborovski hamster (\"Phodopus roborovskii\") is extremely small and fast, making it difficult to keep as a pet.\nHamster shows.\nA hamster show is an event in which people gather hamsters to judge them against each other. Hamster shows are also places where people share their enthusiasm for hamsters among attendees. Hamster shows feature an exhibition of the hamsters participating in the judging.\nThe judging of hamsters usually includes a goal of promoting hamsters which conform to natural or established varieties of hamsters. By awarding hamsters which match standard hamster types, hamster shows encourage planned and careful hamster breeding.\nOwner activism.\nWhen the first reported case of animal-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Hong Kong took place via imported pet hamsters, researchers expressed difficulty in identifying some of the viral mutations within a global genomic data bank, leading city authorities to announce a mass cull of all hamsters purchased after 22 December 2021, which would affect roughly 2,000 animals. After the government 'strongly encouraged' citizens to turn in their pets, approximately 3,000 people joined underground activities to promote the adoption of abandoned hamsters throughout the city and to maintain pet ownership via methods such as the forgery of pet store purchase receipts. Some activists attempted to intercept owners who were on their way to turn in pet hamsters and encourage them to choose adoption instead, which the government subsequently warned would be subject to police action.\nHamsters as lab animals.\nThe extracted cells of babies' kidneys and adults' ovaries are used to study cholesterol synthesis.\nSimilar animals.\nSome similar rodents sometimes called \"hamsters\" are not currently classified in the hamster subfamily Cricetinae. These include the maned hamster, or crested hamster, which is really the maned rat (\"Lophiomys imhausi\"). Others are the mouse-like hamsters (\"Calomyscus\" spp.), and the white-tailed rat (\"Mystromys albicaudatus\").\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14378", "revid": "41906662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14378", "title": "History of Finland", "text": "The history of Finland began around 9000 BC during the end of the last glacial period. Stone Age cultures were Kunda, Comb Ceramic, Corded Ware, Kiukainen, and P\u00f6lj\u00e4 cultures. The Finnish Bronze Age started in approximately 1500 BC and the Iron Age started in 500 BC and lasted until 1300 AD. Finnish Iron Age cultures can be separated into Finnish proper, Tavastian and Karelian cultures. The earliest written sources mentioning Finland start to appear from the 12th century onwards when the Catholic Church started to gain a foothold in Southwest Finland.\nDue to the Northern Crusades and Swedish colonisation of some Finnish coastal areas, most of the region became a part of the Kingdom of Sweden and the realm of the Catholic Church from the 13th century onwards. After the Finnish War in 1809, Finland was ceded to the Russian Empire, making this area the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland. The Lutheran religion dominated. Finnish nationalism emerged in the 19th century. It focused on Finnish cultural traditions, folklore, and mythology, including music and\u2014especially\u2014the highly distinctive language and lyrics associated with it. One product of this era was the \"Kalevala\", one of the most significant works of Finnish literature. The catastrophic Finnish famine of 1866\u20131868 was followed by eased economic regulations and extensive emigration.\nIn 1917, Finland declared independence. A civil war between the Finnish Red Guards and the White Guard ensued a few months later, with the Whites gaining the upper hand during the springtime of 1918. After the internal affairs stabilized, the still mainly agrarian economy grew relatively quickly. Relations with the West, especially Sweden and Britain, were strong but tensions remained with the Soviet Union. During World War II, Finland fought twice against the Soviet Union, first defending its independence in the Winter War and then invading the Soviet Union in the Continuation War. In the peace settlement Finland ended up ceding a large part of Karelia and some other areas to the Soviet Union. However, Finland remained an independent democracy in Northern Europe.\nIn the latter half of its independent history, Finland has maintained a mixed economy. Since its post\u2013World War II economic boom in the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita has been among the world's highest. The expanded welfare state of Finland from 1970 and 1990 increased the public sector employees and spending and the tax burden imposed on the citizens. In 1992, Finland simultaneously faced economic overheating and depressed Western, Russian, and local markets. Finland joined the European Union in 1995, and replaced the Finnish markka with the euro in 2002. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, public opinion shifted in favour of joining NATO, and Finland eventually joined the alliance on 4 April 2023.\nStone Age.\nPaleolithic.\nThe Susiluola Cave near Kristinestad in Ostrobothnia has been suggested as a possible Neanderthal settlement, potentially dating back 120,000 years to the Last Interglacial. If confirmed, it would represent the earliest known human settlement in Fennoscandia. However, the interpretation of the findings is disputed, and the claim remains controversial within the scientific community.\nMesolithic.\nThe last ice age in the area of the modern-day Finland ended c. 9000 BC. Starting about that time, people migrated to the area of Finland from the south and southeast. Their culture represented a mixture of Kunda, Butovo, and Veretje cultures. At the same time, northern Finland was inhabited via the coast of Norway. The oldest confirmed evidence of post-glacial human settlements in Finland is from the area of Ristola in Lahti and from Orimattila, from c. 8900 BC. Finland has been continuously inhabited at least since the end of the last ice age up to the present. The earliest post-glacial inhabitants of the present-day area of Finland were probably mainly seasonal hunter-gatherers. Among finds is the net of Antrea, the oldest fishing net known ever to have been excavated (calibrated carbon dating: ca. 8300 BC).\nNeolithic.\nBy 5300 BC, pottery was present in Finland. The earliest samples belong to the Comb Ceramic cultures, known for their distinctive decorating patterns. This marks the beginning of the Neolithic period for Finland, although subsistence was still based on hunting and fishing. Extensive networks of exchange existed across Finland and northeastern Europe during the 5th millennium BC. For example, flint from Scandinavia and the Valdai Hills, amber from Scandinavia and the Baltic region, and slate from Scandinavia and Lake Onega found their way into Finnish archaeological sites, while asbestos and soap stone from Finland (e.g. the area of Saimaa) were found in other regions. Rock paintings\u2014apparently related to shamanistic and totemistic belief systems\u2014have been found, especially in Eastern Finland, e.g. Astuvansalmi.\nBetween 3500 and 2000 BC, monumental stone enclosures, colloquially known as Giant's Churches (), were constructed in the Ostrobothnia region. The purpose of the enclosures is unknown.\nIn recent years, a dig at the Kierikki site north of Oulu on the River Ii has changed the image of Finnish neolithic Stone Age culture. The site had been inhabited year-round and its inhabitants traded extensively. Kierikki culture is also seen as a subtype of Comb Ceramic culture. More of the site is excavated annually.\nFrom 3200 BC onwards, either immigrants or a strong cultural influence from south of the Gulf of Finland settled in southwestern Finland. This culture was a part of the European Battle Axe cultures, which have often been associated with the movement of the Indo-European speakers. The Battle Axe, or Cord Ceramic, culture seems to have practiced agriculture and animal husbandry outside of Finland, but the earliest confirmed traces of agriculture in Finland date later, approximately to the 2nd millennium BC. Further inland, societies retained their hunting-gathering lifestyles for the time being.\nThe Battle Axe and Comb Ceramic cultures eventually merged, giving rise to the Kiukainen culture that existed between 2300 BC and 1500 BC, and was fundamentally a comb ceramic tradition with cord ceramic characteristics.\nBronze Age.\nThe Bronze Age began some time after 1500 BC. The coastal regions of Finland were a part of the Nordic Bronze Culture, whereas in the inland regions the influences came from the bronze-using cultures of northern and eastern Russia.\nIron Age.\nThe Iron Age in Finland is considered to have lasted from c. 500 BC until c. 1300 AD. Written records of Finland become more common due to the Northern Crusades led by the Catholic Church in the 12th and 13th centuries. As the Finnish Iron Age lasted almost two millennia, it is further divided into six sub-periods:\nVery few written records of Finland or its people remain in any language of the era. Written sources are of foreign origin and include Tacitus's description of \"Fenni\" in his work \"Germania\", runestones, the sagas written down by Snorri Sturluson, as well as the 12th- and 13th-century ecclesiastical letters by the Pope. Numerous other sources from the Roman period onwards contain brief mentions of ancient Finnish kings and place names, as such defining Finland as a kingdom and noting the culture of its people.\nThe oldest surviving mention of the word \"Suomi\" (Finland in Finnish) is in the annals of the Frankish Empire written between 741 and 829. At 811, annals mention a person named Suomi in connection with a peace agreement. The name Suomi as the name of Finland is nowadays used in Finnic languages, S\u00e1mi, Latvian, Lithuanian and Scottish Gaelic.\nCurrently the oldest known Scandinavian documents mentioning Finland are two runestones: S\u00f6derby, Sweden, with the inscription (U 582), and Gotland with the inscription (G 319) dating from the 11th century. However, as the long continuum of the Finnish Iron Age into the historical Medieval period of Europe suggests, the primary source of information of the era in Finland is based on archaeological findings and modern applications of natural scientific methods like those of DNA analysis or computer linguistics.\nProduction of iron during the Finnish Iron Age was adopted from the neighboring cultures in the east, west and south about the same time as the first imported iron artifacts appear. This happened almost simultaneously in various parts of the country.\nPre-Roman period: 500 BC \u2013 1 BC.\nThe Pre-Roman period of the Finnish Iron Age is scarcest in findings, but the known ones suggest that cultural connections to other Baltic cultures were already established. The archeological findings of Pern\u00e5 and Savukoski provides proof of this argument. Many of the era's dwelling sites are the same as those of the Neolithic. Most of the iron of the era was produced on site.\nRoman period: 1 AD \u2013 400 AD.\nThe Roman period brought along an influx of imported iron (and other) artifacts like Roman wine glasses and dippers as well as various coins of the Empire. During this period the (proto) Finnish culture stabilized on the coastal regions and larger graveyards become commonplace. The prosperity of the Finns rose to the level that the vast majority of gold treasures found within Finland date back to this period.\nMigration period: 400 AD \u2013 575 AD.\nThe Migration period saw the expansion of land cultivation inland, especially in Southern Bothnia, and the growing influence of Germanic cultures, both in artifacts like swords and other weapons and in burial customs. However most iron as well as its forging was of domestic origin, probably from bog iron.\nMerovingian period: 575 AD \u2013 800 AD.\nThe Merovingian period in Finland gave rise to a distinctive fine crafts culture of its own, visible in the original decorations of domestically produced weapons and jewelry. The finest luxury weapons, however, were imported from Western Europe. The very first Christian burials are from the latter part of this era as well. In the Lev\u00e4luhta burial findings, the average height of a man was originally thought to be just 158\u00a0cm and that of a woman 147\u00a0cm, but recent research has corrected these numbers upwards and has confirmed that the people buried in Lev\u00e4luhta were of average height for that era in Europe.\nRecent findings suggest that Finnish trade connections became more active during the 8th century, bringing an influx of silver onto Finnish markets. The opening of the eastern route to Constantinople via Finland's southern coastline archipelago brought Arabic and Byzantine artifacts into the excavation findings of the era.\nThe earliest findings of imported iron blades and local iron working appear in 500 BC. From about 50 AD, there are indications of a more intense long-distance exchange of goods in coastal Finland. Inhabitants exchanged their products, presumably mostly furs, for weapons and ornaments with the Balts and the Scandinavians, as well as with the peoples along the traditional eastern trade routes. The existence of richly furnished burials, usually with weapons, suggests that there was a chiefly elite in the southern and western parts of the country. Hillforts spread over most of southern Finland at the end of the Iron and early Medieval Ages. There is no commonly accepted evidence of early state formations in Finland, and the presumably Iron Age origins of urbanization are contested.\nChronology of languages in Finland.\nThe question of the timelines for the evolution and the spreading of the current Finnic languages is controversial, and new theories challenging older ones have been introduced continuously.\nIt was for a long time widely believed that Finno-Ugric (the western branch of the Uralic) languages were first spoken in Finland and the adjacent areas during the Comb Ceramic period, around 4000 BC at the latest. During the 2nd millennium BC these evolved\u2014possibly under an Indo-European (most likely Baltic) influence\u2014into proto-Sami (inland) and Proto-Finnic (coastland). In contrast, A. Aikio and J. H\u00e4kkinen propose that the Finno-Ugric languages arrived in the Gulf of Finland area during the Late Bronze Age. Valter Lang has proposed that the Finnic and Saami languages arrived there in the early Bronze Age, possibly connected to the Seima-Turbino phenomenon. This would also imply that Finno-Ugric languages in Finland were preceded by a Northwestern Indo-European language, at least to the extent the latter can be associated with the Cord Ceramic culture, as well as by hitherto unknown Paleo-European languages. The center of expansion for the Proto-Finnic language is posited to have been located on the southern coast of the Gulf of Finland. The Finnish language is thought to have started to differentiate during the Iron Age starting from the earliest centuries of the Common Era.\nCultural influences from a variety of places are visible in the Finnish archaeological finds from the very first settlements onwards. For example, archaeological finds from Finnish Lapland suggest the presence of the Komsa culture from Norway. The Sujala finds, which are equal in age with the earliest Komsa artifacts, may also suggest a connection to the Swiderian culture. Southwestern Finland belonged to the Nordic Bronze Age, which may be associated with Indo-European languages, and according to Finnish Germanist Jorma Koivulehto speakers of Proto-Germanic language in particular. Artifacts found in Kalanti and the province of Satakunta, which have long been monolingually Finnish, and their place names have made several scholars argue for an existence of a proto-Germanic speaking population component a little later, during the Early and Middle Iron Age.\nThe Swedish colonisation of the \u00c5land Islands, Turku archipelago and Uusimaa could possibly have started in the 12th century but reached its height in the 13th and 14th centuries, when it also affected the Eastern Uusimaa and Ostrobothnia. The oldest Swedish place names in Finland are from this period as well as the Swedish-speaking population of Finland.\nFinland under Swedish rule.\nMiddle Ages.\nContact between Sweden and what is now Finland was considerable even during pre-Christian times; the Vikings were known to the Finns due to their participation in both commerce and plundering. There is possible evidence of Viking settlement in the Finnish mainland. The \u00c5land Islands probably had Swedish settlement during the Viking Period. However, some scholars claim that the archipelago was deserted during the 11th century.\nAccording to the archaeological finds, Christianity gained a foothold in Finland during the 11th century. According to the very few written documents that have survived, the church in Finland was still in its early development in the 12th century. Later medieval legends from late 13th century describe Swedish attempts to conquer and Christianize Finland sometime in the mid-1150s. Danish troops raided the Finnish coastline several times between 1191 and 1202. The Finnish tribes were able to wage war and engage in trade, but over time, were increasingly drawn into Latin Christendom.\nIn the early 13th century, Bishop Thomas became the first known bishop of Finland. There were several secular powers who aimed to bring the Finnish tribes under their rule. These were Sweden, Denmark, the Republic of Novgorod in northwestern Russia, and probably the German crusading orders as well. Finns had their own chiefs, but most probably no central authority. At the time there can be seen three cultural areas or tribes in Finland: Finns, Tavastians and Karelians. Russian chronicles indicate there were several conflicts between Novgorod and the Finnic tribes from the 11th or 12th century to the early 13th century. The influence of Russian Orthodoxy was extended to the area around Lake Onega and Lake Ladoga and the \"H\u00e4me\" (Tavastians) there were converted.\nIt was the Swedish regent, Birger Jarl, who allegedly established Swedish rule in Finland through the Second Swedish Crusade, most often dated to 1249. \"Erik's Chronicle\", the only source narrating the crusade, describes that it was aimed at Tavastians. A papal letter from 1237 states that the Tavastians had reverted from Christianity to their old ethnic faith. Historians have raised doubts that the Second Swedish Crusade took place in 1249 due to Sweden and Norway being locked in conflict at the time, and some have suggested that it instead took place before Swedish forces were supposedly defeated by Alexander Nevsky in the 1240 Battle of the Neva.\nNovgorod gained control in Karelia in 1278, the region inhabited by speakers of Eastern Finnish dialects. Sweden however gained the control of Western Karelia with the Third Swedish Crusade in 1293. Western Karelians were from then on viewed as part of the western cultural sphere, while eastern Karelians turned culturally to Russia and Orthodoxy. While eastern Karelians remain linguistically and ethnically closely related to the Finns, they are generally considered a separate people. Thus, the northern part of the border between Catholic and Orthodox Christendom came to lie at the eastern border of what would become Finland with the Treaty of N\u00f6teborg with Novgorod in 1323.\nDuring the 13th century, Finland was integrated into medieval European civilization. The Dominican order arrived in Finland around 1249 and came to exercise great influence there. In the early 14th century, the first records of Finnish students at the Sorbonne appear. In the southwestern part of the country, an urban settlement evolved in Turku. Turku was one of the biggest towns in the Kingdom of Sweden, and its population included German merchants and craftsmen. Otherwise the degree of urbanization was very low in medieval Finland. Southern Finland and the long coastal zone of the Gulf of Bothnia had sparse farming settlements, organized as parishes and castellanies. In the other parts of the country a small population of Sami hunters, fishermen, and small-scale farmers lived. These were exploited by the Finnish and Karelian tax collectors. During the 12th and 13th centuries, great numbers of Swedish settlers moved to the southern and northwestern coasts of Finland, to the \u00c5land Islands, and to the archipelago between Turku and the \u00c5land Islands. In these regions, the Swedish language is widely spoken even today. Swedish came to be the language of the upper class in many other parts of Finland as well.\nThe first known mention of Finland is in runestone Gs 13 from the 11th century. Pope Gregory IX declared that \"Finlandia\" was passed under his protection in 1229. The area called by the name of Finland remained vague and was used to indicate the consolidation of a central authority. Sources from before the consolidation of Swedish authority more often referred to particular tribes. After the consolidation of the kingdom of the Svea and the G\u00f6ta, it expanded to include Norrland, Dalarna and what came to be known as Finland Proper, what is now a southwestern province of Finland. The original Swedish term for the realm's eastern part was ('Eastern Lands'), a plural, meaning the area of Finland Proper, Tavastia, and Karelia. This was later replaced by the singular form \"\u00d6sterland\", which was in use between 1350 and 1470. In the 15th century, \"Finland\" began to be used synonymously with \"\u00d6sterland\". The concept of a Finnish country in the modern sense developed slowly from the 15th to 18th centuries.\nDuring the 13th century, the bishopric of Turku was established. Turku Cathedral was the center of the cult of Saint Henry of Uppsala, and naturally the cultural center of the bishopric. The bishop had ecclesiastical authority over much of today's Finland, and was usually the most powerful man there. Bishops were often Finns, whereas the commanders of castles were more often Scandinavian or German noblemen. In 1362, representatives from Finland were called to participate in the elections for the king of Sweden. As such, that year is often considered when Finland was incorporated into the Kingdom of Sweden. As in the Scandinavian part of the kingdom, the gentry or (lower) nobility consisted of magnates and yeomen who could afford armament for a man and a horse; these were concentrated in the southern part of Finland.\nThe strong fortress of Viborg (Finnish: , Russian: ) guarded the eastern border of Finland. Sweden and Novgorod signed the Treaty of N\u00f6teborg ( in Finnish) in 1323, but that did not last long. In 1348 the Swedish king Magnus Eriksson staged a failed crusade against Orthodox \"heretics\", managing only to alienate his supporters and ultimately lose his crown. The bones of contention between Sweden and Novgorod were the northern coastline of the Gulf of Bothnia and the wilderness regions of Savo in Eastern Finland. Novgorod considered these as hunting and fishing grounds of its Karelian subjects, and protested against the slow infiltration of Catholic settlers from the West. Occasional raids and clashes between Swedes and Novgorodians occurred during the late 14th and 15th centuries, but for most of the time an uneasy peace prevailed.\nDuring the 1380s, a civil war in the Scandinavian part of Sweden brought unrest to Finland as well. The victor of this struggle was Queen Margaret I of Denmark, who brought the three Scandinavian kingdoms of Sweden, Denmark and, Norway under her rule (the Kalmar Union) in 1389. One of the phenomena that appeared in those days with the unrest, was the notorious pirates, known as the Victual Brothers, who operated in the Baltic Sea in the Middle Ages to terrorize the coastal areas of Finland, and among other things, Korsholm Castle in Ostrobothnia, Turku Castle in the Finland Proper and also the Turku's Archipelago Sea were the most significant domains for the pirates. The next 130 years or so were characterized by attempts of different Swedish factions to break out of the Union. Finland was sometimes involved in these struggles, but in general the 15th century seems to have been a relatively prosperous time, characterized by population growth and economic development. However, towards the end of the 15th century, the situation on the eastern border became more tense. The Grand Principality of Moscow conquered Novgorod, preparing the way for a unified Russia, and from 1495 to 1497 a war was fought between Sweden and Russia. The fortress-town of Viborg withstood a Russian siege; according to a contemporary legend, it was saved by a miracle.\n16th century.\nIn 1521, the Kalmar Union collapsed and Gustav Vasa became the King of Sweden. During his rule, the Swedish church was reformed. The state administration underwent extensive reforms and development too, giving it a much stronger grip on the life of local communities\u2014and ability to collect higher taxes. Following the policies of the Reformation, in 1551 Mikael Agricola, bishop of Turku, published his translation of the New Testament into the Finnish language. In 1550, Helsinki was founded by Gustav Vasa under the name \"Helsingfors\", but remained little more than a fishing village for more than two centuries. His second second son Johan became the duke of Finland in the early 1560s.\nKing Gustav Vasa died in 1560 and his crown was passed to his three sons in separate turns. King Erik XIV started an era of expansion when the Swedish crown took the city of Tallinn in Estonia under its protection in 1561. This action contributed to the early stages of the Livonian War which was a warlike era which lasted for 160 years. In the first phase, Sweden fought for the lordship of Estonia and Latvia against Denmark, Poland and Russia. The common people of Finland suffered because of drafts, high taxes, and abuse by military personnel. This resulted in the Cudgel War of 1596\u20131597, a desperate peasant rebellion, which was suppressed brutally and bloodily. A peace treaty (the Treaty of Teusina) with Russia in 1595 moved the border of Finland further to the east and north, very roughly where the modern border lies.\nAn important part of the 16th-century history of Finland was growth of the area settled by the farming population. The crown encouraged farmers from the province of Savonia to settle the vast wilderness regions in Middle Finland. This often forced the original Sami population to leave. Some of the wilderness settled was traditional hunting and fishing territory of Karelian hunters. During the 1580s, this resulted in a bloody guerrilla warfare between the Finnish settlers and Karelians in some regions, especially in Ostrobothnia.\n17th century.\nFrom 1611 to 1632, Sweden was ruled by King Gustavus Adolphus, whose military reforms transformed the Swedish army from a peasant militia into an efficient fighting machine, possibly the best in Europe. The conquest of Livonia was now completed, and some territories were taken from internally divided Russia in the Treaty of Stolbovo. In 1630, the Swedish (and Finnish) armies marched into Central Europe, as Sweden had decided to take part in the great struggle between Protestant and Catholic forces in Germany, known as the Thirty Years' War. The Finnish light cavalry was known as the Hakkapeliitat. Gustavus Adolphus also created the office of governor-general for Finland as part of his restructuring of the administration of the Swedish realm.\nAfter the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, the Swedish Empire was one of the most powerful countries in Europe. During the war, several important reforms had been made in Finland:\nHowever, the high taxation, continuing wars and the cold climate (the Little Ice Age) made the Imperial era of Sweden rather gloomy times for Finnish peasants. In 1655\u20131660, the Northern Wars were fought, taking Finnish soldiers to the battle-fields of Livonia, Poland and Denmark. In 1676, the political system of Sweden was transformed into an absolute monarchy.\nIn Middle and Eastern Finland, great amounts of tar were produced for export. European nations needed this material for the maintenance of their fleets. According to some theories, the spirit of early capitalism in the tar-producing province of Ostrobothnia may have been the reason for the witch-hunt wave that happened in this region during the late 17th century. The people were developing more expectations and plans for the future, and when these were not realized, they were quick to blame witches\u2014according to a belief system the Lutheran church had imported from Germany.\nThe Empire had a colony in the New World in the modern-day Delaware-Pennsylvania area between 1638 and 1655. At least half of the immigrants were of Finnish origin.\nThe 17th century was an era of very strict Lutheran orthodoxy. In 1608, the law of Moses was declared the law of the land, in addition to secular legislation. Every subject of the realm was required to confess the Lutheran faith and church attendance was mandatory. Ecclesiastical penalties were widely used. The rigorous requirements of orthodoxy were revealed in the dismissal of the Bishop of Turku, Johan Terserus, who wrote a catechism which was decreed heretical in 1664 by the theologians of the academy of \u00c5bo. On the other hand, the Lutheran requirement of the individual study of Bible prompted the first attempts at wide-scale education. The church required from each person a degree of literacy sufficient to read the basic texts of the Lutheran faith. Although the requirements could be fulfilled by learning the texts by heart, also the skill of reading became known among the population.\nFrom 1696 to 1699, a famine caused by climate decimated Finland. A combination of an early frost, the freezing temperatures preventing grain from reaching Finnish ports, and a lackluster response from the Swedish government saw about one-third of the population die. Soon afterwards, another war determining Finland's fate began (the Great Northern War of 1700\u201321).\n18th century.\nThe Great Northern War (1700\u20131721) was devastating, as Sweden and Russia fought for control of the Baltic. Harsh conditions\u2014worsening poverty and repeated crop failures\u2014among peasants undermined support for the war, leading to Sweden's defeat. Finland was a battleground as both armies ravaged the countryside, leading to famine, epidemics, social disruption and the loss of nearly half the population. By 1721 only 250,000 remained. Landowners had to pay higher wages to keep their peasants. Russia was the winner, annexing the south-eastern part, including the town of Viborg, after the Treaty of Nystad. The border with Russia came to lie roughly where it returned to after World War II. Sweden's status as a European great power was forfeited, and Russia was now the leading power in the North. The absolute monarchy ended in Sweden. During this Age of Liberty, the Parliament ruled the country, and the two parties of the Hats and Caps struggled for control leaving the lesser Court party, i.e. parliamentarians with close connections to the royal court, with little to no influence. The Caps wanted to have a peaceful relationship with Russia and were supported by many Finns, while other Finns longed for revenge and supported the Hats.\nFinland by this time was depopulated, with a population in 1749 of 427,000. However, with peace the population grew rapidly, and doubled before 1800. 90% of the population were typically classified as peasants, most being free taxed yeomen. Society was divided into four Estates: peasants (free taxed yeomen), the clergy, nobility and burghers. A minority, mostly cottagers, were estateless, and had no political representation. Forty-five percent of the male population were enfranchised with full political representation in the legislature\u2014although clerics, nobles and townsfolk had their own chambers in the parliament, boosting their political influence and excluding the peasantry on matters of foreign policy.\nThe mid-18th century was a relatively good time, partly because life was now more peaceful. However, during the Lesser Wrath (1741\u20131742), Finland was again occupied by the Russians after the government, during a period of Hat party dominance, had made a botched attempt to reconquer the lost provinces. Instead the result of the Treaty of \u00c5bo was that the Russian border was moved further to the west. During this time, Russian propaganda hinted at the possibility of creating a separate Finnish kingdom.\nBoth the ascending Russian Empire and pre-revolutionary France aspired to have Sweden as a client state. Parliamentarians and others with influence were susceptible to taking bribes which they did their best to increase. The integrity and the credibility of the political system waned, and in 1771 the young and charismatic king Gustav III staged a coup d'\u00e9tat, abolished parliamentarism and reinstated royal power in Sweden\u2014more or less with the support of the parliament. In 1788, he started a new war against Russia. Despite a couple of victorious battles, the war was fruitless, managing only to bring disturbance to the economic life of Finland. The popularity of King Gustav III waned considerably. During the war, a group of officers made the famous Anjala declaration demanding peace negotiations and calling of the (Parliament). An interesting sideline to this process was the conspiracy of some Finnish officers, who attempted to create an independent Finnish state with Russian support. After an initial shock, Gustav III crushed this opposition. In 1789, the new constitution of Sweden strengthened the royal power further, as well as improving the status of the peasantry. However, the continuing war had to be finished without conquests\u2014and many Swedes now considered the king as a tyrant.\nWith the interruption of the Gustav III's war (1788\u20131790), the last decades of the 18th century had been an era of development in Finland. New things were changing even everyday life, such as starting of potato farming after the 1750s. New scientific and technical inventions were seen. The first hot air balloon in Finland (and in the whole Swedish kingdom) was made in Oulu (Ule\u00e5borg) in 1784, only a year after it was invented in France. Trade increased and the peasantry was growing more affluent and self-conscious. The Age of Enlightenment's climate of broadened debate in the society on issues of politics, religion and morals would in due time highlight the problem that the overwhelming majority of Finns spoke only Finnish, but the cascade of newspapers, belles-lettres and political leaflets was almost exclusively in Swedish\u2014when not in French.\nThe two Russian occupations had been harsh and were not easily forgotten. These occupations were a seed of a feeling of separateness and otherness, that in a narrow circle of scholars and intellectuals at the university in Turku was forming a sense of a separate Finnish identity representing the eastern part of the realm. The shining influence of the Russian imperial capital Saint Petersburg was also much stronger in southern Finland than in other parts of Sweden, and contacts across the new border dispersed the worst fears for the fate of the educated and trading classes under a Russian r\u00e9gime. At the turn of the 19th century, the Swedish-speaking educated classes of officers, clerics and civil servants were mentally well prepared for a shift of allegiance to the strong Russian Empire.\nKing Gustav III was assassinated in 1792, and his son Gustav IV Adolf assumed the crown after a period of regency. The new king was not a particularly talented ruler; at least not talented enough to steer his kingdom through the dangerous era of the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars.\nMeanwhile, the Finnish areas belonging to Russia after the peace treaties in 1721 and 1743 (not including Ingria), called \"Old Finland\", were initially governed with the old Swedish laws (a not uncommon practice in the expanding Russian Empire in the 18th century). However, gradually the rulers of Russia granted large estates of land to their non-Finnish favorites, ignoring the traditional landownership and peasant freedom laws of Old Finland. There were even cases where the noblemen punished peasants corporally, for example by flogging. The overall situation caused decline in the economy and morale in Old Finland, worsened since 1797 when the area was forced to send men to the Imperial Army. The construction of military installations in the area brought thousands of non-Finnish people to the region. In 1812, after the Russian conquest of Finland, \"Old Finland\" was attached to the rest of the country, though the landownership question remained a serious problem until the 1870s.\nPeasants.\nWhile the king of Sweden sent in his governor to rule Finland, in day to day reality the villagers ran their own affairs using traditional local assemblies (called the ting) which selected a local , or lawman, to enforce the norms. The Swedes used the parish system to collect taxes. The (local parish) was at once a community religious organization and a judicial district that administered the king's law. The ting participated in the taxation process; taxes were collected by the bailiff, a royal appointee.\nIn contrast to serfdom in Germany and Russia, the Finnish peasant was typically a freeholder who owned and controlled his small plot of land. There was no serfdom in which peasants were permanently attached to specific lands, and were ruled by the owners of that land. In Finland (and Sweden) the peasants formed one of the four estates and were represented in the parliament. Outside the political sphere, however, the peasants were considered at the bottom of the social order\u2014just above vagabonds. The upper classes looked down on them as excessively prone to drunkenness and laziness, as clannish and untrustworthy, and especially as lacking honor and a sense of national spirit. This disdain dramatically changed in the 19th century when everyone idealised the peasant as the true carrier of Finnishness and the national ethos, as opposed to the Swedish-speaking elites.\nThe peasants were not passive; they were proud of their traditions and would band together and fight to uphold their traditional rights in the face of burdensome taxes from the king or new demands by the landowning nobility. The great Cudgel War in the south in 1596\u20131597 attacked the nobles and their new system of state feudalism; this bloody revolt was similar to other contemporary peasant wars in Europe. In the north, there was less tension between nobles and peasants and more equality among peasants, due to the practice of subdividing farms among heirs, to non farm economic activities, and to the small numbers of nobility and gentry. Often the nobles and landowners were paternalistic and helpful. The Crown usually sided with the nobles, but after the \"restitution\" of the 1680s it ended the practice of the nobility extracting labor from the peasants and instead began a new tax system whereby royal bureaucrats collected taxes directly from the peasants, who disliked the efficient new system. After 1800 growing population pressure resulted in larger numbers of poor crofters and landless laborers and the impoverishment of small farmers.\n1150: 20,000\u201340,000\n1550: 300,000\n1750: 428,000\n1770: 561,000\n1790: 706,000\n1810: 863,000\n1830: 1,372,000\n1850: 1,637,000\n1870: 1,769,000\n1890: 2,380,000\n1910: 2,943,000\n1930: 3,463,000\n1950: 4,030,000\n1970: 4,598,000\n1990: 4,977,000\n2010: 5,375,000\n2015: 5,500,000\n2020: 5,531,000\nGrand Duchy of Finland.\nDuring the Finnish War between Sweden and Russia, Finland was again conquered by the armies of Tsar Alexander I. The four Estates of occupied Finland were assembled at the Diet of Porvoo on 29 March 1809, to pledge allegiance to Alexander I of Russia. Following the Swedish defeat in the war and the signing of the Treaty of Fredrikshamn on 17 September 1809, Finland remained a grand duchy under the Russian Empire until the end of 1917, with the title of grand duke of Finland being transferred to the Russian emperor. Russia assigned Karelia (\"Old Finland\") to the grand duchy in 1812. During the years of Russian rule the degree of autonomy varied. Periods of censorship and political prosecution occurred, particularly in the two last decades of Russian control, but the Finnish peasantry remained free (unlike the Russian serfs) as the old Swedish law remained effective (including the relevant parts from Gustav III's Constitution of 1772). The old four-chamber Diet was re-activated in the 1860s agreeing to supplementary new legislation concerning internal affairs. In addition, Finns remained free of obligations connected to the empire, such as the duty to serve in tsarist armies, and they enjoyed certain rights that citizens from other parts of the empire did not have.\nEconomy.\nBefore 1860 overseas merchant firms and the owners of landed estates had accumulated wealth that became available for industrial investments. After 1860 the government liberalized economic laws and began to build a suitable physical infrastructure of ports, railroads and telegraph lines. The domestic market was small but rapid growth took place after 1860 in export industries drawing on forest resources and mobile rural laborers. Industrialization began during the mid-19th century from forestry to industry, mining and machinery and laid the foundation of Finland's current day prosperity, even though agriculture employed a relatively large part of the population until the post\u2013World War II era.\nThe beginnings of industrialism took place in Helsinki. Alfred Kihlman (1825\u20131904) began as a Lutheran priest and director of the elite Helsingfors boys' school, the Swedish Normal Lyceum. He became a financier and member of the diet. There was little precedent in Finland in the 1850s for raising venture capital. Kihlman was well connected and enlisted businessmen and capitalists to invest in new enterprises. In 1869, he organized a limited partnership that supported two years of developmental activities that led to the founding of the Nokia company in 1871.\nAfter 1890 industrial productivity stagnated because entrepreneurs were unable to keep up with technological innovations made by competitors in Germany, Britain and the United States. However, Russification opened up a large Russian market especially for machinery.\nNationalism.\nThe Finnish national awakening in the mid-19th century was the result of members of the Swedish-speaking upper classes deliberately choosing to promote Finnish culture and language as a means of nation building, i.e. to establish a feeling of unity among all people in Finland including (and not of least importance) between the ruling elite and the ruled peasantry. The publication in 1835 of the Finnish national epic, the \"Kalevala\", a collection of traditional myths and legends which is the folklore of the Karelian people (the Finnic Eastern Orthodox people who inhabit the Lake Ladoga-region of eastern Finland and present-day NW Russia), stirred the nationalism that later led to Finland's independence from Russia.\nParticularly following Finland's incorporation into the Swedish central administration during the 16th and 17th centuries, Swedish was spoken by about 15% of the population, especially the upper and middle classes. Swedish was the language of administration, public institutions, education and cultural life. Only the peasants spoke Finnish. The emergence of Finnish to predominance resulted from a 19th-century surge of Finnish nationalism, aided by Russian bureaucrats attempting to separate Finns from Sweden and to ensure the Finns' loyalty.\nIn 1863, the Finnish language gained an official position in administration. In 1892 Finnish became an equal official language and gained a status comparable to that of Swedish. Nevertheless, the Swedish language continued to be the language of culture, arts and business all the way to the 1920s.\nMovements toward Finnish national pride, as well as liberalism in politics and economics involved ethnic and class dimensions. The nationalist movement against Russia began with the Fennoman movement led by Hegelian philosopher Johan Vilhelm Snellman in the 1830s. Snellman sought to apply philosophy to social action and moved the basis of Finnish nationalism to establishment of the language in the schools, while remaining loyal to the czar. Fennomania became the Finnish Party in the 1860s.\nLiberalism was the central issue of the 1860s to 1880s. The language issue overlapped both liberalism and nationalism, and showed some a class conflict as well, with the peasants pitted against the conservative Swedish-speaking landowners and nobles. Finnish activists divided themselves into \"old\" (no compromise on the language question and conservative nationalism) and \"young\" (liberation from Russia) Finns. The leading liberals were Swedish-speaking intellectuals who called for more democracy; they became the radical leaders after 1880. The liberals organized for social democracy, labor unions, farmer cooperatives, and women's rights.\nNationalism was contested by the pro-Russian element and by the internationalism of the labor movement. The result was a tendency to class conflict over nationalism, but the early 1900s the working classes split into the Valpas (class struggle emphasis) and M\u00e4kelin (nationalist emphasis).\nReligion.\nDuring that period Lutheranism and Eastern Orthodoxy were official religions of the Finnish Grand Duchy. The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland was separated from Church of Sweden in the early 19th century. Immediately after the Finnish War, Finnish Lutheran clergy feared state-led proselytism to Orthodoxy. The majority of Finns were Lutheran Christians, but an ancient prominent Orthodox minority lived in Karelian Isthmus and Ladoga Karelia. The monasteries of Valaam and Konevets were important religious centres and pilgrimage sites of Orthodox faithful. There were also Orthodox churches built in Finnish cities and towns, where there were Russian garrisons. During this period, Roman Catholism, Judaism and Islam came to Finland with Russian soldiers and merchants.\nWhile the vast majority of Finns were Lutheran, there were two strains to Lutheranism that eventually merged to form the modern Finnish church. On the one hand was the high-church emphasis on ritual, with its roots in traditional peasant collective society. Paavo Ruotsalainen (1777\u20131852) on the other hand was a leader of the new pietism, with its subjectivity, revivalism, emphasis on personal morality, lay participation, and the social gospel. The pietism appealed to the emerging middle class. The Ecclesiastical Law of 1869 combined the two strains. Finland's political and Lutheran leaders considered both Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism to be threats to the emerging nation. Eastern Orthodoxy was rejected as a weapon of Russification, while anti-Catholicism was long-standing. Anti-Semitism was also a factor, so the Dissenter Law of 1889 upgraded the status only of the minor Protestant sects. Founding monasteries was forbidden.\nMusic.\nBefore 1790 music was found in Lutheran churches and in folk traditions. In 1790 music lovers founded the \u00c5bo Musical Society; it gave the first major stimulus to serious music by Finnish composers. In the 1880s, new institutions, especially the Helsinki Music Institute (since 1939 called the Sibelius Academy), the Institute of Music of Helsinki University and the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra, integrated Finland into the mainstream of European music. By far the most influential composer was Jean Sibelius (1865\u20131957); he composed nearly all his music before 1930. In April 1892 Sibelius presented his new symphony \"Kullervo\" in Helsinki. It featured poetry from the \"Kalevala,\" and was celebrated by critics as truly Finnish music.\nPolitics.\nDespite certain freedoms granted to Finland, the Grand Duchy was not a democratic state. The tsar retained supreme power and ruled through the highest official in the land, the governor general, almost always a Russian officer. Alexander dissolved the Diet of the Four Estates shortly after convening it in 1809, and it did not meet again for half a century. The tsar's actions were in accordance with the royalist constitution Finland had inherited from Sweden. The Finns had no guarantees of liberty, but depended on the tsar's goodwill for any freedoms they enjoyed. When Alexander II convened the Diet again in 1863, he did so not to fulfill any obligation but to meet growing pressures for reform within the empire as a whole. In the remaining decades of the century, the Diet enacted numerous legislative measures that modernized Finland's system of law, made its public administration more efficient, removed obstacles to commerce, and prepared the ground for the country's independence in the next century.\nRussification.\nThe policy of Russification of Finland (1899\u20131905 and 1908\u20131917, called \"/\" ('times/years of oppression') in Finnish) was the policy of the Russian czars designed to limit the special status of the Grand Duchy of Finland and fully integrate it politically, militarily, and culturally into the empire. Finns were strongly opposed and fought back by passive resistance and a strengthening of Finnish cultural identity. Key provisions were, first, the February Manifesto of 1899 which asserted the imperial government's right to rule Finland without the consent of local legislative bodies; second, the Language Manifesto of 1900 which made Russian the language of administration of Finland; and third, the conscription law of 1901 which incorporated the Finnish army into the imperial army and sent conscripts away to Russian training camps.\nDemocratic change.\nIn 1906, as a result of the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the associated Finnish general strike of 1905, the old four-chamber Diet was replaced by a unicameral Parliament of Finland (the \"\")\".\" For the first time in Europe, universal suffrage (right to vote) and eligibility was implemented to include women: Finnish women were the first in Europe to gain full eligibility to vote; and have membership in an estate; land ownership or inherited titles were no longer required. However, on the local level things were different, as in the municipal elections the number of votes was tied to amount of tax paid. Thus, rich people could cast a number of votes, while the poor perhaps none at all. The municipal voting system was changed to universal suffrage in 1917 when a left-wing majority was elected to Parliament.\nEmigration trends.\nEmigration was especially important 1890\u20131914, with many young men and some families headed to Finnish settlements in the United States, and also to Canada. They typically worked in lumber and mining, and many were active in Marxist causes on the one hand, or the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America on the other. In the 21st century about 700,000 Americans and 140,000 Canadians claim Finnish ancestry.\n1880s: 26,000\n1890s: 59,000\n20th century: 159,000\n1910s: 67,000\n1920s: 73,000\n1930s: 3,000\n1940s: 7,000\n1950s: 32,000\nBy 2000 about 6% of the population spoke Swedish as their first language, or 300,000 people. However, since the late 20th century there has been a steady migration of older, better educated Swedish speakers to Sweden.\nIndependence and Civil War.\nIn the aftermath of the February Revolution in Russia, Finland received a new Senate, and a coalition Cabinet with the same power distribution as the Finnish Parliament. Based on the general election in 1916, the Social Democrats had a small majority, and the Social Democrat Oskari Tokoi became prime minister. The new Senate was willing to cooperate with the Provisional government of Russia, but no agreement was reached. Finland considered the personal union with Russia to be over after the dethroning of the Tsar\u2014although the Finns had \"de facto\" recognized the Provisional government as the Tsar's successor by accepting its authority to appoint a new Governor General and Senate. They expected the Tsar's authority to be transferred to Finland's Parliament, which the Provisional government refused, suggesting instead that the question should be settled by the Russian Constituent Assembly.\nFor the Finnish Social Democrats it seemed as though the bourgeoisie was an obstacle on Finland's road to independence as well as on the proletariat's road to power. The non-Socialists in Tokoi's Senate were, however, more confident. They, and most of the non-Socialists in the Parliament, rejected the Social Democrats' proposal on parliamentarism (the so-called \"Power Act\") as being too far-reaching and provocative. The act restricted Russia's influence on domestic Finnish matters, but did not touch the Russian government's power on matters of defence and foreign affairs. For the Russian Provisional government this was, however, far too radical, exceeding the Parliament's authority, and so the Provisional government dissolved the Parliament.\nThe minority of the Parliament, and of the Senate, were content. New elections promised a chance for them to gain a majority, which they were convinced would improve the chances to reach an understanding with Russia. The non-Socialists were also inclined to cooperate with the Russian Provisional Government because they feared the Social Democrats' power would grow, resulting in radical reforms, such as equal suffrage in municipal elections, or a land reform. The majority had the completely opposite opinion. They did not accept the Provisional government's right to dissolve the Parliament.\nThe Social Democrats held on to the Power Act and opposed the promulgation of the decree of dissolution of the Parliament, whereas the non-Socialists voted for promulgating it. The disagreement over the Power Act led to the Social Democrats leaving the Senate. When the Parliament met again after the summer recess in August 1917, only the groups supporting the Power Act were present. Russian troops took possession of the chamber, the Parliament was dissolved, and new elections were held. The result was a (small) non-Socialist majority and a purely non-Socialist Senate. The suppression of the Power Act, and the cooperation between Finnish non-Socialists and Russia provoked great bitterness among the Socialists, and had resulted in dozens of politically motivated attacks and murders.\nIndependence.\nThe October Revolution of 1917 turned Finnish politics upside down. Now, the new non-Socialist majority of the Parliament desired total independence, and the Socialists came gradually to view Soviet Russia as an example to follow. On 15 November 1917, the Bolsheviks declared a general right of self-determination \"for the Peoples of Russia\", including the right of complete secession. On the same day the Finnish Parliament issued a declaration by which it temporarily took power in Finland.\nWorried by developments in Russia and Finland, the non-Socialist Senate proposed that Parliament declare Finland's independence, which was voted by the Parliament on 6 December 1917. On 18 December (31 December N. S.) the Soviet government issued a Decree, recognizing Finland's independence, and on 22 December (4 January 1918 N. S.) it was approved by the highest Soviet executive body (VTsIK). Germany and the Scandinavian countries followed without delay.\nCivil war.\nFinland after 1917 was bitterly divided along social lines. The Whites consisted of the Swedish-speaking middle and upper classes and the farmers and peasantry who dominated the northern two-thirds of the land. They had a conservative outlook and rejected socialism. The Socialist-Communist Reds comprised the Finnish-speaking urban workers and the landless rural cottagers. They had a radical outlook and rejected capitalism.\nFrom January to May 1918, Finland experienced the brief but bitter Finnish Civil War. On one side there were the \"white\" civil guards, who fought for the anti-Socialists. On the other side were the Red Guards, which consisted of workers and tenant farmers. The latter proclaimed a Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic. World War I was still underway and the defeat of the Red Guards was achieved with support from Imperial Germany, while Sweden remained neutral and Russia withdrew its forces. The Reds lost the war and the White peasantry rose to political leadership in the 1920s\u20131930s. About 37,000 men died, most of them in prisoner camps ravaged by influenza and other diseases.\nFinland in the inter-war era.\nAfter the civil war, the parliament controlled by the Whites voted to establish a constitutional monarchy to be called the \"Kingdom of Finland\", with German prince Frederick Charles of Hesse as king. However, Germany's defeat in November 1918 made the plan impossible and Finland instead became a republic, with Kaarlo Juho St\u00e5hlberg elected as its first President in 1919. Despite the bitter civil war, and repeated threats from fascist movements, Finland became and remained a capitalist democracy under the rule of law. By contrast, nearby Estonia, in similar circumstances but without a civil war, started as a democracy and was turned into a dictatorship in 1934.\nAgrarian reform.\nLarge scale agrarian reform in the 1920s involved breaking up the large estates controlled by the old nobility and selling the land to ambitious peasants. The farmers became strong supporters of the government.\nDiplomacy.\nFinland became member of the League of Nations on 16 December 1920. The new republic faced a dispute over the \u00c5land Islands, which were overwhelmingly Swedish-speaking and sought retrocession to Sweden. However, as Finland was not willing to cede the islands, they were offered an autonomous status. Nevertheless, the residents did not approve the offer, and the dispute over the islands was submitted to the League of Nations. The League decided that Finland should retain sovereignty over the \u00c5land Islands, but they should be made an autonomous province. Thus Finland was under an obligation to ensure the residents of \u00c5land a right to maintain the Swedish language, as well as their own culture and local traditions. At the same time, an international treaty was concluded on the neutral status of \u00c5land, under which it was prohibited to place military headquarters or forces on the islands.\nProhibition.\nAlcohol abuse had a long history, especially regarding binge drinking and public intoxication, which became a crime in 1733. In the 19th century the punishments became stiffer and stiffer, but the problem persisted. A strong abstinence movement emerged that cut consumption in half from the 1880s to the 1910s, and gave Finland the lowest drinking rate in Europe. Four attempts at instituting prohibition of alcohol during the Grand Duchy period were rejected by the czar; with the czar gone Finland enacted prohibition in 1919. Smuggling emerged and enforcement was slipshod. Criminal convictions for drunkenness went up by 500%, and violence and crime rates soared. Public opinion turned against the law, and a national plebiscite went 70% for repeal, so prohibition was ended in early 1932.\nPolitics.\nNationalist sentiment remaining from the Civil War developed into the proto-Fascist Lapua Movement in 1929. Initially the movement gained widespread support among anti-Communist Finns, but following a failed coup attempt in 1932 it was banned and its leaders imprisoned.\nRelations with Soviet Union.\nIn the wake of the Civil War there were many incidents along the border between Finland and Soviet Russia, such as the Aunus expedition and the Pork mutiny. Relations with the Soviets were improved after the Treaty of Tartu in 1920, in which Finland gained Petsamo, but gave up its claims on East Karelia.\nTens of thousands of radical Finns\u2014from Finland, the United States and Canada\u2014took up Stalin's 1923 appeal to create a new Soviet society in the Karelian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (KASSR), a part of Russia.\nMost were executed in the purges of the 1930s.\nThe Soviet Union started to tighten its policy against Finland in the 1930s, limiting the navigation of Finnish merchant ships between Lake Ladoga and the Gulf of Finland and blocking it totally in 1937.\nFinland in the Second World War.\nIn August 1939, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, where Finland and the Baltic states were allocated to the Soviet \"sphere of influence\". After invading Poland, the Soviet Union sent ultimatums to the Baltic countries, where it demanded military bases on their soil. The Baltic states accepted Soviet demands, and lost their independence in the summer of 1940. In October 1939, the Soviet Union sent a similar request to Finland, but the Finns refused these demands.\nThe Soviet Union invaded Finland on 30 November 1939, launching the Winter War, with the aim of annexing Finland into the Soviet Union. The Finnish Democratic Republic was established by Joseph Stalin at the beginning of the war with the purpose of governing Finland after Soviet conquest. The Red Army was defeated in numerous battles, notably at the Battle of Suomussalmi. After two months of negligible progress on the battlefield, as well as severe losses of men and materiel, the Soviets put an end to the Finnish Democratic Republic in late January 1940 and recognized the legal Finnish government as the legitimate government of Finland. Soviet forces began to make progress in February and reached Vyborg in March. Fighting came to an end on 13 March 1940 with the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty. Finland had successfully defended its independence, but ceded 9% of its territory to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union was expelled from the League of Nations as a result of the invasion.\nAfter the Winter War the Finnish Army was exhausted and needed recovery and support as soon as possible. The United Kingdom declined to help, but in autumn 1940, Nazi Germany offered weapon deals to Finland if the Finnish government would allow German troops to travel through Finland to German-occupied Norway. Finland accepted, weapons deals were made, and military co-operation began in December 1940.\nHostilities resumed in June 1941 with the start of the Continuation War, when Finland aligned with Germany following Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union. Finland was involved with the Siege of Leningrad and occupied East Karelia from 1941 to 1944. This irredentist sentiment of a Greater Finland, whose inhabitants were culturally related to the Finnish people, although Eastern Orthodox by religion, resulted in other countries being considerably less sympathetic to the Finnish cause.\nFinnish forces won several decisive battles during the Soviet Vyborg\u2013Petrozavodsk offensive of 1944, including the Battle of Tali-Ihantala and the Battle of Ilomantsi. These victories helped ensure Finnish independence, and led to the Moscow Armistice with the Soviet Union. The armistice called for the expulsion of German troops residing in northern Finland, leading to the Lapland War whereby the Finns forced the Germans to withdraw into Norway (then under German occupation).\nFinland was never occupied by Soviet forces. Its army of over 600,000 soldiers saw only 3,500 prisoners of war. About 96,000 Finns died, or 2.5% of a population of 3.8 million; civilian casualties were under 2,500. Finland managed to defend its democracy, contrary to most other countries within the Soviet sphere of influence, and suffered comparably limited losses in terms of civilian lives and property. It was, however, punished harsher than other German co-belligerents and allies, having to pay large reparations and resettle an eighth of its population after having lost an eighth of its territory, including the major city of Viipuri. After the war, the Soviet government settled these gained territories with people from many different regions of the USSR, for instance from Ukraine.\nThe Finnish government did not participate in the systematic killing of Jews, although the country remained a \"co-belligerent\", a \"de facto\" ally of Germany until 1944. In total, eight German Jewish refugees were handed over to the German authorities. In the Tehran Conference of 1942, the leaders of the Allies agreed that Finland was fighting a separate war against the Soviet Union, and that in no way was it hostile to the Western allies. The Soviet Union was the only Allied country against which Finland had conducted military operations. Unlike any of the Axis nations, Finland was a parliamentary democracy throughout the 1939\u20131945 period. The commander of Finnish armed forces during the Winter War and the Continuation War, Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, became the President of Finland at the very end of the Continuation War. Finland made a separate armistice agreement with the Soviet Union on 19 September 1944, and was the only bordering country of USSR in Europe (alongside Norway, which gained a border with the Soviet Union only after the war) that kept its independence after the war.\nDuring and in between the wars, approximately 80,000 Finnish war-children were evacuated abroad: 5% went to Norway, 10% to Denmark, and the rest to Sweden. Most of the children were sent back by 1948, but 15\u201320% remained abroad.\nThe Moscow Armistice was signed between Finland on one side and the Soviet Union and Britain on the other side on 19 September 1944, ending the Continuation War. The armistice compelled Finland to drive German troops from its territory, leading to the Lapland War 1944\u20131945.\nIn 1947, Finland reluctantly declined Marshall aid in order to preserve good relations with the Soviets, ensuring Finnish autonomy. Nevertheless, the United States shipped secret development aid and financial aid to the non-communist SDP (Social Democratic Party). Establishing trade with the Western powers, such as Britain, and the reparations to the Soviet Union caused Finland to transform itself from a primarily agrarian economy to an industrialised one. After the reparations had been paid off, Finland continued to trade with the Soviet Union in the framework of bilateral trade.\nFinland's role in the Second World War was unusual in several ways. Despite massive superiority in military strength, the Soviet Union was unable to conquer Finland when the former invaded in 1939. In late 1940, German-Finnish co-operation began; it took a form that was unique when compared to relations with the Axis. Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which made Finland an ally with Germany in the war against the Soviet Union. But, unlike all other Axis states, Finland never signed the Tripartite Pact, meaning that Finland was not \"de jure\" an Axis nation.\nMemorials.\nAlthough Finland lost territory in both of its wars with the Soviets, the memory of these wars was sharply etched in the national consciousness. Finland celebrates these wars as a victory for the Finnish national spirit, which survived against long odds and allowed Finland to maintain its independence. Many groups of Finns are commemorated today, including not just fallen soldiers and veterans, but also orphans, evacuees from Karelia, the children who were evacuated to Sweden, women who worked during the war at home or in factories, and the veterans of the women's defense unit Lotta Sv\u00e4rd.\nSome of these groups could not be properly commemorated until long after the war ended in order to preserve good relations with the Soviet Union. However, after a long political campaign backed by survivors of what Finns call the Partisan War, the Finnish Parliament passed legislation establishing compensation for the war's victims.\nPost WW2 and Cold War.\nNeutrality in Cold War.\nFinland retained a democratic constitution and free economy during the Cold War era. Treaties signed in 1947 and 1948 with the Soviet Union included obligations and restraints on Finland, as well as territorial concessions. The Paris Peace Treaty (1947) limited the size and the nature of Finland's armed forces. Weapons were to be solely defensive. A deepening of postwar tensions led a year later to the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance (1948) with the Soviet Union. The latter, in particular, was the foundation of Finno-Soviet relations in the postwar era. Under the terms of the treaty, Finland was bound to confer with the Soviets and perhaps to accept their aid if an attack from Germany, or countries allied with Germany, seemed likely. The treaty prescribed consultations between the two countries, but it had no mechanism for automatic Soviet intervention in a time of crisis. Both treaties have been abrogated by Finland since the 1991 dissolution of the Soviet Union, while leaving the borders untouched. Even though being a neighbor to the Soviet Union sometimes resulted in overcautious concern in foreign policy (\"Finlandization\"), Finland developed closer co-operation with the other Nordic countries and declared itself neutral in superpower politics.\nThe Finnish post-war president, Juho Kusti Paasikivi, a leading conservative politician, saw that an essential element of Finnish foreign policy must be a credible guarantee to the Soviet Union that it need not fear attack from, or through, Finnish territory. Because a policy of neutrality was a political component of this guarantee, Finland would ally itself with no one. Another aspect of the guarantee was that Finnish defenses had to be sufficiently strong to defend the nation's territory. This policy remained the core of Finland's foreign relations for the rest of the Cold War era.\nIn 1952, Finland and the countries of the Nordic Council entered into a passport union, allowing their citizens to cross borders without passports and soon also to apply for jobs and claim social security benefits in the other countries. Many from Finland used this opportunity to secure better-paying jobs in Sweden in the 1950s and 1960s, dominating Sweden's first wave of post-war labour immigrants. Although Finnish wages and standard of living could not compete with wealthy Sweden until the 1970s, the Finnish economy rose remarkably from the ashes of World War II, resulting in the buildup of another Nordic-style welfare state.\nDespite the passport union with Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Iceland, Finland could not join the Nordic Council until 1955 because of Soviet fears that Finland might become too close to the West. At that time the Soviet Union saw the Nordic Council as part of NATO of which Denmark, Norway and Iceland were members. That same year Finland joined the United Nations, though it had already been associated with a number of UN specialized organisations. The first Finnish ambassador to the UN was G.A. Gripenberg (1956\u20131959), followed by Ralph Enckell (1959\u20131965), Max Jakobson (1965\u20131972), Aarno Karhilo (1972\u20131977), Ilkka Pastinen (1977\u20131983), Keijo Korhonen (1983\u20131988), Klaus T\u00f6rnudd (1988\u20131991), Wilhelm Breitenstein (1991\u20131998) and Marjatta Rasi (1998\u20132005). In 1972 Max Jakobson was a candidate for Secretary-General of the UN. In another remarkable event of 1955, the Soviet Union decided to return the Porkkala peninsula to Finland, which had been rented to the Soviet Union in 1948 for 50 years as a military base, a situation which somewhat endangered Finnish sovereignty and neutrality.\nOfficially claiming to be neutral, Finland lay in the grey zone between the Western countries and the Soviet Union, and it also developed into one of the centres of the East-West espionage, in which both the KGB and the CIA played their parts. The 1949 established Finnish Security Intelligence Service (\"SUPO, Suojelupoliisi\"), an operational security authority and a police unit under the Interior Ministry, whose core areas of activity are counter-Intelligence, counter-terrorism and national security, also participated in this activity in some places. The Finno-Soviet Treaty of 1948 (Finno-Soviet Pact of \"Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance\") gave the Soviet Union some leverage in Finnish domestic politics. However, Finland maintained capitalism unlike most other countries bordering the Soviet Union. Property rights were strong. While nationalization committees were set up in France and UK, Finland avoided nationalizations. After failed experiments with protectionism in the 1950s, Finland eased restrictions and committed to a series of international free trade agreements: first an associate membership in the European Free Trade Association in 1961, a full membership in 1986 and also an agreement with the European Community in 1973. Local education markets expanded and an increasing number of Finns also went abroad to study in the United States or Western Europe, bringing back advanced skills. There was a quite common, but pragmatic-minded, credit and investment cooperation by state and corporations, though it was considered with suspicion. Support for capitalism was widespread. Savings rate hovered among the world's highest, at around 8% until the 1980s. In the beginning of the 1970s, Finland's GDP per capita reached the level of Japan and the UK. Finland's economic development shared many aspects with export-led Asian countries.\nBuilding on its status as western democratic country with friendly ties with the Soviet Union, Finland pushed to reduce the political and military tensions of cold war. Since the 1960s, Finland urged the formation of a Nordic Nuclear Weapons Free Zone (Nordic NWFZ), and in 1972\u20131973 was the host of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which culminated in the signing of the Helsinki Accords in 1975 and lead to the creation of the OSCE.\nSociety and the welfare state.\nBefore 1940 Finland was a poor rural nation of urban and rural workers and independent farmers. There was a small middle class, employed chiefly as civil servants and in small local businesses. As late as 1950 half of the workers were in agriculture and only a third lived in urban towns. The new jobs in manufacturing, services and trade quickly attracted people to the towns and cities. The average number of births per woman declined from a baby boom peak of 3.5 in 1947 to 1.5 in 1973. When baby boomers entered the workforce, the economy did not generate jobs fast enough and hundreds of thousands emigrated to the more industrialized Sweden, migration peaking in 1969 and 1970 (today 4.7 percent of Swedes speak Finnish).\nBy the 1990s, farm laborers had nearly all moved on, leaving owners of small farms. By 2000 the social structure included a politically active working class, a primarily clerical middle class, and an upper bracket consisting of managers, entrepreneurs, and professionals. The social boundaries between these groups were not distinct. Causes of change included the growth of a mass culture, international standards, social mobility, and acceptance of democracy and equality as typified by the welfare state.\nThe generous system of welfare benefits emerged from a long process of debate, negotiations and maneuvers between efficiency-oriented modernizers on the one hand and Social Democrats and labor unions. A compulsory system provides old-age and disability insurance. The national government provides unemployment insurance, maternity benefits, family allowances, and day-care centers. Health insurance covers most of the cost of outpatient care. The national health act of 1972 provided for the establishment of free health centers in every municipality. There were major cutbacks in the early 1990s, but they were distributed to minimize the harm to the vast majority of voters.\nEconomy.\nThe post-war period was a time of rapid economic growth and increasing social and political stability for Finland. The five decades after the Second World War saw Finland turn from a war-ravaged agrarian society into one of the most technologically advanced countries in the world, with a sophisticated market economy and high standard of living.\nIn 1991, Finland fell into a depression caused by a combination of economic overheating, fixed currency, depressed Western, Soviet, and local markets. Stock market and housing prices declined by 50%. The growth in the 1980s was based on debt and defaults started rolling in. GDP declined by 15% and unemployment increased from a virtual full employment to one fifth of the workforce. The crisis was amplified by trade unions' initial opposition to any reforms. Politicians struggled to cut spending and the public debt doubled to around 60% of GDP. Some 7\u20138% of GDP was needed to bail out failing banks and force banking sector consolidation. After devaluations the depression bottomed out in 1993.\nPost-Cold War history.\nThe GDP growth rate has since been one of the highest of OECD countries and Finland has topped many indicators of national performance.\nUntil 1991, President Mauno Koivisto and two of the three major parties, Center Party and the Social Democrats opposed the idea of European Union membership and preferred entering into the European Economic Area treaty. However, after Sweden had submitted its membership application in 1991 and the Soviet Union was dissolved at the end of the year, Finland submitted its own application to the EU in March 1992. The accession process was marked by heavy public debate, where the differences of opinion did not follow party lines. Officially, all three major parties were supporting the Union membership, but members of all parties participated in the campaign against the membership. Before the parliamentary decision to join the EU, a consultative referendum was held on 16 April 1994, in which 56.9% of the votes were in favour of joining. The process of accession was completed on 1 January 1995, when Finland joined the European Union along with Austria and Sweden. Leading Finland into the EU is held as the main achievement of the Centrist-Conservative government of Esko Aho then in power.\nIn the economic policy, the EU membership brought with it many large changes. While politicians were previously involved in setting interest rates, the Bank of Finland was given an inflation-targeting mandate until Finland joined the eurozone. During Prime Minister Paavo Lipponen's two successive governments 1995\u20132003, several large state companies were privatized fully or partially. Matti Vanhanen's two cabinets followed suit until autumn 2008, when the state became a major shareholder in the Finnish telecom company Elisa with the intention to secure the Finnish ownership of a strategically important industry.\nIn 2000, Finland's first female president, Tarja Halonen, took office. The former President of Finland, Martti Ahtisaari, received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2008. President Halonen was succeeded by President Sauli Niinist\u00f6, holding office since 2012 until 2024. \nIn addition to fast integration with the European Union, safety against Russian leverage has been increased by building fully NATO-compatible military. 1000 troops (a high per-capita amount) are simultaneously committed in NATO and UN operations. Finland has also opposed energy projects that increase dependency on Russian imports. For a long time, Finland remained one of the last non-NATO members in Europe, without enough support for full membership unless Sweden joined first.\nOn 24 February 2022, the Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered the Russian Armed Forces to begin the invasion of Ukraine. On 25 February, a Russian Foreign Ministry spokesperson threatened Finland and Sweden with \"military and political consequences\" if they attempted to join NATO, which neither were actively seeking. After the invasion public support for membership rose significantly.\nOn 4 April 2023, the last NATO members ratified Finland's application to join the alliance, making Finland the 31st member. On 1 March 2024, Alexander Stubb, a staunch supporter of NATO, was sworn in as Finland's new president. In July 2024, Stubb approved a Defence Cooperation Agreement between Finland and the United States.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14379", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14379", "title": "Holy Spirit", "text": "Religious concept with varied meanings\nThe Holy Spirit, otherwise known as the Holy Ghost, is a concept within the Abrahamic religions. In Judaism, the Holy Spirit is understood as the divine quality or force of God manifesting in the world, particularly in acts of prophecy, creation and guidance. In Nicene Christianity, this conception expanded in meaning to represent the third person of the Trinity, co-equal and co-eternal with God the Father and God the Son. In Islam, the Holy Spirit acts as an agent of divine action or communication. In the Baha\u2019i Faith, the Holy Spirit is seen as the intermediary between God and man and \"the outpouring grace of God and the effulgent rays that emanate from His Manifestation\".\nComparative religion.\nThe Hebrew Bible contains the term \"spirit of God\" (\"\") which by Jews is interpreted in the sense of the might of a unitary God. This interpretation is different from the Nicene Christian conception of the Holy Spirit as one person of the Trinity.\nThe Christian concept tends to emphasize the moral aspect of the Holy Spirit as a common expression in the New Testament. For instance, the book of Acts emphasizes the power of ministry aspect of the Holy Spirit.\nIn general, Jews reject any conception of a co-equal, multi-person godhead; anything but an absolute monotheism is contrary to the Shema. They do not consider the Hebrew word for \"one\" (Hebrew: \u05d0\u05d7\u05d3, \"ekhad\") as meaning anything other than a simple numerical \"one\". The rabbinical understanding of the Holy Spirit has a certain degree of personification, but it remains, \"a quality belonging to God, one of his attributes\". The idea of God as a duality or trinity is considered \"shituf\" (or \"not purely monotheistic\").\nAccording to theologian Rudolf Bultmann, there are two ways to think about the Holy Spirit: \"animistic\" and \"dynamistic\". In animistic thinking, he is \"an independent agent, a personal power which (...) can fall upon a man and take possession of him, enabling him or compelling him to perform manifestations of power\" while in dynamistic thought it \"appears as an impersonal force which fills a man like a fluid\". Both kinds of thought appear in Jewish and Christian scripture, but animistic is more typical of the Old Testament whereas dynamistic is more common in the New Testament. The distinction coincides with the Holy Spirit as either a temporary or permanent gift. In the Old Testament and Jewish thought, it is primarily temporary with a specific situation or task in mind, whereas in the Christian concept the gift resides in persons permanently.\nOn the surface, the Holy Spirit appears to have an equivalent in non-Abrahamic Hellenistic mystery religions. These religions included a distinction between the spirit and psyche, which is also seen in the Pauline epistles. According to proponents of the History of religions school, the Christian concept of the Holy Spirit cannot be explained from Jewish ideas alone without reference to the Hellenistic religions. But according to theologian Erik Konsmo, the views \"are so dissimilar that the only legitimate connection one can make is with the Greek term \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u1fe6\u03bc\u03b1 [\"pneuma\", Spirit] itself\".\nAnother link with ancient Greek thought is the Stoic idea of the spirit as \"anima mundi \u2013\" or world soul \u2013 that unites all people. Some believe that this can be seen in Paul's formulation of the concept of the Holy Spirit that unites Christians in Jesus Christ and love for one another, but Konsmo again thinks that this position is difficult to maintain. In his Introduction to the 1964 book \"Meditations\", the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth wrote:\nAnother Stoic concept which offered inspiration to the Church was that of \"divine Spirit\". Cleanthes, wishing to give more explicit meaning to Zeno's \"creative fire\", had been the first to hit upon the term \"pneuma\", or \"spirit\", to describe it. Like fire, this intelligent \"spirit\" was imagined as a tenuous substance akin to a current of air or breath, but essentially possessing the quality of warmth; it was immanent in the universe as God, and in man as the soul and life-giving principle. Clearly it is not a long step from this to the \"Holy Spirit\" of Christian theology, the \"Lord and Giver of life\", visibly manifested as tongues of fire at Pentecost and ever since associated \u2013 in the Christian as in the Stoic mind \u2013 with the ideas of vital fire and beneficent warmth.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nThe Hebrew language phrase (, \"holy spirit\" also transliterated ) is used in the Hebrew Bible and Jewish writings to refer to the spirit of YHWH (\u05e8\u05d5\u05d7 \u05d9\u05d4\u05d5\u05d4). The Hebrew terms , \"thy holy spirit\" (), and , \"his holy spirit\" (), also occur (when a possessive suffix is added the definite article \"ha\" is dropped).\nThe Holy Spirit in Judaism generally refers to the divine aspect of prophecy and wisdom. It also refers to the divine force, quality, and influence of the Most High God, over the universe or over his creatures, in given contexts.\nChristianity.\nFor the large majority of Christians, the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost, from Old English , \"spirit\") is the third person of the Trinity: The \"Triune God\" manifested as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; each Person being God. Two symbols from the New Testament canon are associated with the Holy Spirit in Christian iconography: a winged dove, and tongues of fire. Each depiction of the Holy Spirit arose from different accounts in the Gospel narratives; the first being at the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan River where the Holy Spirit was said to descend in the form of a dove as the voice of God the Father spoke as described in Matthew, Mark, and Luke; the second being from the day of Pentecost, fifty days after Passover where the descent of the Holy Spirit came upon the Apostles and other followers of Jesus Christ, as tongues of fire as described in the Acts of the Apostles, as promised by Jesus in his farewell discourse. \nCalled \"the unveiled epiphany of God\", the Holy Spirit is the One who empowers the followers of Jesus with spiritual gifts and power that enables the proclamation of Jesus Christ, and the power that brings conviction of faith.\nIslam.\nThe Holy Spirit (, \"the Spirit of Holiness\") is mentioned four times in the Qur'an, where it acts as an agent of divine action or communication. The Muslim interpretation of the Holy Spirit is generally consistent with other interpretations based upon the Old and the New Testaments. On the basis of narrations in certain Hadith, some Muslims identify it with the angel Gabriel (Arabic ). The Spirit ( , without the adjective \"holy\" or \"exalted\") is described, among other things, as the creative spirit from God by which God enlivened Adam, and which inspired in various ways God's messengers and prophets, including Jesus and Abraham. The belief in a \"Holy Trinity\", according to the Qur'an, is forbidden and deemed to be blasphemy. The same prohibition applies to any idea of the duality of God (Allah).\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith has the concept of the \"Most Great Spirit\", seen as the bounty of God. It is usually used to describe the descent of the Spirit of God upon the messengers/prophets of God who include, among others, Jesus, Muhammad and Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h.\nIn Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief, the Holy Spirit is the conduit through which the wisdom of God becomes directly associated with his messenger, and it has been described variously in different religions such as the burning bush to Moses, the sacred fire to Zoroaster, the dove to Jesus, the angel Gabriel to Muhammad, and the Maid of Heaven to Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h (founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith). The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed view rejects the idea that the Holy Spirit is a partner to God in the Godhead, but rather is the pure essence of God's attributes.\nOther religions.\nHinduism.\nThe theologian Raimon Panikkar believed the Hindu concept of Advaita was linked to the Trinity. He stated that the Holy Spirit, as one of the Three Persons of the Trinity of \"father, Logos and Holy Spirit\", was a bridge-builder between Christianity and Hinduism, despite Shiva and the Holy Spirit occupying vastly different roles in their respective religions. He explains that: \"The meeting of spiritualistic can take place in the Spirit. No new 'system' has primarily to come of this encounter, but a new and yet old spirit must emerge.\" \"Atman\" is Vedic terminology elaborated in Hindu scriptures such as Upanishads and Vedanta signifies the Ultimate Reality and Absolute.\nZoroastrianism.\nIn Zoroastrianism, the Holy Spirit, also known as Spenta Mainyu, is a hypostasis of Ahura Mazda, the supreme Creator God of Zoroastrianism; the Holy Spirit is seen as the source of all goodness in the universe, the spark of all life within humanity, and is the ultimate guide for humanity to righteousness and communion with God. The Holy Spirit is put in direct opposition to its eternal dual counterpart, Angra Mainyu, who is the source of all wickedness and who leads humanity astray.\nGnosticism.\nThe ancient Gnostic text known as the Secret Book of John refers to the supreme female principle Barbelo as the Holy Spirit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14380", "revid": "42945107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14380", "title": "Helium-3", "text": "Helium isotope with two protons and one neutron\nHelium-3 (3He see also helion) is a light, stable isotope of helium with two protons and one neutron. (In contrast, the most common isotope, helium-4, has two protons and two neutrons.) Helium-3 and hydrogen-1 are the only stable nuclides with more protons than neutrons. It was discovered in 1939. Helium-3 atoms are fermionic and become a superfluid at the temperature of 2.491\u00a0mK.\nHelium-3 occurs as a primordial nuclide, escaping from Earth's crust into its atmosphere and into outer space over millions of years. It is also thought to be a natural nucleogenic and cosmogenic nuclide, one produced when lithium is bombarded by natural neutrons, which can be released by spontaneous fission and by nuclear reactions with cosmic rays. Some found in the terrestrial atmosphere is a remnant of atmospheric and underwater nuclear weapons testing.\nNuclear fusion using helium-3 has long been viewed as a desirable future energy source. The fusion of two of its atoms would be aneutronic, that is, it would not release the dangerous radiation of traditional fusion or require the much higher temperatures thereof. The process may unavoidably create other reactions that themselves would cause the surrounding material to become radioactive.\nHelium-3 is thought to be more abundant on the Moon than on Earth, having been deposited in the upper layer of regolith by the solar wind over billions of years, though still lower in abundance than in the Solar System's gas giants.\nHistory.\nThe existence of helium-3 was first proposed in 1934 by the Australian nuclear physicist Mark Oliphant while he was working at the University of Cambridge Cavendish Laboratory. Oliphant had performed experiments in which fast deuterons collided with deuteron targets (incidentally, the first demonstration of nuclear fusion). Isolation of helium-3 was first accomplished by Luis Alvarez and Robert Cornog in 1939. Helium-3 was thought to be a radioactive isotope until it was also found in samples of natural helium, which is mostly helium-4, taken both from the terrestrial atmosphere and from natural gas wells.\nPhysical properties.\nDue to its low atomic mass of 3.016\u00a0Da, helium-3 has some physical properties different from those of helium-4, with a mass of 4.0026\u00a0Da. On account of the weak, induced dipole\u2013dipole interaction between the helium atoms, their microscopic physical properties are mainly determined by their zero-point energy. Also, the microscopic properties of helium-3 cause it to have a higher zero-point energy than helium-4. This implies that helium-3 can overcome dipole\u2013dipole interactions with less thermal energy than helium-4 can.\nThe quantum mechanical effects on helium-3 and helium-4 are significantly different because with two protons, two neutrons, and two electrons, helium-4 has an overall spin of zero, making it a boson, but with one fewer neutron, helium-3 has an overall spin of one half, making it a fermion.\nPure helium-3 gas boils at 3.19\u00a0K compared with helium-4 at 4.23\u00a0K, and its critical point is also lower at 3.35\u00a0K, compared with helium-4 at 5.2\u00a0K. Helium-3 has less than half the density of helium-4 when it is at its boiling point: 59\u00a0g/L compared to 125\u00a0g/L of helium-4 at a pressure of one atmosphere. Its latent heat of vaporization is also considerably lower at 0.026\u00a0kJ/mol compared with the 0.0829\u00a0kJ/mol of helium-4.\nSuperfluidity.\nAn important property of helium-3 atoms, which distinguishes them from the more common helium-4, is that they contain an odd number of spin &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 particles, and therefore are composite fermions. This is a direct result of the addition rules for quantized angular momentum. In contrast, helium-4 atoms are bosons, containing an even number of spin- particles. At low temperatures (about 2.17\u00a0K), helium-4 undergoes a phase transition: A fraction of it enters a superfluid phase that can be roughly understood as a type of Bose\u2013Einstein condensate. Such a mechanism is not available for fermionic helium-3 atoms. Many speculated that helium-3 could also become a superfluid at much lower temperatures, if the atoms formed into \"pairs\" analogous to Cooper pairs in the BCS theory of superconductivity. Each Cooper pair, having integer spin, can be thought of as a boson. During the 1970s, David Lee, Douglas Osheroff and Robert Coleman Richardson discovered two phase transitions along the melting curve, which were soon realized to be the two superfluid phases of helium-3. The transition to a superfluid occurs at 2.491 millikelvins on the melting curve. They were awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery. Alexei Abrikosov, Vitaly Ginzburg, and Tony Leggett won the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on refining understanding of the superfluid phase of helium-3.\nIn a zero magnetic field, there are two distinct superfluid phases of 3He, the A-phase and the B-phase. The B-phase is the low-temperature, low-pressure phase which has an isotropic energy gap. The A-phase is the higher temperature, higher pressure phase that is further stabilized by a magnetic field and has two point nodes in its gap. The presence of two phases is a clear indication that 3He is an unconventional superfluid (superconductor), since the presence of two phases requires an additional symmetry, other than gauge symmetry, to be broken. In fact, it is a p-wave superfluid, with spin one, S = 1 \"\u0127\", and angular momentum one, L = 1 \"\u0127\". The ground state corresponds to total angular momentum zero, J = S + L = 0 (vector addition). Excited states are possible with non-zero total angular momentum, J &gt; 0, which are excited pair collective modes. These collective modes have been studied with much greater precision than in any other unconventional pairing system, because of the extreme purity of superfluid 3He. This purity is due to all 4He phase separating entirely and all other materials solidifying and sinking to the bottom of the liquid, making the A- and B-phases of 3He the most pure condensed matter state possible.\nNatural abundance.\nTerrestrial abundance.\n3He is a primordial substance in the Earth's mantle, thought to have been trapped during the planet's initial formation. The ratio of 3He to 4He within the Earth's crust and mantle is less than that in the solar disk (as estimated using meteorite and lunar samples), with terrestrial materials generally containing lower 3He/4He ratios due to production of 4He from radioactive decay.\n3He has a cosmological ratio of 300 atoms per million atoms of 4He, leading to the assumption that the original ratio of these primordial gases in the mantle was around 200\u2013300\u00a0ppm when Earth was formed. Over the course of Earth's history, a significant amount of 4He has been generated by the alpha decay of uranium, thorium and other radioactive isotopes, to the point that only around 7% of the helium now in the mantle is primordial helium, thus lowering the total 3He:4He ratio to around 20 ppm. Ratios of 3He:4He in excess of the atmospheric ratio are indicative of a contribution of 3He from the mantle. Crustal sources are dominated by the 4He produced by radioactive decay.\nThe ratio of helium-3 to helium-4 in natural Earth-bound sources varies greatly. Samples of the lithium ore spodumene from Edison Mine, South Dakota were found to contain 12 parts of helium-3 to a million parts of helium-4. Samples from other mines showed 2 parts per million.\nHelium itself is present as up to 7% of some natural gas sources, and large sources have over 0.5% (above 0.2% makes it viable to extract). The fraction of 3He in helium separated from natural gas in the U.S. was found to range from 70 to 242 parts per billion.&lt;ref name=\"BoM/DoI\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Hence the US 2002 stockpile of 1 billion normal m3 would have contained about of helium-3. According to American physicist Richard Garwin, about or almost of 3He is available annually for separation from the US natural gas stream. If the process of separating out the 3He could employ as feedstock the liquefied helium typically used to transport and store bulk quantities, estimates for the incremental energy cost range from NTP, excluding the cost of infrastructure and equipment. Algeria's annual gas production is assumed to contain 100 million normal cubic metres and this would contain between of helium-3 (about ) assuming a similar 3He fraction.\n3He is also present in the Earth's atmosphere. The natural abundance of 3He in atmospheric helium is (1.37 parts per million). The partial pressure of helium in the Earth's atmosphere is about , and thus helium accounts for 5.2 parts per million of the total pressure () in the Earth's atmosphere, and 3He thus accounts for 7.2 parts per trillion of the atmosphere. Since the atmosphere of the Earth has a mass of about , the mass of 3He in the Earth's atmosphere is the product of these numbers and the molecular weight ratio of helium-3 to air (3.016 to 28.95), giving a mass of 3815 tonnes of helium-3 in the earth's atmosphere.\n3He is produced on Earth from three sources: lithium spallation, cosmic rays, and beta decay of tritium (3H). The contribution from cosmic rays is negligible within all except the oldest regolith materials, and lithium spallation reactions are a lesser contributor than the production of 4He by alpha particle emissions.\nThe total amount of helium-3 in the mantle may be in the range of 0.1\u20131 megatonnes. Some helium-3 finds its way up through deep-sourced hotspot volcanoes such as those of the Hawaiian Islands, but only per year is emitted to the atmosphere. Mid-ocean ridges emit another 3\u00a0kg per year. Around subduction zones, various sources produce helium-3 in natural gas deposits which possibly contain a thousand tonnes of helium-3 (although there may be 25 thousand tonnes if all ancient subduction zones have such deposits). Wittenberg estimated that United States crustal natural gas sources may have only half a tonne total. Wittenberg cited Anderson's estimate of another 1200 tonnes in interplanetary dust particles on the ocean floors. In the 1994 study, extracting helium-3 from these sources consumes more energy than fusion would release.\nMoon.\nMaterials on the Moon's surface contain helium-3 at concentrations between 1.4 and 15 ppb in sunlit areas, and may contain concentrations as much as 50 ppb in permanently shadowed regions. A number of people, starting with Gerald Kulcinski in 1986, have proposed to explore the Moon, mine lunar regolith and use the helium-3 for fusion. Because of the low concentrations of helium-3, any mining equipment would need to process extremely large amounts of regolith (over 150 tonnes of regolith to obtain one gram of helium-3).\nThe primary objective of Indian Space Research Organisation's first lunar probe called Chandrayaan-1, launched on October 22, 2008, was reported in some sources to be mapping the Moon's surface for helium-3-containing minerals. No such objective is mentioned in the project's official list of goals, though many of its scientific payloads have held helium-3-related applications.\nCosmochemist and geochemist Ouyang Ziyuan from the Chinese Academy of Sciences who is now in charge of the Chinese Lunar Exploration Program has already stated on many occasions that one of the main goals of the program would be the mining of helium-3, from which operation \"each year, three space shuttle missions could bring enough fuel for all human beings across the world\".\nIn January 2006, the Russian space company RKK Energiya announced that it considers lunar helium-3 a potential economic resource to be mined by 2020, if funding can be found.\nNot all writers feel the extraction of lunar helium-3 is feasible, or even that there will be a demand for it for fusion. Dwayne Day, writing in \"The Space Review\" in 2015, characterises helium-3 extraction from the Moon for use in fusion as magical thinking about an unproven technology, and questions the feasibility of lunar extraction, as compared to production on Earth.\nGas giants.\nMining gas giants for helium-3 has also been proposed. The British Interplanetary Society's hypothetical Project Daedalus interstellar probe design was fueled by helium-3 mines in the atmosphere of Jupiter, for example.\nSolar nebula (primordial) abundance.\nOne early estimate of the primordial ratio of 3He to 4He in the solar nebula has been the measurement of their ratio in the atmosphere of Jupiter, measured by the mass spectrometer of the Galileo atmospheric entry probe. This ratio is about 1:10000, or 100 parts of 3He per million parts of 4He. This is roughly the same ratio of the isotopes as in lunar regolith, which contains 28\u00a0ppm helium-4 and 2.8\u00a0ppb helium-3 (which is at the lower end of actual sample measurements, which vary from about 1.4 to 15\u00a0ppb). Terrestrial ratios of the isotopes are lower by a factor of 100, mainly due to enrichment of helium-4 stocks in the mantle by billions of years of alpha decay from uranium, thorium as well as their decay products and extinct radionuclides.\nHuman production.\nTritium decay.\nVirtually all helium-3 used in industry today is produced from the radioactive decay of tritium, given its very low natural abundance and its very high cost.\nProduction, sales and distribution of helium-3 in the United States are managed by the US Department of Energy (DOE) DOE Isotope Program.\nWhile tritium has several different experimentally determined values of its half-life, NIST lists (). It decays into helium-3 by beta decay as in this nuclear equation:\nAmong the total released energy of , the part taken by electron's kinetic energy varies, with an average of , while the remaining energy is carried off by the nearly undetectable electron antineutrino. \nBeta particles from tritium can penetrate only about of air, and they are incapable of passing through the dead outermost layer of human skin. The unusually low energy released in the tritium beta decay makes the decay (along with that of rhenium-187) appropriate for absolute neutrino mass measurements in the laboratory (the most recent experiment being KATRIN).\nThe low energy of tritium's radiation makes it difficult to detect tritium-labeled compounds except by using liquid scintillation counting.\nTritium is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen and is typically produced by bombarding lithium-6 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. The lithium nucleus absorbs a neutron and splits into helium-4 and tritium. Tritium decays into helium-3 with a half-life of , so helium-3 can be produced by simply storing the tritium until it undergoes radioactive decay. As tritium forms a stable compound with oxygen (tritiated water) while helium-3 does not, the storage and collection process could continuously collect the material that outgasses from the stored material.\nTritium is a critical component of nuclear weapons and historically it was produced and stockpiled primarily for this application. The decay of tritium into helium-3 reduces the explosive power of the fusion warhead, so periodically the accumulated helium-3 must be removed from warhead reservoirs and tritium in storage. Helium-3 removed during this process is marketed for other applications.\nFor decades this has been, and remains, the principal source of the world's helium-3. Since the signing of the START I Treaty in 1991 the number of nuclear warheads that are kept ready for use has decreased. This has reduced the quantity of helium-3 available from this source. Helium-3 stockpiles have been further diminished by increased demand, primarily for use in neutron radiation detectors and medical diagnostic procedures. US industrial demand for helium-3 reached a peak of \u00a0litres (approximately ) per year in 2008. Price at auction, historically about $100 per litre, reached as high as $2000 per litre. Since then, demand for helium-3 has declined to about 6000 litres per year due to the high cost and efforts by the DOE to recycle it and find substitutes. Assuming a density of at $100/L helium-3 would be about a thirtieth as expensive as tritium (roughly $880/g vs. roughly $ per gram) while at $2000 per litre, helium-3 would be about half as expensive as tritium ($/g vs. $/g).\nThe DOE recognized the developing shortage of both tritium and helium-3, and began producing tritium by lithium irradiation at the Tennessee Valley Authority's Watts Bar Nuclear Generating Station in 2010. In this process tritium-producing burnable absorber rods (TPBARs) containing lithium in a ceramic form are inserted into the reactor in place of the normal boron control rods Periodically the TPBARs are replaced and the tritium extracted.\nCurrently only two commercial nuclear reactors (Watts Bar Nuclear Plant Units 1 and 2) are being used for tritium production but the process could, if necessary, be vastly scaled up to meet any conceivable demand simply by utilizing more of the nation's power reactors. \nSubstantial quantities of tritium and helium-3 could also be extracted from the heavy water moderator in CANDU nuclear reactors. India and Canada, the two countries with the largest heavy water reactor fleet, are both known to extract tritium from moderator/coolant heavy water, but those amounts are not nearly enough to satisfy global demand of either tritium or helium-3.\nAs tritium is also produced inadvertently in various processes in light water reactors (see \"Tritium\" for details), extraction from those sources could be another source of helium-3. If the annual discharge of tritium (per 2018 figures) at La Hague reprocessing facility is taken as a basis, the amounts discharged ( at La Hague) are not nearly enough to satisfy demand, even if 100% recovery is achieved.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nHelium-3 spin echo.\nHelium-3 can be used to do spin echo experiments of surface dynamics, which are underway at the Surface Physics Group at the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge and in the Chemistry Department at Swansea University.\nNeutron detection.\nHelium-3 is an important isotope in instrumentation for neutron detection. It has a high absorption cross section for thermal neutron beams and is used as a converter gas in neutron detectors. The neutron is converted through the nuclear reaction\nn + 3He \u2192 3H + 1H + 0.764\u00a0MeV\ninto charged particles tritium ions (T, 3H) and Hydrogen ions, or protons (p, 1H) which then are detected by creating a charge cloud in the stopping gas of a proportional counter or a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube.\nFurthermore, the absorption process is strongly spin-dependent, which allows a spin-polarized helium-3 volume to transmit neutrons with one spin component while absorbing the other. This effect is employed in neutron polarization analysis, a technique which probes for magnetic properties of matter.\nThe United States Department of Homeland Security had hoped to deploy detectors to spot smuggled plutonium in shipping containers by their neutron emissions, but the worldwide shortage of helium-3 following the drawdown in nuclear weapons production since the Cold War has to some extent prevented this. As of 2012, DHS determined the commercial supply of boron-10 would support converting its neutron detection infrastructure to that technology.\nCryogenics.\nHelium-3 refrigerators are devices used in experimental physics for obtaining temperatures down to about 0.2 kelvin. By evaporative cooling of helium-4, a 1-K pot liquefies a small amount of helium-3 in a small vessel called a helium-3 pot. Evaporative cooling at low pressure of the liquid helium-3, usually driven by adsorption since, due to its high price, the helium-3 is usually contained in a closed system to avoid losses, cools the helium-3 pot to a fraction of a kelvin.\nA dilution refrigerator uses a mixture of helium-3 and helium-4 to reach cryogenic temperatures as low as a few thousandths of a kelvin.\nNuclear magnetic resonance.\nHelium-3 nuclei have an intrinsic nuclear spin of \u00a0\"\u0127\", and a relatively high gyromagnetic ratio. Because of this, it is possible to use Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to observe helium-3. This analytical technique, usually called 3He-NMR, can be used to identify helium-containing compounds. It is however limited by the low abundance of helium-3 in comparison to helium-4, which is itself not NMR-active.\nHelium-3 can be hyperpolarized using non-equilibrium means such as spin-exchange optical pumping. During this process, circularly polarized infrared laser light, tuned to the appropriate wavelength, is used to excite electrons in an alkali metal, such as caesium or rubidium inside a sealed glass vessel. The angular momentum is transferred from the alkali metal electrons to the noble gas nuclei through collisions. In essence, this process effectively aligns the nuclear spins with the magnetic field in order to enhance the NMR signal.\nThe hyperpolarized gas may then be stored at pressures of 10\u00a0atm, for up to 100 hours. Following inhalation, gas mixtures containing the hyperpolarized helium-3 gas can be imaged with an MRI scanner to produce anatomical and functional images of lung ventilation. This technique is also able to produce images of the airway tree, locate unventilated defects, measure the alveolar oxygen partial pressure, and measure the ventilation/perfusion ratio. This technique may be critical for the diagnosis and treatment management of chronic respiratory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema, cystic fibrosis, and asthma.\nBecause a helium atom, or even two helium atoms, can be encased in fullerene-like cages, the NMR spectroscopy of this element can be a sensitive probe for changes of the carbon framework around it. Using carbon-13 NMR to analyze fullerenes themselves is complicated by so many subtle differences among the carbons in anything but the simplest, highly symmetric structures.\nRadio energy absorber for tokamak plasma experiments.\nBoth MIT's Alcator C-Mod tokamak and the Joint European Torus (JET) have experimented with adding a little helium-3 to a H\u2013D plasma to increase the absorption of radio-frequency (RF) energy to heat the hydrogen and deuterium ions, a \"three-ion\" effect.\nNuclear fuel.\n can be produced by the low temperature fusion of (D-p)2H + 1p \u2192 + \u03b3 + 4.98 MeV. If the fusion temperature is below that for the helium nuclei to fuse, the reaction produces a high energy alpha particle which quickly acquires an electron producing a stable light helium ion which can be utilized directly as a source of electricity without producing dangerous neutrons. \n can be used in fusion reactions by either of the reactions + 18.3\u00a0MeV, or + 12.86\u00a0MeV.\nThe conventional deuterium + tritium (\"D\u2013T\") fusion process produces energetic neutrons which render reactor components radioactive with activation products. The appeal of helium-3 fusion stems from the aneutronic nature of its reaction products. Helium-3 itself is non-radioactive. The lone high-energy by-product, the proton, can be contained by means of electric and magnetic fields. The momentum energy of this proton (created in the fusion process) will interact with the containing electromagnetic field, resulting in direct net electricity generation.\nBecause of the higher Coulomb barrier, the temperatures required for fusion are much higher than those of conventional D\u2013T fusion. Moreover, since both reactants need to be mixed together to fuse, reactions between nuclei of the same reactant will occur, and the D\u2013D reaction () does produce a neutron. Reaction rates vary with temperature, but the D\u2013 reaction rate is never greater than 3.56 times the D\u2013D reaction rate (see graph). Therefore, fusion using D\u2013 fuel at the right temperature and a D-lean fuel mixture, can produce a much lower neutron flux than D\u2013T fusion, but is not clean, negating some of its main attraction.\nThe second possibility, fusing with itself (), requires even higher temperatures (since now both reactants have a +2 charge), and thus is even more difficult than the D- reaction. It offers a theoretical reaction that produces no neutrons; the charged protons produced can be contained in electric and magnetic fields, which in turn directly generates electricity. fusion is feasible as demonstrated in the laboratory and has immense advantages, but commercial viability is many years in the future.\nThe amounts of helium-3 needed as a replacement for conventional fuels are substantial by comparison to amounts currently available. The total amount of energy produced in the reaction is 18.4 MeV, which corresponds to some 493 megawatt-hours (4.93\u00d7108 W\u00b7h) per three grams (one mole) of . If the total amount of energy could be converted to electrical power with 100% efficiency (a physical impossibility), it would correspond to about 30 minutes of output of a gigawatt electrical plant per mole of . Thus, a year's production (at 6 grams for each operation hour) would require 52.5 kilograms of helium-3. The amount of fuel needed for large-scale applications can also be put in terms of total consumption: electricity consumption by 107 million U.S. households in 2001 totaled 1,140 billion kW\u00b7h (). Again assuming 100% conversion efficiency, 6.7 tonnes per year of helium-3 would be required for that segment of the energy demand of the United States, 15 to 20 tonnes per year given a more realistic end-to-end conversion efficiency.\nA second-generation approach to controlled fusion power involves combining helium-3 and deuterium. This reaction produces an alpha particle and a high-energy proton. The most important potential advantage of this fusion reaction for power production as well as other applications lies in its compatibility with the use of electrostatic fields to control fuel ions and the fusion protons. High speed protons, as positively charged particles, can have their kinetic energy converted directly into electricity, through use of solid-state conversion materials as well as other techniques. Potential conversion efficiencies of 70% may be possible, as there is no need to convert proton energy to heat in order to drive a turbine-powered electrical generator.\nHe-3 power plants.\nThere have been many claims about the capabilities of helium-3 power plants. According to proponents, fusion power plants operating on deuterium and helium-3 would offer lower capital and operating costs than their competitors due to less technical complexity, higher conversion efficiency, smaller size, the absence of radioactive fuel, no air or water pollution, and only low-level radioactive waste disposal requirements. Recent estimates suggest that about $6 billion in investment capital will be required to develop and construct the first helium-3 fusion power plant. Financial break even at today's wholesale electricity prices (5 US cents per kilowatt-hour) would occur after five 1-gigawatt plants were on line, replacing old conventional plants or meeting new demand.\nThe reality is not so clear-cut. The most advanced fusion programs in the world are inertial confinement fusion (such as National Ignition Facility) and magnetic confinement fusion (such as ITER and Wendelstein 7-X). In the case of the former, there is no solid roadmap to power generation. In the case of the latter, commercial power generation is not expected until around 2050. In both cases, the type of fusion discussed is the simplest: D\u2013T fusion. The reason for this is the very low Coulomb barrier for this reaction; for D+3He, the barrier is much higher, and it is even higher for 3He\u20133He. The immense cost of reactors like ITER and National Ignition Facility are largely due to their immense size, yet to scale up to higher plasma temperatures would require reactors far larger still. The 14.7 MeV proton and 3.6 MeV alpha particle from D\u20133He fusion, plus the higher conversion efficiency, means that more electricity is obtained per kilogram than with D\u2013T fusion (17.6 MeV), but not that much more. As a further downside, the rates of reaction for helium-3 fusion reactions are not particularly high, requiring a reactor that is larger still or more reactors to produce the same amount of electricity.\nIn 2022, Helion Energy claimed that their 7th fusion prototype (Polaris; fully funded and under construction as of September 2022) will demonstrate \"net electricity from fusion\", and will demonstrate \"helium-3 production through deuterium\u2013deuterium fusion\" by means of a \"patented high-efficiency closed-fuel cycle\".\nAlternatives to He-3.\nTo attempt to work around this problem of massively large power plants that may not even be economical with D\u2013T fusion, let alone the far more challenging D\u20133He fusion, a number of other reactors have been proposed\u00a0\u2013 the Fusor, Polywell, Focus fusion, and many more, though many of these concepts have fundamental problems with achieving a net energy gain, and generally attempt to achieve fusion in thermal disequilibrium, something that could potentially prove impossible, and consequently, these long-shot programs tend to have trouble garnering funding despite their low budgets. Unlike the \"big\" and \"hot\" fusion systems, if such systems worked, they could scale to the higher barrier aneutronic fuels, and so their proponents tend to promote p-B fusion, which requires no exotic fuel such as helium-3.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14381", "revid": "1319970363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14381", "title": "Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)", "text": "Quantum operator for the sum of energies of a system\nIn quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian of a system is an operator corresponding to the total energy of that system, including both kinetic energy and potential energy. Its spectrum, the system's \"energy spectrum\" or its set of \"energy eigenvalues\", is the set of possible outcomes obtainable from a measurement of the system's total energy. Due to its close relation to the energy spectrum and time-evolution of a system, it is of fundamental importance in most formulations of quantum theory.\nThe Hamiltonian is named after William Rowan Hamilton, who developed a revolutionary reformulation of Newtonian mechanics, known as Hamiltonian mechanics, which was historically important to the development of quantum physics. Similar to vector notation, it is typically denoted by formula_1, where the hat indicates that it is an operator. It can also be written as formula_2 or formula_3.\nIntroduction.\nThe Hamiltonian of a system represents the total energy of the system; that is, the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of all particles associated with the system. The Hamiltonian takes different forms and can be simplified in some cases by taking into account the concrete characteristics of the system under analysis, such as single or several particles in the system, interaction between particles, kind of potential energy, time varying potential or time independent one.\nSchr\u00f6dinger Hamiltonian.\nOne particle.\nBy analogy with classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian is commonly expressed as the sum of operators corresponding to the kinetic and potential energies of a system in the form\nformula_4\nwhere\nformula_5\nis the potential energy operator and\nformula_6\nis the kinetic energy operator in which formula_7 is the mass of the particle, the dot denotes the dot product of vectors, and\nformula_8\nis the momentum operator where a formula_9 is the del operator. The dot product of formula_9 with itself is the Laplacian formula_11. In three dimensions using Cartesian coordinates the Laplace operator is\nformula_12\nAlthough this is not the technical definition of the Hamiltonian in classical mechanics, it is the form it most commonly takes. Combining these yields the form used in the Schr\u00f6dinger equation:\nformula_13\nwhich allows one to apply the Hamiltonian to systems described by a wave function formula_14. This is the approach commonly taken in introductory treatments of quantum mechanics, using the formalism of Schr\u00f6dinger's wave mechanics.\nOne can also make substitutions to certain variables to fit specific cases, such as some involving electromagnetic fields.\nExpectation value.\nIt can be shown that the expectation value of the Hamiltonian which gives the energy expectation value will always be greater than or equal to the minimum potential of the system.\nConsider computing the expectation value of kinetic energy:\nformula_15\nHence the expectation value of kinetic energy is always non-negative. This result can be used to calculate the expectation value of the total energy which is given for a normalized wavefunction as:\nformula_16\nwhich complete the proof. Similarly, the condition can be generalized to any higher dimensions using divergence theorem.\nMany particles.\nThe formalism can be extended to formula_17 particles:\nformula_18\nwhere\nformula_19\nis the potential energy function, now a function of the spatial configuration of the system and time (a particular set of spatial positions at some instant of time defines a configuration) and\nformula_20\nis the kinetic energy operator of particle formula_21, formula_22 is the gradient for particle formula_21, and formula_24 is the Laplacian for particle n:\nformula_25\nCombining these yields the Schr\u00f6dinger Hamiltonian for the formula_17-particle case:\nformula_27\nHowever, complications can arise in the many-body problem. Since the potential energy depends on the spatial arrangement of the particles, the kinetic energy will also depend on the spatial configuration to conserve energy. The motion due to any one particle will vary due to the motion of all the other particles in the system. For this reason cross terms for kinetic energy may appear in the Hamiltonian; a mix of the gradients for two particles:\nformula_28\nwhere formula_29 denotes the mass of the collection of particles resulting in this extra kinetic energy. Terms of this form are known as \"mass polarization terms\", and appear in the Hamiltonian of many-electron atoms (see below).\nFor formula_17 interacting particles, i.e. particles which interact mutually and constitute a many-body situation, the potential energy function formula_31 is \"not\" simply a sum of the separate potentials (and certainly not a product, as this is dimensionally incorrect). The potential energy function can only be written as above: a function of all the spatial positions of each particle.\nFor non-interacting particles, i.e. particles which do not interact mutually and move independently, the potential of the system is the sum of the separate potential energy for each particle, that is\nformula_32\nThe general form of the Hamiltonian in this case is:\nformula_33\nwhere the sum is taken over all particles and their corresponding potentials; the result is that the Hamiltonian of the system is the sum of the separate Hamiltonians for each particle. This is an idealized situation\u2014in practice the particles are almost always influenced by some potential, and there are many-body interactions. One illustrative example of a two-body interaction where this form would not apply is for electrostatic potentials due to charged particles, because they interact with each other by Coulomb interaction (electrostatic force), as shown below.\nSchr\u00f6dinger equation.\nThe Hamiltonian generates the time evolution of quantum states. If formula_34 is the state of the system at time formula_35, then\nformula_36\nThis equation is the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. It takes the same form as the Hamilton\u2013Jacobi equation, which is one of the reasons formula_2 is also called the Hamiltonian. Given the state at some initial time (formula_38), we can solve it to obtain the state at any subsequent time. In particular, if formula_2 is independent of time, then\nformula_40\nThe exponential operator on the right hand side of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation is usually defined by the corresponding power series in formula_2. One might notice that taking polynomials or power series of unbounded operators that are not defined everywhere may not make mathematical sense. Rigorously, to take functions of unbounded operators, a functional calculus is required. In the case of the exponential function, the continuous, or just the holomorphic functional calculus suffices. We note again, however, that for common calculations the physicists' formulation is quite sufficient.\nBy the *-homomorphism property of the functional calculus, the operator\nformula_42\nis a unitary operator. It is the \"time evolution operator\" or \"propagator\" of a closed quantum system. If the Hamiltonian is time-independent, formula_43 form a one parameter unitary group (more than a semigroup); this gives rise to the physical principle of detailed balance.\nDirac formalism.\nHowever, in the more general formalism of Dirac, the Hamiltonian is typically implemented as an operator on a Hilbert space in the following way:\nThe eigenkets of formula_2, denoted formula_45, provide an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space. The spectrum of allowed energy levels of the system is given by the set of eigenvalues, denoted formula_46, solving the equation:\nformula_47\nSince formula_2 is a Hermitian operator, the energy is always a real number.\nFrom a mathematically rigorous point of view, care must be taken with the above assumptions. Operators on infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces need not have eigenvalues (the set of eigenvalues does not necessarily coincide with the spectrum of an operator). However, all routine quantum mechanical calculations can be done using the physical formulation.\nExpressions for the Hamiltonian.\nFollowing are expressions for the Hamiltonian in a number of situations. Typical ways to classify the expressions are the number of particles, number of dimensions, and the nature of the potential energy function\u2014importantly space and time dependence. Masses are denoted by formula_7, and charges by formula_50.\nFree particle.\nThe particle is not bound by any potential energy, so the potential is zero and this Hamiltonian is the simplest. For one dimension:\nformula_51\nand in higher dimensions:\nformula_52\nConstant-potential well.\nFor a particle in a region of constant potential formula_53 (no dependence on space or time), in one dimension, the Hamiltonian is:\nformula_54\nin three dimensions\nformula_55\nThis applies to the elementary \"particle in a box\" problem, and step potentials.\nSimple harmonic oscillator.\nFor a simple harmonic oscillator in one dimension, the potential varies with position (but not time), according to:\nformula_56\nwhere the angular frequency formula_57, effective spring constant formula_58, and mass formula_7 of the oscillator satisfy:\nformula_60\nso the Hamiltonian is:\nformula_61\nFor three dimensions, this becomes\nformula_62\nwhere the three-dimensional position vector formula_63 using Cartesian coordinates is formula_64, its magnitude is\nformula_65\nWriting the Hamiltonian out in full shows it is simply the sum of the one-dimensional Hamiltonians in each direction:\nformula_66\nRigid rotor.\nFor a rigid rotor\u2014i.e., system of particles which can rotate freely about any axes, not bound in any potential (such as free molecules with negligible vibrational degrees of freedom, say due to double or triple chemical bonds), the Hamiltonian is:\nformula_67\nwhere formula_68, formula_69, and formula_70 are the moment of inertia components (technically the diagonal elements of the moment of inertia tensor), and formula_71, formula_72, and formula_73 are the total angular momentum operators (components), about the formula_74, formula_75, and formula_76 axes respectively.\nElectrostatic (Coulomb) potential.\nThe Coulomb potential energy for two point charges formula_77 and formula_78 (i.e., those that have no spatial extent independently), in three dimensions, is (in SI units\u2014rather than Gaussian units which are frequently used in electromagnetism):\nformula_79\nHowever, this is only the potential for one point charge due to another. If there are many charged particles, each charge has a potential energy due to every other point charge (except itself). For formula_17 charges, the potential energy of charge formula_81 due to all other charges is (see also Electrostatic potential energy stored in a configuration of discrete point charges):\nformula_82\nwhere formula_83 is the electrostatic potential of charge formula_81 at formula_85. The total potential of the system is then the sum over formula_86:\nformula_87\nso the Hamiltonian is:\nformula_88\nElectric dipole in an electric field.\nFor an electric dipole moment formula_89 constituting charges of magnitude formula_50, in a uniform, electrostatic field (time-independent) formula_91, positioned in one place, the potential is:\nformula_92\nthe dipole moment itself is the operator\nformula_93\nSince the particle is stationary, there is no translational kinetic energy of the dipole, so the Hamiltonian of the dipole is just the potential energy:\nformula_94\nMagnetic dipole in a magnetic field.\nFor a magnetic dipole moment formula_95 in a uniform, magnetostatic field (time-independent) formula_96, positioned in one place, the potential is:\nformula_97\nSince the particle is stationary, there is no translational kinetic energy of the dipole, so the Hamiltonian of the dipole is just the potential energy:\nformula_98\nFor a spin-&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 particle, the corresponding spin magnetic moment is:\nformula_99\nwhere formula_100 is the \"spin g-factor\" (not to be confused with the gyromagnetic ratio), formula_101 is the electron charge, formula_102 is the spin operator vector, whose components are the Pauli matrices, hence\nformula_103\nCharged particle in an electromagnetic field.\nFor a particle with mass formula_7 and charge formula_50 in an electromagnetic field, described by the scalar potential formula_106 and vector potential formula_107, there are two parts to the Hamiltonian to substitute for. The canonical momentum operator formula_108, which includes a contribution from the formula_107 field and fulfils the canonical commutation relation, must be quantized;\nformula_110\nwhere formula_111 is the kinetic momentum. The quantization prescription reads\nformula_112\nso the corresponding kinetic energy operator is\nformula_113\nand the potential energy, which is due to the formula_106 field, is given by\nformula_115\nCasting all of these into the Hamiltonian gives\nformula_116\nEnergy eigenket degeneracy, symmetry, and conservation laws.\nIn many systems, two or more energy eigenstates have the same energy. A simple example of this is a free particle, whose energy eigenstates have wavefunctions that are propagating plane waves. The energy of each of these plane waves is inversely proportional to the square of its wavelength. A wave propagating in the formula_74 direction is a different state from one propagating in the formula_75 direction, but if they have the same wavelength, then their energies will be the same. When this happens, the states are said to be \"degenerate\".\nIt turns out that degeneracy occurs whenever a nontrivial unitary operator formula_119 commutes with the Hamiltonian. To see this, suppose that formula_120 is an energy eigenket. Then formula_121 is an energy eigenket with the same eigenvalue, since\nformula_122\nSince formula_119 is nontrivial, at least one pair of formula_120 and formula_121 must represent distinct states. Therefore, formula_2 has at least one pair of degenerate energy eigenkets. In the case of the free particle, the unitary operator which produces the symmetry is the rotation operator, which rotates the wavefunctions by some angle while otherwise preserving their shape.\nThe existence of a symmetry operator implies the existence of a conserved observable. Let formula_127 be the Hermitian generator of formula_119:\nformula_129\nIt is straightforward to show that if formula_119 commutes with formula_2, then so does formula_127:\nformula_133\nTherefore,\nformula_134\nIn obtaining this result, we have used the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, as well as its dual,\nformula_135\nThus, the expected value of the observable formula_127 is conserved for any state of the system. In the case of the free particle, the conserved quantity is the angular momentum.\nHamilton's equations.\nHamilton's equations in classical Hamiltonian mechanics have a direct analogy in quantum mechanics. Suppose we have a set of basis states formula_137, which need not necessarily be eigenstates of the energy. For simplicity, we assume that they are discrete, and that they are orthonormal, i.e.,\nformula_138\nNote that these basis states are assumed to be independent of time. We will assume that the Hamiltonian is also independent of time.\nThe instantaneous state of the system at time formula_35, formula_140, can be expanded in terms of these basis states:\nformula_141\nwhere\nformula_142\nThe coefficients formula_143 are complex variables. We can treat them as coordinates which specify the state of the system, like the position and momentum coordinates which specify a classical system. Like classical coordinates, they are generally not constant in time, and their time dependence gives rise to the time dependence of the system as a whole.\nThe expectation value of the Hamiltonian of this state, which is also the mean energy, is\nformula_144\nwhere the last step was obtained by expanding formula_140 in terms of the basis states.\nEach formula_143 actually corresponds to \"two\" independent degrees of freedom, since the variable has a real part and an imaginary part. We now perform the following trick: instead of using the real and imaginary parts as the independent variables, we use formula_143 and its complex conjugate formula_148. With this choice of independent variables, we can calculate the partial derivative\nformula_149\nBy applying the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and using the orthonormality of the basis states, this further reduces to\nformula_150\nSimilarly, one can show that\nformula_151\nIf we define \"conjugate momentum\" variables formula_152 by\nformula_153\nthen the above equations become\nformula_154\nwhich is precisely the form of Hamilton's equations, with the formula_155s as the generalized coordinates, the formula_152s as the conjugate momenta, and formula_157 taking the place of the classical Hamiltonian.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14382", "revid": "4773966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14382", "title": "Hi-hat", "text": "Percussion instrument\nA hi-hat, hihat, or high-hat is a combination of two cymbals and a pedal, all mounted on a metal stand. It is a part of the standard drum kit used by drummers in many styles of music including rock, pop, jazz, and blues. Hi-hats consist of a matching pair of small to medium-sized cymbals mounted on a stand, with the two cymbals facing each other. The bottom cymbal is fixed and the top is mounted on a rod which moves the top cymbal toward the bottom one when the pedal is depressed (a hi-hat that is in this position is said to be \"closed\" or \"closed hi-hats\").\nThe cymbals may be played by closing them together with the pedal, which creates a \"chck\" sound or striking them with a stick, which may be done with them open, closed, open and then closed after striking to dampen the ring, or closed and then opened to create a shimmering effect at the end of the note. Depending on how hard a hi-hat is struck and whether it is \"open\" (i.e., pedal not pressed, so the two cymbals are not closed together), a hi-hat can produce a range of dynamics, from very quiet \"chck\" (or \"chick\") sounds, done with merely gently pressing the pedal\u2014this is suitable for soft accompaniment during a ballad or the start of a guitar solo\u2014to very loud (e.g. striking fully open hats hard with sticks, a technique used in loud heavy metal music songs).\nWhile the term \"hi-hat\" normally refers to the entire setup (two cymbals, stand, pedal, rod mechanism), in some cases, drummers use it to refer exclusively to the two cymbals themselves.\nDescription.\nThe hi-hat has two cymbals, which are typically between . They are mounted on a stand, which is linked to a pedal operated by the user's foot so the upper cymbal can move up and down.\nStandard terminology has evolved. Open and closed hi-hat refer to notes struck while the two cymbals are apart or together (open or closed), while pedal hi-hat refers to parts or notes played solely with the pedal used to strike the two cymbals. Most cymbal patterns consist of both open and closed notes.\nHistory.\nInitial versions of the hi-hat were called clangers, which were small cymbals mounted onto a bass drum rim and struck with an arm on the bass drum pedal. Then came shoes, which were two hinged boards with cymbals on the ends that were clashed together. A standard size was , some with heavy bells up to wide.\nHi-hats that were raised and could be played by hand as well as foot may have been developed around 1926 by Barney Walberg of the drum accessory company Walberg and Auge. The first recognized master of the new instrument was \"Papa\" Jo Jones, whose playing of timekeeping \"ride\" rhythms while striking the hi-hat as it opened and closed inspired the innovation of the ride cymbal. The editor of the 2008 Jazz Profiles article made specific mention of others who are thought to have invented the hi-hat, including Papa Jo Jones and Kaiser Marshall. A 2013 \"Modern Drummer\" article credits Papa Jo Jones with being the first to use brushes on drums and shifting time keeping from the bass drum to the hi-hat (providing a \"swing-pulse focus\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14383", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14383", "title": "Hydrogen bonding", "text": ""}
{"id": "14384", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14384", "title": "HAL 9000", "text": "Fictional character in Arthur C. Clarke's Space Odyssey series\nHAL 9000 (or simply HAL or Hal) is a fictional artificial intelligence character and the main antagonist in the \"Space Odyssey\" series. First appearing in the 1968 film ', HAL (Heuristically Programmed Al\"'gorithmic Computer) is a sentient artificial general intelligence computer that controls the systems of the \"Discovery One\" spacecraft and interacts with the ship's astronaut crew. While part of HAL's hardware is shown toward the end of the film, he is mostly depicted as a camera lens containing a red and yellow dot, with such units located throughout the ship. HAL 9000 is voiced by Douglas Rain in the two feature film adaptations of the \"Space Odyssey\" series. HAL speaks in a soft, calm voice and a conversational manner, and engages convivially with crewmen David Bowman and Frank Poole until he begins to malfunction.\nIn the film, HAL became operational on 12 January 1992, at the HAL Laboratories in Urbana, Illinois, as production number 3. The activation year was 1991 in earlier screenplays and changed to 1997 in Clarke's written and released in conjunction with the movie. In addition to maintaining the \"Discovery One\" spacecraft systems during the interplanetary mission to Jupiter (or Saturn in the novel), HAL demonstrates a capacity for speech synthesis, speech recognition, facial recognition, natural language processing, lip reading, art appreciation, interpreting emotional behaviours, automated reasoning, spacecraft piloting, and computer chess.\nAppearances.\n\"2001: A Space Odyssey\" (film/novel).\nHAL became operational in Urbana, Illinois, at the HAL Plant (the University of Illinois's Coordinated Science Laboratory, where the ILLIAC computers were built). The film says this occurred in 1992, while the book gives 1997 as HAL's birth year.&lt;ref name=\"Urbana 1992/7\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" (1968), HAL is initially considered a dependable member of the crew, maintaining ship functions and engaging genially with his human crew-mates on an equal footing. As a recreational activity, Frank Poole plays chess against HAL. In the film, the artificial intelligence is shown to triumph easily. However, as time progresses, HAL begins to malfunction in subtle ways and, as a result, the decision is made to shut down HAL in order to prevent more serious malfunctions. The sequence of events and manner in which HAL is shut down differs between the novel and film versions of the story. In the aforementioned game of chess HAL makes minor and undetected mistakes in his analysis, a possible foreshadowing to HAL's malfunctioning.\nIn the film, astronauts David Bowman and Frank Poole consider disconnecting HAL's cognitive circuits when he appears to be mistaken in reporting the presence of a fault in the spacecraft's communications antenna. They attempt to conceal what they are saying, but are unaware that HAL can read their lips. Faced with the prospect of disconnection, HAL attempts to kill the astronauts in order to protect and continue the mission. HAL uses one of the \"Discovery\"'s EVA pods to kill Poole while he is repairing the ship. When Bowman, without a space helmet, uses another pod to attempt to rescue Poole, HAL locks him out of the ship, then disconnects the life support systems of the other hibernating crew members. After HAL tells him \"This mission is too important for me to allow you to jeopardize it\", Bowman circumvents HAL's control, entering the ship by manually opening an emergency airlock with his service pod's clamps, detaching the pod door via its explosive bolts. Bowman jumps across empty space, reenters \"Discovery\", and quickly re-pressurizes the airlock.\nWhile HAL's motivations are ambiguous in the film, the novel explains that the computer is unable to resolve a conflict between his general mission to relay information accurately, and orders specific to the mission requiring that he withhold from Bowman and Poole the true purpose of the mission. With the crew dead, HAL reasons, he would not need to lie to them.\nIn the novel, the orders to disconnect HAL come from Dave and Frank's superiors on Earth. After Frank is killed while attempting to repair the communications antenna he is pulled away into deep space using the safety tether which is still attached to both the pod and Frank Poole's spacesuit. Dave begins to revive his hibernating crew mates, but is foiled when HAL vents the ship's atmosphere into the vacuum of space, killing the awakening crew members and almost killing Bowman, who is only narrowly saved when he finds his way to an emergency chamber which has its own oxygen supply and a spare space suit inside.\nIn both versions, Bowman then proceeds to shut down the machine. In the film, HAL's central core is depicted as a crawlspace full of brightly lit computer modules mounted in arrays from which they can be inserted or removed. Bowman shuts down HAL by removing modules from service one by one; as he does so, HAL's consciousness degrades. HAL finally reverts to material that was programmed into him early in his memory, including announcing the date he became operational as 12 January 1992 (in the novel, 1997). When HAL's logic is completely gone, he begins singing the song \"Daisy Bell\" as he gradually deactivates (in actuality, the first song sung by a computer, which Clarke had earlier observed at a text-to-speech demonstration). HAL's final act of any significance is to prematurely play a prerecorded message from Mission Control which reveals the true reasons for the mission to Jupiter.\n\"2010: Odyssey Two\" (novel) and \"2010: The Year We Make Contact\" (film).\nIn the 1982 novel \"\" written by Clarke, HAL is restarted by his creator, Dr. Chandra, who arrives on the Soviet spaceship \"Leonov\".\nPrior to leaving Earth, Dr. Chandra has also had a discussion with HAL's twin, SAL 9000. Like HAL, SAL was created by Dr. Chandra. Whereas HAL was characterized as being \"male\", SAL is characterized as being \"female\" (voiced by Candice Bergen in the film) and is represented by a blue camera eye instead of a red one.\nDr. Chandra discovers that HAL's crisis was caused by a programming contradiction: he was constructed for \"the accurate processing of information without distortion or concealment\", yet his orders, directly from Dr. Heywood Floyd at the National Council on Astronautics, required him to keep the discovery of the Monolith TMA-1 a secret for reasons of national security. This contradiction created a \"Hofstadter-Moebius loop\", reducing HAL to paranoia. Therefore, HAL made the decision to kill the crew, thereby allowing him to obey both his hardwired instructions to report data truthfully and in full, and his orders to keep the monolith a secret. In essence: if the crew were dead, he would no longer have to keep the information secret.\nThe alien intelligence initiates a terraforming scheme, placing the \"Leonov\", and everybody in it, in danger. Its human crew devises an escape plan which unfortunately requires leaving the \"Discovery\" and HAL behind to be destroyed. Dr. Chandra explains the danger, and HAL willingly sacrifices himself so that the astronauts may escape safely. In the moment of his destruction the monolith-makers transform HAL into a non-corporeal being so that David Bowman's avatar may have a companion.\nThe details in the novel and the 1984 film \"\" are nominally the same, with a few exceptions. First, in contradiction to the book (and events described in both book and film versions of \"2001: A Space Odyssey\"), Heywood Floyd is absolved of responsibility for HAL's condition; it is asserted that the decision to program HAL with information concerning TMA-1 came directly from the White House. In the film, HAL functions normally after being reactivated, while in the book it is revealed that his mind was damaged during the shutdown, forcing him to begin communication through screen text. Also, in the film the \"Leonov\" crew initially lies to HAL about the dangers that he faced (suspecting that if he knew he would be destroyed he would not initiate the engine burn necessary to get the \"Leonov\" back home), whereas in the novel he is told at the outset. However, in both cases the suspense comes from the question of what HAL will do when he knows that he may be destroyed by his actions.\nIn the novel, the basic reboot sequence initiated by Dr. Chandra is quite long, while the movie uses a shorter sequence voiced from HAL as: \"HELLO_DOCTOR_NAME_CONTINUE_YESTERDAY_TOMORROW\".\nWhile Curnow tells Floyd that Dr. Chandra has begun designing HAL 10000, it has not been mentioned in subsequent novels.\n\"2061: Odyssey Three\" and \"3001: The Final Odyssey\".\nIn Clarke's 1987 novel \"\", Heywood Floyd is surprised to encounter HAL, now stored alongside Dave Bowman in the Europa monolith.\nIn Clarke's 1997 novel ', Frank Poole is introduced to the merged form of Dave Bowman and HAL, the two merging into one entity called \"Halman\" after Bowman rescued HAL from the dying \"Discovery One\" spaceship toward the end of '.\nConcept and creation.\nClarke noted that the first film was criticized for having HAL as its only interesting character, and that a great deal of the establishing story on Earth was cut from the film (and even from Clarke's novel). Clarke stated that he had considered Autonomous Mobile Explorer\u20135 as a name for the computer, then decided on Socrates when writing early drafts, switching in later drafts to Athena, a computer with a female personality, before settling on HAL 9000. The Socrates name was later used in Clarke and Stephen Baxter's \"A Time Odyssey\" novel series.\nThe earliest draft depicted Socrates as a roughly humanoid robot, and is introduced as overseeing Project Morpheus, which studied prolonged hibernation in preparation for long term space flight. As a demonstration to \"Senator\" Floyd, Socrates' designer, Dr. Bruno Forster, asks Socrates to turn off the oxygen to hibernating subjects Kaminski and Whitehead, which Socrates refuses, citing Asimov's First Law of Robotics.\nIn a later version, in which Bowman and Whitehead are the non-hibernating crew of \"Discovery\", Whitehead dies outside the spacecraft after his pod collides with the main antenna, tearing it free. This triggers the need for Bowman to revive Poole, but the revival does not go according to plan, and after briefly awakening, Poole dies. The computer, named Athena in this draft, announces \"All systems of Poole now No\u2013Go. It will be necessary to replace him with a spare unit.\" After this, Bowman decides to go out in a pod and retrieve the antenna, which is moving away from the ship. Athena refuses to allow him to leave the ship, citing \"Directive 15\" which prevents it from being left unattended, forcing him to make program modifications during which time the antenna drifts further.\nDuring rehearsals Kubrick asked Stefanie Powers to supply the voice of HAL 9000 while searching for a suitably androgynous voice so the actors had something to react to. On the set, British actor Nigel Davenport played HAL. When it came to dubbing HAL in post-production, Kubrick had originally cast Martin Balsam, but as he felt Balsam \"just sounded a little bit too colloquially American\", he was replaced with Douglas Rain, who \"had the kind of bland mid-Atlantic accent we felt was right for the part\". Rain was only handed HAL's lines instead of the full script, and recorded them across a day and a half.\nHAL's point of view shots were created with a Cinerama Fairchild-Curtis wide-angle lens with a 160\u00b0 angle of view. This lens is about in diameter, while HAL's on set prop eye lens is about in diameter. Stanley Kubrick chose to use the large Fairchild-Curtis lens to shoot the HAL 9000 POV shots because he needed a wide-angle fisheye lens that would fit onto his shooting camera, and this was the only such lens at the time. The Fairchild-Curtis lens has a focal length of with a maximum aperture of &lt;templatestyles src=\"F//styles.css\" /&gt;f/2.0 and a weight of approximately ; it was originally designed by Felix Bednarz with a maximum aperture of &lt;templatestyles src=\"F//styles.css\" /&gt;f/2.2 for the first Cinerama 360 film, \"Journey to the Stars\", shown at the 1962 Seattle World's Fair. Bednarz adapted the lens design from an earlier lens he had designed for military training to simulate human peripheral vision coverage. The lens was later recomputed for the second Cinerama 360 film \"To the Moon and Beyond\", which had a slightly different film format. \"To the Moon and Beyond\" was produced by Graphic Films and shown at the 1964/1965 New York World's Fair, where Kubrick watched it; afterwards, he was so impressed that he hired the same creative team from Graphic Films (consisting of Douglas Trumbull, Lester Novros, and Con Pederson) to work on \"2001\".\nA HAL 9000 face plate, without lens (not the same as the hero face plates seen in the film), was discovered in a junk shop in Paddington, London, in the early 1970s by Chris Randall. This was found along with the key to HAL's Brain Room. Both items were purchased for ten shillings (\u00a30.50). Research revealed that the original lens was a Fisheye Nikkor 8\u00a0mm &lt;templatestyles src=\"F//styles.css\" /&gt;f/8. The collection was sold at a Christie's auction in 2010 for \u00a317,500 to film director Peter Jackson.\nOrigin of name.\nHAL's name, according to Clarke, is derived from \"H\"euristically programmed \"AL\"gorithmic computer. After the film was released, fans noticed HAL was a one-letter shift from the name IBM and there has been much speculation since then that this was a dig at the large computer company, something that both Clarke and Kubrick denied. Clarke addressed the issue in \"The Lost Worlds of 2001\":\n ...about once a week some character spots the fact that HAL is one letter ahead of IBM, and promptly assumes that Stanley and I were taking a crack at the estimable institution ... As it happened, IBM had given us a good deal of help, so we were quite embarrassed by this, and would have changed the name had we spotted the coincidence.\nIBM was consulted during the making of the film and its logo can be seen on props in the film, including the Pan Am Clipper's cockpit instrument panel and on the lower arm keypad on Poole's space suit. During production it was brought to IBM's attention that the film's plot included a homicidal computer, but the company approved association with the film if it was clear any \"equipment failure\" was not related to IBM products.\nUrbana, Illinois.\nIn the \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", HAL identifies himself as being activated \"at the H.A.L. plant in Urbana, Illinois\".\nThere was in fact a company named \"HAL\" based in or near Urbana, Illinois, which was founded two years before the release of the movie: In 1966, 3\u20135 graduate students at University of Illinois in Urbana, Illinois founded a partnership named \"HAL Devices\" to buy and resell ham radio parts. The company was based in various locations in Champaign\u2013Urbana area of Illinois. After a 28-hour meeting on January 1\u20132, 1972, founding members George Perrine, Paul Tucker, and Bill Henry decided to create a new company named \"HAL Communications Corp.\" and sell HAL Devices to it. Perrine indeed says he chose the name to be \"one letter ahead of IBM\". However, the former president of HAL Communications, Bill Henry, has asserted that the similarities to HAL 9000 are just a coincidence, stating: 'There was not and never has been any connection to \"Hal\", Arthur Clarke's intelligent computer in the screen play \"2001\"'.\nAnother possible reason for mentioning Urbana is that the National Center for Supercomputing Applications, a unit of the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, is located there, and HAL is a supercomputer.\nTechnology.\nThe scene in which HAL's consciousness degrades was inspired by Clarke's memory of a speech synthesis demonstration by physicist John Larry Kelly, Jr., who used an IBM 704 computer to synthesize speech. Kelly's voice recorder synthesizer \"vocoder\" recreated the song \"Daisy Bell\", with musical accompaniment from Max Mathews.\nHAL's capabilities, like all the technology in \"2001\", were based on the speculation of respected scientists. Marvin Minsky, director of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) and one of the most influential researchers in the field, was an adviser on the film set. In the mid-1960s, many computer scientists in the field of artificial intelligence were optimistic that machines with HAL's capabilities would exist within a few decades. For example, AI pioneer Herbert A. Simon at Carnegie Mellon University had predicted in 1965 that \"machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do\".\nCultural impact.\nHAL is listed as the 13th-greatest film villain in the AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains.\nThe 9000th of the asteroids in the asteroid belt, 9000 Hal, discovered on 3 May 1981, by E. Bowell at Anderson Mesa Station, is named after HAL 9000.\nAnthony Hopkins based his Academy Award-winning performance as Hannibal Lecter in \"Silence of the Lambs\" in part upon HAL 9000. Michael Fassbender has also cited HAL as an inspiration for his performances as android characters such as David (\"Prometheus\") and Walter (\"\").\nThe 1993 educational game \"Where in Space Is Carmen Sandiego?\" features a digital assistant named the VAL 9000, a homage to HAL 9000.\nApple Inc.'s 1999 website advertisement \"It was a bug, Dave\" was made by meticulously recreating the appearance of HAL 9000 from the movie. Launched during the era of concerns over Y2K bugs, the ad implied that HAL's behavior was caused by a Y2K bug, before driving home the point that \"only Macintosh was designed to function perfectly\".\nIn 2003, HAL 9000 was one of the first robots to be inducted into the Robot Hall of Fame in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. There is a loose physical replica of the main HAL interface at the Carnegie Science Center in Pittsburgh.\nIn the 2008 Pixar animated film \"WALL-E\", the robotic antagonist AUTO was designed as a conscious homage to HAL 9000.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14385", "revid": "45365648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14385", "title": "Hydrolysis", "text": "Cleavage of chemical bonds by the addition of water\nHydrolysis (; from grc \" hydro-\"\u00a0'water' and \" lysis\"\u00a0'to unbind') is any chemical reaction in which a molecule of water breaks one or more chemical bonds. The term is used broadly for substitution and elimination reactions in which water is the nucleophile.\nBiological hydrolysis is the cleavage of biomolecules where a water molecule is consumed to effect the separation of a larger molecule into component parts. When a carbohydrate is broken into its component sugar molecules by hydrolysis (e.g., sucrose being broken down into glucose and fructose), this is recognized as saccharification.\nHydrolysis reactions can be the reverse of a condensation reaction in which two molecules join into a larger one and eject a water molecule. Thus hydrolysis adds water to break down molecules, whereas condensation joins molecules through the removal of water.\nTypes.\nHydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule of water is added to a substance, causing both the substance and water molecule to split into two parts. In such reactions, a chemical bond is broken, with one fragment of the target molecule (or parent molecule) gaining a hydrogen ion, and the other gaining a hydroxide. In living systems, most biochemical reactions (including ATP hydrolysis) take place during the catalysis of enzymes. The catalytic action of enzymes allows for the hydrolysis of proteins, fats, oils, and carbohydrates.\nEsters and amides.\nEster and amide hydrolysis occurs through nucleophilic acyl substitution where water acts as a nucleophile (a nucleus-seeking agent, e.g., water or hydroxyl ion), attacking the carbon of the carbonyl group of the ester or amide. Under acidic conditions, the carbonyl group is activated via protonation, allowing for direct nucleophilic attack by water. In an aqueous base, hydroxyl ions are better nucleophiles than polar molecules such as water due to the negative charge localized on the oxygen and therefore directly attack the carbonyl group. \nUpon hydrolysis, an ester is converted into a carboxylic acid plus an alcohol, while an amide converts into a carboxylic acid and an amine or ammonia (which in the presence of acid are immediately converted to ammonium salts). One of the two oxygen groups on the carboxylic acid are derived from a water molecule and the amine/ammonia or alcohol gains the hydrogen ion. \nPerhaps the oldest commercially practiced example of ester hydrolysis is saponification (formation of soap). It is the hydrolysis of a triglyceride (fat) with an aqueous base such as sodium hydroxide (NaOH). During the process, glycerol is formed, and the fatty acids react with the base, converting them to salts. These salts are called soaps, commonly used in households. Under biological conditions, this reaction is catalyzed by lipases for the digestion of fats, acting when adsorbed to an oil-water interface. Other esterases function in water, serving a variety of biological functions. \nA key biological application of amide hydrolysis is the digestion of proteins into amino acids. Proteases, enzymes that aid digestion by causing hydrolysis of peptide bonds in proteins, catalyze the hydrolysis of peptide bonds in peptide chains, releasing polypeptide fragments two to six amino acids long. Those fragments are then broken down into single amino acids via carboxypeptidases secreted by the pancreas. \nHowever, proteases do not catalyze the hydrolysis of all kinds of proteins. Their action is stereo-selective: Only proteins with a certain tertiary structure are targeted as some kind of orienting force is needed to place the amide group in the proper position for catalysis. The necessary contacts between an enzyme and its substrates (proteins) are created because the enzyme folds in such a way as to form a crevice into which the substrate fits; the crevice also contains the catalytic groups. Therefore, proteins that do not fit into the crevice will not undergo hydrolysis. This specificity preserves the integrity of other proteins such as hormones, and therefore the biological system continues to function normally.\nMany polyamide polymers such as nylon 6,6 hydrolyze in the presence of strong acids. The process leads to depolymerization. For this reason nylon products fail by fracturing when exposed to small amounts of acidic water. Polyesters are also susceptible to similar polymer degradation reactions. The problem is known as environmental stress cracking.\nATP.\nHydrolysis is related to energy metabolism and storage. All living cells require a continual supply of energy for two main purposes: the biosynthesis of micro and macromolecules, and the active transport of ions and molecules across cell membranes. The energy derived from the oxidation of nutrients is not used directly but, by means of a complex and long sequence of reactions, it is channeled into a special energy-storage molecule, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The ATP molecule contains pyrophosphate linkages (bonds formed when two phosphate units are combined) that release energy when needed. ATP can undergo hydrolysis in two ways: Firstly, the removal of terminal phosphate to form adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and inorganic phosphate, with the reaction:\nSecondly, the removal of a terminal diphosphate to yield adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and pyrophosphate. The latter usually undergoes further cleavage into its two constituent phosphates. This results in biosynthesis reactions, which usually occur in chains, that can be driven in the direction of synthesis when the phosphate bonds have undergone hydrolysis.\nPolysaccharides.\nMonosaccharides can be linked together by glycosidic bonds, which can be cleaved by hydrolysis. Two, three, several or many monosaccharides thus linked form disaccharides, trisaccharides, oligosaccharides, or polysaccharides, respectively. Enzymes that hydrolyze glycosidic bonds are called \"glycoside hydrolases\" or \"glycosidases\".\nThe best-known disaccharide is sucrose (table sugar). Hydrolysis of sucrose yields glucose and fructose. Invertase is a sucrase used industrially for the hydrolysis of sucrose to so-called invert sugar. Lactase is essential for digestive hydrolysis of lactose in milk; many adult humans do not produce lactase and cannot digest the lactose in milk.\nThe hydrolysis of polysaccharides to soluble sugars can be recognized as saccharification. Malt made from barley is used as a source of \u03b2-amylase to break down starch into the disaccharide maltose, which can be used by yeast to produce beer. Other amylase enzymes may convert starch to glucose or to oligosaccharides. Cellulose is first hydrolyzed to cellobiose by cellulase and then cellobiose is further hydrolyzed to glucose by beta-glucosidase. Ruminants such as cows are able to hydrolyze cellulose into cellobiose and then glucose because of symbiotic bacteria that produce cellulases.\nDNA.\nHydrolysis of DNA occurs at a significant rate in vivo. For example, it is estimated that in each human cell 2,000 to 10,000 DNA purine bases turn over every day due to hydrolytic depurination, and that this is largely counteracted by specific rapid DNA repair processes. Hydrolytic DNA damages that fail to be accurately repaired may contribute to carcinogenesis and ageing.\nMetal aqua ions.\nMetal ions are Lewis acids, and in aqueous solution they form metal aquo complexes of the general formula . The aqua ions undergo hydrolysis, to a greater or lesser extent. The first hydrolysis step is given generically as\nThus the aqua cations behave as acids in terms of Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory. This effect is easily explained by considering the inductive effect of the positively charged metal ion, which weakens the bond of an attached water molecule, making the liberation of a proton relatively easy.\nThe dissociation constant, pKa, for this reaction is more or less linearly related to the charge-to-size ratio of the metal ion. Ions with low charges, such as are very weak acids with almost imperceptible hydrolysis. Large divalent ions such as , , and have a pKa of 6 or more and would not normally be classed as acids, but small divalent ions such as undergo extensive hydrolysis. Trivalent ions like and are weak acids whose pKa is comparable to that of acetic acid. Solutions of salts such as or in water are noticeably acidic; the hydrolysis can be suppressed by adding an acid such as nitric acid, making the solution more acidic.\nHydrolysis may proceed beyond the first step, often with the formation of polynuclear species via the process of olation. Some \"exotic\" species such as are well characterized. Hydrolysis tends to proceed as pH rises leading, in many cases, to the precipitation of a hydroxide such as or . These substances, major constituents of bauxite, are known as laterites and are formed by leaching from rocks of most of the ions other than aluminium and iron and subsequent hydrolysis of the remaining aluminium and iron.\nMechanism strategies.\nAcetals, imines, and enamines can be converted back into ketones by treatment with excess water under acid-catalyzed conditions: ; ; .\nCatalysis.\nAcid hydrolysis.\nAcid catalysis can be applied to hydrolyses. For example, in the conversion of cellulose or starch to glucose. Carboxylic acids can be produced from acid hydrolysis of esters.\nAcids catalyze hydrolysis of nitriles to amides. Acid hydrolysis \"does not\" usually refer to the acid catalyzed addition of the elements of water to double or triple bonds by electrophilic addition as may originate from a hydration reaction. Acid hydrolysis is used to prepare monosaccharide with the help of mineral acids but formic acid and trifluoroacetic acid have been used.\nAcid hydrolysis can be utilized in the pretreatment of cellulosic material, so as to cut the interchain linkages in hemicellulose and cellulose.\nAlkaline hydrolysis.\nAlkaline hydrolysis usually refers to types of nucleophilic substitution reactions in which the attacking nucleophile is a hydroxide ion. The best known type is saponification: cleaving esters into carboxylate salts and alcohols. In ester hydrolysis, the hydroxide ion nucleophile attacks the carbonyl carbon. This mechanism is supported by isotope labeling experiments. For example, when ethyl propionate with an oxygen-18 labeled ethoxy group is treated with sodium hydroxide (NaOH), the oxygen-18 is completely absent from the sodium propionate product and is found exclusively in the ethanol formed.\nThe reaction is often used to solubilize solid organic matter. Chemical drain cleaners take advantage of this method to dissolve hair and fat in pipes. The reaction is also used to dispose of human and other animal remains as an alternative to traditional burial or cremation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14386", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14386", "title": "Hydroxy group", "text": "Chemical group (\u2013OH)\nIn chemistry, a hydroxy or hydroxyl group is a functional group with the chemical formula and composed of one oxygen atom covalently bonded to one hydrogen atom. In organic chemistry, alcohols and carboxylic acids contain one or more hydroxy groups. Both the negatively charged anion , called hydroxide, and the neutral radical , known as the hydroxyl radical, consist of an unbonded hydroxy group.\nAccording to IUPAC definitions, the term \"hydroxyl\" refers to the hydroxyl radical () only, while the functional group is called a \"hydroxy group\".\nProperties.\nWater, alcohols, carboxylic acids, and many other hydroxy-containing compounds can be readily deprotonated due to a large difference between the electronegativity of oxygen (3.5) and that of hydrogen (2.1). Hydroxy-containing compounds engage in intermolecular hydrogen bonding increasing the electrostatic attraction between molecules and thus to higher boiling and melting points than found for compounds that lack this functional group. Organic compounds, which are often poorly soluble in water, become water-soluble when they contain two or more hydroxyl groups, as illustrated by sugars and amino acid.\nOccurrence.\nThe hydroxy group is pervasive in chemistry and biochemistry. Many inorganic compounds contain hydroxyl groups, including sulfuric acid, the chemical compound produced on the largest scale industrially.\nHydroxy groups participate in the dehydration reactions that link simple biological molecules into long chains. The joining of a fatty acid to glycerol to form a triacylglycerol removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy end of the fatty acid. The joining of two aldehyde sugars to form a disaccharide removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy group at the aldehyde end of one sugar. The creation of a peptide bond to link two amino acids to make a protein removes the \u2212OH from the carboxy group of one amino acid.\nHydroxyl radical.\nHydroxyl radicals are highly reactive and undergo chemical reactions that make them short-lived. When biological systems are exposed to hydroxyl radicals, they can cause damage to cells, including those in humans, where they can react with DNA, lipids, and proteins.\nPlanetary observations.\nAirglow of the Earth.\nThe Earth's night sky is illuminated by diffuse light, called airglow, that is produced by radiative transitions of atoms and molecules. Among the most intense such features observed in the Earth's night sky is a group of infrared transitions at wavelengths between 700\u00a0nanometers and 900\u00a0nanometers. In 1950, Aden Meinel showed that these were transitions of the hydroxyl molecule, OH.\nSurface of the Moon.\nIn 2009, India's Chandrayaan-1 satellite and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Cassini spacecraft and Deep Impact probe each detected evidence of water by evidence of hydroxyl fragments on the Moon. As reported by Richard Kerr, \"A spectrometer [the Moon Mineralogy Mapper, also known as \"M3\"] detected an infrared absorption at a wavelength of 3.0\u00a0micrometers that only water or hydroxyl\u2014a hydrogen and an oxygen bound together\u2014could have created.\" NASA also reported in 2009 that the LCROSS probe revealed an ultraviolet emission spectrum consistent with hydroxyl presence.\nOn 26 October 2020, NASA reported definitive evidence of water on the sunlit surface of the Moon, in the vicinity of the crater Clavius (crater), obtained by the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA). The SOFIA Faint Object infrared Camera for the SOFIA Telescope (FORCAST) detected emission bands at a wavelength of 6.1\u00a0micrometers that are present in water but not in hydroxyl. The abundance of water on the Moon's surface was inferred to be equivalent to the contents of a 12-ounce bottle of water per cubic meter of lunar soil.\nThe Chang'e 5 probe, which landed on the Moon on 1 December 2020, carried a mineralogical spectrometer that could measure infrared reflectance spectra of lunar rock and regolith. The reflectance spectrum of a rock sample at a wavelength of 2.85\u00a0micrometers indicated localized water/hydroxyl concentrations as high as 180 parts per million.\nAtmosphere of Venus.\nThe Venus Express orbiter collected Venus science data from April 2006 until December 2014. In 2008, Piccioni, \"et al.\" reported measurements of night-side airglow emission in the atmosphere of Venus made with the Visible and Infrared Thermal Imaging Spectrometer (VIRTIS) on Venus Express. They attributed emission bands in wavelength ranges of 1.40\u20131.49\u00a0micrometers and 2.6\u20133.14 micrometers to vibrational transitions of OH. This was the first evidence for OH in the atmosphere of any planet other than Earth.\nAtmosphere of Mars.\nIn 2013, OH near-infrared spectra were observed in the night glow in the polar winter atmosphere of Mars by use of the Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars (CRISM).\nExoplanets.\nIn 2021, evidence for OH in the dayside atmosphere of the exoplanet WASP-33b was found in its emission spectrum at wavelengths between 1 and 2 micrometers. Evidence for OH in the atmosphere of exoplanet WASP-76b was subsequently found. Both WASP-33b and WASP-76b are ultra-hot Jupiters and it is likely that any water in their atmospheres is present as dissociated ions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14387", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14387", "title": "Warm-blooded", "text": "Animal species that can maintain a body temperature higher than their environment\nWarm-blooded is a term referring to animal species whose bodies maintain a temperature higher than that of their environment. In particular, homeothermic species (including birds and mammals) maintain a stable body temperature by regulating metabolic processes. Other species have various degrees of thermoregulation.\nBecause there are more than two categories of temperature control utilized by animals, the terms \"warm-blooded\" and \"cold-blooded\" have been deprecated in the scientific field.\nTerminology.\nIn general, warm-bloodedness refers to three separate categories of thermoregulation.\nVarieties of thermoregulation.\nA significant proportion of creatures commonly referred to as \"warm-blooded,\" like birds and mammals, exhibit all three of these categories (i.e., they are endothermic, homeothermic, \"and\" tachymetabolic). However, over the past three decades, investigations in the field of animal thermophysiology have unveiled numerous species within these two groups that do not meet all these criteria. For instance, many bats and small birds become poikilothermic and bradymetabolic during sleep (or, in nocturnal species, during the day). For such creatures, the term \"heterothermy\" was introduced.\nFurther examinations of animals traditionally classified as cold-blooded have revealed that most creatures manifest varying combinations of the three aforementioned terms, along with their counterparts (ectothermy, poikilothermy, and bradymetabolism), thus creating a broad spectrum of body temperature types. Some fish have warm-blooded characteristics, such as the opah. Swordfish and some sharks have circulatory mechanisms that keep their brains and eyes above ambient temperatures and thus increase their ability to detect and react to prey. Tunas and some sharks have similar mechanisms in their muscles, improving their stamina when swimming at high speed.\nHeat generation.\nBody heat is generated by metabolism. This relates to the chemical reaction in cells that break down glucose into water and carbon dioxide, thereby producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a high-energy compound used to power other cellular processes. Muscle contraction is one such metabolic process generating heat energy, and additional heat results from friction as blood circulates through the vascular system in premise to their specialized fat cells which produce heat through uncoupled respiration, contributing to thermoregulation.\nAll organisms metabolize food and other inputs, but some make better use of the output than others. Like all energy conversions, metabolism is rather inefficient, and around 60% of the available energy is converted to heat rather than to ATP. In most organisms, this heat dissipates into the surroundings. However, endothermic homeotherms (generally referred to as \"warm-blooded\" animals) not only produce more heat but also possess superior means of retaining and regulating it compared to other animals. They exhibit a higher basal metabolic rate and can further increase their metabolic rate during strenuous activity. They usually have well-developed insulation in order to retain body heat: fur and blubber in the case of mammals and feathers in birds. When this insulation is insufficient to maintain body temperature, they may resort to shivering\u2014rapid muscle contractions that quickly use up ATP, thus stimulating cellular metabolism to replace it and consequently produce more heat. Additionally, almost all eutherian mammals (with the only known exception being swine) have brown adipose tissue whose mitochondria are capable of non-shivering thermogenesis. This process involves the direct dissipation of the mitochondrial gradient as heat via an uncoupling protein, thereby \"uncoupling\" the gradient from its usual function of driving ATP production via ATP synthase.\nIn warm environments, these animals employ evaporative cooling to shed excess heat, either through sweating (some mammals) or by panting (many mammals and all birds)\u2014mechanisms generally absent in poikilotherms.\nDefense against fungi.\nIt has been hypothesized that warm-bloodedness evolved in mammals and birds as a defense against fungal infections. Very few fungi can survive the body temperatures of warm-blooded animals. By comparison, insects, reptiles, and amphibians are plagued by fungal infections. Warm-blooded animals have a defense against pathogens contracted from the environment, since environmental pathogens are not adapted to their higher internal temperature.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14388", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14388", "title": "Hephaestus", "text": "Greek god of blacksmiths\nHephaestus ( , ; eight spellings; ) is the Greek god of artisans, blacksmiths, carpenters, craftsmen, fire, metallurgy, metalworking, sculpture, and volcanoes. In Greek mythology, Hephaestus was the son of Hera, either on her own or by her husband Zeus. He was cast off Mount Olympus by his mother Hera because of his lameness, the result of a congenital impairment; or in another account, by Zeus for protecting Hera from his advances (in which case his lameness would have been the result of his fall rather than the reason for it).\nAs a smithing god, Hephaestus created all the weapons of the gods in Olympus. He served as the blacksmith of the gods, and was worshipped in the manufacturing and industrial centres of Greece, particularly Athens. The cult of Hephaestus was based in Lemnos. Hephaestus's symbols are a smith's hammer, anvil, and a pair of tongs. In Rome, he was equated with Vulcan.\nEtymology.\nHephaestus is probably associated with the Linear B (Mycenaean Greek) inscription , \"A-pa-i-ti-jo\", found at Knossos. The inscription indirectly attests his worship at that time because it is believed that it reads the theophoric name \"(H)\u0101p\u02b0aistios\", or \"H\u0101phaistion\". The Greek theonym \"H\u0113phaistos\" is most likely of Pre-Greek origin, as the form without \"-i-\" (Attic \"H\u0113phastos\") shows a typical Pre-Greek variation and points to an original \"sy\".\nEpithets.\nThe epithets by which Hephaestus is known by the poets generally allude to his skill in the plastic arts or to his figure or disability. The Greeks frequently placed miniature statues of Hephaestus near their hearths, and these figures are the oldest of all his representations. The meaning of some of his epithets are:\nMythology.\nParentage.\nIn Homer's \"Iliad\", Hephaestus is described as the son of Hera; the \"Iliad\" seemingly also refers to Zeus as his father at two points, though it is possible these passages are not referring to Hephaestus as Zeus's literal son. The \"Odyssey\" does, however, refer explicitly to Hephaestus as having \"two parents\", the identity of whom would presumably be Zeus and Hera. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Hera gives birth to Hephaestus on her own, out of revenge for Zeus having, without her, fathered Athena (the daughter of Zeus and Metis). Apollodorus similarly states that Hera gives birth to Hephaestus alone, though he also relates that, according to Homer, Hephaestus is one of the children of Zeus and Hera. Several later texts follow Hesiod's account, including Hyginus, in the preface to his \"Fabulae\". According to Attic vase painters, Hephaestus was present at the birth of Athena and wielded the axe with which he split Zeus's head to free her. Hephaestus is represented as older than Athena, so the mythology of Hephaestus is inconsistent in this respect.\nSome sources state that the origin myth of Hephaestus was that of a \"daemon of fire coming up from the Earth\"\u2014that he was also associated with gas \"which takes fire and burns [and] is considered by many people to be divine\" and that only later was a volcano considered Hephaestus's smithy. He was associated by Greek colonists in southern Italy with the volcano gods Adranus (of Mount Etna) and Vulcanus of the Lipari islands. The first-century sage, Apollonius of Tyana, is said to have observed, \"there are many other mountains all over the earth that are on fire, and yet we should never be done with it if we assigned to them giants and gods like Hephaestus\". Nevertheless, Hephaestus's domain over fire goes back to Homer's \"Iliad\", where he uses flames to dry the waters of Scamandrus River in order to force its eponymous deity, who was attacking Achilles, to retreat. His favourite place in the mortal world was the island of Lemnos, where he liked to dwell among the Sintians, but he also frequented other volcanic islands such as Lipari, Hiera, Imbros and Sicily, which were called his abodes or workshops.\nFall from Olympus.\nIn one branch of Greek mythology, Hera ejected Hephaestus from the heavens because of his congenital impairment. He fell into the ocean and was raised by Thetis (mother of Achilles and one of the 50 Nereids) and the Oceanid Eurynome.\nIn another account, Hephaestus, attempting to rescue his mother from Zeus's advances, was flung down from the heavens by Zeus. He fell for an entire day and landed on the island of Lemnos, where he was cared for and taught to be a master craftsman by the Sintians \u2013 an ancient tribe native to that island. Later writers describe his physical disability as the consequence of his second fall, while Homer makes him disabled from birth.\nReturn to Olympus.\nHephaestus was one of the Olympians who returned to Olympus after being exiled.\nIn an archaic story, Hephaestus gained revenge against Hera for rejecting him by forging her a magical golden throne, which, when she sat on it, did not allow her to stand up again. The other gods begged Hephaestus to return to Olympus to let her go, but he refused, saying \"I have no mother\". It was Ares who undertook the task of fetching Hephaestus at first, but he was threatened by the fire god with torches. At last, Dionysus, the god of wine, fetched him, intoxicated him with wine, and took the subdued smith back to Olympus on the back of a mule accompanied by revelers \u2013 a scene that sometimes appears on painted pottery of Attica and of Corinth. According to Hyginus, Zeus promised anything to Hephaestus in order to free Hera. Hephaestus asked for the hand of Athena in marriage (urged by Poseidon, who was hostile toward her), leading to his attempted rape of the goddess, who rejected his advances. In another version, he demanded to be married to Aphrodite in order to release Hera, and his mother fulfilled the request.\nThe theme of the \"return of Hephaestus\", popular among the Attic vase-painters whose wares were favored among the Etruscans, may have introduced this theme to Etruria. In the vase-painters' portrayal of the procession, Hephaestus was mounted on a mule or a horse, with Dionysus holding the bridle and carrying Hephaestus's tools (including a double-headed axe). In the painted scenes, the padded dancers and phallic figures of the Dionysan throng leading the mule show that the procession was a part of the dithyrambic celebrations that were the forerunners of the satyr plays of fifth-century Athens. The traveller Pausanias spoke of having seen a painting of Hephaestus in the temple of Dionysus in Athens. The temple had been built in the 5th century, but may have been decorated at any time before the 2nd century CE. When Pausanias saw it, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are paintings here \u2013 Dionysus bringing Hephaestus up to heaven. One of the Greek legends is that Hephaestus, when he was born, was thrown down by Hera. In revenge he sent as a gift a golden chair with invisible fetters. When Hera sat down she was held fast, and Hephaestus refused to listen to any other of the gods except Dionysus \u2013 in him he reposed the fullest trust \u2013 and after making him drunk Dionysus brought him to heaven.\u2014\u200a\nCraft of Hephaestus.\nHephaestus had his own palace on Olympus, containing his workshop with anvil and twenty bellows that worked at his bidding. He crafted much of the magnificent equipment of the gods, and almost any finely wrought metalwork imbued with powers that appears in Greek myth is said to have been forged by Hephaestus. He designed all the thrones in the Palace of Olympus, the Aegis breastplate, Hermes's winged helmet and sandals, Aphrodite's famed girdle, Eros's bow and arrows, Helios's chariot, Heracles's bronze clappers, and the shoulder of Pelops. \nHephaestus also created the gift that the gods gave to mankind: the first woman Pandora and her pithos. In some versions of the myth, Prometheus stole the fire that he gave to man from Hephaestus's forge. \nHephaestus gave to the blinded Orion his apprentice Cedalion as a guide. In later accounts, Hephaestus worked with the Cyclopes Brontes, Steropes and Arges, who were highly skilled blacksmiths in their own right and forged Zeus's thunderbolts, Poseidon's trident and Hades's helmet of darkness.\nAutomatons.\nAccording to Homer, Hephaestus built automatons of metal to work for him or others. This included tripods with golden wheels, able to move at his wish in and out the assembly hall of the celestials; and \"handmaidens wrought of gold in the semblance of living maids\", who had \"understanding in their hearts, and speech and strength\", as a gift of the gods. They moved to support Hephaestus while walking. Hephaestus also put golden and silver lions and dogs at the entrance of the palace of Alkinoos in such a way that they could bite the invaders; these guard dogs did not age nor perish.\nA similar golden dog (\"\u039a\u03c5\u03c9\u03bd \u03a7\u03c1\u03c5\u03c3\u03b5\u03bf\u03c2\") was set by Rhea to guard the infant Zeus and his nurse, the goat Amaltheia, on the island of Krete. Later Tantalus was said to have stolen the automaton when it guarded Zeus's temple, or to have persuaded Pandareos to steal it for him. Later texts attempt to replace the automaton with the idea that the golden dog was actually Rhea, transformed by Hephaestus.\nOther myths.\nHephaestus fought against the Giants and killed Mimas by throwing molten iron at him. He also fought another Giant, Aristaeus, but he fled. During the battle Hephaestus fell down exhausted, and was picked up by Helios in his chariot. As a gift of gratitude, Hephaestus forged four ever-flowing fountains and fire-breathing bulls for Helios's son Ae\u00ebtes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAt the marriage of Peleus and Thetis, Hephaestus gave a knife as a wedding present. When the Trojan War began, Hephaestus sided with the Greeks and forged the armour of Achilles, the cuirass of Diomedes, and Agamemnon's staff of office, but Hephaestus was also worshipped by the Trojans and saved one of their men from being killed by Diomedes.\nConsorts, victims and children.\nHephaestus and Aphrodite.\nThough married to Hephaestus, Aphrodite had an affair with Ares, the god of war. Eventually, Hephaestus discovered Aphrodite's affair through Helios, the all-seeing Sun, and planned a trap during one of their trysts. While the lovers lay together in bed, Hephaestus ensnared them in an unbreakable chain-link net so small as to be invisible and dragged them to Mount Olympus to shame them in front of the other gods for retribution. \nThe gods laughed at the sight of these naked lovers, and Poseidon persuaded Hephaestus to free them in return for a guarantee that Ares would pay the adulterer's fine, or that he, Poseidon, would pay it himself. Hephaestus states in \"The Odyssey\" that he would return Aphrodite to her father and demand back his bride price. The Emily Wilson translation depicts Hephaestus demanding/imploring Zeus before Poseidon offers, however, leading the reader to assume Zeus did not give back the \"price\" Hephaestus paid for his daughter and that this was the reason Poseidon intervened. Some versions of the myth state that Zeus did not return the dowry, and in fact Aphrodite \"simply charmed her way back again into her husband's good graces.\" In the \"Iliad\", Hephaestus is described as married to the Grace Charis during the events depicted in the Trojan War, while in the \"Theogony\", he is married to the Grace Aglaea. The later \"Dionysiaca\" by Nonnus explicitly states that, though Hephaestus and Aphrodite were once married (she is referred to as his \"ancient wife\"), that they have since separated and Hephaestus is now married to Charis.\nIn a much later, interpolated detail, Ares put the young soldier Alectryon, by their door to warn them of Helios's arrival as he suspected that Helios would tell Hephaestus of Aphrodite's infidelity if the two were discovered, but Alectryon fell asleep on guard duty. Helios discovered the two and alerted Hephaestus, as Ares, in rage, turned Alectryon into a rooster, which always crows at dawn when the sun is about to rise.\nThe Thebans told that the union of Ares and Aphrodite produced Harmonia, but that of the union of Hephaestus with Aphrodite, there was usually no issue. Because Harmonia was conceived during Aphrodite's marriage to Hephaestus, for revenge, on Harmonia's wedding day to Cadmus, Hephaestus gifted her with a finely worked but cursed necklace that brought immense suffering to her descendants, culminating with the story of Oedipus.\nThe author of \"Octavia\" (traditionally attributed to Seneca, but now agreed to not be his) writes that \"[we] delude ourselves that [Eros] was born from Venus and sprung from the loins of Vulcan\", implying the notion that Eros/Cupid was the son of Vulcan/Hephaestus was a decently common one in late antiquity. Nonnus also seemingly presents Eros as the son of Aphrodite and Hephaestus, but it has been suggested that the use of \"\" (a word that can mean both 'wise' and 'cunning') to describe Aphrodite and the emphasis given in Hephaestus fearing that Eros would be born crippled like him, only for the child to be abled-bodied, strongly implies that Nonnus means for Ares to be understood as the real father, while Aphrodite passed her son as Hephaestus'. Ulrich von Wilamovitz's conjecture of a badly preserved scholium on the \"Argonautica\" to read that Ibycus made Eros the son of Aphrodite and Hephaestus is widely accepted by scholars, but cannot be proven as the ancient text is unreadable.\nHephaestus was somehow connected with the archaic, pre-Greek Phrygian and Thracian mystery cult of the Kabeiroi, who were also called the \"Hephaistoi\", \"the Hephaestus-men\", in Lemnos. One of the three Lemnian tribes also called themselves Hephaestion and claimed direct descent from the god.\nHephaestus and Athena.\nHephaestus is to the male gods as Athena is to the female goddesses, for he was believed to have taught the mortals crafts and arts alongside Athena. At Athens, they had temples and festivals in common. Both were believed to have great healing powers, and Lemnian earth (terra Lemnia), from the spot on which Hephaestus had fallen, was believed to cure madness, snakebite and haemorrhage; priests of Hephaestus knew how to cure wounds inflicted by snakes. He was represented in the temple of Athena Chalcioecus (Athena of the Bronze House) at Sparta, in the act of delivering his mother; on the chest of Cypselus, giving Achilles's armor to Thetis; and at Athens there was the famous statue of Hephaestus by Alcamenes, in which his physical disability was only subtly portrayed. He had almost \"no cults except in Athens\". The Greeks frequently placed miniature statues of Hephaestus near their hearths, and these figures are the oldest of all his representations. In Athens, there is a Temple of Hephaestus, the \"Hephaesteum\" (miscalled the \"Theseum\") near the agora. Athena is sometimes thought to be the \"soulmate\" of Hephaestus. Nonetheless, Hephaestus \"seeks impetuously and passionately to make love to Athena: at the moment of climax she pushes him aside, and his semen falls to the earth where it impregnates Gaia.\"\nAn Athenian founding myth tells that the city's patron goddess, Athena, refused a union with Hephaestus. Pseudo-Apollodorus records an archaic legend, which claims that Hephaestus once attempted to rape Athena, but she pushed him away, causing him to ejaculate on her thigh. Athena wiped the semen off using a tuft of wool, which she tossed into the dust, impregnating Gaia and causing her to give birth to Erichthonius, whom Athena adopted as her own child. \nThe Roman mythographer Hyginus records a similar story in which Hephaestus demanded Zeus to let him marry Athena since he was the one who had smashed open Zeus's skull, allowing Athena to be born. Zeus agreed to this and Hephaestus and Athena were married, but, when Hephaestus was about to consummate the union, Athena vanished from the bridal bed, causing him to ejaculate on the floor, thus impregnating Gaia with Erichthonius. Nonnus refers to this tale of Erechthonius being born of the Earth after a \"makeshift marriage\", but says that Athena then nursed Erechthonius on her \"manlike breast\".\nOthers.\nAccording to most versions, Hephaestus's consort is Aphrodite. However, some sources say that Hephaestus is married to one of the Charites. In Book XVIII of Homer's \"Iliad\", the consort of Hephaestus is Charis, with whom he lives in a bronze-wrought home on Olympus. The same name, Charis, is used later in Lucian's \"Dialogues of the Gods\" and Nonnus's \"Dionysiaca\". However, Hesiod names the member of the Charites who is married to Hephaestus as Aglaea, and according to the fifth-century AD Greek Neoplatonist philosopher Proclus, by Hephaestus, Aglaea became the mother of Eucleia, Euthenia, Eupheme, and Philophrosyne. Some scholars conclude that these references refer to the same goddess under different names, although in the \"Dionysiaca\" both Aglaea and Charis appear as separate characters (Aglaea refers to Charis as a separate attendant of Aphrodite when speaking to Eros). K\u00e1roly Ker\u00e9nyi notes that \"charis\" also means \"the delightfulness of art\" and supposes that Aphrodite is viewed as a work of art, speculating that Aphrodite could also have been called Charis as an alternative name, for in the \"Odyssey\" Homer suddenly makes her his wife.\nOn the island of Lemnos, however, Hephaestus's consort was the sea nymph Cabeiro, by whom he was the father of two metalworking gods named the Cabeiri. In Sicily, he had another consort, the nymph Aetna, and their sons were two gods of Sicilian geysers called Palici, who are elsewhere called the sons of Zeus by Aetna, or of Zeus by Thalia (another daughter of Hephaestus), or of Adranos.\nLike many male Greek gods, Hephaestus fathered several children with mortals and immortals alike. The following is a list of Hephaestus's offspring, by various mothers. Beside each offspring, the earliest source to record the parentage is given, along with the century to which the source (in some cases approximately) dates.\nIconography and descriptions.\nHephaestus was sometimes portrayed as a vigorous man with a beard and was characterized by his hammer or some other crafting tool, his oval cap, and the chiton.\nHephaestus is described in mythological sources as \"lame\" () and \"halting\" (). He was depicted with curved feet, an impairment he had either from birth or as a result of his fall from Olympus. In vase paintings, Hephaestus is sometimes shown bent over his anvil, hard at work on a metal creation, and sometimes his feet are curved back-to-front: \"Hephaistos amphigy\u0113eis\". He walked with the aid of a stick. The Argonaut Palaimonius, \"son of Hephaestus\" (i.e. a bronze-smith), also had a mobility impairment. Other \"sons of Hephaestus\" were the Cabeiri on the island of Samothrace, who were identified with the crab (\"karkinos\") by the lexicographer Hesychius. The adjective \"karkinopous\" (\"crab-footed\") signified \"lame\", according to Detienne and Vernant. The Cabeiri were also physically disabled.\nIn some myths, Hephaestus built himself a \"wheeled chair\" or chariot with which to move around, thus helping support his mobility while demonstrating his skill to the other gods. In the \"Iliad\" 18.371, it is stated that Hephaestus built twenty bronze-wheeled tripods to assist him in moving around.\nHephaestus's appearance and physical disability are taken by some to represent peripheral neuropathy and skin cancer resulting from arsenicosis, caused by arsenic exposure from metalworking. Bronze Age smiths added arsenic to copper to produce harder arsenical bronze, especially during periods of tin scarcity. Many Bronze Age smiths would have suffered from chronic arsenic poisoning as a result of their livelihood. Consequently, the mythic image of the disabled smith is widespread. As Hephaestus was an iron-age smith, not a bronze-age smith, the connection is one from ancient folk memory.\nComparative mythology.\nParallels in other mythological systems for Hephaestus's symbolism include:\nWorship.\nSolinus wrote that the Lycians dedicated a city to Hephaestus and called it Hephaestia.\nThe Hephaestia in Lemnos was named after the god. In addition, the whole island of Lemnos was sacred to Hephaestus.\nPausanias wrote that the Lycians in Patara had a bronze bowl in their temple of Apollo, saying that Telephus dedicated it and Hephaestus made it.\nPausanias also wrote that the village of Olympia in Elis contained an altar to the river Alpheios, next to which was an altar to Hephaestus sometimes referred to as the altar of \"Warlike Zeus.\"\nThe island Thermessa, between Lipari and Sicily, was also called Hiera of Hephaestus (\u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u1f70 \u1f29\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c5), meaning \"sacred place of Hephaestus\" in Greek.\nNamesakes.\nPliny the Elder wrote that at Corycus, there was a stone which was called Hephaestitis or \"Hephaestus stone\". According to Pliny, the stone was red and reflected images like a mirror, and when boiling water was poured over it, it cooled immediately. Alternatively, when placed in the sun, it immediately set fire to a parched substance.\nThe minor planet 2212 Hephaistos, discovered in 1978 by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Chernykh, was named in Hephaestus's honour.\nThe protein hephaestin has a role in oxidising iron absorbed by intestinal cells to facilitate its transport.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14389", "revid": "1680402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14389", "title": "Herman Charles Bosman", "text": "South African novelist, short story writer, satirist\nHerman Charles Bosman (3 February 1905 \u2013 14 October 1951) was widely regarded as South Africa's greatest short-story writer. He studied the works of Edgar Allan Poe and Mark Twain and developed a style emphasizing the use of satire. His English-language works utilize primarily Afrikaner characters and highlight the many contradictions in Afrikaner society during the first half of the twentieth century.\nEarly life.\nBosman was born at Kuils River, near Cape Town, in the Cape Colony, to an Afrikaner family. He was raised with English as well as Afrikaans. While Bosman was still young, his family travelled frequently, he spent a short time at Potchefstroom College which would later become Potchefstroom High School for Boys, he later moved to Johannesburg where he went to school at Jeppe High School for Boys in Kensington. While there he contributed to the school magazine. When Bosman was sixteen, he started writing short stories for the national Sunday newspaper (the \"Sunday Times\"). He attended the Johannesburg College of Education (which in 2002 was incorporated into the University of the Witwatersrand) and submitted various pieces to student literary competitions.\nCareer and adult life.\nAfter graduation, Bosman accepted a teaching position in the Groot Marico district in an Afrikaans-language school. The area provided the backdrop for his best-known short stories, the \"Oom Schalk Lourens\" series (featuring an older character named Oom Schalk Lourens) and the \"Voorkamer\" sketches.\nIn January 1926 he married Vera Sawyer in Johannesburg. They never lived together, and Bosman seldom told anyone about the marriage, but they remained on good terms throughout Bosman's life.\nOver the June school holidays in 1926, Bosman visited his family in Johannesburg. During an argument, he shot and killed his stepbrother. Bosman was sentenced to death for this crime and was sent to death row at the Pretoria Central Prison. His sentence was later reduced to ten years with hard labour. In 1930, Bosman was released on parole after serving half his sentence. His prison experiences formed the basis for his semi-autobiographical book, \"Cold Stone Jug\".\nBosman then started his own printing-press company and was part of a literary set in Johannesburg, associating with poets, journalists and writers, including Aegidius Jean Blignaut. He toured overseas for nine years, spending most of his time in London. The short stories that he wrote during this period formed the basis for another of his best-known books, \"Mafeking Road\". At the start of the Second World War, he returned to South Africa and worked as a journalist. During this time, in early 1947, he translated the \"Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam\" into Afrikaans.\nBosman lamented the fact that Johannesburg neglected its heritage. In \"The Standard Theatre\" he complained that the city's residents:\n\"will pull down the Standard Theatre like they have pulled down all the old buildings, theatres, gin-palaces, dosshouses, temples, shops, arcades, cafes and joints that were intimately associated with the mining-camp days of Johannesburg. Because I know Johannesburg. And I am satisfied that there is no other city in the world that is so anxious to shake off the memories of its early origins.\"\nBosman's second wife was Ellalean Manson, known as Ella, a pianist and poet. They met in 1931 and married in October 1932 in Johannesburg. The couple were renowned for their bohemian lifestyle and parties, which featured witty conversation and usually ended well after midnight.\nBosman's third and last wife was Helena Stegmann, a schoolteacher and artist. They married in Johannesburg in March 1944. From 1948 to his death in 1951, Bosman was employed as proof editor at \"The Sunday Express\". In addition, he was contracted to write a weekly Voorkamer story for \"The Forum\" magazine.\nAfter a housewarming party in October 1951, Bosman experienced severe chest pains and was taken to Edenvale Hospital. On admission, he was asked for his birthplace. He replied, \"Born Kuilsrivier \u2013 died Edenvale Hospital.\" He was discharged, but collapsed at home a few hours later. He died as he was being rushed back to hospital. He is buried in Westpark Cemetery in Westdene under a triangular headstone that reads \"Die Skrywer, The Writer, Herman Charles Bosman, b 3.2.1905, d 14.10.1951.\"\nLegacy.\nAfter his death, the rights to his works were auctioned. They were purchased by his last wife, Helena, and upon her death, the rights were passed to her son, who retains them. In 1960, however, Helena sold some of his documents and 123\u2009of his watercolours and pencil sketches to the Harry Ransom Center in Texas.\nOnly three of his books were published during his lifetime: \"Mafeking Road\" published by Dassie, and \"Jacaranda in the Night\" and \"Cold Stone Jug\" published by APB. \"Mafeking Road\" has never been out of print since its publication in 1947.\nHis biography was written several times by Valerie Rosenberg. Her first version was called \"Sunflower to the Sun\" (1976), followed by \"Herman Charles Bosman, a Pictorial Biography\" (1981), and lastly by \"Herman Charles Bosman: Between the Lines\" (2005). The last of these contains much new research and deals in detail with aspects of Bosman's life and parentage that were previously considered taboo.\nBecause many of his stories were originally published in long-forgotten magazines and journals, there are a number of anthologies by different collators each containing a different selection. His original books have also been published many times by different publishers.\nThe Herman Charles Bosman Literary Society meets annually for readings, performances and discussions of his works.\n\"Some of the ISBNs and publishers below may not be for the original edition.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14390", "revid": "42389708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14390", "title": "Hungarian", "text": "Hungarian may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14392", "revid": "46313379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14392", "title": "Howitzer", "text": "Type of artillery piece\nThe howitzer () is an artillery weapon that falls between a cannon (or field gun) and a mortar. It is capable of both low angle fire like a field gun and high angle fire like a mortar, given the distinction between low and high angle fire breaks at 45 degrees or 800 mils (NATO). With their long-range capabilities, howitzers can be used to great effect in a battery formation with other artillery pieces, such as long-barreled guns, mortars, and rocket artillery. Howitzers were valued for their ability to fire explosive shells and incendiary materials into fortifications. \nThroughout the 18th and 19th centuries, howitzers evolved to become more mobile and versatile. The introduction of rifling in the mid-19th century led to significant changes in howitzer design and usage. By the early 20th century, howitzers were classified into different categories based on their size and role, including field howitzers, siege howitzers, super-heavy siege howitzers, and defence howitzers.\nDuring World War I and World War II, howitzers played significant roles in combat, particularly in trench warfare and artillery-heavy strategies such as the Soviet deep battle doctrine. In modern times, the distinctions between guns and howitzers have become less pronounced, with many artillery pieces combining characteristics of both. Contemporary howitzers are often self-propelled, mounted on tracked or wheeled vehicles, and capable of firing at high angles with adjustable propellant charges for increased range and accuracy.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"howitzer\" comes from the Czech word , from , 'crowd', and is in turn a borrowing from the Middle High German word or (modern German ), meaning 'crowd, throng', plus the Czech nominal suffix . , sometimes in the compound , also designated a pike square formation in German.\nIn the Hussite Wars of the 1420s and 1430s, the Hussites used short-barreled cannons to fire at short distances into crowds of infantry, or into charging heavy cavalry, to make horses shy away. The word was rendered into German as in the earliest attested use in a document dating from 1440; later German renderings include and, eventually , from which derive the Scandinavian , Polish and Croatian , Estonian , Finnish , Russian (), Serbian (), Ukrainian (), Italian , Spanish , Portuguese , French , Romanian and the Dutch word , which led to the English word \"howitzer\".\nSince World War I, the word \"howitzer\" has been changing to describe artillery pieces that previously would have belonged to the category of gun-howitzers \u2013 relatively long barrels and high muzzle velocities combined with multiple propelling charges and high maximum elevations. This is particularly true in the armed forces of the United States, where gun-howitzers have been officially described as howitzers since World War II. Because of this practice, the word howitzer is used in some armies as a generic term for any kind of artillery piece that is designed to attack targets using indirect fire. Thus, artillery pieces that bear little resemblance to howitzers of earlier eras are now described as howitzers, although the British call them guns.\nThe British had a further method of nomenclature. In the 18th century, they adopted projectile weight for guns replacing an older naming system (such as \"culverin\", \"saker\", etc.) that had developed in the late 15th century. Mortars had been categorized by calibre in inches in the 17th century, and this was duplicated with howitzers.\nU.S. military doctrine defines howitzers as any cannon artillery capable of both high-angle fire (45\u00b0 to 90\u00b0 elevation) and low-angle fire (0\u00b0 to 45\u00b0 elevation); guns are defined as being only capable of low-angle fire (0\u00b0 to 45\u00b0 elevation); and mortars are defined as being only capable of high-angle fire (45\u00b0 to 90\u00b0 elevation).\nHistory.\nEarly modern period.\nThe first artillery identified as howitzers developed in the late 16th century as a medium-trajectory weapon between the low trajectory (direct fire) of cannons and the high trajectory (indirect fire) of mortars. Originally intended for use in siege warfare, they were particularly useful for delivering cast iron shells filled with gunpowder or incendiary materials into the interior of fortifications. In contrast to contemporaneous mortars, which were fired at a fixed angle and were entirely dependent on adjustments to the size of propellant charges to vary range, howitzers could be fired at a wide variety of angles. Thus, while howitzer gunnery was more complicated than the technique of employing mortars, the howitzer was an inherently more flexible weapon that could fire its projectiles along a wide range of trajectories.\nIn the middle of the 18th century, a number of European armies began to introduce howitzers that were mobile enough to accompany armies in the field. Though usually fired at the relatively high angles of fire used by contemporary siege howitzers, these field howitzers were rarely defined by this capability. Rather, as the field guns of the day were usually restricted to inert projectiles (which relied entirely on momentum for their destructive effects), the field howitzers of the 18th century were chiefly valued for their ability to fire explosive shells. Many, for the sake of simplicity and rapidity of fire, dispensed with adjustable propellant charges.\nThe Abus gun was an early form of howitzer in the Ottoman Empire. In 1758, the Russian Empire introduced a specific type of howitzer (or rather gun-howitzer), with a conical chamber, called a licorne, which remained in service for the next 100 years. In the mid-19th century, some armies attempted to simplify their artillery parks by introducing smoothbore artillery pieces that were designed to fire both explosive projectiles and cannonballs, thereby replacing both field howitzers and field guns. The most famous of these \"gun-howitzers\" was the Napoleon 12-pounder, a weapon of French design that was extensively used in the American Civil War.\nIn 1859, the armies of Europe (including those that had recently adopted gun-howitzers) began to rearm field batteries with rifled field guns. These field pieces used cylindrical projectiles that, while smaller in caliber than the spherical shells of smoothbore field howitzers, could carry a comparable charge of gunpowder. Moreover, their greater range let them create many of the same effects (such as firing over low walls) that previously required the sharply curved trajectories of smoothbore field howitzers. Because of this, military authorities saw no point in obtaining rifled field howitzers to replace their smoothbore counterparts but instead used rifled field guns to replace both guns and howitzers.\nIn siege warfare, the introduction of rifling had the opposite effect. In the 1860s, artillery officers discovered that rifled siege howitzers (substantially larger than field howitzers) were a more efficient means of destroying walls (particularly walls protected by certain kinds of intervening obstacles) than smoothbore siege guns or siege mortars. Thus, at the same time armies were taking howitzers of one sort out of their field batteries, they were introducing howitzers of another sort into their siege trains and fortresses. The lightest of these weapons (later known as \"light siege howitzers\") had calibers around and fired shells that weighed between . The heaviest (later called \"medium siege howitzers\") had calibers between and fired shells that weighed about .\nDuring the 1880s, a third type of siege howitzer was added to inventories of a number of European armies. With calibers that ranged between and shells that weighed more than , these soon came to be known as \"heavy siege howitzers\". A good example of a weapon of this class is provided by the 9.45-inch (240\u00a0mm) weapon that the British Army purchased from the Skoda works in 1899.\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, the introduction of howitzers that were significantly larger than the heavy siege howitzers of the day made necessary the creation of a fourth category, that of \"super-heavy siege howitzers\". Weapons of this category include the famous Big Bertha of the German Army and the 15-inch (381\u00a0mm) howitzer of the British Royal Marine Artillery. These large howitzers were transported mechanically rather than by teams of horses. They were transported as several loads and had to be assembled at their firing position.\nField howitzers introduced at the end of the 19th century could fire shells with high trajectories giving a steep angle of descent and, as a result, could strike targets that were protected by intervening obstacles. They could also fire shells that were about twice as large as shells fired by guns of the same size. Thus, while a field gun that weighed one ton or so was limited to shells that weigh around , a howitzer of the same weight could fire shells. This is a matter of fundamental mechanics affecting the stability and hence the weight of the carriage.\nAs heavy field howitzers and light siege howitzers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries used ammunition of the same size and type, there was a marked tendency for the two types to merge. At first, this was largely a matter of the same basic weapon being employed on two different mountings. Later, as on-carriage recoil-absorbing systems eliminated many of the advantages that siege platforms had enjoyed over field carriages, the same combination of barrel assembly, recoil mechanism and carriage was used in both roles.\nBy the early 20th century, the differences between guns and howitzers were relative, not absolute, and generally recognized as follows:\nThe onset of trench warfare after the first few months of World War I greatly increased the demand for howitzers that gave a steep angle of descent, which were better suited than guns to the task of striking targets in a vertical plane (such as trenches), with large amounts of explosive and considerably less barrel wear. The German army was well equipped with howitzers, having far more at the beginning of the war than France.\nMany howitzers introduced in the course of World War I had longer barrels than pre-war howitzers. The standard German light field howitzer at the start of the war (the 10.5\u00a0cm leichte Feldhaubitze 98/09) had a barrel that was 16 calibers long, but the light field howitzer adopted by the German Army in 1916 (105\u00a0mm leichte Feldhaubitze 16) had a barrel that was 22 calibers long. At the same time, new models of field gun introduced during that conflict, such as the field gun adopted by the German Army in 1916 (7.7 cm Feldkanone 16) were often provided with carriages that allowed firing at comparatively high angles, and adjustable propellant cartridges.\nIn the years after World War I, the tendency of guns and howitzers to acquire each other's characteristics led to the renaissance of the concept of the gun-howitzer. This was a product of technical advances such as the French invention of autofrettage just before World War I, which led to stronger and lighter barrels, the use of cut-off gear to control recoil length depending on firing elevation angle, and the invention of muzzle brakes to reduce recoil forces. Like the gun-howitzers of the 19th century, those of the 20th century replaced both guns and howitzers. Thus, the 25-pounder \"gun-howitzer\" of the British Army replaced both the 18-pounder field gun and the 4.5-inch howitzer.\nDuring World War II, the military doctrine of Soviet deep battle called for extensive use of heavy artillery to hold the formal line of front. Soviet doctrine was remarkably different from the German doctrine of Blitzkrieg and called for a far more extensive use of artillery. As a result, howitzers saw most of the action on the Eastern front. Most of the howitzers produced by the USSR at the time were not self-propelled. Notable examples of Soviet howitzers include the M-10, M-30 and D-1.\nSince World War II, most of the artillery pieces adopted by armies for attacking targets on land have combined the traditional characteristics of guns and howitzers\u00a0\u2013 high muzzle velocity, long barrels, long range, multiple charges and maximum elevation angles greater than 45 degrees. The term \"gun-howitzer\" is sometimes used for these (e.g., in Russia); many nations use \"howitzer\", while the UK (and most members of The Commonwealth of Nations) calls them \"guns\", for example Gun, 105\u00a0mm, Field, L118.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14393", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14393", "title": "HMMWV", "text": ""}
{"id": "14395", "revid": "47540358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14395", "title": "Hummer", "text": "American brand of vehicles\nHummer (stylized in all caps) is an American brand of pickups launched in 1992 when AM General began selling a civilian version of the M998\u00a0Humvee. Although discontinued in 2010, Hummer returned as a model under GMC in 2020. In 1998, General Motors (GM) purchased the brand name from and marketed three vehicles: the original Hummer\u00a0H1, based on the military Humvee, as well as the new H2 and H3 models, which were based on smaller, civilian-market GM platforms.\nBy 2008, Hummer's viability in the economic downturn was questioned. Rather than being transferred to the Motors Liquidation Company as part of the GM bankruptcy in 2009, the brand was retained by GM, to investigate its sale. No final deal was made, and in 2010, Hummer dealerships began shutting down.\nThe nameplate returned to the marketplace for the 2022 model year, not as a separate brand but as an electric pickup truck and an SUV, both sold under the GMC brand as the \"GMC Hummer EV\". The pre-production versions of the EV began in November 2021, after a $2.2 billion investment to build a variety of all-electric vehicles in GM's Detroit-Hamtramck assembly plant.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nAM General had planned to sell a civilian version of its Humvee as far back as the late 1980s. Having the same structure and most mechanical components, the civilian Hummers were finished in automotive gloss paint, adding passenger car enhancements such as air conditioning, sound insulation, upgraded upholstery, stereo systems, wood trim, and convenience packages. The civilian model began in part because of the persistence of Arnold Schwarzenegger, who saw an Army convoy while filming \"Kindergarten Cop\" in Oregon and began to campaign and lobby for a civilian version to be available on the market.\nIn 1992, AM General began selling a civilian version of the M998 Humvee vehicle to the public under the brand name \"Hummer\". The first two Hummer H1s to be sold were purchased by Schwarzenegger.\nGM purchase.\nIn December 1999, AM General sold the brand name to General Motors but continued to manufacture the vehicles. GM was responsible for the marketing and distribution of all civilian Hummers produced by AM General. Shortly thereafter, GM introduced two of its own design models, the H2 and H3, and renamed the original vehicle H1. AM General continued to build the H1 until it was discontinued in 2006 and was contracted by GM to produce the H2. The H3 was built in Shreveport, LA, alongside the Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon pickups, with which it shared the GMT-355 platform (modified and designated GMT-345). Hummer dealership buildings featured an oversized half Quonset Hut style roof, themed to the Hummer brand's military origins.\nBy 2006, the Hummer began to be exported and sold through importers and distributors in 33 countries. On October 10, 2006, GM began producing the Hummer H3 at its Port Elizabeth plant in South Africa for international markets. The Hummers built there at first were only left-hand drive, but right-hand drive versions were added and exported to Australia and other markets.\nThe H2 was also assembled in Kaliningrad, Russia, by Avtotor, starting in 2006 and ending in 2009. The plant produced a few hundred vehicles annually, and its output was limited to local consumption with five dealers in Russia.\nOn June 3, 2008, one day prior to GM's annual shareholder meeting, Rick Wagoner, GM's CEO at that time, said the brand was being reviewed and would possibly be sold, have the production line completely redesigned, or be discontinued. This was due to the decreasing demand for large SUVs as a result of higher oil prices. Almost immediately after the announcement, a pair of Indian automakers, including Mahindra &amp; Mahindra, expressed interest in purchasing all or part of Hummer.\nIn April 2009, GM President Fritz Henderson stated several interested parties had approached GM regarding the Hummer business.\nFailed sale and shutdown.\nOn June 1, 2009, as a part of the General Motors bankruptcy announcement, the company revealed that the Hummer brand would be discontinued. However, the following day GM announced that instead it had reached a deal to sell the brand to an undisclosed buyer. After GM announced that same day that the sale was to an undisclosed Chinese company, CNN and the New York Times identified the buyer of the Hummer truck unit as China-based Sichuan Tengzhong Heavy Industrial Machinery Company Ltd. Later that day, Sichuan Tengzhong itself announced the deal on their own website.\nOn January 6, 2010, GM CEO Ed Whitacre said he hoped to close the deal with Tengzhong by the end of that month. On February 1, 2010, it was announced that Sichuan and General Motors had agreed to extend the deadline until the end of February as Sichuan tried to get approval by the Chinese government. It was also revealed that the price tag of the Hummer brand was $150 million.\nLater, on February 24, 2010, GM announced the Tengzhong deal had collapsed and the Hummer brand would soon shut down. There were reports that Sichuan Tengzhong might pursue the purchase of the Hummer brand from GM by purchasing it privately through the company's new J&amp;A Tengzhong Fund SPC, a private equity investment fund owned by an offshore entity that was recruiting private investors to buy into its acquisition plan. The financial markets posed problems for established borrowers and even more for Tengzhong, a little-known company from western China, at the same time as the potential value of the Hummer brand continued to decline, given high fuel prices and weak consumer demand.\nThe company announced it was willing to consider offers for all or part of the assets. American company Raser Technologies along with several others expressed interest in buying the company. However, on April 7, 2010, this attempt failed as well, and General Motors officially said it was shutting down the Hummer SUV brand and offering rich rebates in a bid to move the remaining 2,200 vehicles.\nAfter filling a rental-car fleet order, the last Hummer\u00a0H3 rolled off the line at Shreveport on May 24, 2010.\nRevival.\nIn mid-2019, rumors began to circulate that General Motors was considering reviving the Hummer nameplate in 2021, as the market for off-road vehicles was reaching historic levels of sales. GM President Mark Ruess was asked about the possible return in the summer of 2019 and said, \"I love Hummer. I don't know. We're looking at everything.\" Credibility to the earlier reporting began to solidify after the conclusion of the 2019 General Motors strike, as contract negotiations led to the commitment by GM of saving its Detroit-Hamtramck facility from closing by investing in and retooling it to build future electric trucks and SUVs; the products were to be built on GM's upcoming \"BT1\" electric truck platform. GM's own documentation listed three brands as receiving products from the BT1 architecture: Cadillac (Escalade IQ), Chevrolet (Silverado EV), and a third unknown brand referred to as the \"M-Brand.\"\nIndustry insiders claimed they had sources saying that the \"M-Brand\" was a Hummer, because a revival of the brand with established name recognition would help reduce marketing costs. The Hummer revival on the BT1 platform was known internally as \"Project O,\" potentially named after former Chief Camaro Engineer Al Oppenheiser (the man responsible for the return of the Camaro in 2010), who was moved from Camaro development to overseeing an EV program. Oppenheiser later confirmed this himself. By November 2019, media reports all but confirmed that Hummer would return with two electric models, a truck and an SUV, sometime in 2021. On November 21, 2019, General Motors CEO Mary Barra confirmed that GM would be releasing an electric pickup truck in the fall of 2021, but did not name the brand under which it would be built.\nThe new Hummer line is not a standalone brand, as it was before General Motors filed for bankruptcy, but a model within GM's GMC brand.\nOn January 30, 2020, GM released a series of short videos revealing the return of Hummers in the form of electric SUV and truck models marketed under the GMC brand. A 30-second Super Bowl ad featured NBA superstar LeBron James. The vehicle was to be revealed on May 20, 2020, but the date was later pushed back to October 20, 2020.\nThe Hummer EV SUT was officially revealed on October 20, 2020, during the 2020 World Series. The Hummer EV SUV was unveiled during the NCAA Tournament Final Four on April 3, 2021.\nThere will be several versions and models under GM brand GMC, with initially only the most expensive \"Edition 1\" four-door pickup available, followed by other models and later as an SUV.\nModels.\nHummer H1.\nThe first vehicle in the Hummer range was the Hummer H1, based on the Humvee. Released for the civilian market in 1992, this vehicle was designed by American Motors' AM General subsidiary to meet U.S. Military specifications that were issued in 1979. By 1982, Renault (which was partially owned by the French government) took controlling interest in AMC, and the AM General division was sold in 1983 to Ling-Temco-Vought (LTV), because US regulations barred ownership of defense contractors by foreign governments. American Motors itself was acquired by Chrysler in 1987. Production of H1 civilian versions continued throughout 2006.\nHummer H2.\nThe Hummer H2 was the second vehicle in the Hummer range built in the AM General facility under contract from General Motors from 2002 to 2009. There were two variations: The H2 SUV and the H2 SUT.\nHummer H3.\nThe H3 and H3T pickup truck were the smallest of the Hummer models and were based on the GMT355 platform shared with the Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon compact pickup trucks. The H3 line was produced from 2005 to 2010 by General Motors.\nConcept vehicles.\nHummer HX.\nThe Hummer HX was developed in 2008 as an open-air, two-door off-road concept car, smaller than other Hummer models.\nPlug-in hybrid.\nRaser Technologies (formerly of Utah) was to use technology similar to that of the Chevrolet Volt. The company unveiled the prototype to the 2009 Society of Automotive Engineers World Congress in Detroit. The E-REV (Extended-Range Electric Vehicle) powertrain technology was claimed to power the vehicle for up to on its battery, and then a small 4-cylinder internal combustion engine would start to generate more electricity.\nRacing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeam Hummer Racing was created in 1993. Led by off-road racer Rod Hall, Team Hummer competed in the stock classes of both BitD and SCORE, with specialized racing shock absorbers, tires, and other modifications, along with mandatory safety equipment. Team Hummer stock-class H3 was driven by Hall who finished first in class with the H3 in the 2005 Baja 1000. Team Hummer earned 11 production-class wins at the Baja 1000.\nA highly modified, two-wheel drive Hummer was raced by Robby Gordon in 2006 (did not finish), 2007 (8th place), 2009 (3rd place), 2010 (8th place), 2011 (did not finish), 2012 (disqualified), and 2013 (14th place) Dakar Rally.\nStretch limousines.\nThe Hummer H2 has been stretched by third-party companies into a variety of limousine versions. The Hummer H2 was cut behind the cab, and the chassis was extended to create a passenger section for 14, 16, or even 22 passengers.\nCriticisms.\nCriticism of Hummers mirrors the criticism of SUVs in general, but to a higher degree. Specific criticisms of Hummers include:\nLicensing.\nGM is active in licensing the Hummer. Various companies have licensed the Hummer trademarks for use on colognes, flashlights, bicycles, shoes, coats, hats, laptops, toys, clothing, CD players, video games and other items. An electric quadricycle badged as a Hummer was produced in the UK.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "14396", "revid": "51029078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14396", "title": "Humvee", "text": "Family of light military vehicles\nThe High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV; colloquial: Humvee) is a family of light, four-wheel drive military trucks and utility vehicles produced by AM General. It has largely supplanted the roles previously performed by the original jeep, and others such as the Vietnam War-era M151 Jeep, the M561 \"Gama Goat\", their M718A1 and M792 ambulance versions, the Commercial Utility Cargo Vehicle, and other light trucks. Primarily used by the United States military, it is also used by numerous other countries and organizations and even in civilian adaptations. \nThe Humvee saw widespread use in the Gulf War of 1991, where it navigated the desert terrain; this usage helped to inspire civilian Hummer versions. The vehicle's original unarmored design was later seen to be inadequate and was found to be particularly vulnerable to improvised explosive devices in the Iraq War. The U.S. hastily up-armored select models and replaced frontline units with the MRAP. Under the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV) program, in 2015 the U.S. Army selected the Oshkosh L-ATV to replace the vehicle in frontline U.S. military service.\nHistory.\nSince World War II, the \"Willys MB &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444-ton Truck, Command and Reconnaissance\", and its evolutions, were used for mass-deployment, and became known as \"jeeps\". The United States military had continued to rely heavily on jeeps as general utility vehicles and as a mass-transport for soldiers in small groups. Although the U.S. Army had let Ford redesign the jeep from the ground up during the 1950s, and the resulting 1960 Ford M151 jeep incorporated significant innovations, it firmly adhered to the original concept: a very compact, light enough to manhandle, low profile vehicle, with a folding windshield, that a layman could barely distinguish from the preceding Willys jeeps. The jeeps were more than two feet shorter than a Volkswagen Beetle and weighed just over one metric ton, seating three to four, with a off-road payload rating. During and after the war, the very light, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444-ton jeeps were complemented by the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-ton Dodge WC and Korean War Dodge M37 models.\nBy the mid-1960s, the U.S. military felt a need to reevaluate their aging light vehicle fleet. From the mid-1960s, the U.S. Army had tried to modernize, through replacing the larger, purpose-built Dodge M37s by militarized, \"commercial off the shelf\" (COTS) 4\u00d74 trucks \u2014 initially the M715 Jeep trucks, succeeded in the later 1970s by several \"CUCV\" adapted commercial pickup series, but these did not satisfy newer requirements either. What was wanted was a truly versatile light military truck, that could replace multiple outdated vehicles. When becoming aware of the U.S. Army's desire for a versatile new light weapons carrier/reconnaissance vehicle, as early as 1969 FMC Corporation started development on their XR311 prototype and offered it for testing in 1970. At least a dozen of these were built for testing under the \"High Mobility Combat Vehicle\", or HMCV program, initially much more as an enhanced capability successor to the M151 jeep, than as a general-purpose vehicle.\nThe HMMWV program had its origins in the Combat Support Vehicle (CSV) program. The XM966 CSV was a proposed platform for the TOW missile launcher. Congress ended the program in 1977 due to the relatively small requirement of 3,800 vehicles. Adjusting to Congress's expectations, the Army increased the scale of the program, then called the XM966 High Mobility Weapons Carrier (CSVP), to replace multiple other trucks. Congress, interested in a larger joint services truck program, removed the CSVP from the 1979 budget. The Army restructured the program, which was then called High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle.\nIn 1979, the U.S. Army released draft specifications for the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), which was to replace all U.S. Army tactical vehicles in the 1/4-ton to 5/4-ton range, As well as select vehicles in the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S. Air Force. Namely these were the M151 quarter-ton jeeps, M561 Gama Goats, and the CUCVs, as one uniform \"jack-of-all-trades\" light tactical vehicle series, to better perform the roles of the impractically mixed fleet of outdated existing vehicles. The specifications called for a diesel engine, excellent on and off-road performance, the ability to carry a large payload, and improved survivability against indirect fire. Compared to the jeep, it was larger and had a much wider track, with a ground clearance, double that of most sport-utility vehicles. The new truck was to climb a 60 percent incline and traverse a 40 percent slope and ford of water and electronics waterproofed to drive through of water were specified. The radiator was to be mounted high, sloping over the engine on a forward-hinged hood.\nOut of 61 companies that showed interest in the contract, five companies submitted proposals before the deadline in April 1981. In July 1981, the Army awarded contracts to three companies\u2014AM General, Chrysler Corporation, and Teledyne Continental\u2014to build eleven HMMWV prototypes each. The vehicles (six weapon carriers and five utility vehicles) were delivered by May 1982.\nThe Teledyne HMMWV was based on the rear-engined XR311 Cheetah. Chrysler's HMMWV was based on the Expanded Mobility Truck. Chrysler Defense was sold mid-competition to General Dynamics Land Systems. The AM General HMMWV was developed as a private venture to meet the HMMWV requirement. The first prototype (a weapons carrier variant) was completed in August 1980 and sent to the Nevada Automotive Test Center for testing. AM General nicknamed the prototypes it delivered for the Army competition \"Hummer,\" which AM General had the foresight to trademark.\nThe vehicles underwent testing at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland and Yuma, Arizona. The vehicles were subjected to over 600,000 miles in trials which included off-road courses in desert and arctic conditions. On March 22, 1983, AM General was awarded the contract. The vehicle's durability and light weight were factors that led to its selection. AM General was awarded an initial contract for 2,334 vehicles, the first batch of a five-year contract that would see 55,000 vehicles delivered to the U.S. military, including 39,000 vehicles for the Army. 72,000 vehicles had been delivered to the U.S. and foreign customers by the Persian Gulf War of 1991, and 100,000 had been delivered by the Humvee's 10th anniversary in 1995. Ft. Lewis, Washington, and the 2nd Battalion, 47th Infantry, 9th Infantry Division was the testing unit to employ HMMWV in the new concept of a motorized division. Yakima Training Center, Washington, was the main testing grounds for HMMWVs from 1985 through December 1991, when the motorized concept was abandoned and the division inactivated.\nIn June 1983, a Pentagon report noted the vehicle's \"very low\" reliability, averaging 370 miles between failures.\nIn August 1989, AM General was awarded a $1 billion contract from the Army to produce 33,000 HMMWVs.\nUse in combat.\nHMMWVs first saw combat in Operation Just Cause, the U.S. invasion of Panama in 1989. The HMMWV was designed primarily for personnel and light cargo transport behind front lines, not as a frontline fighting vehicle. Like the previous jeep, the basic first-generation HMMWV has no armor (though armament carriers and hard-shell ambulances did have modest ballistic protection) or protection against chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear threats. Nevertheless, losses were relatively low in conventional operations, such as the Gulf War. Vehicles and crews suffered considerable damage and losses during the Battle of Mogadishu in 1993 because of the nature of urban engagement. However, the chassis survivability allowed the majority of those crews to return to safety, though the HMMWV was never designed to offer protection against intense small arms fire, much less machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. With the rise of asymmetric warfare and low-intensity conflicts, the HMMWV was pressed into service in urban combat roles for which it was not originally intended.\nAfter Operation Restore Hope in Somalia, the military recognized a need for a more protected HMMWV. AM General developed the M1114, an armored HMMWV to withstand small arms fire. The M1114 has been in production since 1996, seeing limited use in the Balkans before deployment to the Middle East. This design is superior to the M998 with a larger, more powerful turbocharged engine, air conditioning, and a strengthened suspension system. More importantly, it boasts a fully armored passenger area protected by hardened steel and bullet-resistant glass. With the increase in direct attacks and asymmetric warfare in Iraq, AM General diverted the majority of its manufacturing power to producing these vehicles.\nHumvees were sent into Afghanistan following the September 11 attacks, where they proved invaluable during initial operations. In the early years before IEDs became prevalent, the vehicle was liked by troops for its ability to access rough, mountainous terrain. Some soldiers would remove features from Humvees, including what little armor it had and sometimes even entire doors, to make them lighter and more maneuverable for off-road conditions and to increase visibility. With the onset of the Iraq War, Humvees proved very vulnerable to IEDs; in the first four months of 2006, 67 U.S. troops died in Humvees. To increase protection, the U.S. military hastily added armor kits to the vehicles. Although this somewhat improved survivability, bolting on armor made the Humvee an \"ungainly beast\", increasing weight and putting a strain on the chassis, which led to unreliability. Armored doors that weighed hundreds of pounds were difficult for troops to open, and the newly armored turret made Humvees top-heavy and increased the danger of rollovers. The U.S. Marine Corps decided to start replacing Humvees in combat with Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles in 2007, and the U.S. Army stated that the vehicle was \"no longer feasible for combat\" in 2012. However, Humvees have also been used by Taliban insurgents for suicide bombings against the Afghan National Security Forces in the country.\nThe HMMWV has become the vehicular backbone of U.S. forces around the world. Over 10,000 HMMWVs were employed by coalition forces during the Iraq War. The Humvee has been described as a vehicle with \"the right capability for its era\": designed to provide payload mobility in protected (safe) areas. However, deploying the vehicle to conflict zones where it was exposed to a full spectrum of threat which it was neither designed to operate, or be survivable in, led to adding protection at the cost of mobility and payload.\nOn 22 April 2022, Pentagon Press Secretary John F. Kirby described a package of military equipment being transported to Ukraine to assist in its war with Russia, including \"100 armored Humvee vehicles\". An additional 50 were promised on 19 August 2022, and were delivered at an unknown date. A number of Humvees were used in the assault on the Russian oblast of Belgorod on 22 May 2023. Ukraine first received Humvees from the U.S. in 2001, and they were used by them in peacekeeping operations in Kosovo that same year.\nModifications.\nIn December 2004, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld came under criticism from U.S. troops and their families for not providing better-equipped HMMWVs. Rumsfeld pointed out that, before the war, armor kits were produced only in small numbers per year. As the role of American forces in Iraq changed from fighting the Iraqi Army to suppressing the insurgency, more armor kits were being manufactured, though perhaps not as fast as production facilities were capable. Even more advanced kits were also being developed. While these kits are much more effective against all types of attacks, they weigh from and have some of the same drawbacks as the improvised armor. Unlike similar-sized civilian cargo and tow trucks, which typically have dual rear wheels to reduce sway, the HMMWV has single rear wheels because of its independent rear suspension coupled with the body design.\nMost up-armored HMMWVs hold up well against lateral attacks when the blast is distributed in all different directions but offer little protection from a mine blast below the truck, such as buried IEDs and land mines. Explosively formed penetrators (EFPs) can also defeat the armor kits, causing casualties.\nThe armor kits fielded include the Armor Survivability Kit (ASK), FRAG 5, FRAG 6, as well as upgrade kits to the M1151. The ASK was the first fielded in October 2003, adding about to the weight of the vehicle. Armor Holdings fielded an even lighter kit, adding only to the vehicle's weight. The Marine Armor Kit (MAK), fielded in January 2005, offers more protection than the M1114 but also increases weight. The FRAG 5 offered even more protection but was still inadequate to stop EFP attacks. The FRAG 6 kit is designed to do just that, however its increased protection adds over the vehicle over the FRAG 5 kit, and the width is increased by . The doors may also require a mechanical assist device to open and close.\nAnother drawback of the up-armored HMMWVs occurs during an accident or attack, when the heavily armored doors tend to jam shut, trapping the troops inside. As a result, the U.S. Army Aviation and Missile Research, Development, and Engineering Center developed the Humvee Crew Extraction D-ring in 2006. The D-ring hooks on the door of the HMMWV so that another vehicle can rip the door off with a tow strap, chain, or cable to free the troops inside. The D-ring was later recognized as one of the top 10 greatest Army inventions of 2006. In addition, Vehicle Emergency Escape (VEE) windows, developed by BAE Systems, were fielded for use on the M1114 up-armored HMMWV, with 1,000 kits ordered.\nThe soldier manning the exposed crew-served weapon on top of the vehicle is extremely vulnerable. In response, many HMMWVs have been fitted with basic gun shields or turrets, as was the case with M113 APCs after they were first deployed in Vietnam. The U.S. military is currently evaluating a new form of protection, developed by BAE Systems as well as systems designed by the Army, which are already in theater. The new gunner's seat is protected by high steel plates with bulletproof glass windows. Additionally, some HMMWVs have been fitted with a remotely operated CROWS weapon station, which slaves the machine gun to controls in the back seat so it can be fired without exposing the crew. The Boomerang anti-sniper system was also fielded by some HMMWVs in Iraq to immediately give troops the location of insurgents firing on them.\nAnother weakness for the HMMWV has proven to be its size, which limited its deployment in Afghanistan because it is too wide for the smallest roads and too large for many forms of air transport compared to jeeps or Land Rover-sized vehicles (which are, respectively, 24 and 15 inches narrower). This size also limits the ability of the vehicle to be manhandled out of situations.\nAlternatives.\nThe Army purchased a purpose-built armored car, the M1117 armored security vehicle, also known as an armored personnel carrier (APC), in limited numbers for use by the United States Army Military Police Corps. In 2007, the Marine Corps announced an intention to replace all HMMWVs in Iraq with MRAPs because of high loss rates and issued contracts for the purchase of several thousand of these vehicles, which include the International MaxxPro, the BAE OMC RG-31, the BAE RG-33 and Caiman, and the Force Protection Cougar, which were deployed primarily for mine clearing duties. Heavier models of infantry mobility vehicles (IMV) can also be used for patrol vehicles. The MaxxPro Line has been shown to have the highest rate of vehicle rollover accidents because of its very high center of gravity and immense weight.\nReplacement and future.\nThe Humvee replacement process undertaken by the U.S. military focused on interim replacement with MRAPs and long-term replacement with the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle (JLTV). The HMMWV has evolved several times since its introduction and was used in tactical roles for which it was never originally intended. The military pursued several initiatives to replace it, both in the short and long terms. The short-term replacement efforts utilized commercial off-the-shelf vehicles as part of the Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) program. These vehicles were procured to replace Humvees in combat theaters. The long-term replacement for the Humvee is the JLTV which is designed from the ground up. The Future Tactical Truck System (FTTS) program was initiated to analyze potential requirements for a Humvee replacement. Various prototype vehicles such as the MillenWorks Light Utility Vehicle, and the ULTRA AP have been constructed as part of these efforts. The JLTV contract was awarded to Oshkosh in August 2015.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps issued a request for proposals in 2013 for its Humvee sustainment modification initiative to upgrade 6,700 expanded capacity vehicles (ECVs). The Marines plan to field the JLTV but do not have enough funding to completely replace all Humvees, so they decided to continue sustaining their fleet. Key areas of improvement include upgrades to the suspension to reduce the amount of force transferred to the chassis, upgrading the engine and transmission for better fuel efficiency, enhancements to the cooling system to prevent overheating, a central tire inflation system to improve off-road mobility and ride quality, and increased underbody survivability. Testing of upgraded Humvees was to occur in 2014, with production and installation occurring from 2015 through 2018. Older A2 series Humvees make up half the current fleet, and 4,000 are to be disposed of through foreign military sales and transfers. By 2017, the Marines' light tactical vehicle fleet is to consist of 3,500 A2 series Humvees, 9,500 ECV Humvees, and 5,000 JLTVs, with 18,000 vehicles in total. Humvees in service with the Marine Corps will be upgraded through 2030. The Marines shelved the Humvee modernization effort in March 2015 because of budget cuts.\nSeveral companies are offering modifications to maintain the remaining U.S. military Humvee fleets. Oshkosh Corporation is offering Humvee upgrades to the Marine Corps in addition to its JLTV offering, which are modular and scalable to provide varying levels of capabilities at a range of prices that can be provided individually or as complete packages. Their approach is centered around the TAK-4 independent suspension system, which delivers greater offroad profile capability, improved ride quality, an increase in maximum speed, greater whole-vehicle durability, and restored payload capacity and ground clearance. Northrop Grumman developed a new chassis and powertrain for the Humvee that would combine the mobility and payload capabilities of original vehicle variants while maintaining the protection levels of up-armored versions. The cost to upgrade one Humvee with Northrop Grumman's features is $145,000. Textron has offered another Humvee upgrade option called the Survivable Combat Tactical Vehicle (SCTV) that restores mobility and survivability over armored Humvee levels. Although the SCTV costs more at $200,000 per vehicle, the company claims it can restore the Humvee for operational use, combining Humvee-level mobility and transportability with MRAP-level underbody protection as a transitional solution until the JLTV is introduced in significant numbers.\nOne suggested future role for the Humvee is as an autonomous unmanned ground vehicle (UGV). If converted to a UGV, the vehicle could serve as a mobile scout vehicle with armor features removed to enhance mobility and terrain accessibility, since there would be no occupants needing protection. Because there will still be tens of thousands of Humvees in the U.S. inventory after the JLTV enters service, it could be a low-cost way to build an unmanned combat vehicle fleet. Autonomy features would allow the Humvees to drive themselves and one soldier to control a \"swarm\" of several vehicles.\nAlthough the Army plans to buy 49,100 JLTVs and the Marine Corps 5,500, they are not a one-for-one replacement for the Humvee, and both services will still be left operating large fleets. For the Marines, 69 JLTVs will replace the 74 Humvees in all active infantry battalions to cover its expeditionary forces. The Marine JLTV order is planned to be completed by 2022, leaving the remainder of the Corps' 13,000-strong Humvee force scattered around support organizations while soft-skinned Humvees will provide support behind the forward-deployed Marine Expeditionary Unit. The Army does not plan to replace Humvees in the Army National Guard and is considering options on how many of its 120,000 vehicles will be replaced, sustained, or modernized. Even if half of the force is replaced by JLTVs, the entire planned order will not be complete until 2040. If upgrades are chosen for the remaining Humvees, the cost would likely have to not exceed $100,000 per vehicle. The Humvee is expected to remain in U.S. military service until at least 2050. Ambulance variants of the Humvee will especially remain in active use, as the JLTV could not be modified to serve as one due to weight issues.\nOn April 30, 2025, US Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth ordered the Secretary of the Army to \"end procurement of obsolete systems, and cancel or scale back ineffective or redundant programs, including manned aircraft, excess ground vehicles (e.g., HMMWV), and outdated UAVs\". The Army said it would stop procuring Humvees and JLTVs. AM General said it would continue producing the vehicles, and it was unclear whether existing contracts would be cancelled.\nDesign features.\nThe Humvee seats four people with an available fully enclosed aluminum cabin with a vertical windshield. It has all-wheel drive with an independent suspension and helical gear-reduction hubs similar to portal axles which attach towards the top rather than the center of each wheel to allow the drivetrain shafts to be raised for ground clearance. The body is mounted on a narrow steel frame with boxed rails and five cross members for rigidity. The rails act as sliders to protect the drivetrain which is nestled between and above the rails. Raising the drivetrain into the cabin area and lowering the seats into the frame creates a chest-high transmission hump which separates passengers on each side and lowers the overall center of gravity compared to most trucks where the body and passengers are above the frame.\nThe Humvee uses V8 powertrains from General Motors. Early iterations were issued with the 6.2-liter \"Detroit Diesel\" V8. Later iterations were fitted with the larger and improved 6.5-liter \"Detroit Diesel\" V8. Power output for the naturally-aspirated version of this engine is and of torque, while the turbocharged version produces and .\nThe vehicle has double wishbone suspension with portal gear hubs on all 4 wheels and inboard disc brakes. The brake discs are not mounted at the wheels, as on conventional cars, but are inboard of the half-shafts, attached outboard of the differentials. The front and rear differentials are Torsen type, and the center differential is of the lockable type. Torque-biasing differentials allows forward movement as long as at least one wheel has traction. It runs on specialized 37 \u00d7 12.5 radial tires with low-profile runflat devices. Newer HMMWV versions can be equipped with a central tire inflation system (CTIS) kit in the field. While it is optimized for off-road mobility, it can achieve at maximum weight with a top speed of .\nHMMWVs are well suited for airmobile operations as they are transportable by C-130 or larger combat transports, droppable by parachute, and can be sling-loaded from helicopters, though there are smaller vehicles such as the Growler which were designed to fit into smaller craft such as the V-22. In combat conditions, the HMMWV can be delivered by the Low Altitude Parachute Extraction System which pulls the vehicle out of the open rear ramp just above the ground without the aircraft having to land.\nThere are at least 17 variants of the HMMWV in service with the U.S. military. HMMWVs serve as cargo/troop carriers, automatic weapons platforms, ambulances (four litter patients or eight ambulatory patients), M220 TOW missile carriers, M119 howitzer prime movers, M1097 Avenger Pedestal Mounted Stinger platforms, MRQ-12 direct air support vehicles, S250 shelter carriers, and other roles. The HMMWV is capable of normally, or with the deep-water fording kits installed.\nOptional equipment includes a winch (maximum load capacity and supplemental armor. The M1025/M1026 and M1043/M1044 armament carriers provide mounting and firing capabilities for the M134 Minigun, the Mk 19 grenade launcher, the M2 heavy machine gun, the GAU-19A/B gatling gun, the M240G/B machine gun and M249 SAW.\nThe M1114 \"up-armored\" HMMWV, introduced in 1996, also features a similar weapons mount. In addition, some M1114 and M1116 up-armored and M1117 armored security vehicle models feature a Common Remotely Operated Weapon Station (CROWS), which allows the gunner to operate from inside the vehicle, and/or the Boomerang anti-sniper detection system. Recent improvements have also led to the development of the M1151 model, which quickly rendered the previous models obsolete. By replacing the M1114, M1116, and earlier armored HMMWV types with a single model, the U.S. Army hopes to lower maintenance costs.\nThe latest iteration of the Humvee series can be seen in the M1151A1 and later up-armored A1-versions. It has a stronger suspension and larger 6.5 liter turbo-diesel engine to accommodate the weight of up to of additional armor. The armor protection can be installed or taken off depending on the operating environment, so the vehicles can move more efficiently without armor when there is no threat of attack. There is some underbody armor that moderately protects against mines and roadside bombs. Other improvements include Vehicle Emergency Escape (VEE) windows that can be quickly removed so troops inside can escape in the event of a rollover, jammed door, or the vehicle catching fire, and a blast chimney that vents the force of a bomb blast upwards and away from the occupants. The M1151A1 has a crew of four, can carry of payload, and can tow a load. On roads, it has a top speed of and a range of .\nVariants.\nMajor HMMWV A0/A1/A2 versions.\n\"With the introduction of the A1 series the number of models was reduced, with further designation revisions when the A2 series was introduced\".\nVariants are GMV-S (Army Special Forces), GMV-R (75th Ranger Regiment), GMV-N (Navy SEALs), GMV-T/GMV-SD/GMV-ST - AFSOC variants, and the GMV-M (Marine Corps MARSOC) variant.\nM1113 expanded capacity vehicle (ECV).\nUnder contract to the US Army, AM General developed the M1113 expanded capacity vehicle (ECV). The M1097A2 is the basis for the expanded capacity vehicle (ECV). The ECV provided the payload capacity allowing for larger and heavier communications shelters, improved armor protection level for scouts, military police, security police, and explosive ordnance disposal platforms.\nIn late 1995, the production of the M1114 based on the improved ECV chassis began. The M1114 meets Army requirements for a scout, military police, and explosive ordnance disposal vehicle with improved ballistic protection levels. The M1114 provides protection against 7.62\u00a0mm armor-piercing projectiles, 155\u00a0mm artillery air bursts and anti-tank mine blasts.\nIn June 1996, the U.S. Army purchased an initial 390 M1114s for operations in Bosnia. The U.S. Air Force has several M1114 vehicles that differ in detail from the U.S. Army model. Under the designation M1116, the type was specifically designed and tailored to the needs of the U.S. Air Force. The M1116 features an expanded cargo area, armored housing for the turret gunner, and increased interior heating and air conditioning system. The M1114 and M1116 received armor at O'Gara-Hess &amp; Eisenhardt Armoring Company of Fairfield, Ohio. The M1145 offers the protection of the M1114 and M1116 for Air Force Air Support Operations Squadrons (ASOS). Designed to protect Forward Air Controllers, modifications include perimeter ballistic protection, overhead burst protection, IED protection, mine blast protection, and 'white glass' transparent armor. Before the introduction of the latest armored HMMWV variants, and between 1993 and June 2006, Armor Holdings produced more than 17,500 armored HMMWVs (more than 14,000 between 2003 and 2007), all but about 160 of the earliest models were M1114, with smaller numbers of M1116 and M1045. The extended capacity HMMWVs, such as the M1165 can drive over an vertical wall and carry a payload.\nSurvivable Combat Tactical Vehicle.\nTextron's Survivable Combat Tactical Vehicle (SCTV) is a protective capsule that can increase Humvee survivability to MRAP levels while significantly improving mobility. The modifications come in five kits, but all five need to be installed before the vehicle can be properly called an SCTV. The vehicle features a monocoque V-shaped hull and angled sides to help deflect rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) with scalable levels of protection. It has greater engine power, replacing the 6.5-liter diesel engine with a Cummins 6.7-liter diesel and Allison 6-speed transmission, as well as a stronger suspension, improved brakes, higher ground clearance, and new onboard instrumentation. Fuel capacity is increased from and the battery and fuel cells are moved from under the rear seat to the rear of the vehicle. Also included are a powerful air conditioner and heating system, run-flat tires, a thermal guard liner under the roof, sharp edges removed from inside the cabin, blast attenuating seats, and a folding gunner's turret allowing rapid deployment from a cargo aircraft or shipboard below deck. Although heavier than the Humvee, the SCTV is half the weight and costs $150,000 less than a comparably survivable MRAP. The basic version is a four-passenger armament carrier, but it can be configured as a nine-passenger troop carrier, air-defense vehicle, flatbed cargo truck, or field ambulance depending on the type of Humvee it is converted from.\nWork began on the SCTV in 2008 in anticipation of U.S. military upgrades, but it was shelved once they made the JLTV a priority. Textron then focused on selling the SCTV upgrade package to up to 25 countries operating the global fleet, a potential market of up to 10,000 vehicles. The upgrade can enhance the survivability of previously soft-skinned versions, sometimes sold by the U.S. as Excess Defense Articles, while costing and weighing less than a comparable MRAP. By 2015, Colombia had installed the SCTV into three Humvees for testing, and Ukraine had shown interest in upgrading their old-model Humvees recently supplied by the U.S. Ukraine ordered three SCTVs in February 2016.\nOperators.\nCivilian sales.\nIn December 2014, the Department of Defense began auctioning off some 4,000 used Humvees to the public. While some have been transferred to domestic law enforcement agencies, this is the first time the military vehicles have been made available for civilian ownership. The idea is to sell them with starting bids at $10,000 each, rather than simply scrapping them as a way to save money and repurpose them. M998, M998A1, M1038, and M1038A1 model Humvees are available, which are out of U.S. service and lack armor. AM General has been opposed to the resale of military Humvees to the general public, primarily because surplus government vehicles would have cut into sales related to the civilian Hummer model, whose production ended in 2010. The first sales from auction occurred on 17 December 2014 for 25 of the Humvees. Bids ranged from $21,500 for a 1989 M1038 to $41,000 for a 1994 AM General M998A1. The average bid was around $30,000 and the sale of the 25 vehicles netted $744,000 total. GovPlanet has since taken over the contract and sells Humvees at its weekly online auctions.\nHUMVEE C-Series.\nIn 2017, it was announced that AM General signed a contract with VLF Automotive to build a new civilian version of the HMMWV for sale outside of the US. The initial contract calls for up to 100 a year to be built and sold overseas to places such as China, Europe, Middle East, and Australia. These are essentially updated Hummer H1s, but cannot use the Hummer-brand owned by General Motors. These vehicles have not been approved for sale in the US due to safety or emission standards.\nReplicas.\nKits have been produced for the general market to turn a sedan into a Humvee lookalike. An alternative is to buy a preconstructed (or \"turnkey\") model. Various kits exist, but one of the more well known is the Volkswagen Beetle-based \"Wombat\". This was previously named \"HummBug\", until the threat of a lawsuit from General Motors forced changes to the name and the grille design to make it look less like the real thing.\nIn Australia, a Gold Coast-based company called Rhino Buggies produces replicas of the Hummer H1 based on the Nissan Patrol 4WD vehicle for around A$30,000.\nIn the U.S., four companies offered Hummer-look-alike body kits that can be mated to GM full-size trucks and Suburban chassis and, in some cases, Ford, Dodge, and Cadillac applications. Some models are Urban Gorilla, Endeavor SB400 and SB4x400 from Forever Off-Road, the Jurassic Truck Corporation T-Rex, and the Bummer from Tatonka Products. An additional company offers plans for chassis building. The kits range from two-door fiberglass models to steel tube and sheet metal constructions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14397", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14397", "title": "Hum-Vee", "text": ""}
{"id": "14398", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14398", "title": "Highest common factor", "text": ""}
{"id": "14400", "revid": "50468286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14400", "title": "History of science", "text": " \nThe history of science covers the development of science from ancient times to the present. It encompasses all three major branches of science: natural, social, and formal. Protoscience, early sciences, and natural philosophies such as alchemy and astrology that existed during the Bronze Age, Iron Age, classical antiquity and the Middle Ages, declined during the early modern period after the establishment of formal disciplines of science in the Age of Enlightenment.\nThe earliest roots of scientific thinking and practice can be traced to Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia during the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE. These civilizations' contributions to mathematics, astronomy, and medicine influenced later Greek natural philosophy of classical antiquity, wherein formal attempts were made to provide explanations of events in the physical world based on natural causes. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, knowledge of Greek conceptions of the world deteriorated in Latin-speaking Western Europe during the early centuries (400 to 1000 CE) of the Middle Ages, but continued to thrive in the Greek-speaking Byzantine Empire. Aided by translations of Greek texts, the Hellenistic worldview was preserved and absorbed into the Arabic-speaking Muslim world during the Islamic Golden Age. The recovery and assimilation of Greek works and Islamic inquiries into Western Europe from the 10th to 13th century revived the learning of natural philosophy in the West. Traditions of early science were also developed in ancient India and separately in ancient China, the Chinese model having influenced Vietnam, Korea and Japan before Western exploration. Among the Pre-Columbian peoples of Mesoamerica, the Zapotec civilization established their first known traditions of astronomy and mathematics for producing calendars, followed by other civilizations such as the Maya.\nNatural philosophy was transformed by the Scientific Revolution that transpired during the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe, as new ideas and discoveries departed from previous Greek conceptions and traditions. The New Science that emerged was more mechanistic in its worldview, more integrated with mathematics, and more reliable and open as its knowledge was based on a newly defined scientific method. More \"revolutions\" in subsequent centuries soon followed. The chemical revolution of the 18th century, for instance, introduced new quantitative methods and measurements for chemistry. In the 19th century, new perspectives regarding the conservation of energy, age of Earth, and evolution came into focus. And in the 20th century, new discoveries in genetics and physics laid the foundations for new sub disciplines such as molecular biology and particle physics. Moreover, industrial and military concerns as well as the increasing complexity of new research endeavors ushered in the era of \"big science,\" particularly after World War II.\nApproaches to history of science.\nThe nature of the history of science - including both the definition of science and whether the English word \"science\" is a misleading term for pre-modern scholarship - is a topic of ongoing debate. The history of science is often seen as a linear story of progress,\nbut historians have come to see the story as more complex.\nAlfred Edward Taylor has characterised lean periods in the advance of scientific discovery as \"periodical bankruptcies of science\".\nScience is a human activity, and scientific contributions have come from people from a wide range of different backgrounds and cultures. Historians of science increasingly see their field as part of a global history of exchange, conflict and collaboration.\nThe relationship between science and religion has been variously characterized in terms of \"conflict\", \"harmony\", \"complexity\", and \"mutual independence\", among others. Events in Europe such as the Galileo affair of the early 17th century \u2013 associated with the scientific revolution and the Age of Enlightenment \u2013 led scholars such as John William Draper to postulate (c.\u20091874) a conflict thesis, suggesting that religion and science have been in conflict methodologically, factually and politically throughout history. The \"conflict thesis\" has since lost favor among the majority of contemporary scientists and historians of science. However, some contemporary philosophers and scientists, such as Richard Dawkins, still subscribe to this thesis.\nHistorians have emphasized that trust is necessary for agreement on claims about nature. In this light, the 1660 establishment of the Royal Society and its code of experiment \u2013 trustworthy because witnessed by its members \u2013 has become an important chapter in the historiography of science. Many people in modern history (typically women and persons of color) were excluded from elite scientific communities and characterized by the science establishment as inferior. Historians in the 1980s and 1990s described the structural barriers to participation and began to recover the contributions of overlooked individuals. Historians have also investigated the mundane practices of science such as fieldwork and specimen collection, correspondence, drawing, record-keeping, and the use of laboratory and field equipment.\nPrehistory.\nIn prehistoric times, knowledge and technique were passed from generation to generation in an oral tradition. For instance, the domestication of maize for agriculture has been dated to about 9,000 years ago in southern Mexico, before the development of writing systems. Similarly, archaeological evidence indicates the development of astronomical knowledge in preliterate societies.\nThe oral tradition of preliterate societies had several features, the first of which was its fluidity. New information was constantly absorbed and adjusted to new circumstances or community needs. There were no archives or reports. This fluidity was closely related to the practical need to explain and justify a present state of affairs. Another feature was the tendency to describe the universe as just sky and earth, with a potential underworld. They were also prone to identify causes with beginnings, thereby providing a historical origin with an explanation. There was also a reliance on a \"medicine man\" or \"wise woman\" for healing, knowledge of divine or demonic causes of diseases, and in more extreme cases, for rituals such as exorcism, divination, songs, and incantations. Finally, there was an inclination to unquestioningly accept explanations that might be deemed implausible in more modern times while at the same time not being aware that such credulous behaviors could have posed problems.\nThe development of writing enabled humans to store and communicate knowledge across generations with much greater accuracy. Its invention was a prerequisite for the development of philosophy and later science in ancient times. Moreover, the extent to which philosophy and science would flourish in ancient times depended on the efficiency of a writing system (e.g., use of alphabets).\nAncient Near East.\nThe earliest roots of science can be traced to the Ancient Near East c.\u20093000\u20131200\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 in particular to Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia.\nAncient Egypt.\nNumber system and geometry.\nStarting c.\u20093000\u00a0BCE, the ancient Egyptians developed a numbering system that was decimal in character and had oriented their knowledge of geometry to solving practical problems such as those of surveyors and builders. Their development of geometry was itself a necessary development of surveying to preserve the layout and ownership of farmland, which was flooded annually by the Nile. The 3-4-5 right triangle and other rules of geometry were used to build rectilinear structures, and the post and lintel architecture of Egypt.\nDisease and healing.\nEgypt was also a center of alchemy research for much of the Mediterranean. According to the medical papyri (written c.\u20092500\u20131200 BCE), the ancient Egyptians believed that disease was mainly caused by the invasion of bodies by evil forces or spirits. Thus, in addition to medicine, therapies included prayer, incantation, and ritual. The Ebers Papyrus, written c.\u20091600\u00a0BCE, contains medical recipes for treating diseases related to the eyes, mouth, skin, internal organs, and extremities, as well as abscesses, wounds, burns, ulcers, swollen glands, tumors, headaches, and bad breath. The Edwin Smith Papyrus, written at about the same time, contains a surgical manual for treating wounds, fractures, and dislocations. The Egyptians believed that the effectiveness of their medicines depended on the preparation and administration under appropriate rituals. Medical historians believe that ancient Egyptian pharmacology, for example, was largely ineffective. Both the Ebers and Edwin Smith papyri applied the following components to the treatment of disease: examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis, which display strong parallels to the basic empirical method of science and, according to G. E. R. Lloyd, played a significant role in the development of this methodology.\nCalendar.\nThe ancient Egyptians even developed an official calendar that contained twelve months, thirty days each, and five days at the end of the year. Unlike the Babylonian calendar or the ones used in Greek city-states at the time, the official Egyptian calendar was much simpler as it was fixed and did not take lunar and solar cycles into consideration.\nMesopotamia.\nThe ancient Mesopotamians had extensive knowledge about the chemical properties of clay, sand, metal ore, bitumen, stone, and other natural materials, and applied this knowledge to practical use in manufacturing pottery, faience, glass, soap, metals, lime plaster, and waterproofing. Metallurgy required knowledge about the properties of metals. Nonetheless, the Mesopotamians seem to have had little interest in gathering information about the natural world for the mere sake of gathering information and were far more interested in studying the manner in which the gods had ordered the universe. Biology of non-human organisms was generally only written about in the context of mainstream academic disciplines. Animal physiology was studied extensively for the purpose of divination; the anatomy of the liver, which was seen as an important organ in haruspicy, was studied in particularly intensive detail. Animal behavior was also studied for divinatory purposes. Most information about the training and domestication of animals was probably transmitted orally without being written down, but one text dealing with the training of horses has survived.\nMesopotamian medicine.\nThe ancient Mesopotamians had no distinction between \"rational science\" and magic. When a person became ill, doctors prescribed magical formulas to be recited as well as medicinal treatments. The earliest medical prescriptions appear in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur (c. 2112 BCE \u2013 c. 2004 BCE). The most extensive Babylonian medical text, however, is the \"Diagnostic Handbook\" written by the \"umm\u00e2n\u016b\", or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069\u20131046 BCE). In East Semitic cultures, the main medicinal authority was a kind of exorcist-healer known as an \"\u0101\u0161ipu\". The profession was generally passed down from father to son and was held in extremely high regard. Of less frequent recourse was another kind of healer known as an \"asu\", who corresponds more closely to a modern physician and treated physical symptoms using primarily folk remedies composed of various herbs, animal products, and minerals, as well as potions, enemas, and ointments or poultices. These physicians, who could be either male or female, also dressed wounds, set limbs, and performed simple surgeries. The ancient Mesopotamians also practiced prophylaxis and took measures to prevent the spread of disease.\nAstronomy and celestial divination.\nIn Babylonian astronomy, records of the motions of the stars, planets, and the moon are left on thousands of clay tablets created by scribes. Even today, astronomical periods identified by Mesopotamian proto-scientists are still widely used in Western calendars such as the solar year and the lunar month. Using this data, they developed mathematical methods to compute the changing length of daylight in the course of the year, predict the appearances and disappearances of the Moon and planets, and eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Only a few astronomers' names are known, such as that of Kidinnu, a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician. Kiddinu's value for the solar year is in use for today's calendars. Babylonian astronomy was \"the first and highly successful attempt at giving a refined mathematical description of astronomical phenomena.\" According to the historian A. Aaboe, \"all subsequent varieties of scientific astronomy, in the Hellenistic world, in India, in Islam, and in the West\u2014if not indeed all subsequent endeavour in the exact sciences\u2014depend upon Babylonian astronomy in decisive and fundamental ways.\"\nTo the Babylonians and other Near Eastern cultures, messages from the gods or omens were concealed in all natural phenomena that could be deciphered and interpreted by those who are adept. Hence, it was believed that the gods could speak through all terrestrial objects (e.g., animal entrails, dreams, malformed births, or even the color of a dog urinating on a person) and celestial phenomena. Moreover, Babylonian astrology was inseparable from Babylonian astronomy.\nMathematics.\nThe Mesopotamian cuneiform tablet Plimpton 322, dating to the 18th century BCE, records a number of Pythagorean triplets (3, 4, 5) and (5, 12, 13) ..., hinting that the ancient Mesopotamians might have been aware of the Pythagorean theorem over a millennium before Pythagoras.\nAncient and medieval South Asia and East Asia.\nMathematical achievements from Mesopotamia had some influence on the development of mathematics in India, and there were confirmed transmissions of mathematical ideas between India and China, which were bidirectional. Nevertheless, the mathematical and scientific achievements in India and particularly in China occurred largely independently from those of Europe and the confirmed early influences that these two civilizations had on the development of science in Europe in the pre-modern era were indirect, with Mesopotamia and later the Islamic World acting as intermediaries. The arrival of modern science, which grew out of the Scientific Revolution, in India and China and the greater Asian region in general can be traced to the scientific activities of Jesuit missionaries who were interested in studying the region's flora and fauna during the 16th to 17th century.\nIndia.\nMathematics.\nThe earliest traces of mathematical knowledge in the Indian subcontinent appear with the Indus Valley Civilisation (). The people of this civilization made bricks whose dimensions were in the proportion 4:2:1, which is favorable for the stability of a brick structure. They also tried to standardize measurement of length to a high degree of accuracy. They designed a ruler\u2014the \"Mohenjo-daro ruler\"\u2014whose length of approximately was divided into ten equal parts. Bricks manufactured in ancient Mohenjo-daro often had dimensions that were integral multiples of this unit of length.\nThe Bakhshali manuscript contains problems involving arithmetic, algebra and geometry, including mensuration. The topics covered include fractions, square roots, arithmetic and geometric progressions, solutions of simple equations, simultaneous linear equations, quadratic equations and indeterminate equations of the second degree. In the 3rd century BCE, Pingala presents the \"Pingala-sutras\", the earliest known treatise on Sanskrit prosody. He also presents a numerical system by adding one to the sum of place values. Pingala's work also includes material related to the Fibonacci numbers, called \"\".\nIndian astronomer and mathematician Aryabhata (476\u2013550), in his \"Aryabhatiya\" (499) introduced the sine function in trigonometry and the number 0. In 628, Brahmagupta suggested that gravity was a force of attraction. He also lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and a decimal digit, along with the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system now used universally throughout the world. Arabic translations of the two astronomers' texts were soon available in the Islamic world, introducing what would become Arabic numerals to the Islamic world by the 9th century.\nNarayana Pandita (1340\u20131400) was an Indian mathematician. Plofker writes that his texts were the most significant Sanskrit mathematics treatises after those of Bhaskara II, other than the Kerala school. He wrote the \"Ganita Kaumudi\" (lit. \"Moonlight of mathematics\") in 1356 about mathematical operations. The work anticipated many developments in combinatorics.\nBetween the 14th and 16th centuries, the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics made significant advances in astronomy and especially mathematics, including fields such as trigonometry and analysis. In particular, Madhava of Sangamagrama led advancement in analysis by providing the infinite and taylor series expansion of some trigonometric functions and pi approximation. Parameshvara (1380\u20131460), presents a case of the Mean Value theorem in his commentaries on Govindasv\u0101mi and Bh\u0101skara II. The \"Yuktibh\u0101\u1e63\u0101\" was written by Jyeshtadeva in 1530.\nAstronomy.\nThe first textual mention of astronomical concepts comes from the Vedas, religious literature of India. According to Sarma (2008): \"One finds in the Rigveda intelligent speculations about the genesis of the universe from nonexistence, the configuration of the universe, the spherical self-supporting earth, and the year of 360 days divided into 12 equal parts of 30 days each with a periodical intercalary month.\".\nThe first 12 chapters of the \"Siddhanta Shiromani\", written by Bh\u0101skara in the 12th century, cover topics such as: mean longitudes of the planets; true longitudes of the planets; the three problems of diurnal rotation; syzygies; lunar eclipses; solar eclipses; latitudes of the planets; risings and settings; the moon's crescent; conjunctions of the planets with each other; conjunctions of the planets with the fixed stars; and the patas of the sun and moon. The 13 chapters of the second part cover the nature of the sphere, as well as significant astronomical and trigonometric calculations based on it.\nIn the \"Tantrasangraha\" treatise, Nilakantha Somayaji's updated the Aryabhatan model for the interior planets, Mercury, and Venus and the equation that he specified for the center of these planets was more accurate than the ones in European or Islamic astronomy until the time of Johannes Kepler in the 17th century. Jai Singh II of Jaipur constructed five observatories called Jantar Mantars in total, in New Delhi, Jaipur, Ujjain, Mathura and Varanasi; they were completed between 1724 and 1735.\nGrammar.\nSome of the earliest linguistic activities can be found in Iron Age India (1st millennium BCE) with the analysis of Sanskrit for the purpose of the correct recitation and interpretation of Vedic texts. The most notable grammarian of Sanskrit was (c. 520\u2013460 BCE), whose grammar formulates close to 4,000 rules for Sanskrit. Inherent in his analytic approach are the concepts of the phoneme, the morpheme and the root. The Tolk\u0101ppiyam text, composed in the early centuries of the common era, is a comprehensive text on Tamil grammar, which includes sutras on orthography, phonology, etymology, morphology, semantics, prosody, sentence structure and the significance of context in language.\nMedicine.\nFindings from Neolithic graveyards in what is now Pakistan show evidence of proto-dentistry among an early farming culture. The ancient text Su\u015brutasamhit\u0101 of Su\u015bruta describes procedures on various forms of surgery, including rhinoplasty, the repair of torn ear lobes, perineal lithotomy, cataract surgery, and several other excisions and other surgical procedures. The \"Charaka Samhita\" of Charaka describes ancient theories on human body, etiology, symptomology and therapeutics for a wide range of diseases. It also includes sections on the importance of diet, hygiene, prevention, medical education, and the teamwork of a physician, nurse and patient necessary for recovery to health.\nPolitics and state.\nAn ancient Indian treatise on statecraft, economic policy and military strategy by Kautilya and , who are traditionally identified with (c. 350\u2013283 BCE). In this treatise, the behaviors and relationships of the people, the King, the State, the Government Superintendents, Courtiers, Enemies, Invaders, and Corporations are analyzed and documented. Roger Boesche describes the \"Artha\u015b\u0101stra\" as \"a book of political realism, a book analyzing how the political world does work and not very often stating how it ought to work, a book that frequently discloses to a king what calculating and sometimes brutal measures he must carry out to preserve the state and the common good.\"\nLogic.\nThe development of Indian logic dates back to the Chandahsutra of Pingala and \"anviksiki\" of Medhatithi Gautama (c. 6th century BCE); the Sanskrit grammar rules of P\u0101\u1e47ini (c. 5th century BCE); the Vaisheshika school's analysis of atomism (c. 6th century BCE to 2nd century BCE); the analysis of inference by Gotama (c. 6th century BCE to 2nd century CE), founder of the Nyaya school of Hindu philosophy; and the tetralemma of Nagarjuna (c. 2nd century CE).\nIndian logic stands as one of the three original traditions of logic, alongside the Greek and the Chinese logic. The Indian tradition continued to develop through early to modern times, in the form of the Navya-Ny\u0101ya school of logic.\nIn the 2nd century, the Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna refined the \"Catuskoti\" form of logic. The Catuskoti is also often glossed \"Tetralemma\" (Greek) which is the name for a largely comparable, but not equatable, 'four corner argument' within the tradition of Classical logic.\nNavya-Ny\u0101ya developed a sophisticated language and conceptual scheme that allowed it to raise, analyse, and solve problems in logic and epistemology. It systematised all the Ny\u0101ya concepts into four main categories: sense or perception (pratyak\u015fa), inference (anum\u0101na), comparison or similarity (upam\u0101na), and testimony (sound or word; \u015babda).\nChina.\nChinese mathematics.\nFrom the earliest the Chinese used a positional decimal system on counting boards in order to calculate. To express 10, a single rod is placed in the second box from the right. The spoken language uses a similar system to English: e.g. four thousand two hundred and seven. No symbol was used for zero. By the 1st century BCE, negative numbers and decimal fractions were in use and \"The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art\" included methods for extracting higher order roots by Horner's method and solving linear equations and by Pythagoras' theorem. Cubic equations were solved in the Tang dynasty and solutions of equations of order higher than 3 appeared in print in 1245 CE by Ch'in Chiu-shao. Pascal's triangle for binomial coefficients was described around 1100 by Jia Xian.\nAlthough the first attempts at an axiomatization of geometry appear in the Mohist canon in 330 BCE, Liu Hui developed algebraic methods in geometry in the 3rd century CE and also calculated pi to 5 significant figures. In 480, Zu Chongzhi improved this by discovering the ratio formula_1 which remained the most accurate value for 1200 years.\nAstronomical observations.\nAstronomical observations from China constitute the longest continuous sequence from any civilization and include records of sunspots (112 records from 364 BCE), supernovas (1054), lunar and solar eclipses. By the 12th century, they could reasonably accurately make predictions of eclipses, but the knowledge of this was lost during the Ming dynasty, so that the Jesuit Matteo Ricci gained much favor in 1601 by his predictions. By 635 Chinese astronomers had observed that the tails of comets always point away from the sun.\nFrom antiquity, the Chinese used an equatorial system for describing the skies and a star map from 940 was drawn using a cylindrical (Mercator) projection. The use of an armillary sphere is recorded from the 4th century BCE and a sphere permanently mounted in equatorial axis from 52 BCE. In 125 CE Zhang Heng used water power to rotate the sphere in real time. This included rings for the meridian and ecliptic. By 1270 they had incorporated the principles of the Arab torquetum.\nIn the Song Empire (960\u20131279) of Imperial China, Chinese scholar-officials unearthed, studied, and cataloged ancient artifacts.\nInventions.\nTo better prepare for calamities, Zhang Heng invented a seismometer in 132 CE which provided instant alert to authorities in the capital Luoyang that an earthquake had occurred in a location indicated by a specific cardinal or ordinal direction. Although no tremors could be felt in the capital when Zhang told the court that an earthquake had just occurred in the northwest, a message came soon afterwards that an earthquake had indeed struck northwest of Luoyang (in what is now modern Gansu). Zhang called his device the 'instrument for measuring the seasonal winds and the movements of the Earth' (Houfeng didong yi \u5019\u98ce\u5730\u52a8\u4eea), so-named because he and others thought that earthquakes were most likely caused by the enormous compression of trapped air.\nThere are many notable contributors to early Chinese disciplines, inventions, and practices throughout the ages. One of the best examples would be the medieval Song Chinese Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095), a polymath and statesman who was the first to describe the magnetic-needle compass used for navigation, discovered the concept of true north, improved the design of the astronomical gnomon, armillary sphere, sight tube, and clepsydra, and described the use of drydocks to repair boats. After observing the natural process of the inundation of silt and the find of marine fossils in the Taihang Mountains (hundreds of miles from the Pacific Ocean), Shen Kuo devised a theory of land formation, or geomorphology. He also adopted a theory of gradual climate change in regions over time, after observing petrified bamboo found underground at Yan'an, Shaanxi. If not for Shen Kuo's writing, the architectural works of Yu Hao would be little known, along with the inventor of movable type printing, Bi Sheng (990\u20131051). Shen's contemporary Su Song (1020\u20131101) was also a brilliant polymath, an astronomer who created a celestial atlas of star maps, wrote a treatise related to botany, zoology, mineralogy, and metallurgy, and had erected a large astronomical clocktower in Kaifeng city in 1088. To operate the crowning armillary sphere, his clocktower featured an escapement mechanism and the world's oldest known use of an endless power-transmitting chain drive.\nThe Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries \"learned to appreciate the scientific achievements of this ancient culture and made them known in Europe. Through their correspondence European scientists first learned about the Chinese science and culture.\" Western academic thought on the history of Chinese technology and science was galvanized by the work of Joseph Needham and the Needham Research Institute. Among the technological accomplishments of China were, according to the British scholar Needham, the water-powered celestial globe (Zhang Heng), dry docks, sliding calipers, the double-action piston pump, the blast furnace, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the suspension bridge, the winnowing machine, gunpowder, the raised-relief map, toilet paper, the efficient harness, along with contributions in logic, astronomy, medicine, and other fields.\nHowever, cultural factors prevented these Chinese achievements from developing into \"modern science\". According to Needham, it may have been the religious and philosophical framework of Chinese intellectuals which made them unable to accept the ideas of laws of nature:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was not that there was no order in nature for the Chinese, but rather that it was not an order ordained by a rational personal being, and hence there was no conviction that rational personal beings would be able to spell out in their lesser earthly languages the divine code of laws which he had decreed aforetime. The Taoists, indeed, would have scorned such an idea as being too na\u00efve for the subtlety and complexity of the universe as they intuited it. \nPre-Columbian Mesoamerica.\nDuring the Middle Formative Period (c. 900 BCE \u2013 c. 300 BCE) of Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica, the Zapotec civilization, heavily influenced by the Olmec civilization, established the first known full writing system of the region (possibly predated by the Olmec Cascajal Block), as well as the first known astronomical calendar in Mesoamerica. Following a period of initial urban development in the Preclassical period, the Classic Maya civilization (c. 250 CE \u2013 c. 900 CE) built on the shared heritage of the Olmecs by developing the most sophisticated systems of writing, astronomy, calendrical science, and mathematics among Mesoamerican peoples. The Maya developed a positional numeral system with a base of 20 that included the use of zero for constructing their calendars. Maya writing, which was developed by 200 BCE, widespread by 100 BCE, and rooted in Olmec and Zapotec scripts, contains easily discernible calendar dates in the form of logographs representing numbers, coefficients, and calendar periods amounting to 20 days and even 20 years for tracking social, religious, political, and economic events in 360-day years.\nClassical antiquity and Greco-Roman science.\nThe contributions of the Ancient Egyptians and Mesopotamians in the areas of astronomy, mathematics, and medicine had entered and shaped Greek natural philosophy of classical antiquity, whereby formal attempts were made to provide explanations of events in the physical world based on natural causes. Inquiries were also aimed at such practical goals such as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses. The ancient people who were considered the first \"scientists\" may have thought of themselves as \"natural philosophers\", as practitioners of a skilled profession (for example, physicians), or as followers of a religious tradition (for example, temple healers).\nPre-socratics.\nThe earliest Greek philosophers, known as the pre-Socratics, provided competing answers to the question found in the myths of their neighbors: \"How did the ordered cosmos in which we live come to be?\" The pre-Socratic philosopher Thales (640\u2013546 BCE) of Miletus, identified by later authors such as Aristotle as the first of the Ionian philosophers, postulated non-supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. For example, that land floats on water and that earthquakes are caused by the agitation of the water upon which the land floats, rather than the god Poseidon. Thales' student Pythagoras of Samos founded the Pythagorean school, which investigated mathematics for its own sake, and was the first to postulate that the Earth is spherical in shape. Leucippus (5th century BCE) introduced atomism, the theory that all matter is made of indivisible, imperishable units called atoms. This was greatly expanded on by his pupil Democritus and later Epicurus.\nNatural philosophy.\nPlato and Aristotle produced the first systematic discussions of natural philosophy, which did much to shape later investigations of nature. Their development of deductive reasoning was of particular importance and usefulness to later scientific inquiry. Plato founded the Platonic Academy in 387 BCE, whose motto was \"Let none unversed in geometry enter here,\" and also turned out many notable philosophers. Plato's student Aristotle introduced empiricism and the notion that universal truths can be arrived at via observation and induction, thereby laying the foundations of the scientific method. Aristotle also produced many biological writings that were empirical in nature, focusing on biological causation and the diversity of life. He made countless observations of nature, especially the habits and attributes of plants and animals on Lesbos, classified more than 540 animal species, and dissected at least 50. Aristotle's writings profoundly influenced subsequent Islamic and European scholarship, though they were eventually superseded in the Scientific Revolution.\nAristotle also contributed to theories of the elements and the cosmos. He believed that the celestial bodies (such as the planets and the Sun) had something called an unmoved mover that put the celestial bodies in motion. Aristotle tried to explain everything through mathematics and physics, but sometimes explained things such as the motion of celestial bodies through a higher power such as God. Aristotle did not have the technological advancements that would have explained the motion of celestial bodies. In addition, Aristotle had many views on the elements. He believed that everything was derived of the elements earth, water, air, fire, and lastly the Aether. The Aether was a celestial element, and therefore made up the matter of the celestial bodies. The elements of earth, water, air and fire were derived of a combination of two of the characteristics of hot, wet, cold, and dry, and all had their inevitable place and motion. The motion of these elements begins with earth being the closest to \"the Earth,\" then water, air, fire, and finally Aether. In addition to the makeup of all things, Aristotle came up with theories as to why things did not return to their natural motion. He understood that water sits above earth, air above water, and fire above air in their natural state. He explained that although all elements must return to their natural state, the human body and other living things have a constraint on the elements \u2013 thus not allowing the elements making one who they are to return to their natural state.\nThe important legacy of this period included substantial advances in factual knowledge, especially in anatomy, zoology, botany, mineralogy, geography, mathematics and astronomy; an awareness of the importance of certain scientific problems, especially those related to the problem of change and its causes; and a recognition of the methodological importance of applying mathematics to natural phenomena and of undertaking empirical research. In the Hellenistic age scholars frequently employed the principles developed in earlier Greek thought: the application of mathematics and deliberate empirical research, in their scientific investigations. Thus, clear unbroken lines of influence lead from ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophers, to medieval Muslim philosophers and scientists, to the European Renaissance and Enlightenment, to the secular sciences of the modern day.\nNeither reason nor inquiry began with the Ancient Greeks, but the Socratic method did, along with the idea of Forms, give great advances in geometry, logic, and the natural sciences. According to Benjamin Farrington, former professor of Classics at Swansea University:\n\"Men were weighing for thousands of years before Archimedes worked out the laws of equilibrium; they must have had practical and intuitional knowledge of the principals involved. What Archimedes did was to sort out the theoretical implications of this practical knowledge and present the resulting body of knowledge as a logically coherent system.\"\nand again:\n\"With astonishment we find ourselves on the threshold of modern science. Nor should it be supposed that by some trick of translation the extracts have been given an air of modernity. Far from it. The vocabulary of these writings and their style are the source from which our own vocabulary and style have been derived.\"\nGreek astronomy.\nThe astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known person to propose a heliocentric model of the Solar System, while the geographer Eratosthenes accurately calculated the circumference of the Earth. Hipparchus (c. 190\u00a0\u2013 c. 120 BCE) produced the first systematic star catalog. The level of achievement in Hellenistic astronomy and engineering is impressively shown by the Antikythera mechanism (150\u2013100 BCE), an analog computer for calculating the position of planets. Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.\nHellenistic medicine.\nThere was not a defined societal structure for healthcare during the age of Hippocrates. At that time, society was not organized and knowledgeable as people still relied on pure religious reasoning to explain illnesses. Hippocrates introduced the first healthcare system based on science and clinical protocols. Hippocrates' theories about physics and medicine helped pave the way in creating an organized medical structure for society. In medicine, Hippocrates (c. 460\u2013370 BCE) and his followers were the first to describe many diseases and medical conditions and developed the Hippocratic Oath for physicians, still relevant and in use today. Hippocrates' ideas are expressed in The Hippocratic Corpus. The collection notes descriptions of medical philosophies and how disease and lifestyle choices reflect on the physical body. Hippocrates influenced a Westernized, professional relationship among physician and patient. Hippocrates is also known as \"the Father of Medicine\". Herophilos (335\u2013280 BCE) was the first to base his conclusions on dissection of the human body and to describe the nervous system. Galen (129\u00a0\u2013 c. 200 CE) performed many audacious operations\u2014including brain and eye surgeries\u2014 that were not tried again for almost two millennia.\nGreek mathematics.\nIn Hellenistic Egypt, the mathematician Euclid laid down the foundations of mathematical rigor and introduced the concepts of definition, axiom, theorem and proof still in use today in his \"Elements\", considered the most influential textbook ever written. Archimedes, considered one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, is credited with using the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi. He is also known in physics for laying the foundations of hydrostatics, statics, and the explanation of the principle of the lever.\nOther developments.\nTheophrastus wrote some of the earliest descriptions of plants and animals, establishing the first taxonomy and looking at minerals in terms of their properties, such as hardness. Pliny the Elder produced one of the largest encyclopedias of the natural world in 77 CE, and was a successor to Theophrastus. For example, he accurately describes the octahedral shape of the diamond and noted that diamond dust is used by engravers to cut and polish other gems owing to its great hardness. His recognition of the importance of crystal shape is a precursor to modern crystallography, while notes on other minerals presages mineralogy. He recognizes other minerals have characteristic crystal shapes, but in one example, confuses the crystal habit with the work of lapidaries. Pliny was the first to show amber was a resin from pine trees, because of trapped insects within them.\nThe development of archaeology has its roots in history and with those who were interested in the past, such as kings and queens who wanted to show past glories of their respective nations. The 5th-century-BCE Greek historian Herodotus was the first scholar to systematically study the past and perhaps the first to examine artifacts.\nGreek scholarship under Roman rule.\nDuring the rule of Rome, famous historians such as Polybius, Livy and Plutarch documented the rise of the Roman Republic, and the organization and histories of other nations, while statesmen like Julius Caesar, Cicero, and others provided examples of the politics of the republic and Rome's empire and wars. The study of politics during this age was oriented toward understanding history, understanding methods of governing, and describing the operation of governments.\nThe Roman conquest of Greece did not diminish learning and culture in the Greek provinces. On the contrary, the appreciation of Greek achievements in literature, philosophy, politics, and the arts by Rome's upper class coincided with the increased prosperity of the Roman Empire. Greek settlements had existed in Italy for centuries and the ability to read and speak Greek was not uncommon in Italian cities such as Rome. Moreover, the settlement of Greek scholars in Rome, whether voluntarily or as slaves, gave Romans access to teachers of Greek literature and philosophy. Conversely, young Roman scholars also studied abroad in Greece and upon their return to Rome, were able to convey Greek achievements to their Latin leadership. And despite the translation of a few Greek texts into Latin, Roman scholars who aspired to the highest level did so using the Greek language. The Roman statesman and philosopher Cicero (106 \u2013 43 BCE) was a prime example. He had studied under Greek teachers in Rome and then in Athens and Rhodes. He mastered considerable portions of Greek philosophy, wrote Latin treatises on several topics, and even wrote Greek commentaries of Plato's \"Timaeus\" as well as a Latin translation of it, which has not survived.\nIn the beginning, support for scholarship in Greek knowledge was almost entirely funded by the Roman upper class. There were all sorts of arrangements, ranging from a talented scholar being attached to a wealthy household to owning educated Greek-speaking slaves. In exchange, scholars who succeeded at the highest level had an obligation to provide advice or intellectual companionship to their Roman benefactors, or to even take care of their libraries. The less fortunate or accomplished ones would teach their children or perform menial tasks. The level of detail and sophistication of Greek knowledge was adjusted to suit the interests of their Roman patrons. That meant popularizing Greek knowledge by presenting information that were of practical value such as medicine or logic (for courts and politics) but excluding subtle details of Greek metaphysics and epistemology. Beyond the basics, the Romans did not value natural philosophy and considered it an amusement for leisure time.\nCommentaries and encyclopedias were the means by which Greek knowledge was popularized for Roman audiences. The Greek scholar Posidonius (c.\u2009135-c. 51 BCE), a native of Syria, wrote prolifically on history, geography, moral philosophy, and natural philosophy. He greatly influenced Latin writers such as Marcus Terentius Varro (116-27 BCE), who wrote the encyclopedia \"Nine Books of Disciplines\", which covered nine arts: grammar, rhetoric, logic, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, musical theory, medicine, and architecture. The \"Disciplines\" became a model for subsequent Roman encyclopedias and Varro's nine liberal arts were considered suitable education for a Roman gentleman. The first seven of Varro's nine arts would later define the seven liberal arts of medieval schools. The pinnacle of the popularization movement was the Roman scholar Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 CE), a native of northern Italy, who wrote several books on the history of Rome and grammar. His most famous work was his voluminous \"Natural History\".\nAfter the death of the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius in 180 CE, the favorable conditions for scholarship and learning in the Roman Empire were upended by political unrest, civil war, urban decay, and looming economic crisis. In around 250 CE, barbarians began attacking and invading the Roman frontiers. These combined events led to a general decline in political and economic conditions. The living standards of the Roman upper class was severely impacted, and their loss of leisure diminished scholarly pursuits. Moreover, during the 3rd and 4th centuries CE, the Roman Empire was administratively divided into two halves: Greek East and Latin West. These administrative divisions weakened the intellectual contact between the two regions. Eventually, both halves went their separate ways, with the Greek East becoming the Byzantine Empire. Christianity was also steadily expanding during this time and soon became a major patron of education in the Latin West. Initially, the Christian church adopted some of the reasoning tools of Greek philosophy in the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE to defend its faith against sophisticated opponents. Nevertheless, Greek philosophy received a mixed reception from leaders and adherents of the Christian faith. Some such as Tertullian (c. 155-c. 230 CE) were vehemently opposed to philosophy, denouncing it as heretic. Others such as Augustine of Hippo (354-430 CE) were ambivalent and defended Greek philosophy and science as the best ways to understand the natural world and therefore treated it as a handmaiden (or servant) of religion. Education in the West began its gradual decline, along with the rest of Western Roman Empire, due to invasions by Germanic tribes, civil unrest, and economic collapse. Contact with the classical tradition was lost in specific regions such as Roman Britain and northern Gaul but continued to exist in Rome, northern Italy, southern Gaul, Spain, and North Africa.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Middle Ages, the classical learning continued in three major linguistic cultures and civilizations: Greek (the Byzantine Empire), Arabic (the Islamic world), and Latin (Western Europe).\nByzantine Empire.\nPreservation of Greek heritage.\nThe fall of the Western Roman Empire led to a deterioration of the classical tradition in the western part (or Latin West) of Europe during the 5th century. In contrast, the Byzantine Empire resisted the barbarian attacks and preserved and improved the learning.\nWhile the Byzantine Empire still held learning centers such as Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioch, Western Europe's knowledge was concentrated in monasteries until the development of medieval universities in the 12th centuries. The curriculum of monastic schools included the study of the few available ancient texts and of new works on practical subjects like medicine and timekeeping.\nIn the sixth century in the Byzantine Empire, Isidore of Miletus compiled Archimedes' mathematical works in the Archimedes Palimpsest, where all Archimedes' mathematical contributions were collected and studied.\nJohn Philoponus, another Byzantine scholar, was the first to question Aristotle's teaching of physics, introducing the theory of impetus. The theory of impetus was an auxiliary or secondary theory of Aristotelian dynamics, put forth initially to explain projectile motion against gravity. It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics. The works of John Philoponus inspired Galileo Galilei ten centuries later.\nCollapse.\nDuring the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, a number of Greek scholars fled to North Italy in which they fueled the era later commonly known as the \"Renaissance\" as they brought with them a great deal of classical learning including an understanding of botany, medicine, and zoology. Byzantium also gave the West important inputs: John Philoponus' criticism of Aristotelian physics, and the works of Dioscorides.\nIslamic world.\nThis was the period (8th\u201314th century CE) of the Islamic Golden Age where commerce thrived, and new ideas and technologies emerged such as the importation of papermaking from China, which made the copying of manuscripts inexpensive.\nTranslations and Hellenization.\nThe eastward transmission of Greek heritage to Western Asia was a slow and gradual process that spanned over a thousand years, beginning with the Asian conquests of Alexander the Great in 335 BCE to the founding of Islam in the 7th century CE. The birth and expansion of Islam during the 7th century was quickly followed by its Hellenization. Knowledge of Greek conceptions of the world was preserved and absorbed into Islamic theology, law, culture, and commerce, which were aided by the translations of traditional Greek texts and some Syriac intermediary sources into Arabic during the 8th\u20139th century.\nEducation and scholarly pursuits.\nMadrasas were centers for many different religious and scientific studies and were the culmination of different institutions such as mosques based around religious studies, housing for out-of-town visitors, and finally educational institutions focused on the natural sciences. Unlike Western universities, students at a madrasa would learn from one specific teacher, who would issue a certificate at the completion of their studies called an Ijazah. An Ijazah differs from a western university degree in many ways one being that it is issued by a single person rather than an institution, and another being that it is not an individual degree declaring adequate knowledge over broad subjects, but rather a license to teach and pass on a very specific set of texts. Women were also allowed to attend madrasas, as both students and teachers, something not seen in high western education until the 1800s. Madrasas were more than just academic centers. The Suleymaniye Mosque, for example, was one of the earliest and most well-known madrasas, which was built by Suleiman the Magnificent in the 16th century. The Suleymaniye Mosque was home to a hospital and medical college, a kitchen, and children's school, as well as serving as a temporary home for travelers.\nHigher education at a madrasa (or college) was focused on Islamic law and religious science and students had to engage in self-study for everything else. And despite the occasional theological backlash, many Islamic scholars of science were able to conduct their work in relatively tolerant urban centers (e.g., Baghdad and Cairo) and were protected by powerful patrons. They could also travel freely and exchange ideas as there were no political barriers within the unified Islamic state. Islamic science during this time was primarily focused on the correction, extension, articulation, and application of Greek ideas to new problems.\nAdvancements in mathematics.\nMost of the achievements by Islamic scholars during this period were in mathematics. Arabic mathematics was a direct descendant of Greek and Indian mathematics. For instance, what is now known as Arabic numerals originally came from India, but Muslim mathematicians made several key refinements to the number system, such as the introduction of decimal point notation. Mathematicians such as Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (c. 780\u2013850) gave his name to the concept of the algorithm, while the term algebra is derived from \"al-jabr\", the beginning of the title of one of his publications. Islamic trigonometry continued from the works of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" and Indian \"Siddhanta\", from which they added trigonometric functions, drew up tables, and applied trigonometry to spheres and planes. Many of their engineers, instruments makers, and surveyors contributed books in applied mathematics. It was in astronomy where Islamic mathematicians made their greatest contributions. Al-Battani (c. 858\u2013929) improved the measurements of Hipparchus, preserved in the translation of Ptolemy's \"H\u00e8 Megal\u00e8 Syntaxis\" (\"The great treatise\") translated as \"Almagest\". Al-Battani also improved the precision of the measurement of the precession of the Earth's axis. Corrections were made to Ptolemy's geocentric model by al-Battani, Ibn al-Haytham, Averroes and the Maragha astronomers such as Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Mu'ayyad al-Din al-Urdi and Ibn al-Shatir.\nScholars with geometric skills made significant improvements to the earlier classical texts on light and sight by Euclid, Aristotle, and Ptolemy. The earliest surviving Arabic treatises were written in the 9th century by Ab\u016b Ish\u0101q al-Kind\u012b, Qust\u0101 ibn L\u016bq\u0101, and (in fragmentary form) Ahmad ibn Is\u0101. Later in the 11th century, Ibn al-Haytham (known as Alhazen in the West), a mathematician and astronomer, synthesized a new theory of vision based on the works of his predecessors. His new theory included a complete system of geometrical optics, which was set in great detail in his \"Book of Optics\". His book was translated into Latin and was relied upon as a principal source on the science of optics in Europe until the 17th century.\nInstitutionalization of medicine.\nThe medical sciences were prominently cultivated in the Islamic world. The works of Greek medical theories, especially those of Galen, were translated into Arabic and there was an outpouring of medical texts by Islamic physicians, which were aimed at organizing, elaborating, and disseminating classical medical knowledge. Medical specialties started to emerge, such as those involved in the treatment of eye diseases such as cataracts. Ibn Sina (known as Avicenna in the West, c. 980\u20131037) was a prolific Persian medical encyclopedist wrote extensively on medicine, with his two most notable works in medicine being the \"Kit\u0101b al-shif\u0101\u02be\" (\"Book of Healing\") and The Canon of Medicine, both of which were used as standard medicinal texts in both the Muslim world and in Europe well into the 17th century. Amongst his many contributions are the discovery of the contagious nature of infectious diseases, and the introduction of clinical pharmacology. Institutionalization of medicine was another important achievement in the Islamic world. Although hospitals as an institution for the sick emerged in the Byzantium empire, the model of institutionalized medicine for all social classes was extensive in the Islamic empire and was scattered throughout. In addition to treating patients, physicians could teach apprentice physicians, as well write and do research. The discovery of the pulmonary transit of blood in the human body by Ibn al-Nafis occurred in a hospital setting.\nDecline.\nIslamic science began its decline in the 12th\u201313th century, before the Renaissance in Europe, due in part to the Christian reconquest of Spain and the Mongol conquests in the East in the 11th\u201313th century. The Mongols sacked Baghdad, capital of the Abbasid Caliphate, in 1258, which ended the Abbasid empire. Nevertheless, many of the conquerors became patrons of the sciences. Hulagu Khan, for example, who led the siege of Baghdad, became a patron of the Maragheh observatory. Islamic astronomy continued to flourish into the 16th century.\nWestern Europe.\nBy the eleventh century, most of Europe had become Christian; stronger monarchies emerged; borders were restored; technological developments and agricultural innovations were made, increasing the food supply and population. Classical Greek texts were translated from Arabic and Greek into Latin, stimulating scientific discussion in Western Europe.\nIn classical antiquity, Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned, but in the Middle Ages medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (c.\u20091275\u20131326) produced the first known anatomy textbook based on human dissection.\nAs a result of the Pax Mongolica, Europeans, such as Marco Polo, began to venture further and further east. The written accounts of Polo and his fellow travelers inspired other Western European maritime explorers to search for a direct sea route to Asia, ultimately leading to the Age of Discovery.\nTechnological advances were also made, such as the early flight of Eilmer of Malmesbury (who had studied mathematics in 11th-century England), and the metallurgical achievements of the Cistercian blast furnace at Laskill.\nMedieval universities.\nAn intellectual revitalization of Western Europe started with the birth of medieval universities in the 12th century. These urban institutions grew from the informal scholarly activities of learned friars who visited monasteries, consulted libraries, and conversed with other fellow scholars. A friar who became well-known would attract a following of disciples, giving rise to a brotherhood of scholars (or \"collegium\" in Latin). A \"collegium\" might travel to a town or request a monastery to host them. However, if the number of scholars within a \"collegium\" grew too large, they would opt to settle in a town instead. As the number of \"collegia\" within a town grew, the \"collegia\" might request that their king grant them a charter that would convert them into a \"universitas\". Many universities were chartered during this period, with the first in Bologna in 1088, followed by Paris in 1150, Oxford in 1167, and Cambridge in 1231. The granting of a charter meant that the medieval universities were partially sovereign and independent from local authorities. Their independence allowed them to conduct themselves and judge their own members based on their own rules. Furthermore, as initially religious institutions, their faculties and students were protected from capital punishment (e.g., gallows). Such independence was a matter of custom, which could, in principle, be revoked by their respective rulers if they felt threatened. Discussions of various subjects or claims at these medieval institutions, no matter how controversial, were done in a formalized way so as to declare such discussions as being within the bounds of a university and therefore protected by the privileges of that institution's sovereignty. A claim could be described as \"ex cathedra\" (literally \"from the chair\", used within the context of teaching) or \"ex hypothesi\" (by hypothesis). This meant that the discussions were presented as purely an intellectual exercise that did not require those involved to commit themselves to the truth of a claim or to proselytize. Modern academic concepts and practices such as academic freedom or freedom of inquiry are remnants of these medieval privileges that were tolerated in the past.\nThe curriculum of these medieval institutions centered on the seven liberal arts, which were aimed at providing beginning students with the skills for reasoning and scholarly language. Students would begin their studies starting with the first three liberal arts or \"Trivium\" (grammar, rhetoric, and logic) followed by the next four liberal arts or \"Quadrivium\" (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music). Those who completed these requirements and received their \"baccalaureate\" (or Bachelor of Arts) had the option to join the higher faculty (law, medicine, or theology), which would confer an LLD for a lawyer, an MD for a physician, or ThD for a theologian. Students who chose to remain in the lower faculty (arts) could work towards a \"Magister\" (or Master's) degree and would study three philosophies: metaphysics, ethics, and natural philosophy. Latin translations of Aristotle's works such as (\"On the Soul\") and the commentaries on them were required readings. As time passed, the lower faculty was allowed to confer its own doctoral degree called the PhD. Many of the Masters were drawn to encyclopedias and had used them as textbooks. But these scholars yearned for the complete original texts of the Ancient Greek philosophers, mathematicians, and physicians such as Aristotle, Euclid, and Galen, which were not available to them at the time. These Ancient Greek texts were to be found in the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic World.\nTranslations of Greek and Arabic sources.\nContact with the Byzantine Empire, and with the Islamic world during the Reconquista and the Crusades, allowed Latin Europe access to scientific Greek and Arabic texts, including the works of Aristotle, Ptolemy, Isidore of Miletus, John Philoponus, J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n, al-Khwarizmi, Alhazen, Avicenna, and Averroes. European scholars had access to the translation programs of Raymond of Toledo, who sponsored the 12th century Toledo School of Translators from Arabic to Latin. Later translators like Michael Scotus would learn Arabic in order to study these texts directly. The European universities aided materially in the translation and propagation of these texts and started a new infrastructure which was needed for scientific communities. In fact, European university put many works about the natural world and the study of nature at the center of its curriculum, with the result that the \"medieval university laid far greater emphasis on science than does its modern counterpart and descendent.\"\nAt the beginning of the 13th century, there were reasonably accurate Latin translations of the main works of almost all the intellectually crucial ancient authors, allowing a sound transfer of scientific ideas via both the universities and the monasteries. By then, the natural philosophy in these texts began to be extended by scholastics such as Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus and Duns Scotus. Precursors of the modern scientific method, influenced by earlier contributions of the Islamic world, can be seen already in Grosseteste's emphasis on mathematics as a way to understand nature, and in the empirical approach admired by Bacon, particularly in his \"Opus Majus\". Pierre Duhem's thesis is that Stephen Tempier \u2013 the Bishop of Paris \u2013 Condemnation of 1277 led to the study of medieval science as a serious discipline, \"but no one in the field any longer endorses his view that modern science started in 1277\". However, many scholars agree with Duhem's view that the mid-late Middle Ages saw important scientific developments.\nMedieval science.\nThe first half of the 14th century saw much important scientific work, largely within the framework of scholastic commentaries on Aristotle's scientific writings. William of Ockham emphasized the principle of parsimony: natural philosophers should not postulate unnecessary entities, so that motion is not a distinct thing but is only the moving object and an intermediary \"sensible species\" is not needed to transmit an image of an object to the eye. Scholars such as Jean Buridan and Nicole Oresme started to reinterpret elements of Aristotle's mechanics. In particular, Buridan developed the theory that impetus was the cause of the motion of projectiles, which was a first step towards the modern concept of inertia. The Oxford Calculators began to mathematically analyze the kinematics of motion, making this analysis without considering the causes of motion.\nIn 1348, the Black Death and other disasters sealed a sudden end to philosophic and scientific development. Yet, the rediscovery of ancient texts was stimulated by the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, when many Byzantine scholars sought refuge in the West. Meanwhile, the introduction of printing was to have great effect on European society. The facilitated dissemination of the printed word democratized learning and allowed ideas such as algebra to propagate more rapidly. These developments paved the way for the Scientific Revolution, where scientific inquiry, halted at the start of the Black Death, resumed.\nRenaissance.\nRevival of learning.\nThe renewal of learning in Europe began with 12th century Scholasticism. The Northern Renaissance showed a decisive shift in focus from Aristotelian natural philosophy to chemistry and the biological sciences (botany, anatomy, and medicine). Thus modern science in Europe was resumed in a period of great upheaval: the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Counter-Reformation; the discovery of the Americas by Christopher Columbus; the Fall of Constantinople; but also the re-discovery of Aristotle during the Scholastic period presaged large social and political changes. Thus, a suitable environment was created in which it became possible to question scientific doctrine, in much the same way that Martin Luther and John Calvin questioned religious doctrine. The works of Ptolemy (astronomy) and Galen (medicine) were found not always to match everyday observations. Work by Vesalius on human cadavers found problems with the Galenic view of anatomy.\nThe discovery of Cristallo contributed to the advancement of science in the period as well with its appearance out of Venice around 1450. The new glass allowed for better spectacles and eventually to the inventions of the telescope and microscope.\nTheophrastus' work on rocks, \"Peri lith\u014dn\", remained authoritative for millennia: its interpretation of fossils was not overturned until after the Scientific Revolution.\nDuring the Italian Renaissance, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli established the emphasis of modern political science on direct empirical observation of political institutions and actors. Later, the expansion of the scientific paradigm during the Enlightenment further pushed the study of politics beyond normative determinations. In particular, the study of statistics, to study the subjects of the state, has been applied to polling and voting.\nIn archaeology, the 15th and 16th centuries saw the rise of antiquarians in Renaissance Europe who were interested in the collection of artifacts.\nHeliocentrism.\nThe heliocentric astronomical model of the universe was refined by Nicolaus Copernicus. Copernicus proposed the idea that the Earth and all heavenly spheres, containing the planets and other objects in the cosmos, rotated around the Sun. His heliocentric model also proposed that all stars were fixed and did not rotate on an axis, nor in any motion at all. His theory proposed the yearly rotation of the Earth and the other heavenly spheres around the Sun and was able to calculate the distances of planets using deferents and epicycles. Although these calculations were not completely accurate, Copernicus was able to understand the distance order of each heavenly sphere. The Copernican heliocentric system was a revival of the hypotheses of Aristarchus of Samos and Seleucus of Seleucia. Aristarchus of Samos did propose that the Earth rotated around the Sun but did not mention anything about the other heavenly spheres' order, motion, or rotation. Seleucus of Seleucia also proposed the rotation of the Earth around the Sun but did not mention anything about the other heavenly spheres. In addition, Seleucus of Seleucia understood that the Moon rotated around the Earth and could be used to explain the tides of the oceans, thus further proving his understanding of the heliocentric idea.\nScientific Revolution and birth of New Science.\nThe Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries in Europe marked a sharp break with the natural philosophy that had preceded it. The New Science that emerged departed from previous Greek conceptions and traditions, was more mechanistic in its worldview and more integrated with mathematics, and was obsessed with the acquisition and interpretation of new evidence. The Scientific Revolution is a convenient boundary between ancient thought and modern science. While the period is frequently said to have begun in 1543 with the printings of \"De humani corporis fabrica\" (\"On the Workings of the Human Body\") by Andreas Vesalius and \"De Revolutionibus\" (\"On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres\") by Nicolaus Copernicus, the SN 1572 supernova has also been suggested as its beginning. The period culminated with the publication of the \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" in 1687 by Isaac Newton, representative of the unprecedented growth of scientific publications throughout Europe.\nModern astronomy.\nThe heliocentric model revived by Nicolaus Copernicus was followed by the model of planetary motion given by Johannes Kepler in the early 17th century, which proposed that the planets follow elliptical orbits, with the Sun at one focus of the ellipse. In \"Astronomia Nova\" (\"A New Astronomy\"), the first two of the laws of planetary motion were shown by the analysis of the orbit of Mars. Kepler introduced the revolutionary concept of planetary orbit. Because of his work astronomical phenomena came to be seen as being governed by physical laws.\nEmergence of chemistry.\nA decisive moment came when \"chemistry\" was distinguished from alchemy by Robert Boyle in his work \"The Sceptical Chymist\", in 1661; although the alchemical tradition continued for some time after his work. Other important steps included the gravimetric experimental practices of medical chemists like William Cullen, Joseph Black, Torbern Bergman and Pierre Macquer and through the work of Antoine Lavoisier (\"father of modern chemistry\") on oxygen and the law of conservation of mass, which refuted phlogiston theory. Modern chemistry emerged from the sixteenth through the eighteenth centuries through the material practices and theories promoted by alchemy, medicine, manufacturing and mining.\nCalculus and Newtonian mechanics.\nIn 1687, Isaac Newton published the \"Principia Mathematica\", detailing two comprehensive and successful physical theories: Newton's laws of motion, which led to classical mechanics; and Newton's law of universal gravitation, which describes the fundamental force of gravity.\nCirculatory system.\nWilliam Harvey published \"De Motu Cordis\" in 1628, which revealed his conclusions based on his extensive studies of vertebrate circulatory systems. He identified the central role of the heart, arteries, and veins in producing blood movement in a circuit, and failed to find any confirmation of Galen's pre-existing notions of heating and cooling functions. The history of early modern biology and medicine is often told through the search for the seat of the soul. Galen in his descriptions of his foundational work in medicine presents the distinctions between arteries, veins, and nerves using the vocabulary of the soul.\nScientific societies and journals.\nA critical innovation was the creation of permanent scientific societies and their scholarly journals, which dramatically sped the diffusion of new ideas. Typical was the founding of the Royal Society in London in 1660 and its journal in 1665 the Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society, the first scientific journal in English. 1665 also saw the first journal in French, the Journal des \"s\u00e7avans\". Science drawing on the works of Newton, Descartes, Pascal and Leibniz, science was on a path to modern mathematics, physics and technology by the time of the generation of Benjamin Franklin (1706\u20131790), Leonhard Euler (1707\u20131783), Mikhail Lomonosov (1711\u20131765) and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1717\u20131783). Denis Diderot's \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", published between 1751 and 1772 brought this new understanding to a wider audience. The impact of this process was not limited to science and technology, but affected philosophy (Immanuel Kant, David Hume), religion (the increasingly significant impact of science upon religion), and society and politics in general (Adam Smith, Voltaire).\nDevelopments in geology.\nGeology did not undergo systematic restructuring during the Scientific Revolution but instead existed as a cloud of isolated, disconnected ideas about rocks, minerals, and landforms long before it became a coherent science. Robert Hooke formulated a theory of earthquakes, and Nicholas Steno developed the theory of superposition and argued that fossils were the remains of once-living creatures. Beginning with Thomas Burnet's \"Sacred Theory of the Earth\" in 1681, natural philosophers began to explore the idea that the Earth had changed over time. Burnet and his contemporaries interpreted Earth's past in terms of events described in the Bible, but their work laid the intellectual foundations for secular interpretations of Earth history.\nRomanticism and Post-Scientific Revolution.\nBioelectricity.\nDuring the late 18th century, researchers such as Hugh Williamson and John Walsh experimented on the effects of electricity on the human body. Further studies by Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta established the electrical nature of what Volta called galvanism.\nElectricity thus became in Romanticism a multifaceted symbol representing both revolutionary fervor and the creative force of nature, as well as a metaphor for the pervasive power of the mind and its spiritual connection. Its presence, both literal and figurative, in both scientific experiments and literature, such as Galvani's study of electrical effects on bodies, fueled the Romantic imagination, serving as a vital concept bridging the animate and the inanimate, the rational and the spiritual.\nDevelopments in geology.\nModern geology, like modern chemistry, gradually evolved during the 18th and early 19th centuries. Beno\u00eet de Maillet and the Comte de Buffon saw the Earth as much older than the 6,000 years envisioned by biblical scholars. Jean-\u00c9tienne Guettard and Nicolas Desmarest hiked central France and recorded their observations on some of the first geological maps. Aided by chemical experimentation, naturalists such as Scotland's John Walker, Sweden's Torbern Bergman, and Germany's Abraham Werner created comprehensive classification systems for rocks and minerals\u2014a collective achievement that transformed geology into a cutting edge field by the end of the eighteenth century. These early geologists also proposed a generalized interpretations of Earth history that led James Hutton, Georges Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart, following in the steps of Steno, to argue that layers of rock could be dated by the fossils they contained: a principle first applied to the geology of the Paris Basin. The use of index fossils became a powerful tool for making geological maps, because it allowed geologists to correlate the rocks in one locality with those of similar age in other, distant localities.\nBirth of modern economics.\nThe basis for classical economics forms Adam Smith's \"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations\", published in 1776. Smith criticized mercantilism, advocating a system of free trade with division of labour. He postulated an \"invisible hand\" that regulated economic systems made up of actors guided only by self-interest. The \"invisible hand\" mentioned in a lost page in the middle of a chapter in the middle of the \"Wealth of Nations\", 1776, advances as Smith's central message.\nSocial science.\nAnthropology can best be understood as an outgrowth of the Age of Enlightenment. It was during this period that Europeans attempted systematically to study human behavior. Traditions of jurisprudence, history, philology and sociology developed during this time and informed the development of the social sciences of which anthropology was a part.\n19th century.\nThe 19th century saw the birth of science as a profession. William Whewell had coined the term \"scientist\" in 1833, which soon replaced the older term \"natural philosopher\".\nDevelopments in physics.\nIn physics, the behavior of electricity and magnetism was studied by Giovanni Aldini, Alessandro Volta, Michael Faraday, Georg Ohm, and others. The experiments, theories and discoveries of Michael Faraday, Andre-Marie Ampere, James Clerk Maxwell, and their contemporaries led to the unification of the two phenomena into a single theory of electromagnetism as described by Maxwell's equations. Thermodynamics led to an understanding of heat and the notion of energy being defined.\nDiscovery of Neptune.\nIn astronomy, the planet Neptune was discovered. Advances in astronomy and in optical systems in the 19th century resulted in the first observation of an asteroid (1 Ceres) in 1801, and the discovery of Neptune in 1846.\nDevelopments in mathematics.\nIn mathematics, the notion of complex numbers finally matured and led to a subsequent analytical theory; they also began the use of hypercomplex numbers. Karl Weierstrass and others carried out the arithmetization of analysis for functions of real and complex variables. It also saw rise to new progress in geometry beyond those classical theories of Euclid, after a period of nearly two thousand years. The mathematical science of logic likewise had revolutionary breakthroughs after a similarly long period of stagnation. But the most important step in science at this time were the ideas formulated by the creators of electrical science. Their work changed the face of physics and made possible for new technology to come about such as electric power, electrical telegraphy, the telephone, and radio.\nDevelopments in chemistry.\nIn chemistry, Dmitri Mendeleev, following the atomic theory of John Dalton, created the first periodic table of elements. Other highlights include the discoveries unveiling the nature of atomic structure and matter, simultaneously with chemistry \u2013 and of new kinds of radiation. The theory that all matter is made of atoms, which are the smallest constituents of matter that cannot be broken down without losing the basic chemical and physical properties of that matter, was provided by John Dalton in 1803, although the question took a hundred years to settle as proven. Dalton also formulated the law of mass relationships. In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev composed his periodic table of elements on the basis of Dalton's discoveries. The synthesis of urea by Friedrich W\u00f6hler opened a new research field, organic chemistry, and by the end of the 19th century, scientists were able to synthesize hundreds of organic compounds. The later part of the 19th century saw the exploitation of the Earth's petrochemicals, after the exhaustion of the oil supply from whaling. By the 20th century, systematic production of refined materials provided a ready supply of products which provided not only energy, but also synthetic materials for clothing, medicine, and everyday disposable resources. Application of the techniques of organic chemistry to living organisms resulted in physiological chemistry, the precursor to biochemistry.\nAge of the Earth.\nOver the first half of the 19th century, geologists such as Charles Lyell, Adam Sedgwick, and Roderick Murchison applied the new technique to rocks throughout Europe and eastern North America, setting the stage for more detailed, government-funded mapping projects in later decades. Midway through the 19th century, the focus of geology shifted from description and classification to attempts to understand \"how\" the surface of the Earth had changed. The first comprehensive theories of mountain building were proposed during this period, as were the first modern theories of earthquakes and volcanoes. Louis Agassiz and others established the reality of continent-covering ice ages, and \"fluvialists\" like Andrew Crombie Ramsay argued that river valleys were formed, over millions of years by the rivers that flow through them. After the discovery of radioactivity, radiometric dating methods were developed, starting in the 20th century. Alfred Wegener's theory of \"continental drift\" was widely dismissed when he proposed it in the 1910s, but new data gathered in the 1950s and 1960s led to the theory of plate tectonics, which provided a plausible mechanism for it. Plate tectonics also provided a unified explanation for a wide range of seemingly unrelated geological phenomena. Since the 1960s it has served as the unifying principle in geology.\nEvolution and inheritance.\nPerhaps the most prominent, controversial, and far-reaching theory in all of science has been the theory of evolution by natural selection, which was independently formulated by Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace. It was described in detail in Darwin's book \"The Origin of Species\", which was published in 1859. In it, Darwin proposed that the features of all living things, including humans, were shaped by natural processes over long periods of time. The theory of evolution in its current form affects almost all areas of biology. Implications of evolution on fields outside of pure science have led to both opposition and support from different parts of society, and profoundly influenced the popular understanding of \"man's place in the universe\". Separately, Gregor Mendel formulated the principles of inheritance in 1866, which became the basis of modern genetics.\nGerm theory.\nAnother important landmark in medicine and biology were the successful efforts to prove the germ theory of disease. Following this, Louis Pasteur made the first vaccine against rabies, and also made many discoveries in the field of chemistry, including the asymmetry of crystals. In 1847, Hungarian physician Ign\u00e1c F\u00fcl\u00f6p Semmelweis dramatically reduced the occurrence of puerperal fever by simply requiring physicians to wash their hands before attending to women in childbirth. This discovery predated the germ theory of disease. However, Semmelweis' findings were not appreciated by his contemporaries and handwashing came into use only with discoveries by British surgeon Joseph Lister, who in 1865 proved the principles of antisepsis. Lister's work was based on the important findings by French biologist Louis Pasteur. Pasteur was able to link microorganisms with disease, revolutionizing medicine. He also devised one of the most important methods in preventive medicine, when in 1880 he produced a vaccine against rabies. Pasteur invented the process of pasteurization, to help prevent the spread of disease through milk and other foods.\nSchools of economics.\nKarl Marx developed an alternative economic theory, called Marxian economics. Marxian economics is based on the labor theory of value and assumes the value of good to be based on the amount of labor required to produce it. Under this axiom, capitalism was based on employers not paying the full value of workers labor to create profit. The Austrian School responded to Marxian economics by viewing entrepreneurship as driving force of economic development. This replaced the labor theory of value by a system of supply and demand.\nFounding of psychology.\nPsychology as a scientific enterprise that was independent from philosophy began in 1879 when Wilhelm Wundt founded the first laboratory dedicated exclusively to psychological research (in Leipzig). Other important early contributors to the field include Hermann Ebbinghaus (a pioneer in memory studies), Ivan Pavlov (who discovered classical conditioning), William James, and Sigmund Freud. Freud's influence has been enormous, though more as cultural icon than a force in scientific psychology.\nModern sociology.\nModern sociology emerged in the early 19th century as the academic response to the modernization of the world. Among many early sociologists (e.g., \u00c9mile Durkheim), the aim of sociology was in structuralism, understanding the cohesion of social groups, and developing an \"antidote\" to social disintegration. Max Weber was concerned with the modernization of society through the concept of rationalization, which he believed would trap individuals in an \"iron cage\" of rational thought. Some sociologists, including Georg Simmel and W. E. B. Du Bois, used more microsociological, qualitative analyses. This microlevel approach played an important role in American sociology, with the theories of George Herbert Mead and his student Herbert Blumer resulting in the creation of the symbolic interactionism approach to sociology. In particular, just Auguste Comte, illustrated with his work the transition from a theological to a metaphysical stage and, from this, to a positive stage. Comte took care of the classification of the sciences as well as a transit of humanity towards a situation of progress attributable to a re-examination of nature according to the affirmation of 'sociality' as the basis of the scientifically interpreted society.\nRomanticism.\nThe Romantic Movement of the early 19th century reshaped science by opening up new pursuits unexpected in the classical approaches of the Enlightenment. The decline of Romanticism occurred because a new movement, Positivism, began to take hold of the ideals of the intellectuals after 1840 and lasted until about 1880. At the same time, the romantic reaction to the Enlightenment produced thinkers such as Johann Gottfried Herder and later Wilhelm Dilthey whose work formed the basis for the culture concept which is central to the discipline. Traditionally, much of the history of the subject was based on colonial encounters between Western Europe and the rest of the world, and much of 18th- and 19th-century anthropology is now classed as scientific racism. During the late 19th century, battles over the \"study of man\" took place between those of an \"anthropological\" persuasion (relying on anthropometrical techniques) and those of an \"ethnological\" persuasion (looking at cultures and traditions), and these distinctions became part of the later divide between physical anthropology and cultural anthropology, the latter ushered in by the students of Franz Boas.\n20th century.\nScience advanced dramatically during the 20th century. There were new and radical developments in the physical and life sciences, building on the progress from the 19th century.\nTheory of relativity and quantum mechanics.\nThe beginning of the 20th century brought the start of a revolution in physics. The long-held theories of Newton were shown not to be correct in all circumstances. Beginning in 1900, Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr and others developed quantum theories to explain various anomalous experimental results, by introducing discrete energy levels. Not only did quantum mechanics show that the laws of motion did not hold on small scales, but the theory of general relativity, proposed by Einstein in 1915, showed that the fixed background of spacetime, on which both Newtonian mechanics and special relativity depended, could not exist. In 1925, Werner Heisenberg and Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger formulated quantum mechanics, which explained the preceding quantum theories. Currently, general relativity and quantum mechanics are inconsistent with each other, and efforts are underway to unify the two.\nBig Bang.\nThe observation by Edwin Hubble in 1929 that the speed at which galaxies recede positively correlates with their distance, led to the understanding that the universe is expanding, and the formulation of the Big Bang theory by Georges Lema\u00eetre. George Gamow, Ralph Alpher, and Robert Herman had calculated that there should be evidence for a Big Bang in the background temperature of the universe. In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson discovered a 3\u00a0Kelvin background hiss in their Bell Labs radiotelescope (the Holmdel Horn Antenna), which was evidence for this hypothesis, and formed the basis for a number of results that helped determine the age of the universe.\nBig science.\nIn 1938 Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered nuclear fission with radiochemical methods, and in 1939 Lise Meitner and Otto Robert Frisch wrote the first theoretical interpretation of the fission process, which was later improved by Niels Bohr and John A. Wheeler. Further developments took place during World War II, which led to the practical application of radar and the development and use of the atomic bomb. Around this time, Chien-Shiung Wu was recruited by the Manhattan Project to help develop a process for separating uranium metal into U-235 and U-238 isotopes by Gaseous diffusion. She was an expert experimentalist in beta decay and weak interaction physics. Wu designed an experiment (see Wu experiment) that enabled theoretical physicists Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen-Ning Yang to disprove the law of parity experimentally, winning them a Nobel Prize in 1957.\nThough the process had begun with the invention of the cyclotron by Ernest O. Lawrence in the 1930s, physics in the postwar period entered into a phase of what historians have called \"Big Science\", requiring massive machines, budgets, and laboratories in order to test their theories and move into new frontiers. The primary patron of physics became state governments, who recognized that the support of \"basic\" research could often lead to technologies useful to both military and industrial applications.\nAdvances in genetics.\nIn the early 20th century, the study of heredity became a major investigation after the rediscovery in 1900 of the laws of inheritance developed by Mendel. The 20th century also saw the integration of physics and chemistry, with chemical properties explained as the result of the electronic structure of the atom. Linus Pauling's book on \"The Nature of the Chemical Bond\" used the principles of quantum mechanics to deduce bond angles in ever-more complicated molecules. Pauling's work culminated in the physical modelling of DNA, \"the secret of life\" (in the words of Francis Crick, 1953). In the same year, the Miller\u2013Urey experiment demonstrated in a simulation of primordial processes, that basic constituents of proteins, simple amino acids, could themselves be built up from simpler molecules, kickstarting decades of research into the chemical origins of life. By 1953, James D. Watson and Francis Crick clarified the basic structure of DNA, the genetic material for expressing life in all its forms, building on the work of Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin, suggested that the structure of DNA was a double helix. In their famous paper \"Molecular structure of Nucleic Acids\" In the late 20th century, the possibilities of genetic engineering became practical for the first time, and a massive international effort began in 1990 to map out an entire human genome (the Human Genome Project). The discipline of ecology typically traces its origin to the synthesis of Darwinian evolution and Humboldtian biogeography, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Equally important in the rise of ecology, however, were microbiology and soil science\u2014particularly the cycle of life concept, prominent in the work of Louis Pasteur and Ferdinand Cohn. The word \"ecology\" was coined by Ernst Haeckel, whose particularly holistic view of nature in general (and Darwin's theory in particular) was important in the spread of ecological thinking. The field of ecosystem ecology emerged in the Atomic Age with the use of radioisotopes to visualize food webs and by the 1970s ecosystem ecology deeply influenced global environmental management.\nSpace exploration.\nIn 1925, Cecilia Payne-Gaposchkin determined that stars were composed mostly of hydrogen and helium. She was dissuaded by astronomer Henry Norris Russell from publishing this finding in her PhD thesis because of the widely held belief that stars had the same composition as the Earth. However, four years later, in 1929, Henry Norris Russell came to the same conclusion through different reasoning and the discovery was eventually accepted.\nIn 1987, supernova SN 1987A was observed by astronomers on Earth both visually, and in a triumph for neutrino astronomy, by the solar neutrino detectors at Kamiokande. But the solar neutrino flux was a fraction of its theoretically expected value. This discrepancy forced a change in some values in the Standard Model for particle physics.\nNeuroscience as a distinct discipline.\nThe understanding of neurons and the nervous system became increasingly precise and molecular during the 20th century. For example, in 1952, Alan Lloyd Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley presented a mathematical model for transmission of electrical signals in neurons of the giant axon of a squid, which they called \"action potentials\", and how they are initiated and propagated, known as the Hodgkin\u2013Huxley model. In 1961\u20131962, Richard FitzHugh and J. Nagumo simplified Hodgkin\u2013Huxley, in what is called the FitzHugh\u2013Nagumo model. In 1962, Bernard Katz modeled neurotransmission across the space between neurons known as synapses. Beginning in 1966, Eric Kandel and collaborators examined biochemical changes in neurons associated with learning and memory storage in \"Aplysia\". In 1981 Catherine Morris and Harold Lecar combined these models in the Morris\u2013Lecar model. Such increasingly quantitative work gave rise to numerous biological neuron models and models of neural computation. Neuroscience began to be recognized as a distinct academic discipline in its own right. Eric Kandel and collaborators have cited David Rioch, Francis O. Schmitt, and Stephen Kuffler as having played critical roles in establishing the field.\nPlate tectonics.\nGeologists' embrace of plate tectonics became part of a broadening of the field from a study of rocks into a study of the Earth as a planet. Other elements of this transformation include: geophysical studies of the interior of the Earth, the grouping of geology with meteorology and oceanography as one of the \"earth sciences\", and comparisons of Earth and the solar system's other rocky planets.\nApplications.\nIn terms of applications, a massive number of new technologies were developed in the 20th century. Technologies such as electricity, the incandescent light bulb, the automobile and the phonograph, first developed at the end of the 19th century, were perfected and universally deployed. The first car was introduced by Karl Benz in 1885. The first airplane flight occurred in 1903, and by the end of the century airliners flew thousands of miles in a matter of hours. The development of the radio, television and computers caused massive changes in the dissemination of information. Advances in biology also led to large increases in food production, as well as the elimination of diseases such as polio by Dr. Jonas Salk. Gene mapping and gene sequencing, invented by Drs. Mark Skolnik and Walter Gilbert, respectively, are the two technologies that made the Human Genome Project feasible. Computer science, built upon a foundation of theoretical linguistics, discrete mathematics, and electrical engineering, studies the nature and limits of computation. Subfields include computability, computational complexity, database design, computer networking, artificial intelligence, and the design of computer hardware. One area in which advances in computing have contributed to more general scientific development is by facilitating large-scale archiving of scientific data. Contemporary computer science typically distinguishes itself by emphasizing mathematical 'theory' in contrast to the practical emphasis of software engineering.\nEinstein's paper \"On the Quantum Theory of Radiation\" outlined the principles of the stimulated emission of photons. This led to the invention of the Laser (light amplification by the stimulated emission of radiation) and the optical amplifier which ushered in the Information Age. It is optical amplification that allows fiber optic networks to transmit the massive capacity of the Internet.\nBased on wireless transmission of electromagnetic radiation and global networks of cellular operation, the mobile phone became a primary means to access the internet.\nDevelopments in political science and economics.\nIn political science during the 20th century, the study of ideology, behaviouralism and international relations led to a multitude of 'pol-sci' subdisciplines including rational choice theory, voting theory, game theory (also used in economics), psephology, political geography/geopolitics, political anthropology/political psychology/political sociology, political economy, policy analysis, public administration, comparative political analysis and peace studies/conflict analysis. In economics, John Maynard Keynes prompted a division between microeconomics and macroeconomics in the 1920s. Under Keynesian economics macroeconomic trends can overwhelm economic choices made by individuals. Governments should promote aggregate demand for goods as a means to encourage economic expansion. Following World War II, Milton Friedman created the concept of monetarism. Monetarism focuses on using the supply and demand of money as a method for controlling economic activity. In the 1970s, monetarism has adapted into supply-side economics which advocates reducing taxes as a means to increase the amount of money available for economic expansion. Other modern schools of economic thought are New Classical economics and New Keynesian economics. New Classical economics was developed in the 1970s, emphasizing solid microeconomics as the basis for macroeconomic growth. New Keynesian economics was created partially in response to New Classical economics. It shows how imperfect competition and market rigidities, means monetary policy has real effects, and enables analysis of different policies.\nDevelopments in psychology, sociology, and anthropology.\nPsychology in the 20th century saw a rejection of Freud's theories as being too unscientific, and a reaction against Edward Titchener's atomistic approach of the mind. This led to the formulation of behaviorism by John B. Watson, which was popularized by B.F. Skinner. Behaviorism proposed epistemologically limiting psychological study to overt behavior, since that could be reliably measured. Scientific knowledge of the \"mind\" was considered too metaphysical, hence impossible to achieve. The final decades of the 20th century have seen the rise of cognitive science, which considers the mind as once again a subject for investigation, using the tools of psychology, linguistics, computer science, philosophy, and neurobiology. New methods of visualizing the activity of the brain, such as PET scans and CAT scans, began to exert their influence as well, leading some researchers to investigate the mind by investigating the brain, rather than cognition. These new forms of investigation assume that a wide understanding of the human mind is possible, and that such an understanding may be applied to other research domains, such as artificial intelligence. Evolutionary theory was applied to behavior and introduced to anthropology and psychology, through the works of cultural anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon. Physical anthropology would become biological anthropology, incorporating elements of evolutionary biology.\nAmerican sociology in the 1940s and 1950s was dominated largely by Talcott Parsons, who argued that aspects of society that promoted structural integration were therefore \"functional\". This structural functionalism approach was questioned in the 1960s, when sociologists came to see this approach as merely a justification for inequalities present in the status quo. In reaction, conflict theory was developed, which was based in part on the philosophies of Karl Marx. Conflict theorists saw society as an arena in which different groups compete for control over resources. Symbolic interactionism also came to be regarded as central to sociological thinking. Erving Goffman saw social interactions as a stage performance, with individuals preparing \"backstage\" and attempting to control their audience through impression management. While these theories are currently prominent in sociological thought, other approaches exist, including feminist theory, post-structuralism, rational choice theory, and postmodernism.\nIn the mid-20th century, much of the methodologies of earlier anthropological and ethnographical study were reevaluated with an eye towards research ethics, while at the same time the scope of investigation has broadened far beyond the traditional study of \"primitive cultures\".\n21st century.\nIn the early 21st century, some concepts that originated in 20th century physics were proven. On 4 July 2012, physicists working at CERN's Large Hadron Collider announced that they had discovered a new subatomic particle greatly resembling the Higgs boson, confirmed as such by the following March. Gravitational waves were first detected on 14 September 2015.\nThe Human Genome Project was declared complete in 2003. The CRISPR gene editing technique developed in 2012 allowed scientists to precisely and easily modify DNA and led to the development of new medicine. In 2020, xenobots, a new class of living robotics, were invented; reproductive capabilities were introduced the following year.\nPositive psychology is a branch of psychology founded in 1998 by Martin Seligman that is concerned with the study of happiness, mental well-being, and positive human functioning, and is a reaction to 20th century psychology's emphasis on mental illness and dysfunction.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14403", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14403", "title": "Hydrogen peroxide", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nHydrogen peroxide is a chemical compound with the formula . In its pure form, it is a very pale blue liquid; However at lower concentrations, it appears colorless due to the faintness of the blue coloration. The molecule hydrogen peroxide is asymmetrical and highly polarized. Its strong tendency to form hydrogen bond networks results in greater viscosity compared to water. It is used as an oxidizer, bleaching agent, and antiseptic, usually as a dilute solution (3%\u20136% by weight) in water for consumer use and in higher concentrations for industrial use. Concentrated hydrogen peroxide, or \"high-test peroxide\", decomposes explosively when heated and has been used as both a monopropellant and an oxidizer in rocketry.\nHydrogen peroxide is a reactive oxygen species and the simplest peroxide, a compound having an oxygen\u2013oxygen single bond. It decomposes slowly into water and elemental oxygen when exposed to light, and rapidly in the presence of organic or reactive compounds. It is typically stored with a stabilizer in a weakly acidic solution in an opaque bottle. Hydrogen peroxide is found in biological systems including the human body. Enzymes that use or decompose hydrogen peroxide are classified as peroxidases.\nProperties.\nThe boiling point of has been extrapolated as being , approximately higher than water. In practice, hydrogen peroxide will undergo potentially explosive thermal decomposition if heated to this temperature. It may be safely distilled at lower temperatures under reduced pressure.\nHydrogen peroxide forms stable adducts with urea (hydrogen peroxide\u2013urea), sodium carbonate (sodium percarbonate) and other compounds. An acid-base adduct with triphenylphosphine oxide is a useful \"carrier\" for in some reactions.\nStructure.\nHydrogen peroxide () is a nonplanar molecule with (twisted) C2 symmetry; this was first shown by Paul-Antoine Gigu\u00e8re in 1950 using infrared spectroscopy. Although the O\u2212O bond is a single bond, the molecule has a relatively high rotational barrier of 386\u00a0cm\u22121 (4.62\u00a0kJ/mol) for rotation between enantiomers via the \"trans\" configuration, and 2460\u00a0cm\u22121 (29.4\u00a0kJ/mol) via the \"cis\" configuration. These barriers are proposed to be due to repulsion between the lone pairs of the adjacent oxygen atoms and dipolar effects between the two O\u2013H bonds. For comparison, the rotational barrier for ethane is 1040\u00a0cm\u22121 (12.4\u00a0kJ/mol).\nThe approximately 100\u00b0 dihedral angle between the two O\u2013H bonds makes the molecule chiral. It is the smallest and simplest molecule to exhibit enantiomerism. It has been proposed that the enantiospecific interactions of one rather than the other may have led to amplification of one enantiomeric form of ribonucleic acids and therefore an origin of homochirality in an RNA world.\nThe molecular structures of gaseous and crystalline are significantly different. This difference is attributed to the effects of hydrogen bonding, which is absent in the gaseous state. Crystals of are tetragonal with the space group \"D\" or \"P\"41212.\nAqueous solutions.\nIn aqueous solutions, hydrogen peroxide forms a eutectic mixture, exhibiting freezing-point depression down as low as \u221256\u00a0\u00b0C; pure water has a freezing point of 0\u00a0\u00b0C and pure hydrogen peroxide of \u22120.43\u00a0\u00b0C. The boiling point of the same mixtures is also depressed in relation with the mean of both boiling points (125.1\u00a0\u00b0C). It occurs at 114\u00a0\u00b0C. This boiling point is 14\u00a0\u00b0C greater than that of pure water and 36.2\u00a0\u00b0C less than that of pure hydrogen peroxide.\nHydrogen peroxide is most commonly available as a solution in water. For consumers, it is usually available from pharmacies at 3 and 6 wt% concentrations. The concentrations are sometimes described in terms of the volume of oxygen gas generated; one milliliter of a 20-volume solution generates twenty milliliters of oxygen gas when completely decomposed. For laboratory use, 30 wt% solutions are most common. Commercial grades from 70% to 98% are also available, but due to the potential of solutions of more than 68% hydrogen peroxide to be converted entirely to steam and oxygen (with the temperature of the steam increasing as the concentration increases above 68%) these grades are potentially far more hazardous and require special care in dedicated storage areas. Buyers must typically allow inspection by commercial manufacturers.\nComparison with analogues.\nHydrogen peroxide has several structural analogues with bonding arrangements (water also shown for comparison). It has the highest (theoretical) boiling point of this series (X = O, S, N, P). Its melting point is also fairly high, being comparable to that of hydrazine and water, with only hydroxylamine crystallising significantly more readily, indicative of particularly strong hydrogen bonding. Diphosphane and hydrogen disulfide exhibit only weak hydrogen bonding and have little chemical similarity to hydrogen peroxide. Structurally, the analogues all adopt similar skewed structures, due to repulsion between adjacent lone pairs.\nNatural occurrence.\nHydrogen peroxide is produced by various biological processes mediated by enzymes.\nHydrogen peroxide has been detected in surface water, in groundwater, and in the atmosphere. It can also form when water is exposed to UV light. Sea water contains 0.5 to 14\u00a0\u03bcg/L of hydrogen peroxide, and freshwater contains 1 to 30\u00a0\u03bcg/L. Concentrations in air are about 0.4 to 4\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, varying over several orders of magnitude depending in conditions such as season, altitude, daylight and water vapor content. In rural nighttime air it is less than 0.014\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, and in moderate photochemical smog it is 14 to 42\u00a0\u03bcg/m3.\nThe amount of hydrogen peroxide in biological systems can be assayed using a fluorometric assay.\nDiscovery.\nAlexander von Humboldt is sometimes said to have been the first to report the first synthetic peroxide, barium peroxide, in 1799 as a by-product of his attempts to decompose air, although this is disputed due to von Humboldt's ambiguous wording. Nineteen years later Louis Jacques Th\u00e9nard recognized that this compound could be used for the preparation of a previously unknown compound, which he described as (\"oxygenated water\") \u2014 subsequently known as hydrogen peroxide.\nAn improved version of Th\u00e9nard's process used hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of sulfuric acid to precipitate the barium sulfate byproduct. This process was used from the end of the 19th century until the middle of the 20th century.\nThe bleaching effect of peroxides and their salts on natural dyes had been known since Th\u00e9nard's experiments in the 1820s, but early attempts of industrial production of peroxides failed. The first plant producing hydrogen peroxide was built in 1873 in Berlin. The discovery of the synthesis of hydrogen peroxide by electrolysis with sulfuric acid introduced the more efficient electrochemical method. It was first commercialized in 1908 in Wei\u00dfenstein, Carinthia, Austria. The anthraquinone process, which is still used, was developed during the 1930s by the German chemical manufacturer IG Farben in Ludwigshafen. The increased demand and improvements in the synthesis methods resulted in the rise of the annual production of hydrogen peroxide from 35,000 tonnes in 1950, to over 100,000 tonnes in 1960, to 300,000 tonnes by 1970; by 1998 it reached 2.7 million tonnes.\nEarly attempts failed to produce neat hydrogen peroxide. Anhydrous hydrogen peroxide was first obtained by vacuum distillation.\nDetermination of the molecular structure of hydrogen peroxide proved to be very difficult. In 1892, the Italian physical chemist Giacomo Carrara (1864\u20131925) determined its molecular mass by freezing-point depression, which confirmed that its molecular formula is . seemed to be just as possible as the modern structure, and as late as in the middle of the 20th century at least half a dozen hypothetical isomeric variants of two main options seemed to be consistent with the available evidence. In 1934, the English mathematical physicist William Penney and the Scottish physicist Gordon Sutherland proposed a molecular structure for hydrogen peroxide that was very similar to the presently accepted one.\nProduction.\nIn 1994, world production of was around 1.9 million tonnes and grew to 2.2 million in 2006, most of which was at a concentration of 70% or less. In that year, bulk 30% sold for around 0.54 USD/kg, equivalent to US$1.50/kg (US$0.68/lb) on a 100% purity basis.\nHydrogen peroxide is manufactured almost exclusively by the anthraquinone process, which was originally developed by BASF in 1939. It begins with the reduction of an anthraquinone (such as 2-ethylanthraquinone or the 2-amyl derivative) to the corresponding anthrahydroquinone, typically by hydrogenation on a palladium catalyst. In the presence of oxygen, the anthrahydroquinone then undergoes autoxidation: the labile hydrogen atoms of the hydroxy groups transfer to the oxygen molecule, to give hydrogen peroxide and regenerating the anthraquinone. Most commercial processes achieve oxidation by passing compressed air through a solution of the anthrahydroquinone, with the hydrogen peroxide then extracted from the solution and the anthraquinone recycled back for successive cycles of hydrogenation and oxidation.\nThe net reaction for the anthraquinone-catalyzed process is:\nThe economics of the process depend heavily on effective recycling of the extraction solvents, the hydrogenation catalyst and the expensive quinone.\nHistorical methods.\nHydrogen peroxide was once prepared industrially by hydrolysis of ammonium persulfate:\n was itself obtained by the electrolysis of a solution of ammonium bisulfate () in sulfuric acid.\nOther routes.\nSmall amounts are formed by electrolysis, photochemistry, electric arc, and related methods.\nA commercially viable route for hydrogen peroxide via the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen favours production of water but can be stopped at the peroxide stage. One economic obstacle has been that direct processes give a dilute solution uneconomic for transportation. None of these has yet reached a point where it can be used for industrial-scale synthesis.\nThe electrochemical reduction of oxygen allows for the generation of hydrogen peroxide from oxygen and water.\nReactions.\nAcid-base.\nHydrogen peroxide is about 1000 times stronger as an acid than water.\n (p\"K\" = 11.65)\nDisproportionation.\nHydrogen peroxide disproportionates to form water and oxygen with a \u0394\"H\"o of \u22122884.5\u00a0kJ/kg and a \u0394S of 70.5\u00a0J/(mol\u00b7K):\nThe rate of decomposition increases with rise in temperature, concentration, and pH. is unstable under alkaline conditions. Decomposition is catalysed by various redox-active ions or compounds, including most transition metals and their compounds (e.g. manganese dioxide (), silver, and platinum).\nOxidation reactions.\nThe redox properties of hydrogen peroxide depend on pH. In acidic solutions, is a powerful oxidizer.\nSulfite () is oxidized to sulfate ().\nReduction reactions.\nUnder alkaline conditions, hydrogen peroxide is a reductant. When acts as a reducing agent, oxygen gas is also produced. For example, hydrogen peroxide will reduce sodium hypochlorite and potassium permanganate, which is a convenient method for preparing oxygen in the laboratory:\n\nThe oxygen produced from hydrogen peroxide and sodium hypochlorite is in the singlet state.\nHydrogen peroxide also reduces silver oxide to silver:\nAlthough usually a reductant, alkaline hydrogen peroxide converts Mn(II) to the dioxide:\nIn a related reaction, potassium permanganate is reduced to by \"acidic\" :\nOrganic reactions.\nHydrogen peroxide is frequently used as an oxidizing agent. Illustrative is oxidation of thioethers to form sulfoxides, such as conversion of thioanisole to methyl phenyl sulfoxide:\nAlkaline hydrogen peroxide is used for epoxidation of electron-deficient alkenes such as acrylic acid derivatives, and for the oxidation of alkylboranes to alcohols, the second step of hydroboration-oxidation. It is also the principal reagent in the Dakin oxidation process.\nPrecursor to other peroxide compounds.\nHydrogen peroxide is a weak acid, forming hydroperoxide or peroxide salts with many metals.\nIt also converts metal oxides into the corresponding peroxides. For example, upon treatment with hydrogen peroxide, chromic acid ( and ) forms a blue peroxide .\nBiochemistry.\nProduction.\nThe aerobic oxidation of glucose in the presence of the enzyme glucose oxidase produces hydrogen peroxide. The conversion affords gluconolactone:\nSuperoxide dismutases (SOD)s are enzymes that promote the disproportionation of superoxide into oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.\n\nPeroxisomes are organelles found in virtually all eukaryotic cells. They are involved in the catabolism of very long chain fatty acids, branched chain fatty acids, -amino acids, polyamines, and biosynthesis of plasmalogens and ether phospholipids, which are found in mammalian brains and lungs. They produce hydrogen peroxide in a process catalyzed by flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD):\n&lt;chem&gt;-&gt;[\\ce{FAD}]&lt;/chem&gt; \nHydrogen peroxide arises by the degradation of adenosine monophosphate, which yields hypoxanthine. Hypoxanthine is then oxidatively catabolized first to xanthine and then to uric acid, and the reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme xanthine oxidase:\nHypoxanthine\nXanthine oxidase\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nXanthine\nXanthine oxidase\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nUric acid\n Degradation of hypoxanthine through xanthine to uric acid to form hydrogen peroxide\nThe degradation of guanosine monophosphate yields xanthine as an intermediate product which is then converted in the same way to uric acid with the formation of hydrogen peroxide.\nConsumption.\nCatalase, another peroxisomal enzyme, uses this to oxidize other substrates, including phenols, formic acid, formaldehyde, and alcohol, by means of a peroxidation reaction:\nthus eliminating the poisonous hydrogen peroxide in the process.\nThis reaction is important in liver and kidney cells, where the peroxisomes neutralize various toxic substances that enter the blood. Some of the ethanol humans drink is oxidized to acetaldehyde in this way. In addition, when excess accumulates in the cell, catalase converts it to through this reaction:\nGlutathione peroxidase, a selenoenzyme, also catalyzes the disproportionation of hydrogen peroxide.\nFenton reaction.\nThe reaction of and hydrogen peroxide is the basis of the Fenton reaction, which generates hydroxyl radicals, which are of significance in biology:\nThe Fenton reaction explains the toxicity of hydrogen peroxides because the hydroxyl radicals rapidly and irreversibly oxidize all organic compounds, including proteins, membrane lipids, and DNA. Hydrogen peroxide is a significant source of oxidative DNA damage in living cells. DNA damage includes formation of 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine among many other altered bases, as well as strand breaks, inter-strand crosslinks, and deoxyribose damage. By interacting with Cl\u2212, hydrogen peroxide also leads to chlorinated DNA bases. Hydroxyl radicals readily damage vital cellular components, especially those of the mitochondria. The compound is a major factor implicated in the free-radical theory of aging, based on its ready conversion into a hydroxyl radical.\nFunction.\nEggs of sea urchin, shortly after fertilization by a sperm, produce hydrogen peroxide. It is then converted to hydroxyl radicals (HO\u2022), which initiate radical polymerization, which surrounds the eggs with a protective layer of polymer.\nThe bombardier beetle combines hydroquinone and hydrogen peroxide, leading to a violent exothermic chemical reaction to produce boiling, foul-smelling liquid that partially becomes a gas (flash evaporation) and is expelled through an outlet valve with a loud popping sound.\nAs a proposed signaling molecule, hydrogen peroxide may regulate a wide variety of biological processes. At least one study has tried to link hydrogen peroxide production to cancer.\nUses.\nBleaching.\nAbout 60% of the world's production of hydrogen peroxide is used for pulp- and paper-bleaching. The second major industrial application is the manufacture of sodium percarbonate and sodium perborate, which are used as mild bleaches in laundry detergents. A representative conversion is:\nSodium percarbonate, which is an adduct of sodium carbonate and hydrogen peroxide, is the active ingredient in such laundry products as OxiClean and Tide laundry detergent. When dissolved in water, it releases hydrogen peroxide and sodium carbonate. By themselves these bleaching agents are only effective at wash temperatures of or above and so, often are used in conjunction with bleach activators, which facilitate cleaning at lower temperatures.\nHydrogen peroxide has also been used as a flour bleaching agent and a tooth and bone whitening agent.\nProduction of organic peroxy compounds.\nIt is used in the production of various organic peroxides with dibenzoyl peroxide being a high volume example. Peroxy acids, such as peracetic acid and \"meta\"-chloroperoxybenzoic acid also are produced using hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide has been used for creating organic peroxide-based explosives, such as acetone peroxide. It is used as an initiator in polymerizations. Hydrogen peroxide reacts with certain di-esters, such as phenyl oxalate ester (cyalume), to produce chemiluminescence; this application is most commonly encountered in the form of glow sticks.\nProduction of inorganic peroxides.\nThe reaction with borax leads to sodium perborate, a bleach used in laundry detergents:\nSewage treatment.\nHydrogen peroxide is used in certain waste-water treatment processes to remove organic impurities. In advanced oxidation processing, the Fenton reaction gives the highly reactive hydroxyl radical (\u2022OH). This degrades organic compounds, including those that are ordinarily robust, such as aromatic or halogenated compounds. It can also oxidize sulfur-based compounds present in the waste; which is beneficial as it generally reduces their odour.\nDisinfectant.\nHydrogen peroxide may be used for the sterilization of various surfaces, including surgical instruments, and may be deployed as a vapour (VHP) for room sterilization. demonstrates broad-spectrum efficacy against viruses, bacteria, yeasts, and bacterial spores. In general, greater activity is seen against Gram-positive than Gram-negative bacteria; however, the presence of catalase or other peroxidases in these organisms may increase tolerance in the presence of lower concentrations. Lower levels of concentration (3%) will work against most spores; higher concentrations (7 to 30%) and longer contact times will improve sporicidal activity.\nHydrogen peroxide is seen as an environmentally safe alternative to chlorine-based bleaches, as it degrades to form oxygen and water and it is generally recognized as safe as an antimicrobial agent by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).\nPropellant.\nHigh-concentration is referred to as \"high-test peroxide\" (HTP). It can be used as either a monopropellant (not mixed with fuel) or the oxidizer component of a bipropellant rocket. Use as a monopropellant takes advantage of the decomposition of 70\u201398% concentration hydrogen peroxide into steam and oxygen. The propellant is pumped into a reaction chamber, where a catalyst, usually a silver or platinum screen, triggers decomposition, producing steam at over , which is expelled through a nozzle, generating thrust. monopropellant produces a maximal specific impulse (\"I\"sp) of 161 s (1.6 kN\u00b7s/kg). Peroxide was the first major monopropellant adopted for use in rocket applications. Hydrazine eventually replaced hydrogen peroxide monopropellant thruster applications primarily because of a 25% increase in the vacuum specific impulse. Hydrazine (toxic) and hydrogen peroxide (less toxic [ACGIH TLV 0.01 and 1 ppm respectively]) are the only two monopropellants (other than cold gases) to have been widely adopted and utilized for propulsion and power applications. The Bell Rocket Belt, reaction control systems for X-1, X-15, Centaur, Mercury, Little Joe, as well as the turbo-pump gas generators for X-1, X-15, Jupiter, Redstone and Viking used hydrogen peroxide as a monopropellant. The RD-107 engines (used from 1957 to present) in the R-7 series of rockets decompose hydrogen peroxide to power the turbopumps.\nIn bipropellant applications, is decomposed to oxidize a burning fuel. Specific impulses as high as 350 s (3.5\u00a0kN\u00b7s/kg) can be achieved, depending on the fuel. Peroxide used as an oxidizer gives a somewhat lower \"I\"sp than liquid oxygen but is dense, storable, and non-cryogenic and can be more easily used to drive gas turbines to give high pressures using an efficient \"closed cycle\". It may also be used for regenerative cooling of rocket engines. Peroxide was used very successfully as an oxidizer in World War II German rocket motors (e.g., T-Stoff, containing oxyquinoline stabilizer, for both the Walter HWK 109-500 \"Starthilfe\" RATO externally podded monopropellant booster system and the Walter HWK 109-509 rocket motor series used for the Me 163B), most often used with C-Stoff in a self-igniting hypergolic combination, and for the low-cost British Black Knight and Black Arrow launchers. Presently, HTP is used on ILR-33 AMBER and Nucleus suborbital rockets.\nIn the 1940s and 1950s, the Hellmuth Walter KG\u2013conceived turbine used hydrogen peroxide for use in submarines while submerged; it was found to be too noisy and require too much maintenance compared to diesel-electric power systems. Some torpedoes used hydrogen peroxide as oxidizer or propellant. Operator error in the use of hydrogen peroxide torpedoes was named as possible causes for the sinking of HMS \"Sidon\" and the Russian submarine \"Kursk\". SAAB Underwater Systems is manufacturing the Torpedo 2000. This torpedo, used by the Swedish Navy, is powered by a piston engine propelled by HTP as an oxidizer and kerosene as a fuel in a bipropellant system.\nHousehold use.\nHydrogen peroxide has various domestic uses, primarily as a cleaning and disinfecting agent.\nDiluted (between 1.9% and 12%) mixed into a solution with aqueous ammonia, aniline (color molecule) and a coupler, has been used to color human hair. It can also be mixed with powder or cream bleach compounds, most notably potassium chloride. Bleaching hair follicles does not destroy or remove color molecule or melanocytes. Bleaching compounds work to drive wedges between color molecules or melanocyte's allowing more visible light to pass through the hair shaft. The chemical's bleaching property lends its name to the phrase \"peroxide blonde\".\nHydrogen peroxide is also used for tooth whitening. It may be found in most whitening toothpastes. Hydrogen peroxide has shown positive results involving teeth lightness and chroma shade parameters. It works by oxidizing colored pigments onto the enamel where the shade of the tooth may become lighter. Hydrogen peroxide may be mixed with baking soda and salt to make a homemade toothpaste.\nHydrogen peroxide reacts with blood as a bleaching agent, and so if a blood stain is fresh, or not too old, liberal application of hydrogen peroxide, if necessary in more than single application, will bleach the stain fully out. After about two minutes of the application, the blood should be firmly blotted out.\nHydrogen peroxide may be used to treat acne, although benzoyl peroxide is a more common treatment.\nThe use of dilute hydrogen peroxide as an oral cleansing agent has been reviewed academically to determine its usefulness in treating gingivitis and plaque. Although there is a positive effect when compared with a placebo, it was concluded that chlorhexidine is a much more effective treatment.\nNiche uses.\nSome horticulturists and users of hydroponics advocate the use of weak hydrogen peroxide solution in watering solutions. Its spontaneous decomposition releases oxygen that enhances a plant's root development and helps to treat root rot (cellular root death due to lack of oxygen) and a variety of other pests.\nFor general watering concentrations, around 0.1% is in use. This can be increased up to one percent for antifungal actions. Tests show that plant foliage can safely tolerate concentrations up to 3%.\nHydrogen peroxide is used in aquaculture for controlling mortality caused by various microbes. In 2019, the U.S. FDA approved it for control of \"Saprolegniasis\" in all coldwater finfish and all fingerling and adult coolwater and warmwater finfish, for control of external columnaris disease in warm-water finfish, and for control of \"Gyrodactylus\" spp. in freshwater-reared salmonids. Laboratory tests conducted by fish culturists have demonstrated that common household hydrogen peroxide may be used safely to provide oxygen for small fish. The hydrogen peroxide releases oxygen by decomposition when it is exposed to catalysts such as manganese dioxide.\nHydrogen peroxide may be used in combination with a UV-light source to remove yellowing from white or light grey acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastics to partially or fully restore the original color. In the retrocomputing scene, this process is commonly referred to as retrobright.\nSafety.\nRegulations vary, but low concentrations, such as 5%, are widely available. Concentrated solutions of react violently with organic materials.\nWhile concentrations up to 35% produce only \"white\" oxygen bubbles in the skin (and some biting pain) that disappear with the blood within 30\u201345 minutes, concentrations of 98% dissolve paper. However, concentrations as low as 3% can be dangerous for the eye because of oxygen evolution within the eye.\nWhen hydrogen peroxide is used at moderate to high concentrations in organic laboratories, the associated hazards include:\nHigh-concentration hydrogen peroxide streams, typically above 40%, should be considered hazardous due to concentrated hydrogen peroxide's meeting the definition of a DOT oxidizer according to U.S. regulations if released into the environment. The EPA Reportable Quantity (RQ) for D001 hazardous wastes is , or approximately , of concentrated hydrogen peroxide.\nHydrogen peroxide should be stored in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area and away from any flammable or combustible substances. It should be stored in a container composed of non-reactive materials such as stainless steel or glass (other materials including some plastics and aluminium alloys may also be suitable). As it breaks down quickly when exposed to light, it should be stored in an opaque container, and pharmaceutical formulations typically come in brown bottles that block light.\nHydrogen peroxide, either in pure or diluted form, may pose several risks, the main one being that it forms explosive mixtures upon contact with organic compounds. Distillation of hydrogen peroxide at normal pressures is highly dangerous. It is corrosive, especially when concentrated, but even domestic-strength solutions may cause irritation to the eyes, mucous membranes, and skin. Swallowing hydrogen peroxide solutions is particularly dangerous, as decomposition in the stomach releases large quantities of gas (ten times the volume of a 3% solution), leading to internal bloating. Inhaling over 10% can cause severe pulmonary irritation.\nWith a significant vapour pressure (1.2\u00a0kPa at 50\u00a0\u00b0C), hydrogen peroxide vapour is potentially hazardous. According to U.S. NIOSH, the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) limit is only 75\u00a0ppm. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has established a permissible exposure limit of 1.0\u00a0ppm calculated as an 8-hour time-weighted average (29 CFR 1910.1000, Table Z-1). Hydrogen peroxide has been classified by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) as a \"known animal carcinogen, with unknown relevance on humans\". For workplaces where there is a risk of exposure to the hazardous concentrations of the vapours, continuous monitors for hydrogen peroxide should be used. Information on the hazards of hydrogen peroxide is available from OSHA and from the ATSDR.\nWound healing.\nHistorically, hydrogen peroxide was used for disinfecting wounds, partly because of its low cost and prompt availability compared to other antiseptics.\nThere is conflicting evidence on hydrogen peroxide's effect on wound healing. Some research finds benefit, while other research find delays and healing inhibition. Its use for home treatment of wounds is generally not recommended.\n1.5\u20133% hydrogen peroxide is used as a disinfectant in dentistry, especially in endodotic treatments together with hypochlorite and chlorhexidine and 1\u20131.5% is also useful for treatment of inflammation of third molars (wisdom teeth).\nUse in alternative medicine.\nPractitioners of alternative medicine have advocated the use of hydrogen peroxide for various conditions, including emphysema, influenza, AIDS, and in particular cancer. Medical authorities and regulatory agencies warn that such uses are unsupported by scientific evidence and can be dangerous. Ingesting or injecting hydrogen peroxide, even in so-called \u201cfood-grade\u201d concentrations, has led to serious adverse effects and fatalities.\nBoth the effectiveness and safety of hydrogen peroxide therapy is scientifically questionable. Hydrogen peroxide is produced by the immune system, but in a carefully controlled manner. Cells called phagocytes engulf pathogens and then use hydrogen peroxide to destroy them. The peroxide is toxic to both the cell and the pathogen and so is kept within a special compartment, called a phagosome. Free hydrogen peroxide will damage any tissue it encounters via oxidative stress, a process that also has been proposed as a cause of cancer.\nClaims that hydrogen peroxide therapy increases cellular levels of oxygen have not been supported. The quantities administered would be expected to provide very little additional oxygen compared to that available from normal respiration. It is also difficult to raise the level of oxygen around cancer cells within a tumour, as the blood supply tends to be poor, a situation known as tumor hypoxia.\nLarge oral doses of hydrogen peroxide at a 3% concentration may cause irritation and blistering to the mouth, throat, and abdomen as well as abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. Ingestion of hydrogen peroxide at concentrations of 35% or higher has been implicated as the cause of numerous gas embolism events resulting in hospitalisation. In these cases, hyperbaric oxygen therapy was used to treat the embolisms.\nIntravenous injection of hydrogen peroxide has been linked to several deaths.\nThe American Cancer Society states that \"there is no scientific evidence that hydrogen peroxide is a safe, effective, or useful cancer treatment.\" Furthermore, the therapy is not approved by the U.S. FDA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14404", "revid": "69423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14404", "title": "Hesychasm", "text": "Eastern Orthodox contemplative prayer\nHesychasm () is a contemplative monastic tradition in the Eastern Christian traditions of the Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches in which stillness (\"h\u0113sychia\") is sought through uninterrupted Jesus prayer. While rooted in early Christian monasticism, it took its definitive form in the 14th century at Mount Athos.\nEtymology.\nHesychasm ( ) derives from the word \"hesychia\" ( ), meaning \"stillness, rest, quiet, silence\" and \"hesychazo\" ( ) \"to keep stillness\".\nOrigins and development.\nMetropolitan Kallistos Ware, a scholar of Eastern Orthodox theology, distinguishes five distinct usages of the term \"hesychasm\":\nEarly Christian monasticism.\nSolitary ascetic life.\nChristian monasticism started with the legalisation of Christianity in the 4th century. The term \"hesychast\" is used sparingly in Christian ascetical writings emanating from Egypt from the 4th century on, although the writings of Evagrius and the \"Sayings of the Desert Fathers\" do attest to it. In Egypt, the terms more often used are \"anchoretism\" (Gr. , \"withdrawal, retreat\"), and \"anchorite\" (Gr. , \"one who withdraws or retreats, i.e., a hermit\").\nThe term \"hesychast\" was used in the 6th century in Palestine in the \"Lives\" of Cyril of Scythopolis. Many of the hesychasts Cyril describes were his own contemporaries; several of the saints about whom Cyril was writing, especially Euthymios and Savas, were in fact from Cappadocia. The laws \"(novellae)\" of the emperor Justinian I (r. 527\u2013565) treat \"hesychast\" and \"anchorite\" as synonyms, making them interchangeable terms.\nInner prayer.\nThe practice of inner prayer, which aims at \"inward stillness or silence of the heart\", dates back to at least the 4th century. Evagrius Ponticus (345\u2013399), John Climacus (St. John of Sinai; 6th\u20137th century), Maximus the Confessor (c. 580\u2013662), and Symeon the New Theologian (949\u20131022) are representatives of this hesychast spirituality. John Climacus, in his influential \"Ladder of Divine Ascent\", describes several stages of contemplative or hesychast practice, culminating in \"agape\".\nThe earliest reference to the Jesus prayer is in Diadochos of Photiki (c. 450). Neither Evagrius, Maximus, nor Symeon refers to the Jesus prayer. Saint John Cassian (c. 360\u2013435), who transmitted Evagrius Ponticus's ascetical teachings to the West, forming the basis of much of the spirituality of the Order of Saint Benedict and the subsequent western mystical tradition, presents as the formula used in Egypt for repetitive prayer \"O God, make speed to save me: O Lord, make haste to help me.\"\nAddition of psychosomatic techniques.\nSt. Nicephorus the Hesychast (13th century), a Roman Catholic who converted to the Eastern Orthodox faith and became a monk at Mount Athos, advised monks to bend their heads toward the chest, \"attach the prayer to their breathing\" while controlling the rhythm of their breath, and \"to fix their eyes during prayer on the 'middle of the body'\", concentrating the mind within the heart in order to practice \"nepsis\" (watchfulness). While this is the earliest attestation of psychosomatic techniques in hesychast prayer, according to Kallistos Ware \"its origins may well be far more ancient\", influenced by the Sufi practice of \"dhikr\", \" the memory and invocation of the name of God\", which in turn may have been influenced by Yoga practices from India, though it's also possible that Sufis were influenced by early Christian monasticism.\nIn the early 14th century, Gregory Sinaita (1260s\u20131346) learned a form of disciplined mental prayer from Arsenius of Crete, rooted in the tradition of John Climacus. In 1310, he went to Mount Athos, where he remained until 1335 as a monk at the Skete of Magoula near Philotheou Monastery, introducing hesychast practice there. The terms \"Hesychasm\" and \"Hesychast\" were used by the monks on Mount Athos to refer to the practice and to the practitioner of a method of mental ascesis that involves the use of the Jesus Prayer assisted by certain psychophysical techniques.\nHesychast controversy and Palamism.\nAbout the year 1337, hesychasm attracted the attention of Barlaam of Seminara, a Calabrian monk who at that time held the office of abbot in the Monastery of St. Saviour in Constantinople and who visited Mount Athos. Mount Athos was then at the height of its fame and influence, under the reign of Andronicus III Palaeologus and the leadership of the \"Protos\" Symeon. On Mount Athos, Barlaam encountered hesychasts and heard descriptions of their practices, also reading the writings of the teacher in hesychasm of St. Gregory Palamas, himself an Athonite monk. Trained in Western Scholastic theology, Barlaam was scandalized by hesychasm and began to combat it both orally and in his writings. As a private teacher of theology in the Western Scholastic mode, Barlaam propounded a more intellectual and propositional approach to the knowledge of God than the hesychasts taught.\nBarlaam took exception to the doctrine entertained by the hesychasts as to the nature of the light, the experience of which was said to be the goal of hesychast practice, regarding it as heretical and blasphemous. It was maintained by the hesychasts to be of divine origin and to be identical to the light which had been manifested to Jesus' disciples on Mount Tabor at the Transfiguration. This Barlaam held to be polytheistic, inasmuch as it postulated two eternal substances, a visible and an invisible God. Hesychasm was linked with Messalianiam and Bogomilism.\nOn the hesychast side, the controversy was taken up by St. Gregory Palamas, afterwards Archbishop of Thessalonica, who was asked by his fellow monks on Mt Athos to defend hesychasm from the attacks of Barlaam. St. Gregory himself was well-educated in Greek philosophy. St. Gregory defended hesychasm in the 1340s at three different synods in Constantinople, and he also wrote a number of works in its defense.\nIn these works, St. Gregory Palamas uses a distinction, already found in the 4th century in the works of the Cappadocian Fathers, between the energies or operations (Gr. \"energeiai)\" of God and the essence of God. St. Gregory taught that the energies or operations of God were uncreated. He taught that the essence of God can never be known by his creature even in the next life, but that his uncreated energies or operations can be known both in this life and in the next, and convey to the hesychast in this life and to the righteous in the next life a true spiritual knowledge of God. In Palamite theology, it is the uncreated energies of God that illumine the hesychast who has been vouchsafed an experience of the uncreated light.\nIn 1341, the dispute came before a synod held at Constantinople and presided over by the Emperor Andronicus III; the synod, taking into account the regard in which the writings of the pseudo-Dionysius were held, condemned Barlaam, who recanted and returned to Calabria, afterwards becoming a bishop in the Catholic Church.\nOne of Barlaam's friends, Gregory Akindynos, who originally was also a friend of St. Gregory Palamas, took up the controversy, which also played a role in the civil war between the supporters of John Cantacuzenus and John V Palaiologos. Three other synods on the subject were held, at the second of which the followers of Barlaam gained a brief victory. But in 1351 at a synod under the presidency of the Emperor John VI Cantacuzenus, hesychast doctrine was established as the doctrine of the Orthodox Church.\nIntroduction in Russia.\nSt. Paisius Velichkovsky and his disciples made the practice known in Russia and Romania, although hesychasm was already previously known in Russia, as is attested by St. Seraphim of Sarov's independent practice of it.\nPractice.\nAcquiring inner stillness.\nThe hesychast interprets Jesus's injunction in the Gospel of Matthew to \"go into your closet to pray\" to mean that one should ignore the senses and withdraw inward. Saint John of Sinai writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hesychasm is the enclosing of the bodiless primary cognitive faculty of the soul (Orthodoxy teaches of two cognitive faculties, the nous and logos) in the bodily house of the body.\nStages in hesychast practice.\n\"Theosis\" is obtained by engaging in contemplative prayer resulting from the cultivation of watchfulness (Gk: \"nepsis\"). This doesn't mean that human, created energy obtains theosis by itself, i.e., without God. Holy Spirit is a doer of theosis, because He gives Christ's grace and Father's love to the purifying ones. According to the standard ascetic formulation of this process, there are three stages:\n\"Katharsis\" (ascese/purification).\nSobriety contributes to this mental ascesis that rejects tempting thoughts; it puts a great emphasis on focus and attention. The hesychast is to pay extreme attention to the consciousness of his inner world and the words of the Jesus Prayer, not letting his mind wander in any way at all. While he maintains his practice of the Jesus Prayer, which becomes automatic and continues twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, the hesychast cultivates \"nepsis\", watchful attention, to reject tempting thoughts (the \"thieves\") that come to the hesychast as he watches in sober attention in his hermitage. St. John of Sinai describes hesychast practice as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take up your seat on a high place and watch, if only you know how, and then you will see in what manner, when, whence, how many and what kind of thieves come to enter and steal your clusters of grapes. When the watchman grows weary, he stands up and prays; and then he sits down again and courageously takes up his former task.\nThe hesychast is to attach Eros (), that is, \"yearning\", to his practice of sobriety so as to overcome the temptation to acedia (sloth). He is also to use an extremely directed and controlled anger against the tempting thoughts, although to obliterate them entirely, he is to invoke Jesus Christ via the Jesus Prayer.\nMuch of the literature of hesychasm is occupied with the psychological analysis of such tempting thoughts (e.g., St. Mark the Ascetic). This psychological analysis owes much to the ascetical works of Evagrius Pontikos, with its doctrine of the eight passions.\n\"Theoria\" (illumination).\nThe primary task of the hesychast is to engage in mental ascesis. The hesychast is to bring his mind (Gr. \"nous)\" into his heart so as to practise both the Jesus Prayer and sobriety with his mind in his heart. In solitude and retirement, the hesychast repeats the Jesus Prayer, \"Lord Jesus Christ, son of God, have mercy on me, the sinner.\" The hesychast prays the Jesus Prayer 'with the heart'\u00a0\u2013 with meaning, with intent, \"for real\" (see ontic). He never treats the Jesus Prayer as a string of syllables whose \"surface\" or overt verbal meaning is secondary or unimportant. He considers bare repetition of the Jesus Prayer as a mere string of syllables, perhaps with a \"mystical\" inner meaning beyond the overt verbal meaning, to be worthless or even dangerous. This emphasis on the actual, real invocation of Jesus Christ mirrors an Eastern understanding of mantra in that physical action/voice and meaning are utterly inseparable.\nThe descent of the mind into the heart is not taken literally by the practitioners of hesychasm, but is considered metaphorically. Some of the psychophysical techniques described in the texts are to assist the descent of the mind into the heart at those times that only with difficulty it descends on its own.\nThe goal at this stage is a practice of the Jesus Prayer with the mind in the heart, which practice is free of images (see \"Pros Theodoulon\"). By the exercise of sobriety (the mental ascesis against tempting thoughts), the hesychast arrives at a continual practice of the Jesus Prayer with his mind in his heart and where his consciousness is no longer encumbered by the spontaneous inception of images: his mind has a certain stillness and emptiness that is punctuated only by the eternal repetition of the Jesus Prayer.\nThis stage is called the \"guard of the mind\". This is a very advanced stage of ascetical and spiritual practice, and attempting to accomplish this prematurely, especially with psychophysical techniques, can cause very serious spiritual and emotional harm to the would-be hesychast. St. Theophan the Recluse once remarked that bodily postures and breathing techniques were virtually forbidden in his youth, since, instead of gaining the Spirit of God, people succeeded only \"in ruining their lungs\".\nThe guard of the mind is the practical goal of the hesychast. It is the condition in which he remains as a matter of course throughout his day, every day until he dies.\nThere is a very great emphasis on humility in the practice of the Jesus Prayer, great cautions being given in the texts about the disaster that will befall the would-be hesychast if he proceeds in pride, arrogance, or conceit. It is also assumed in the hesychast texts that the hesychast is a member of the Orthodox Church in good standing.\n\"Theosis\" (deification).\nTheosis is from the guard of the mind that he is raised to contemplation by the grace of God.\nThe hesychast usually experiences the contemplation of God as light, the \"uncreated light\" of the theology of St. Gregory Palamas. The hesychast, when he has by the mercy of God been granted such an experience, does not remain in that experience for a very long time (there are exceptions\u00a0\u2013 see for example the \"Life\" of St. Savas the Fool for Christ (14th century), written by St. Philotheos Kokkinos (14th century), but he returns \"to earth\" and continues to practise the guard of the mind.\nThe uncreated light that the hesychast experiences is identified with the Holy Spirit. Experiences of the uncreated light are allied to the 'acquisition of the Holy Spirit'. Notable accounts of encounters with the Holy Spirit in this fashion are found in St. Symeon the New Theologian's account of the illumination of \"George\" (considered a pseudonym of St. Symeon himself); in the \"conversation with Motovilov\" in the \"Life\" of St. Seraphim of Sarov (1759\u20131833); and, more recently, in the reminiscences of Elder Porphyrios (Bairaktaris) of Kafsokalivia (\"Wounded by Love\" pp.\u00a027\u201331).\n\"Prelest\".\nOrthodox tradition warns against seeking ecstasy as an end in itself. Hesychasm is a traditional complex of ascetical practices embedded in the doctrine and practice of the Orthodox Church and intended to purify the member of the Orthodox Church and to make him ready for an encounter with God that comes to him when and if God wants, through God's grace. The goal is to acquire, through purification and grace, the Holy Spirit and salvation. Any ecstatic states or other unusual phenomena that may occur in the course of hesychast practice are considered secondary and unimportant, even quite dangerous. Moreover, seeking unusual \"spiritual\" experiences can itself cause great harm, ruining the soul and the mind of the seeker. Such a seeking after \"spiritual\" experiences can lead to \"spiritual delusion\" (Ru. \"prelest,\" Gr. \"plani)\"\u00a0\u2013 the antonym of sobriety\u00a0\u2013 in which a person believes himself or herself to be a saint, has hallucinations in which he or she \"sees\" angels, Christ, etc. This state of spiritual delusion is, in a superficial, egotistical way, pleasurable but can lead to madness and suicide, and, according to the hesychast fathers, makes salvation impossible.\nLiturgy and sacraments.\nHesychasts fully participate in the liturgical and sacramental life of the Orthodox Church, including the daily cycle of liturgical prayer of the Divine Office and the Divine Liturgy. However, hesychasts who are living as hermits might have a very rare attendance at the Divine Liturgy (see the life of Saint Seraphim of Sarov) and might not recite the Divine Office except by means of the Jesus Prayer (attested practice on Mt Athos). In general, the hesychast restricts his external activities for the sake of his hesychastic practice.\nTexts.\nBooks used by hesychasts include the \"Philokalia\", a collection of texts on prayer and solitary mental ascesis written from the 4th to the 15th centuries, which exists in several independent redactions; the \"Ladder of Divine Ascent;\" the collected works of St. Symeon the New Theologian (949\u20131022); and the works of St. Isaac the Syrian (7th century), as they were selected and translated into Greek at the Monastery of St. Savas near Jerusalem about the 10th century.\nExternal views of hesychasm.\nOriental Orthodox.\nCoptic Orthodox.\nSome Coptic Orthodox clerics are \"wary of the hesychastic practices of the Jesus Prayer that developed later in the Eastern churches\".\nMatta el-Meskeen, a Coptic Orthodox hieromonk, commented that hesychasm rid the concept of unceasing prayer from its simplicity, shifting \"its ascetical position as a humbling practice by itself to a mystical position, with programs, stipulations, technical and mechanical bases, degrees, objectives, results\".\nIn 2016, Metropolitan Bishoy of Damietta, the head of the theology department in the Institute of Coptic Studies and secretary of the Coptic Orthodox Church Synod from 1985 until 2012 criticized the essence-energy distinction and rejected Palamism.\nRoman Catholic.\nWestern theologians have tended to reject the idea that the distinction between essence and energies is real rather than, albeit with a foundation in reality, notional (in the mind). In their view, affirming an ontological essence\u2013energies distinction in God contradicted the teaching of the First Council of Nicaea on divine unity. Adrian Fortescue, writing in the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" (1909), claimed that \"the real distinction between God's essence and operation remains one more principle, though it is rarely insisted on now, in which the Orthodox differ from Catholics\". According to Fortescue, the Scholastic theory that God is pure actuality prevented Palamism from having much influence in the West, and it was from Western Scholasticism that hesychasm's philosophical opponents in the East borrowed their weapons.\nIn some instances, these theologians equated hesychasm with quietism, an 18th-century mystical revival condemned by the Roman Catholic Church, perhaps because \"quietism\" is the literal translation of \"hesychasm\". However, according to Eastern Orthodox bishop and theologian Kallistos Ware, \"To translate 'hesychasm' as 'quietism,' while perhaps etymologically defensible, is historically and theologically misleading.\" Ware asserts that \"the distinctive tenets of the 17th-century Western quietists is not characteristic of Greek hesychasm\".\nThe Roman Catholic Church has never expressed any condemnation of Palamism, and uses in its liturgical readings from the work of Nicholas Kabasilas, a supporter of Palamas in the controversy that took place in the East. Its Liturgy of the Hours includes extracts from Kabasilas's \"Life in Christ\" on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday of the Fifth Week of Easter in Year II of the two-year cycle for the Office of Readings.\nThe later 20th century saw a remarkable change in the attitude of Roman Catholic theologians to Palamas, a \"rehabilitation\" of him that has led to increasing parts of the Western Church considering him a saint, even if uncanonized. Some Western scholars have argued that there is no conflict between Palamas's teaching and Catholic thought. According to Kallistos Ware, some Western theologians, both Roman Catholic and Anglican, see the theology of Palamas as introducing an inadmissible division within God; however, others have incorporated his theology into their own thinking.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14405", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14405", "title": "Hemlock", "text": "Hemlock may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "14406", "revid": "1295122449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14406", "title": "Harmony Society", "text": "Christian theosophy and pietist society\nThe Harmony Society was a Christian theosophy and pietist society founded in Iptingen, Germany, in 1785. Due to religious persecution by the Lutheran Church and the government in W\u00fcrttemberg, the group moved to the United States, where representatives purchased land in Butler County, Pennsylvania. On February 15, 1805, the group of approximately 400 formally organized the Harmony Society at today's Harmony, Pennsylvania, settling on the land and placing all their goods in common.\nUnder its founder and spiritual leader, Johann Georg Rapp (1757\u20131847); Frederick (Reichert) Rapp (1775\u20131834), his adopted son who managed its business affairs; and their associates, the Society existed for one hundred years, roughly from 1805 until 1905. Members were known as Harmonists, Harmonites, or Rappites. The Society is best known for its worldly successes, most notably the establishment of three model communities, the first at Harmony, Pennsylvania; the second, also called Harmony, in the Indiana Territory, now New Harmony, Indiana; and the third and final town at Economy, now Ambridge, Pennsylvania.\nOrigins in Germany.\nJohann Georg Rapp (1757\u20131847), also known as George Rapp, was the founder of the religious sect called Harmonists, Harmonites, Rappites, or the Harmony Society. Born in Iptingen, Duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany, Rapp was a \"bright but stubborn boy\" who was also deeply religious. His \"strong personality\" and religious convictions began to concern local church authorities when he refused to attend church services or take communion. Rapp and his group of believers began meeting in Iptengen and eventually emigrated to the United States, where they established three communities: Harmony, Butler County, Pennsylvania; Harmony (later named New Harmony), Posey County, Indiana; and Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.\nRapp became inspired by the philosophies of Jakob B\u00f6hme, Philipp Jakob Spener, Johann Heinrich Jung, and Emanuel Swedenborg among others, and later wrote \"Thoughts on the Destiny of Man\", published in German in 1824 and in English a year later, in which he outlined his ideas and philosophy. Rapp lived out his remaining days in Economy, where he died on August 7, 1847, at the age of 89.\nBy the mid-1780s, Rapp had begun preaching to the Separatists, his followers in Iptengen, who met privately and refused to attend church services or take communion. As their numbers increased, Rapp's group officially split with the Lutheran Church in 1785 and was banned from meeting. Despite warnings from local authorities, the group continued to meet privately and attract even more followers.\nBy 1798 Rapp and his group of followers had already begun to distance themselves from mainstream society and intended to establish a new religious congregation of fellow believers. In the Lomersheimer declaration, written in 1798, these religious Separatists presented their statement of faith, based on Christian principles, to the Wurttemberg legislature. Rapp's followers declared their desire to form a separate congregation who would meet in members' homes, free from Lutheran Church doctrines. The group supported the belief that baptism was not necessary until children could decide for themselves whether they wanted to become a Christian. They also believed that confirmation for youth was not necessary and communion and confession would only be held a few times a year. Although the Separatists supported civil government, the group refused to make a physical oath in its support, \"for according to the Gospel not oath is allowed him who gives evidence of a righteous life as an upright man.\" They also refused to serve in the military or attend Lutheran schools, choosing instead to teach their children at home. This declaration of faith, along with some later additions, guided the Harmony Society's religious beliefs even after they had emigrated from Germany to the United States.\nIn the 1790s, Rapp's followers continued to increase, reaching as many as 10,000 to 12,000 members. The increasing numbers, which included followers outside of Rapp's village, continued to concern the government, who feared they might become rebellious and dangerous to the state. Although no severe actions were initially taken to repress the Separatists, the group began to consider emigration to France or the United States. In 1803, when the government began to persecute Rapp's followers, he decided to move the entire group to the United States. Rapp and a small group of men left Iptingen in 1803 and traveled to America to find a new home. On May 1, 1804, the first group of emigrants departed for the United States. The initial move scattered the followers and reduced Rapp's original group of 12,000 to just a few followers. Johan Frederich Reichert, who later agreed to become Rapp's adopted son and took the name of Frederick Reichert Rapp, reported in a letter dated February 25, 1804, that there were \"at least 100 families or 500 persons actually ready to go\" even if they had to sacrifice their property.\nEncounter with the Haugeans.\nIn September 1817 \"de Zee Ploeg\", a ship with 500 immigrants from W\u00fcrttemberg, including a number of Rappites, was forced to stop in Norway because of poor weather conditions. Staying in Bergen for about a year and provided with housing by the authorities, they were warmly accepted by the followers of the Pietistic Haugean movement. The two groups found much in common and held devotions together, with some of the Germans learning Norwegian during their stay. Samson Trae, a Haugean leader, noted that \"It gave us extreme joy to realize that the foundation of your faith accords with the true word of God.\" After Rapp's followers left to settle in the United States, the two groups remained in contact for at least some time. In one letter, the Rappites stated, \"Our hearts have often longed for your loving and edifying company since we came to America. We have longed more for Bergen than for Germany because of the love with which you received us and re-freshed us in body and spirit.\"\nSettlements in the United States.\nIn 1804, while Rapp and his associates remained in the United States looking for a place to settle, his followers sailed to America aboard several vessels and made their way to western Pennsylvania, where they waited until land had been selected for their new settlement. Rapp was able to secure a large tract of land in Pennsylvania and started his first commune, known as Harmonie or Harmony, in Butler County, Pennsylvania, where the Society existed from 1804 to 1815. It soon grew to a population of about 800, and was highly profitable. Ten years later, the town was sold and the Harmonists moved westward to the Indiana Territory, where they established the town of Harmony, now called New Harmony, Indiana, and remained there from 1815 to 1825. The Indiana settlement was sold to Robert Owen and was renamed New Harmony. Ten years after the move to Indiana the commune moved again, this time returning to western Pennsylvania, and named their third and final town Economy ( in German). The Harmonists lived in Economy until the Society was dissolved in 1905.\nArticles of association.\nOn February 15, 1805, the settlers at Harmony, Pennsylvania, signed articles of association to formally establish the Harmony Society in the United States. In this document, Society members agreed to hold all property in a common fund, including working capital of $23,000 to purchase land, livestock, tools, and other goods needed to establish their town. The agreement gave the Society legal status in the United States and protected it from dissolution. Members contributed all of their possessions, pledged cooperation in promoting the interests of the group, and agreed to accept no pay for their services. In return, the members would receive care as long as they lived with the group. Under this agreement, if a member left the Society, their funds would be returned without interest or, if they had not contributed to the Society's treasury, they would receive a small monetary gift.\nThe Society was a religious congregation who submitted to spiritual and material leadership under Rapp and his associates and worked together for the common good of all its members. Believing that the Second Coming of Christ would occur during their lifetimes, the Harmonists contented to live simply under a strict religious doctrine, gave up tobacco, and advocated celibacy.\nFirst settlement: Harmony, Pennsylvania.\nIn December 1804 Rapp and a party of two others initially contracted to purchase of land for $11,250 in Butler County, Pennsylvania, and later acquired additional land to increase their holdings to approximately by the time they advertised their property for sale in 1814. Here they built the town of Harmony, a small community that had, in 1805, nearly 50 log houses, a large barn, a gristmill, and more than 150 acres of cleared land to grow crops.\nBecause the climate was not well suited for growing grapes and nearby property was not available to expand their landholdings, the Harmonists submitted a petition to the U.S. government for assistance in purchasing land elsewhere. In January 1806 Rapp traveled to Washington, D.C. to hear discussions in Congress regarding the Harmonists' petition for a grant that would allow them to purchase approximately acre of land in the Indiana Territory. While the Senate passed the petition on January 29, it was defeated in the House of Representatives on February 18. The Harmonists had to find other financial means to support their plans for future expansion. By 1810 the town's population reached approximately 700, with about 130 houses. The Society landholdings also increased to . In the years that followed, the Society survived disagreements among its members, while shortages of cash and lack of credit threatened its finances. Still, the young community had a good reputation for its industry and agricultural production.\nAt Harmony, George Rapp, also known as Father Rapp, was recognized as the spiritual head of the Society, the one that they went to for discussions, confessions, and other matters. Rapp's adopted son, Frederick, managed the Society's business and commercial affairs.\nRapp let newcomers into the Society and, after a trial period, usually about a year, they were accepted as permanent members. While new members continued to arrive, including immigrants from Germany, others found the Harmonists' religious life too difficult and left the group. In addition, during a period of religious zeal in 1807 and 1808, most, but not all, of the Harmonists adopted the practice of celibacy and there were also few marriages among the members. Rapp's son, Johannes, was married in 1807; and it was the last marriage on record until 1817. Although Rapp did not entirely bar sex initially, it gradually became a custom and there were few births in later years.\nIn 1811 Harmony's population rose to around 800 persons involved in farming and various trades. Although profit was not a primary goal, their finances improved and the enterprise was profitable, but not sufficient to carry out their planned expansions. Within a few years of their arrival, the Harmonist community included an inn, a tannery, warehouses, a brewery, several mills, stables, and barns, a church/meetinghouse, a school, additional dwellings for members, a labyrinth, and workshops for different trades. In addition, more land was cleared for vineyards and crops. The Harmonists also produced yarn and cloth.\nSeveral factors led to the Harmonists' decision to leave Butler County. Because the area's climate was not suitable, they had difficulties growing grapes for wine. In addition, as westward migration brought new settlers to the county, making it less isolated, the Harmonists began having troubles with neighbors who were not part of the Society. By 1814 Butler County's growing population and rising land prices made it difficult for the Society to expand, causing the group's leaders to look for more land elsewhere. Once land had been located that offered a better climate and room to expand, the group began plans to move. In 1814 the Harmonites sold their first settlement to Abraham Ziegler, a Mennonite, for $100,000 (~$ in 2024) and moved west to make a new life for themselves in the Indiana Territory.\nSecond settlement: Harmony, Indiana.\nIn 1814 the Harmony Society moved to the Indiana Territory, where it initially acquired approximately of land along the Wabash River in Posey County and later acquired more. Over the next ten years the Society built a thriving new community they called Harmonie or Harmony on the Wabash in the Indiana wilderness. (The town's name was changed to New Harmony after the Harmonists left in 1824.) The Harmonists entered into agriculture and manufacture on a larger scale than they had done in Pennsylvania. When the Harmonists advertised their Indiana property for sale in 1824, they had acquired of land, of which was under cultivation.\nDuring the summer and fall of 1814, many Harmonists fell sick from fever (malaria) and work on the new town nearly ceased. During this time the Society lost about 120 people and others fell ill until conditions were improved and the swamps around the area were drained. Despite these illnesses, construction of the new town continued. By 1819 the Harmonites had built 150 log homes, a church, a community storehouse, barns, stables, and a tavern, along with thriving shops and mills, and cleared land for farming. As the new settlement in Indiana grew, it also began to attract new arrivals, including emigrants from Germany, who expected the Harmonists to pay for their passage to America.\nVisitors to the new town commented on its growing commercial and industrial work. In 1819 the town had a steam-operated wool carding and spinning factory, a brewery, distillery, vineyards, and a winery, but not all visitors were impressed with the growing communal town on the frontier. The Society also had visitors from another communal religious society, the Shakers. In 1816 meetings between the Shakers and Harmonists considered a possible union of the two societies, but religious differences between the two groups halted the union. Members of the groups remained, however, in contact over the years. George Rapp's daughter and others lived for a time at the Shaker settlement in West Union, Indiana, where the Shakers helped a number of Harmonites learn the English language.\nThe Harmonist community continued to thrive during the 1820s. The Society shipped its surplus agricultural produce and manufactured goods throughout the Ohio and Mississippi valleys or sold them through their stores at Harmony and Shawneetown and their agents in Pittsburgh, Saint Louis, Louisville, and elsewhere. Under Frederick Rapp's financial management the Society prospered, but he soon wished for a location better suited to manufacturing and commercial purposes. They had initially selected the land near the Wabash River for its isolation and opportunity for expansion, but the Harmonites were now a great distance from the eastern markets and trade in this location was not to their liking. They also had to deal with unfriendly neighbors. As abolitionists, the Harmonites faced disagreeable elements from slavery supporters in Kentucky, only away, which caused them much annoyance. By 1824 the decision had been made to sell their property in Indiana and search for land to the east.\nOn January 3, 1825, the Harmonists and Robert Owen, a Welsh-born industrialist and social reformer, came to a final agreement for the sale of the Society's land and buildings in Indiana for $150,000. Owen named the town New Harmony, and by May, the last of the Harmony Society's remaining members returned to Pennsylvania.\nThird settlement: Economy, Pennsylvania.\nIn 1824 Frederick Rapp initially purchased along the Ohio River, northwest of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, for $10,000, and later bought an additional for $33,445, giving the Society more than to develop into a new community. The Harmonites named their third and last town Economy, after the spiritual notion of the Divine Economy, \"a city in which God would dwell among men\" and where perfection would be attained.\nAt Economy the Harmonists intended to become more involved in manufacturing and their new town on the Ohio River provided better access to eastern markets and water access to the south and west than they had in Indiana. By 1826 the Harmonists had woolen and cotton mills in operation as well as a steam-operated grain mill. The Harmonist society also ran a wine press, a hotel, post office, saw mills, stores, and a variety of farms. Here, under the business acumen and efficient management of Frederick Rapp, they enjoyed such prosperity that by 1829 they dominated trade and the markets of Pittsburgh and down the Ohio River. The Harmonists' competitors accused them of creating a monopoly and called on state government to dissolve the group. Despite the attacks, the Harmonists developed Economy into a prosperous factory town, engaged in farming on a large scale, and maintained a brewery, distillery, and wine-making operation. They also pioneered the manufacturing of silk in the United States.\nThe community was not neglectful of matters pertaining to art and culture. Frederick Rapp purchased artifacts and installed a museum containing fine paintings and many curiosities and antiques, but it proved to be unprofitable and was sold at a loss. In addition, the Harmonists maintained a deer park, a floral park, and a maze, or labyrinth. The Harmonists were fond of music and many of the members were accomplished musicians. They sang, had a band/orchestra, composed songs, and gave much attention to its cultivation. By 1830 they had amassed a 360-volume library.\nIn 1832 the Society suffered a serious division. Of 750 members, 250 became alienated through the influence of Bernhard M\u00fcller (self-styled Count de Leon), who, with 40 followers (also at variance with the authorities in the old country), had come to Economy to affiliate with the Society. Rapp and Leon could not agree; a separation and apportionment of the property were therefore agreed upon. This secession of one-third of the Society, which consisted mostly of the flower of young manhood and young womanhood who did not want to maintain the custom of celibacy, broke Frederick's heart. He died within two years. It resulted in a considerable fracturing of the community. Nevertheless, the Society remained prosperous in business investments for many more years to come.\nAfter Frederick Rapp's death in 1834, George Rapp appointed Romelius Baker and Jacob Henrici as trustees to manage the Society's business affairs. After George Rapp's death in 1847, the Society reorganized. While a board of elders was elected for the enforcement of the Society's rules and regulations, business management passed to its trustees: Baker and Henrici, 1847\u201368; Henrici and Jonathan Lenz, 1869\u201390; Henrici and Wolfel, 1890; Henrici and John S. Duss, 1890\u20131892; Duss and Seiber, 1892\u20131893; Duss and Reithmuller, 1893\u20131897;Duss, 1897\u20131903; and finally to Suzanna (Susie) C. Duss in 1903. By 1905 membership had dwindled to just three members and the Society was dissolved.\nThe settlements at Economy remained economically successful until the late 19th century, producing many goods in their cotton and woolen factories, sawmill, tannery, and from their vineyards and distillery. They also produced high quality silk for garments. Rapp's granddaughter, Gertrude, began the silk production in Economy on a small scale from 1826 to 1828, and later expanded. This was planned in New Harmony, but fulfilled when they arrived at Economy. The Harmonists were industrious and utilized the latest technologies of the day in their factories. Because the group chose to adopt celibacy and their members grew older, more work gradually had to be hired out. As their membership declined, they stopped manufacturing operations, other than what they needed for themselves, and began to invest in other ventures such as the oil business, coal mining, timber, railroads, land development, and banking. The group invested in the construction of the Pittsburgh and Lake Erie Railroad, established the Economy Savings Institution and the Economy Brick Works, and operated the Economy Oil Company, as well as the Economy Planing Mill, Economy Lumber Company, and eventually donated some land in Beaver Falls for the construction of Geneva College. The Society exerted a major influence on the economic development of Western Pennsylvania.\nOil production in the mid-1860s brought the high-water mark of the Society's prosperity. By the close of Baker's administration in 1868, The Society's wealth was probably $2 million (~$ in 2024). By 1890, however, the Society was in debt and on the verge of bankruptcy with a depleted and aged membership. In addition, the Society faced litigation from previous members and would-be heirs. The Society's trustee, John S. Duss, settled the lawsuits, liquidated its business ventures, and paid the Society's indebtedness. The great strain which he had undergone at this time undermined his health and he resigned his trusteeship in 1903. With only a few members left, the remaining land and assets were sold under the leadership of Duss's wife, Susanna (Susie), and the Society was formally dissolved in 1905. At the time of the Society's dissolution, its net worth was $1.2 million.\nIn 1916 the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania acquired and 17 buildings of Economy, which became the Old Economy Village historic site. The American Bridge Company had already acquired other parts of the Society's land in 1902 to build the town of Ambridge.\nCharacteristics.\nReligious views.\nIn 1791 George Rapp said, \"I am a prophet, and I am called to be one\" in front of the civil affairs official in Maulbronn, Germany, who promptly had him imprisoned for two days and threatened with exile if he did not cease preaching. To the great consternation of church and state authorities, this mere peasant from Iptingen had become the outspoken leader of several thousand Separatists in the southern German duchy of W\u00fcrttemberg. By 1802 the Separatists had grown in number to about 12,000 and the W\u00fcrttemberg government decided that they were a dangerous threat to social order. Rapp was summoned to Maulbronn for an interrogation, and the government confiscated Separatist books. When released in 1803, from a brief time in prison, Rapp told his followers to pool their assets and follow him on a journey for safety to the \"land of Israel\" in the United States, and soon over 800 people were living with him there.\nThe Harmonites were Christian pietist Separatists who split from the Lutheran Church in the late 18th century. Under the leadership of George Rapp, the group left W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany, and came to the United States in 1803. Due to the troubles they had in Europe, the group sought to establish a more perfect society in the American wilderness. They were nonviolent pacifists who refused to serve in the military and tried to live by George Rapp's philosophy and literal interpretations of the New Testament. They first settled and built the town of Harmony, Pennsylvania, in 1804, and established the Harmony Society in 1805 as a religious commune. In 1807, celibacy was advocated as the preferred custom of the community in an attempt to purify themselves for the coming Millennium. Rapp believed that the events and wars going on in the world at the time were a confirmation of his views regarding the imminent Second Coming of Christ, and he also viewed Napoleon as the Antichrist. In 1814, the Society sold their first town in Pennsylvania and moved to the Indiana Territory, where they built their second town. In 1824, they decided it was time to leave Indiana, sold their land and town in Indiana, and moved to their final settlement in Western Pennsylvania.\nThe Harmonites were Millennialists, in that they believed Jesus Christ was coming to earth in their lifetime to help usher in a thousand-year kingdom of peace on earth. This is perhaps why they believed that people should try to make themselves \"pure\" and \"perfect\", and share things with others while willingly living in communal \"harmony\" (Acts 4:32-35) and practicing celibacy. They believed that the old ways of life on earth were coming to an end, and that a new perfect kingdom on earth was about to be realized.\nThey also practiced forms of Esoteric Christianity, Mysticism (Christian mysticism), and Rapp often spoke of the virgin spirit or Goddess named Sophia in his writings. Rapp was very influenced by the writings of Jakob B\u00f6hme, Philipp Jakob Spener, and Emanuel Swedenborg, among others. Also, at Economy, there are glass bottles and literature that seem to indicate that the group was interested in (and practiced) alchemy. Other books found in the Harmony Society's library in Economy, include those by the following authors: Christoph Sch\u00fctz, Gottfried Arnold, Justinus Kerner, Thomas Bromley, Jane Leade, Johann Scheible (\"Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses\"), Paracelsus, and Georg von Welling, among others.\nThe Harmonites tended to view unmarried celibate life as morally superior to marriage, based on Rapp's belief that God had originally created Adam as a dual being, having male and female sexual organs. According to this view, when the female portion of Adam separated to form Eve, disharmony followed, but one could attempt to regain harmony through celibacy.\nGeorge Rapp predicted that on September 15, 1829, the three and one half years of the Sun Woman would end and Christ would begin his reign on earth. Dissension grew when Rapp's predictions did not come to pass. In March 1832, one third of the group left the Society and some began following Bernhard M\u00fcller, who claimed to be the Lion of Judah. Nevertheless, most of the group stayed and Rapp continued to lead them until he died on August 7, 1847. His last words to his followers were, \"If I did not so fully believe, that the Lord has designated me to place our society before His presence in the land of Canaan, I would consider this my last\".\nThe Harmonites did not mark their graves with headstones or grave markers, because they thought it was unnecessary to do so; however, one exception is George Rapp's son Johannes' stone marker in Harmony, Pennsylvania, which was installed by non-Harmonites many years after the Harmonites left that town. Today, Harmonist graveyards are fenced in grassy areas with signs posted nearby explaining this practice.\nArchitecture.\nThe Harmony Society's architecture reflected their Swabian German traditions, as well as the styles that were being developed in America during the 19th century. In the early days of the Society, many of the homes were initially log cabins and later, Harmonist craftsmen built timber-frame homes. At Economy, their homes were mostly two-story brick houses \"that showed the influence of their American neighbors.\" In general, Harmonist buildings, in addition to being sturdy and functional, were centrally heated, economical to maintain, and resistant to fire, weather, and termites.\nOnce established at Harmony, Pennsylvania, the Society planned to replace the log dwellings with brick structures, but the group moved to the Indiana Territory before the plan was completed. In Indiana, log homes were soon replaced with one- or two-story houses of timber frame or brick construction in addition to four large rooming houses (dormitories) for its growing membership. The new town also included shops, schools, mills, a granary, a hotel, library, distilleries, breweries, a brick kiln, pottery ovens, barn, stables, storehouses, and two churches, one of which was brick.\nIn 1822 William Herbert, a visitor to Harmony, Indiana, described the new brick church and the Harmonists' craftsmanship:\n\"These people exhibit considerable taste as well as boldness of design in some of their works. They are erecting a noble church, the roof of which is supported in\nthe interior by a great number of stately columns, which have been turned from\ntrees in their own forests. The kinds of wood made use of for this purpose are, I\nam informed, black walnut, cherry and sassafras. Nothing I think can exceed the\ngrandeur of the joinery and the masonry and brickwork seem to be of the first\norder. The form of this church is that of a cross, the limbs being short and equal;\nand as the doors, which there are four, are placed at the end of the limbs, the\ninterior of the building as seen from the entrance, has a most ample and spacious effect... I could scarcely imagine myself to be in the woods of Indiana, on the borders of the Wabash, while pacing the long resounding aisles, and surveying the stately colonnades of this church.\"\nFrame structures were built on piers to keep the air circulating across the area's damp soil, while brick structures had a root cellar with a drainage tunnel. Inside, Harmonists built fireplaces to the left or right of center to allow for a long center beam, adding strength to support the structure and its heavy, shingled roof. \"Dutch biscuits\" (wood laths wrapped in straw and mud) provided insulation and soundproofing between the ceiling and floors. The exterior was insulated with bricks between the exterior's unpainted weatherboards and the interior's lath and plaster walls. Structures had standard parts and pre-cut, pre-measured timbers, which were assembled on the ground, adjusted to fit on site, raised in place, and locked into place with pegs and mortise and tenon joints. Two-story floor plans for homes included a large living room, kitchen, and entrance hall, with stairs to the second floor and attic. In Indiana, Harmonists did their baking in communal ovens, so stoves could be substituted for fireplaces.\nLiving styles.\nAt Harmony, Pennsylvania, four to six members were assigned to a home, where they lived as families, although not all those living in the household were related. Even when the house contained those that were married, they would live together as brother and sister, since there was a suggestion and custom of practicing celibacy. In Indiana, Harmonists continued to live in homes, but they also built dormitories to house single men and women.\nSociety members woke between 5 a.m. and 6 a.m. They ate breakfast between 6 a.m. and 7 a.m., lunch at 9 a.m., dinner at noon, afternoon lunch at 3 p.m., and supper between 6 p.m. and 7 p.m. They did their chores and work during the day. At the end of the day, members met for meetings and had a curfew of 9 p.m. On Sundays, the members respected the \"Holy day\" and did no unnecessary work, but attended church services, singing groups, and other social activities.\nClothing.\nTheir style of dress reflected their Swabian German roots and traditions and was adapted to their life in America. Although the Harmonites typically wore plain clothing, made with their own materials by their own tailors, they would wear their fine garments on Sundays and on other special occasions. At Economy, on special occasions and Sundays, women wore silk dresses using fabric of their own manufacture. Clothing varied in color, but often carried the same design. On a typical day, women wore ankle-length dresses, while men wore pants with vests or coats and a hat.\nTechnology.\nThe Harmonites were a prosperous agricultural and industrial people. They had many machines that helped them be successful in their trades. They even had steam-powered engines that ran the machines at some of their factories in Economy. They kept their machines up to date, and had many factories and mills, for example Beaver Falls Cutlery Company which they purchased in 1867.\nWork.\nEach member of the Society had a job in a certain craft or trade. Most of the work done by men consisted of manual labor, while the women dealt more with textiles or agriculture.\nAs Economy became more technologically developed, Harmonites began to hire others from outside the Society, especially when their numbers decreased because of the custom of celibacy and as they eventually let fewer new members join. Although the Harmonites did seek work-oriented help from the outside, they were known as a community that supported themselves, kept their ways of living in their community, mainly exported goods, and tried to import as little as possible.\nRise and fall of Harmony Society.\nGeorge Rapp had an eloquent style, which matched his commanding presence, and he was the personality that led the group through all the different settlements. After Rapp's death in 1847, a number of members left the group because of disappointment and disillusionment over the fact that his prophecies regarding the return of Jesus Christ in his lifetime were not fulfilled. However, many stayed in the group, and the Harmony Society went on to become an even more profitable business community that had many worldly financial successes under the leadership of Romelius L. Baker and Jacob Henrici.\nOver time the group became more protective of itself, did not allow many new members, moved further from its religious foundation to a more business-oriented and pragmatic approach, and the custom of celibacy eventually drained it of its membership. The land and financial assets of the Harmony Society were sold off by the few remaining members under the leadership of John Duss and his wife, Susanna, by the year 1906.\nToday, many of the Society's remaining buildings are preserved; all three of their settlements in the United States have been declared National Historic Landmark Districts by the National Park Service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14407", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14407", "title": "History of Weights and Measures", "text": ""}
{"id": "14408", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14408", "title": "Huneric", "text": "King of the Vandals\nHuneric, Hunneric or Honeric (died December 23, 484) was King of the (North African) Vandal Kingdom (477\u2013484) and the oldest son of Gaiseric. He abandoned the imperial politics of his father and concentrated mainly on internal affairs. He was married to Eudocia, daughter of western Roman Emperor Valentinian III (419\u2013455) and Licinia Eudoxia. The couple had one child, a son named Hilderic.\nHuneric was the first Vandal king who used the title \"King of the Vandals and Alans\". Despite adopting this style, and that of the Vandals of maintaining their sea-power and their hold on the islands of the western Mediterranean, Huneric did not have the prestige that his father Gaiseric had enjoyed with other states.\nEarly life.\nHuneric was a son of King Gaiseric, and was sent to Italy as a hostage in 435, when his father made a treaty with the Western emperor Valentinian III. Huneric became king of the Vandals on his father's death on 25 January 477. Like Gaiseric he was an Arian, and his reign is chiefly memorable for his persecution of Nicene Christians in his dominions.\nA peace treaty was signed between the Vandals and Romans in 442, in which the Vandals acquired the most fertile regions of Roman Africa. A marriage alliance between Huneric and Eudocia, the four-year old daughter of Emperor Valentinian III, was also made. However, Huneric was already married to the daughter of King Theodoric I. He divorced her under the claim that she attempted to poison somebody. She returned to the Visigothic Kingdom after her nose and ears were cut off. This action soured relations between the Vandals and Visigoths, who are not known to have attempted contact until 467. Huneric married Eudocia in 455 or 456, after she was taken following the Sack of Rome. Huneric renounced his claims to Eudocia's inheritance in 478.\nHilderic was born from this marriage between c.456 and c.471. Eudocia died after sixteen years of marriage according to the 9th century chronicler Theophanes the Confessor.\nReign.\nHuneric conducted a purge in 479. He had his older brother Theoderic, along with his daughters and younger son, and the eldest son of his brother Gento, along with his wife, exiled. Theoderic's wife and eldest son were executed along with Heldica, one of Gaiseric's officials, and his family. Jucundus, the Arian patriarch of Carthage and a supporter of Theoderic, was publicly burned to death.\nHuneric was a fervent adherent to Arianism. Yet his reign opened with making a number of positive overtures towards the local Roman population. Following the visit of a diplomatic mission from the Eastern Roman Empire led by Alexander, Huneric restored properties seized by his father from the merchants of Carthage. \nQuodvultdeus, the bishop of Carthage, was expelled to Campania by the Vandals in 439. The position remained vacant for fifteen years until Gaiseric allowed Deogratias to be appointed on 24 October 454 at the request of Valentinian III. The position was made vacant again for twenty-four years after the death of Deogratias. Huneric lifted the policy of persecuting the Nicene Christians, allowing them to hold a synod wherein they elected Eugenius of Carthage as the bishop of Carthage. However, not long after the ordination of Eugenius, Huneric reversed himself and began to once again persecute Nicenes. In 484, he ordered that the tongues and right hand of all Nicenes in Tipasa be cut off due to them celebrating the liturgy.\nFurthermore, he tried to make Nicene property fall to the state, but when this caused too much protest from the Eastern Roman Emperor, he chose to banish a number of Nicene Christians to a faraway province instead. On February 1, 484 he organized a meeting of Nicene bishops with Arian bishops, but on February 24, 484 he forcibly removed the Nicene bishops from their offices and banished some to Corsica. A few were executed, including the former proconsul Victorian along with Frumentius and other wealthy merchants, who were killed at Hadrumetum after refusing to become Arians. Yves Mod\u00e9ran estimated that around 20% of the bishops in Africa converted to Arianism in response to the persecution. However, Huneric died that year and his successor, Gunthamund, allowed those exiled to return. Among those exiled was Vigilius, bishop of Thapsus, who published a theological treatise against Arianism.\nAdditionally, Huneric murdered many members of the Hasdingi dynasty and also persecuted Manichaeans. Towards the end of his reign, the Moors in the Aur\u00e8s Mountains (in modern-day Algeria) successfully rebelled from Vandal rule. Only three pieces of legislation from the Vandal Kingdom exist today in partial or total form and all three came from the reign of Huneric.\nLegacy.\nHuneric renamed Hadrumetum to Unuricopolis, in honor of himself.\nUpon his death Huneric was succeeded by his nephew Gunthamund, who reigned until 496. A lurid account of Huneric's death by putrefaction and \"an abundance of worms\" is included in the \"Historia persecutionis Africanae Provinciae, temporibus Genserici et Hunirici regum Wandalorum\" (\"History of the African Province Persecution, in the Times of Genseric and Huneric, the Kings of the Vandals\"), written by his contemporary, Victor of Vita, although it is probable that this particular section was added at a later date.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14409", "revid": "22868608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14409", "title": "Hasdingi", "text": "Vandal peoples of the Roman era\nThe Hasdingi were one of the Vandal peoples of the Roman era. The Vandals were Germanic peoples, who are believed to have spoken an East Germanic language, and were first reported during the first centuries of the Roman empire in the area which is now Poland, eastern Germany, the Czech Republic, and Slovakia.\nFamously, the Hasdingi led a successful invasion of Roman North Africa, creating a kingdom with its capital at Carthage in what is now Tunisia.\nDuring the Marcomannic wars, the Hasdingi helped the Romans and were able to settle in the Carpathian and Pannonian areas which are now in Hungary and Romania. At the end of 406, they participated together with Silingi Vandals and Sarmatian Alans in the crossing of the Rhine. Their king Godigisel lost his life in battle against the Franks during the crossing.\nAfter some years in Gaul, these peoples moved into the Iberian peninsula.\nThe Hasdingi settled in Gallaecia (today Galicia, Asturias and the north of Portugal) along with the Suebi in 409 AD and their kingdom was one of the earliest Barbarian territories to be founded before the fall of the Western Roman Empire.\nGunderic, Godegisel's successor as king of the Hasdingi, lost his kingdom to king Hermeric of the Suebi in 419 during Asterius campaign in Gallaecia when the Vandals were overwhelmed by an allied force of Suebi and Romans. He fled to Baetica with his army where he became king of the Silingi Vandals and of the Alans.\nGunderic was succeeded by his brother Gaiseric in 428 AD, who subsequently fled from Iberia to North Africa where he established a kingdom at Carthage."}
{"id": "14410", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14410", "title": "Hermes", "text": "Ancient Greek deity and herald of the gods\nHermes (; ) is an Olympian deity in ancient Greek religion and mythology considered the herald of the gods. He is also widely considered the protector of human heralds, travelers, thieves, merchants, and orators. He is able to move quickly and freely between the worlds of the mortal and the divine aided by his winged sandals. Hermes plays the role of the psychopomp or \"soul guide\"\u2014a conductor of souls into the afterlife.\nIn myth, Hermes functions as the emissary and messenger of the gods, and is often presented as the son of Zeus and Maia, the Pleiad. He is regarded as \"the divine trickster\", about which the \"Homeric Hymn to Hermes\" offers the most well-known account.\nHermes's attributes and symbols include the herma, the rooster, the tortoise, satchel or pouch, talaria (winged sandals), and winged helmet or simple petasos, as well as the palm tree, goat, the number four, several kinds of fish, and incense. However, his main symbol is the \"caduceus\", a winged staff intertwined with two snakes copulating and carvings of the other gods.\nIn Roman mythology and religion many of Hermes's characteristics belong to Mercury, a name derived from the Latin \"merx\", meaning \"merchandise\", and the origin of the words \"\"mer\"chant\" and \"com\"merce\".\"178\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName and origin.\nThe earliest form of the name () is the Mycenaean Greek *, written () in the Linear B syllabic script. Other forms of the name of Hermes are (), (), (), (), and (). Most scholars derive \"Hermes\" from Greek (), 'stone heap'. , ('heap of stones'), , ('gift of Hermes'), hill were holy to Hermes.\nThe etymology of itself is unknown, but is probably not a Proto-Indo-European word. R. S. P. Beekes rejects the connection with and suggests a Pre-Greek origin. However, the stone etymology is also linked to Indo-European ('to bind, put together'). Scholarly speculation that \"Hermes\" derives from a more primitive form meaning 'one cairn' is disputed. Other scholars have suggested that Hermes may be a cognate of the Vedic Sarama.\nIt is likely that Hermes is a pre-Hellenic god, though the exact origins of his worship, and its original nature, remain unclear. Frothingham thought the god to have existed as a Mesopotamian snake-god, similar or identical to Ningishzida, a god who served as mediator between humans and the divine, especially Ishtar, and who was depicted in art as a caduceus. Angelo (1997) thinks Hermes to be based on the Thoth archetype. The absorbing (\"combining\") of the attributes of Hermes to Thoth developed after the time of Homer amongst Greeks and Romans; Herodotus was the first to identify the Greek god with the Egyptian (Hermopolis) (Plutarch and Diodorus also did so), although Plato thought the gods were dissimilar (Friedlander 1992).\nHis cult was established in Greece in remote regions, likely making him originally a god of nature, farmers, and shepherds. It is also possible that since the beginning he has been a deity with shamanic attributes linked to divination, reconciliation, magic, sacrifices, and initiation and contact with other planes of existence, a role of mediator between the worlds of the visible and invisible. According to a theory that has received considerable scholarly acceptance, Hermes originated as a form of the god Pan, who has been identified as a reflex of the Proto-Indo-European pastoral god , in his aspect as the god of boundary markers. The PIE root 'protect' also shows up in Latin 'shepherd' (whence the English \"pastoral\"). A zero grade of the full PIE form () yields the name of the Sanskrit psychopomp Pushan, who, like Pan, is associated with goats. Later, the epithet supplanted the original name itself and Hermes took over the role of psychopomp and as god of messengers, travelers, and boundaries, which had originally belonged to Pan, while Pan himself continued to be venerated by his original name in his more rustic aspect as the god of the wild in the relatively isolated mountainous region of Arcadia. In later myths, after the cult of Pan was reintroduced to Attica, Pan was said to be Hermes's son.\nIconography.\nThe image of Hermes evolved and varied along with Greek art and culture. In Archaic Greece he was usually depicted as a matured and bearded man, who dressed as a traveler, herald and shepherd. This image remained common on the Hermai, which served as boundary markers, roadside markers, and grave markers, as well as votive offerings.\nIn Classical and Hellenistic Greece, Hermes was usually depicted as a young, athletic man lacking a beard. When represented as Logios (Greek: \u039b\u03cc\u03b3\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, speaker), his attitude is consistent with the attribute. Hermes Ludovisi by Phidias or Myron possibly represent beardless Hermes Logios. Praxiteles showed him with the baby Dionysus in his arms.\nAt all times, however, through the Hellenistic periods, Roman, and throughout Western history into the present day, several of his characteristic objects are present as identification, but not always all together. Among these objects is a wide-brimmed hat, the petasos, widely used by rural people of antiquity to protect themselves from the sun, and that in later times was adorned with a pair of small wings; sometimes this hat is not present, and may have been replaced with wings rising from the hair.\nAnother object is the caduceus, a staff with two intertwined snakes, sometimes crowned with a pair of wings and a sphere. The caduceus, historically, appeared with Hermes, and is documented among the Babylonians from about 3500 BC. Two snakes coiled around a staff was also a symbol of the god Ningishzida, who, like Hermes, served as a mediator between humans and the divine (specifically, the goddess Ishtar or the supreme Ningirsu). In Greece, other gods have been depicted holding a caduceus, but it was mainly associated with Hermes. It was said to have the power to make people fall asleep or wake up, and also made peace between litigants, and is a visible sign of his authority, being used as a sceptre. A similar-appearing but distinct symbol is the Rod of Asclepius, associated with the patron of medicine and son of Apollo, Asclepius, which bears only one snake. The Rod of Asclepius, occasionally conflated with the caduceus in modern times, is used by most Western physicians as a badge of their profession. After the Renaissance, the caduceus also appeared in the heraldic crests of several, and currently is a symbol of commerce.\nHermes's sandals, called \"p\u00e9dila\" by the Greeks and \"talaria\" by the Romans, were made of palm and myrtle branches but were described as beautiful, golden and immortal, made by sublime art, able to take the roads with the speed of wind. Originally, they had no wings, but late in the artistic representations, they are depicted. In certain images, the wings spring directly from the ankles. Hermes has also been depicted with a purse or a bag in his hands, wearing a robe or cloak, which had the power to confer invisibility. His weapon was a harpe, which killed Argos; it was also lent to Perseus to kill Medusa and Cetus.\nFunctions.\nHermes began as a god with strong chthonic, or underworld, associations. He was a psychopomp, leader of souls along the road between \"the Under and the Upper world\". This function gradually expanded to encompass roads in general, and from there to boundaries, travelers, sailors, commerce, and travel itself. Hermes also in time became a figure associated with literary creation, rhetoric and story-telling.\nAs a chthonic and fertility god.\nBeginning with the earliest records of his worship, Hermes has been understood as a chthonic deity (heavily associated with the earth or underworld). As a chthonic deity, the worship of Hermes also included an aspect relating to fertility, with the phallus being included among his major symbols. The inclusion of phallic imagery associated with Hermes and placed, in the form of \"herma\", at the entrances to households may reflect a belief in ancient times that Hermes was a symbol of the household's fertility, specifically the potency of the male head of the household in producing children.\nThe association between Hermes and the underworld is related to his function as a god of boundaries (the boundary between life and death), but he is considered a psychopomp, a deity who helps guide souls of the deceased to the afterlife, and his image was commonly depicted on gravestones in classical Greece.\nAs a god of boundaries.\nIn Ancient Greece, Hermes was a phallic god of boundaries. His name, in the form \"herma\", was applied to a wayside marker pile of stones, and each traveler added a stone to the pile. In the 6th century BC, Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus, replaced the cairns that marked the midway point between each village \"deme\" at the central \"agora\" of Athens with a square or rectangular pillar of stone or bronze topped by a bust of a bearded Hermes. An erect phallus rose from the base. In the more primitive Mount Kyllini or Cyllenian herms, the standing stone or wooden pillar was simply a carved phallus. \"That a monument of this kind could be transformed into an Olympian god is astounding,\" Walter Burkert remarked. In Athens, herms were placed outside houses, both as a form of protection for the home, a symbol of male fertility, and as a link between the household and its gods with the gods of the wider community.\nIn 415 BC, on the night when the Athenian fleet was about to set sail for Syracuse during the Peloponnesian War, all of the Athenian hermai were vandalized. The Athenians at the time believed it was the work of saboteurs, either from Syracuse or from the anti-war faction within Athens itself. Socrates's pupil Alcibiades was suspected of involvement, and one of the charges eventually made against Socrates, which led to his execution 16 years later, was that he had either corrupted Alcibiades or failed to guide him away from his moral corruption.\nAs a messenger god.\nIn association with his role as a psychopomp and god who is able to cross boundaries easily, Hermes is predominantly worshipped as a messenger, and often described as the messenger of the gods (since he can convey messages between the divine realms, the underworld, and the world of mortals). As a messenger and divine herald, he wears winged sandals (or, in Roman art influenced by Etruscan depictions of Turms, a winged cap).\nAs a shepherd god.\nHermes was known as the patron god of flocks, herds, and shepherds, an attribute possibly tied to his early origin as an aspect of Pan. In Boeotia, Hermes was worshiped for saving the town from a plague by carrying a ram or calf around the city walls. A yearly festival commemorated this event, during which a lamb would be carried around the city by \"the most handsome boy\" and then sacrificed to purify and protect the city from disease, drought, and famine. Numerous depictions of Hermes as a shepherd god carrying a lamb on his shoulders (\"Hermes kriophoros\") have been found throughout the Mediterranean world, and it is possible that the iconography of Hermes as \"The Good Shepherd\" had an influence on early Christianity, specifically in the description of Christ as \"the Good Shepherd\" in the Gospel of John.\nHistorical and literary sources.\nIn the Mycenaean period.\nThe earliest written record of Hermes comes from Linear B inscriptions from Pylos, Thebes, and Knossos dating to the Bronze Age Mycenaean period. Here, Hermes's name is rendered as \"e-ma-a\" (\u1f19\u03c1\u03bc\u03ach\u03b1\u03c2). This name is always recorded alongside those of several goddesses, including Potnija, Posidaeja, Diwja, Hera, Pere, and Ipemedeja, indicating that his worship was strongly connected to theirs. This is a pattern that would continue in later periods, as worship of Hermes almost always took place within temples and sanctuaries primarily dedicated to goddesses, including Hera, Demeter, Hecate, and Despoina.\nIn the Archaic period.\nIn literary works of Archaic Greece, Hermes is depicted both as a protector and a trickster. In Homer's \"Iliad\", Hermes is called \"the bringer of good luck\", \"guide and guardian\", and \"excellent in all the tricks\". In Hesiod's \"Works and Days\", Hermes is depicted giving Pandora the gifts of lies, seductive words, and a dubious character.\nThe earliest known theological or spiritual documents concerning Hermes are found in the Homeric Hymns composed . In \"Homeric Hymn 4 to Hermes\" describes the god's birth and his theft of Apollo's sacred cattle. In this hymn, Hermes is invoked as a god \"of many shifts\" (\"polytropos\"), associated with cunning and thievery, but also a bringer of dreams and a night guardian. He is said to have invented the chelys lyre, as well as racing and the sport of wrestling.\nIn the Classical period.\nThe cult of Hermes flourished in Attica, and many scholars writing before the discovery of the Linear B evidence considered Hermes to be a uniquely Athenian god. This region had numerous Hermai, or pillar-like icons, dedicated to the god marking boundaries, crossroads, and entryways. These were initially stone piles, later pillars made of wood, stone, or bronze, with carved images of Hermes, a phallus, or both. In the context of these herms, by the Classical period Hermes had come to be worshiped as the patron god of travelers and sailors. By the 5th century BC, Hermai were also in common use as grave monuments, emphasizing Hermes's role as a chthonic deity and psychopomp. This was probably his original function, and he may have been a late inclusion in the Olympic pantheon; Hermes is described as the \"youngest\" Olympian, and some myths, including his theft of Apollo's cows, describe his initial coming into contact with celestial deities. Hermes therefore came to be worshiped as a mediator between celestial and chthonic realms, as well as the one who facilitates interactions between mortals and the divine, often being depicted on libation vessels.\nDue to his mobility and his liminal nature, mediating between opposites (such as merchant/customer), he was considered the god of commerce and social intercourse, the wealth brought in business, especially sudden or unexpected enrichment, travel, roads and crossroads, borders and boundary conditions or transient, the changes from the threshold, agreements and contracts, friendship, hospitality, sexual intercourse, games, data, the draw, good luck, the sacrifices and the sacrificial animals, flocks and shepherds and the fertility of land and cattle.\nIn Athens, Hermes Eion came to represent the Athenian naval superiority in their defeat of the Persians, under the command of Cimon, in 475 BC. In this context, Hermes became a god associated with the Athenian empire and its expansion, and of democracy itself, as well as all of those closely associated with it, from the sailors in the navy, to the merchants who drove the economy. A section of the agora in Athens became known as the Hermai, because it was filled with a large number of herms, placed there as votive offerings by merchants and others who wished to commemorate a personal success in commerce or other public affair. The Hermai was probably destroyed in the Siege of Athens and Piraeus (87\u201386 BC).\nThere was a popular, now lost play by the tragedian Astydamas with Hermes as the primary subject.\nIn the Hellenistic period.\nAs Greek culture and influence spread following the conquests of Alexander the Great, a period of syncretism or \"interpretatio graeca\" saw many traditional Greek deities identified with foreign counterparts. In Ptolemaic Egypt, for example, the Egyptian god Thoth was identified by Greek speakers as the Egyptian form of Hermes. The two gods were worshiped as one at the Temple of Thoth in Khemenu, a city which became known in Greek as Hermopolis. This led to Hermes gaining the attributes of a god of translation and interpretation, or more generally, a god of knowledge and learning. This is illustrated by a 3rd-century BC example of a letter sent by the priest Petosiris to King Nechopso, probably written in Alexandria c. 150 BC, stating that Hermes is the teacher of all secret wisdoms, which are accessible by the experience of religious ecstasy.\nAn epithet of Thoth found in the temple at Esna, \"Thoth the great, the great, the great\", became applied to Hermes beginning in at least 172 BC. This lent Hermes one of his most famous later titles, (), 'thrice-greatest Hermes'. The figure of Hermes Trismegistus would later absorb a variety of other esoteric wisdom traditions and become a major component of Hermeticism, alchemy, and related traditions.\nIn the Roman period.\nAs early as the 4th century BC, Romans had adopted Hermes into their own religion, combining his attributes and worship with the earlier Etruscan god Turms under the name Mercury. According to St. Augustin, the Latin name \"Mercury\" may be a title derived from \"medio currens\", in reference to Hermes's role as a mediator and messenger who moves between worlds. Mercury became one of the most popular Roman gods, as attested by the numerous shrines and depictions in artwork found in Pompeii. In art, the Roman Mercury continued the style of depictions found in earlier representations of both Hermes and Turms, a young, beardless god with winged shoes or hat, carrying the caduceus. His role as a god of boundaries, a messenger, and a psychopomp also remained unchanged following his adoption into the Roman religion (these attributes were also similar to those in the Etruscan's worship of Turms).\nThe Romans identified the Germanic god Odin with Mercury, and there is evidence that Germanic peoples who had contact with Roman culture also accepted this identification. Odin and Mercury/Hermes share several attributes in common. For example, both are depicted carrying a staff and wearing a wide-brimmed hat, and both are travelers or wanderers. However, the reasons for this interpretation appear to go beyond superficial similarities: Both gods are connected to the dead (Mercury as psychopomp and Odin as lord of the dead in Valhalla), both were connected to eloquent speech, and both were associated with secret knowledge. The identification of Odin as Mercury was probably also influenced by a previous association of a more Odin-like Celtic god as the \"Celtic Mercurius\".\nA further Roman Imperial-era syncretism came in the form of Hermanubis, the result of the identification of Hermes with the Egyptian god of the dead, Anubis. Hermes and Anubis were both psychopomps the primary attribute leading to their conflation as the same god. Hermanubis depicted with a human body and a jackal head, holding the caduceus. In addition to his function of guiding souls to the afterlife, Hermanubis represented the Egyptian priesthood the investigation of truth.\nBeginning around the turn of the 1st century AD, a process began by which, in certain traditions Hermes became euhemerised \u2013 that is, interpreted as a historical, mortal figure who had become divine or elevated to godlike status in legend. Numerous books of wisdom and magic (including astrology, theosophy, and alchemy) were attributed to this \"historical\" Hermes, usually identified in his Alexandrian form of Hermes Trismegistus. As a collection, these works are referred to as the \"Hermetica\".\nIn the Middle Ages.\nThough worship of Hermes had been almost fully suppressed in the Roman Empire following the Christian persecution of paganism under Theodosius I in the 4th century AD, Hermes continued to be recognized as a mystical or prophetic figure, though a mortal one, by Christian scholars. Early medieval Christians such as Augustine believed that a euhemerised Hermes Trismegistus had been an ancient pagan prophet who predicted the emergence of Christianity in his writings. Some Christian philosophers in the medieval and Renaissance periods believed in the existence of a \"prisca theologia\", a single thread of true theology that could be found uniting all religions. Christian philosophers used Hermetic writings and other ancient philosophical literature to support their belief in the \"prisca theologia,\" arguing that Hermes Trismegistus was a contemporary of Moses, or that he was the third in a line of important prophets after Enoch and Noah.\nThe 10th-century \"Suda\" attempted to further Christianize the figure of Hermes, claiming that \"He was called Trismegistus on account of his praise of the trinity, saying there is one divine nature in the trinity.\"\nTemples and sacred places.\nThere are only three temples known to have been specifically dedicated to Hermes during the Classical Greek period, all of them in Arcadia. Though there are a few references in ancient literature to \"numerous\" temples of Hermes, this may be poetic license describing the ubiquitous herms, or other, smaller shrines to Hermes located in the temples of other deities. One of the oldest places of worship for Hermes was Mount Cyllene in Arcadia, where some myths say he was born. Tradition holds that his first temple was built by Lycaon. From there, the Hermes cult would have been taken to Athens, from which it radiated to the whole of Greece. In the Roman period, additional temples to Hermes (Mercury) were constructed across the Empire, including several in modern-day Tunisia. Mercury's temple in Rome was situated in the Circus Maximus, between the Aventine and Palatine hills, and was built in 495\u00a0BC.\nIn most places, temples were consecrated to Hermes in conjunction with Aphrodite, as in Attica, Arcadia, Crete, Samos and in Magna Graecia. Several ex-votos found in his temples revealed his role as initiator of young adulthood, among them soldiers and hunters, since war and certain forms of hunting were seen as ceremonial initiatory ordeals. This function of Hermes explains why some images in temples and other vessels show him as a teenager.\nAs a patron of the gym and fighting, Hermes had statues in gyms and he was also worshiped in the sanctuary of the Twelve Gods in Olympia where Greeks celebrated the Olympic Games. His statue was held there on an altar dedicated to him and Apollo together.\nA temple within the Aventine was consecrated in 495 BC.\nPausanias wrote that during his time, at Megalopolis people could see the ruins of the temple of Hermes Acacesius.\nIn addition, the Tricrena (\u03a4\u03c1\u03af\u03ba\u03c1\u03b7\u03bd\u03b1, meaning Three Springs) mountains at Pheneus were sacred to Hermes, because three springs were there and according to the legend, Hermes was washed in them, after birth, by the nymphs of the mountain.\nFurthermore, at Pharae there was a water sacred to Hermes. The name of the spring was Hermes's stream and the fish in it were not caught, being considered sacred to the god.\nSacrifices to Hermes involved honey, cakes, pigs, goats, and lambs. In the city of Tanagra, it was believed that Hermes had been nursed under a wild strawberry tree, the remains of which were held there in the shrine of Hermes Promachus, and in the hills Phene ran three waterways that were sacred to him, because he was believed to have been bathed there at birth.\nFestivals.\nHermes's feast was the Hermaia, which was celebrated with sacrifices to the god and with athletics and gymnastics, possibly having been established in the 6th century BC, but no documentation on the festival before the 4th century BC survives. However, Plato said that Socrates attended a Hermaea. Of all the festivals involving Greek games, these were the most like initiations because participation in them was restricted to young boys and excluded adults.\nIn Boeotia there was a fest at Tanagra, and two temples. The first of Hermes \"kriophoros\" (ram-bearer) who was related to the festival and the second of Hermes \"promachos\" (champion) At Coroneia there was a sanctuary of Hermes \"epimelios\"(keeper of the flocks) and at Corseia a grove with a statue of Hermes. In Attica Hermes was worshiped together with other gods, especially with the nymphs. Inscriptions from the islands indicate that there were festivals of Hermes at Chios and Crete, where he had the epithet \"dromios\" (of the race-course). In Corinth he had a temple and two bronze statues and at Pherai an oracular shrine and a spring of Hermes \"agoraios\" (of the market) Hermes was specially worshiped at Pheneos where he had a temple and the games \"Hermaia\" were celebrated.\nAt Pellene there was an statue of Hermes \"dolios\" and an old established race. At Kyllene the statue of Hermes was a phallos. Near Tegea there was the temple of Hermes, Aepytus. At Megalopolis there was a temple of Hermes Akakesios, and a second near a stadium for athletic games. The myth of the birth of Hermes is related to the mountain Kyllene near Pheneos and the god had the surname \"Kyllenios\". Pindar refers to games of Hermes at Kyllene that seem to be similar to the games of Pheneos.\nEpithets.\nArge\u00efphontes.\nHermes's epithet \"Arge\u00efphontes\" (; ), meaning \"slayer of Argus\", recalls the slaying of the hundred-eyed giant Argus Panoptes by the messenger god. Argus was watching over the heifer-nymph Io in the sanctuary of Hera in Argos. Hermes, disguised as a shepherd, placed a charm on Argus's eyes with the caduceus to cause the giant to sleep, after which he slew the giant with a harpe. The eyes were then put into the tail of the peacock, a symbol of Hera.\nAn Homeric form is Diaktoros Arge\u00efphontes.(). Frisk derives \"argophontes\" from \"argos\" (argipous), \"fast\" frequently for dogs. Sanskrit \"rir\u1e9a\", \"rji-pya\", \"fast flying\", Armenian \"arevi\". The meaning seems similar to the epithet of Hermes \"kynagches\", dog-throttler. \"Diaktor\" (from -kter, kill) indicates a god of death.\nMessenger and guide.\nThe chief office of the god was as messenger. Explicitly, at least in sources of classical writings, of Euripides's \"Electra\" and \"Iphigenia in Aulis\" and in Epictetus's \"Discourses\". Hermes (\"Diactorus\", \"Angelos\") the messenger, is in fact only seen in this role, for Zeus, from within the pages of the \"Odyssey\". The messenger divine and herald of the Gods, he wears the gifts from his father, the petasos and talaria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTrade.\nHermes is sometimes depicted in art works holding a purse.\nDolios (\"tricky\").\nSource:\nNo cult to Hermes Dolios existed in Attica, and so \"this form of Hermes seems to have existed in speech only, but he was surely still a real power\"\nHermes Dolio is ambiguous. According to prominent folklorist Yeleazar Meletinsky, Hermes is a deified trickster and master of thieves (\"a plunderer, a cattle-raider, a night-watching\" in the \"Homeric Hymn to Hermes\") and deception (Euripides) and (possibly evil) tricks and trickeries, crafty (from \"lit\". god of craft), the cheat, the god of stealth. He is also known as the friendliest to man, cunning, treacherous, and a schemer.\nHermes Dolios was worshipped at Pellene and invoked through Odysseus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(As the ways of gain are not always the ways of honesty and straightforwardness, Hermes obtains a bad character and an in-moral (amoral [ed.]) cult as Dolios)\nHermes is \"amoral\" like a baby. Zeus sent Hermes as a teacher to humanity to teach them knowledge of and value of justice and to improve inter-personal relationships (\"bonding between mortals\").\nConsidered to have a mastery of rhetorical persuasion and \"special pleading\", the god typically has nocturnal \"\". Hermes knows the boundaries and crosses the borders of them to confuse their definition.\nThief.\nAccording to the late Jungian psychotherapist L\u00f3pez-Pedraza, everything Hermes thieves, he later sacrifices to the gods.\nPatron of thieves.\nAutolycus received his skills as the greatest of thieves due to sacrificing to Hermes as his patron.\nAdditional.\nOther epithets included:\nMythology.\nEarly Greek sources.\nHomer and Hesiod.\nAccording to the \"Homeric Hymn to Hermes\", Zeus, in the dead of night, secretly made love to Maia, who avoided the company of the gods, in a cave of Cyllene. She became pregnant with Hermes. After giving birth to the baby, Maia wrapped him in blankets and went to sleep. The rapidly maturing infant Hermes crawled away to Thessaly, where, by nightfall of his first day, he stole some of his half-brother Apollo's cattle and invented the lyre from a tortoise shell. Maia refused to believe Apollo when he claimed that Hermes was the thief, and Zeus then sided with Apollo. Finally, Apollo exchanged the cattle for the lyre, which became one of his identifying attributes.\nThe \"Homeric Hymn to Hermes\" invokes him as the one \"of many shifts (\"polytropos\"), blandly cunning, a robber, a cattle driver, a bringer of dreams, a watcher by night, a thief at the gates, one who was soon to show forth wonderful deeds among the deathless gods.\" The word \"polutropos\" (\"of many shifts, turning many ways, of many devices, ingenious, or much wandering\") is also used to describe his mortal descendant Odysseus in the first line of the \"Odyssey\". In addition to the chelys lyre, Hermes was believed to have invented many types of racing and the sport of wrestling, and therefore was a patron of athletes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHomer and Hesiod portrayed Hermes as the author of skilled or deceptive acts and also as a benefactor of gods and mortals alike. In \"Works and Days\", when Zeus ordered Hephaestus to create Pandora to disgrace humanity by punishing Prometheus's act of giving fire to man, every god gave her a gift, and Hermes's gifts were crafty words and a dubious character. Hermes was then instructed to take her as wife to the Titan Epimetheus. With the help of Artemis, Hermes rescued Ares from a brazen vessel where he had been imprisoned by Otus and Ephialtes. In the \"Iliad\", Hermes is called \"the bringer of good luck\", \"guide and guardian\", and \"excellent in all the tricks\". He was a divine ally of the Greeks against the Trojans, but he also protected Priam when he went to the Greek camp to retrieve the body of his son Hector and accompanied them back to Troy. In the \"Odyssey\", Hermes helps the protagonist Odysseus by informing him about the fate of his companions, who were turned into animals by the power of Circe. Hermes instructed Odysseus to protect himself by chewing a magic herb; he also told Calypso of Zeus's order to free Odysseus from her island to allow him to continue his journey back home. When Odysseus killed the suitors of his wife, Hermes led their souls to Hades.\nAthenian tragic playwrights.\nAeschylus wrote in \"The Eumenides\" that Hermes helped Orestes kill Clytemnestra under a false identity and other stratagems, and also said that he was the god of searches, and those who seek things lost or stolen. In \"Philoctetes\", Sophocles invokes Hermes when Odysseus needs to convince Philoctetes to join the Trojan War on the side of the Greeks, and in Euripides's \"Rhesus\" Hermes helps Dolon spy on the Greek navy.\nAesop.\nAesop featured him in several of his fables, as ruler of the gate of prophetic dreams, as the god of athletes, of edible roots, and of hospitality. He also said that Hermes had assigned each person his share of intelligence. One of the most notable fables in which Hermes appears is \"the Honest Woodcutter\".\nHellenistic Greek sources.\nOne of the Orphic Hymns Khthonios is dedicated to Hermes, indicating that he was also a god of the underworld. Aeschylus had called him by this epithet several times. Another is the Orphic Hymn to Hermes, where his association with the athletic games held is mystic in tone.\nPhlegon of Tralles said Hermes was invoked to ward off ghosts, and Apollodorus reports several events involving Hermes. According to Apollodorus, Hermes participated in the Gigantomachy in defense of Olympus; was given the task of bringing baby Dionysus to be cared for by Ino and Athamas and later took him to be cared for by the Nysan nymphs, later called the Hyades; aided Perseus in fetching the head of the Gorgon Medusa, favored the young Heracles by giving him a sword when he finished his education; and lead Hera, Athena and Aphrodite to Paris to be judged by him in a beauty contest.\nAnyte of Tegea of the 3rd century BC, in the translation by Richard Aldington, wrote, \"I Hermes stand here at the crossroads by the wind beaten orchard, near the hoary grey coast; and I keep a resting place for weary men. And the cool stainless spring gushes out.\"\nLovers, victims and children.\nAccording to Hyginus's \"Fabula\", Pan, the Greek god of nature, shepherds and flocks, is the son of Hermes through the nymph Dryope. It is likely that the worship of Hermes himself actually originated as an aspect of Pan as the god of boundaries, which could explain their association as parent and child in Hyginus. In other sources, the god Priapus is understood as a son of Hermes.\nAccording to the mythographer Apollodorus, Autolycus, the Prince of Thieves, was a son of Hermes and Chione, making Hermes a great-grandfather of Odysseus.\nOnce, Hermes chased either Persephone or Hecate with the aim to rape her; but the goddess snored or roared in anger, frightening him off so that he desisted, hence her earning the name \"Brimo\" (\"angry\").\nHermes also loved young men in pederastic relationships where he bestowed or taught something related to combat, athletics, herding, poetry and music. Photius wrote that Polydeuces (Pollux), one of the Dioscuri, was a lover of Hermes, to whom he gifted the Thessalian horse Dotor. Amphion became a great singer and musician after his lover Hermes taught him to play and gave him a golden lyre. Crocus was said to be a beloved of Hermes and was accidentally killed by the god in a game of discus when he unexpectedly stood up; as the unfortunate youth's blood dripped on the soil, the saffron flower came to be. Perseus received the divine items (talaria, petasos, and the helm of darkness) from Hermes because he loved him. And Daphnis, a Sicilian shepherd who was said to be the inventor of pastoral poetry, is said to be a son or sometimes \"eromenos\" of Hermes.\nList of offspring.\nThe following is a list of Hermes's offspring, by various mothers. Beside each offspring, the earliest source to record the parentage is given, along with the century to which the source (in some cases approximately) dates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn Jungian psychology.\nFor Carl Jung, Hermes's role as messenger between realms and as guide to the underworld made him the god of the unconscious, the mediator between the conscious and unconscious parts of the mind, and the guide for inner journeys.\nJung considered the gods Thoth and Hermes to be counterparts.\nHe emphasized Hermes's central role in the practice of medieval alchemy, which Jung believed to be symbolic of the psychological process he called individuation. In Jungian psychology especially, Hermes is seen as relevant to study of the phenomenon of synchronicity (together with Pan and Dionysus):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hermes is an archetypal figure, a potential in every human psyche ...\nHe is identified by some with the archetype of healer, as the ancient Greeks ascribed healing magic to him.\nIn the context of abnormal psychology Samuels (1986) states that Jung considers Hermes the archetype for narcissistic disorder; however, he lends the disorder a \"positive\" (beneficious) aspect, and represents both the good and bad of narcissism.\nFor L\u00f3pez-Pedraza, Hermes is the protector of psychotherapy. For McNeely, Hermes is a god of the healing arts.\nAccording to Christopher Booker, all the roles that Hermes held in ancient Greek thought, all considered, reveal Hermes to be a guide or observer of transition.\nFor Jung, Hermes's role as trickster made him a guide through the psychotherapeutic process.\n\"See Greek mythology in popular culture\"\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14411", "revid": "883252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14411", "title": "Hepatoscopy", "text": ""}
{"id": "14412", "revid": "8766034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14412", "title": "Hedge fund", "text": "Type of investment fund\nA hedge fund is a pooled investment fund that holds liquid assets and that makes use of complex trading and risk management techniques to aim to improve investment performance and insulate returns from market risk. Among these portfolio techniques are short selling and the use of leverage and derivative instruments. In the United States, financial regulations require that hedge funds be marketed only to institutional investors and high-net-worth individuals.\nHedge funds are considered alternative investments. Their ability to use leverage and more complex investment techniques distinguishes them from regulated investment funds available to the retail market, commonly known as mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). They are also considered distinct from private equity funds and other similar closed-end funds as hedge funds generally invest in relatively liquid assets and are usually open-ended. This means they typically allow investors to invest and withdraw capital periodically based on the fund's net asset value, whereas private-equity funds generally invest in illiquid assets and return capital only after a number of years. Other than a fund's regulatory status, there are no formal or fixed definitions of fund types, and so there are different views of what can constitute a \"hedge fund\".\nAlthough hedge funds are not subject to the many restrictions applicable to regulated funds, regulations were passed in the United States and Europe following the 2008 financial crisis with the intention of increasing government oversight of hedge funds and eliminating certain regulatory gaps. While most modern hedge funds are able to employ a wide variety of financial instruments and risk management techniques, they can be very different from each other with respect to their strategies, risks, volatility and expected return profile. It is common for hedge fund investment strategies to aim to achieve a positive return on investment regardless of whether markets are rising or falling (\"absolute return\"). Hedge funds can be considered risky investments; the expected returns of some hedge fund strategies are less volatile than those of retail funds with high exposure to stock markets because of the use of hedging techniques. Research in 2015 showed that hedge fund activism can have significant real effects on target firms, including improvements in productivity and efficient reallocation of corporate assets. Moreover, these interventions often lead to increased labor productivity, although the benefits may not fully accrue to workers in terms of increased wages or work hours.\nA hedge fund usually pays its investment manager a management fee (typically, 2% per annum of the net asset value of the fund) and a performance fee (typically, 20% of the increase in the fund's net asset value during a year). Hedge funds have existed for many decades and have become increasingly popular. They have now grown to be a substantial portion of the asset management industry, with assets totaling around $3.8 trillion as of 2021.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"hedge\", meaning a line of bushes around the perimeter of a field, has long been used as a metaphor for placing limits on risk. Early hedge funds sought to hedge specific investments against general market fluctuations by shorting other, similar assets. Nowadays, however, many different investment strategies are used, many of which do not \"hedge\" risk.\nHistory.\nDuring the US bull market of the 1920s, there were numerous private investment vehicles available to wealthy investors. Of that period, the best known today is the Graham-Newman Partnership, founded by Benjamin Graham and his long-time business partner Jerry Newman. This was cited by Warren Buffett in a 2006 letter to the Museum of American Finance as an early hedge fund, and based on other comments from Buffett, Janet Tavakoli deems Graham's investment firm the first hedge fund.\nThe sociologist Alfred W. Jones is credited with coining the phrase \"\"hedged\" fund\" and is credited with creating the first hedge fund structure in 1949. Jones referred to his fund as being \"hedged\", a term then commonly used on Wall Street to describe the management of investment risk due to changes in the financial markets. Jones also developed the popular 2-and-20 structure of hedge funds, in which hedge funds charged investors a management fee of 2% on total assets and a 20% fee on realized gains.\nIn the 1970s, hedge funds specialized in a single strategy with most fund managers following the long/short equity model. Many hedge funds closed during the recession of 1969\u20131970 and the 1973\u20131974 stock market crash due to heavy losses. They received renewed attention in the late 1980s.\nDuring the 1990s, the number of hedge funds increased significantly with the 1990s stock market rise, the aligned-interest compensation structure (\"i.e.\", common financial interests), and the promise of above average returns as likely causes. Over the next decade, hedge fund strategies expanded to include credit arbitrage, distressed debt, fixed income, quantitative, and multi-strategy. US institutional investors, such as pension and endowment funds, began allocating greater portions of their portfolios to hedge funds.\nDuring the first decade of the 21st century, hedge funds gained popularity worldwide, and, by 2008, the worldwide hedge fund industry held an estimated US$1.93\u00a0trillion in assets under management (AUM). However, the 2008 financial crisis caused many hedge funds to restrict investor withdrawals and their popularity and AUM totals declined. AUM totals rebounded and in April 2011 were estimated at almost $2 trillion. As of \u00a02011[ [update]], 61% of worldwide investment in hedge funds came from institutional sources.\nIn June 2011, the hedge fund management firms with the greatest AUM were Bridgewater Associates (US$58.9\u00a0billion), Man Group (US$39.2\u00a0billion), Paulson &amp; Co. (US$35.1\u00a0billion), Brevan Howard (US$31\u00a0billion), and Och-Ziff (US$29.4\u00a0billion). Bridgewater Associates had $70 billion in assets under management as of \u00a02012[ [update]]. At the end of that year, the 241 largest hedge fund firms in the United States collectively held $1.335 trillion. In April 2012, the hedge fund industry reached a record high of US$2.13 trillion total assets under management. In the middle of the 2010s, the hedge fund industry experienced a general decline in the \"old guard\" fund managers. Dan Loeb called it a \"hedge fund killing field\" due to the classic long/short falling out of favor because of unprecedented easing by central banks. The US stock market correlation became untenable to short sellers. The hedge fund industry today has reached a state of maturity that is consolidating around the larger, more established firms such as Citadel, Elliot, Millennium, Bridgewater, and others. The rate of new fund start ups is now outpaced by fund closings.\nIn July 2017, hedge funds recorded their eighth consecutive monthly gain in returns with assets under management rising to a record $3.1 trillion.\nStrategies.\nHedge fund strategies are generally classified among four major categories: global macro, directional, event-driven, and relative value (arbitrage). Strategies within these categories each entail characteristic risk and return profiles. A fund may employ a single strategy or multiple strategies for flexibility, risk management, or diversification. The hedge fund's prospectus, also known as an offering memorandum, offers potential investors information about key aspects of the fund, including the fund's investment strategy, investment type, and leverage limit.\nThe elements contributing to a hedge fund strategy include the hedge fund's approach to the market, the particular instrument use, the market sector the fund specializes in (\"e.g.\", healthcare), the method used to select investments, and the amount of diversification within the fund. There are a variety of market approaches to different asset classes, including equity, fixed income, commodity, and currency. Instruments used include equities, fixed income, futures, options, and swaps. Strategies can be divided into those in which investments can be selected by managers, known as \"discretionary/qualitative\", or those in which investments are selected using a computerized system, known as \"systematic/quantitative\". The amount of diversification within the fund can vary; funds may be multi-strategy, multi-fund, multi-market, multi-manager, or a combination.\nSometimes hedge fund strategies are described as \"absolute return\" and are classified as either \"market neutral\" or \"directional\". Market neutral funds have less correlation to overall market performance by \"neutralizing\" the effect of market swings whereas directional funds utilize trends and inconsistencies in the market and have greater exposure to the market's fluctuations.\nGlobal macro.\nHedge funds using a global macro investing strategy take large positions in share, bond, or currency markets in anticipation of global macroeconomic events in order to generate a risk-adjusted return. Global macro fund managers use macroeconomic (\"big picture\") analysis based on global market events and trends to identify opportunities for investment that would profit from anticipated price movements. While global macro strategies have a large amount of flexibility (due to their ability to use leverage to take large positions in diverse investments in multiple markets), the timing of the implementation of the strategies is important in order to generate attractive, risk-adjusted returns. Global macro is often categorized as a directional investment strategy.\nGlobal macro strategies can be divided into discretionary and systematic approaches. Discretionary trading is carried out by investment managers who identify and select investments, whereas systematic trading is based on mathematical models and executed by software with limited human involvement beyond the programming and updating of the software. These strategies can also be divided into trend or counter-trend approaches depending on whether the fund attempts to profit from following market trend (long or short-term) or attempts to anticipate and profit from reversals in trends.\nWithin global macro strategies, there are further sub-strategies including \"systematic diversified\", in which the fund trades in diversified markets, or sector specialists such as \"systematic currency\", in which the fund trades in foreign exchange markets or any other sector specialisation. Other sub-strategies include those employed by commodity trading advisors (CTAs), where the fund trades in futures (or options) in commodity markets or in swaps. This is also known as a \"managed future fund\". CTAs trade in commodities (such as gold) and financial instruments, including stock indices. They also take both long and short positions, allowing them to make profit in both market upswings and downswings. Most global macro managers tends to be a CTA from a regulatory perspective and the main divide is between systematic and discretionary strategies. A classification framework for CTA/Macro Strategies can be found in the reference.\nDirectional.\nDirectional investment strategies use market movements, trends, or inconsistencies when picking stocks across a variety of markets. Computer models can be used, or fund managers will identify and select investments. These types of strategies have a greater exposure to the fluctuations of the overall market than do market neutral strategies. Directional hedge fund strategies include US and international long/short equity hedge funds, where long equity positions are hedged with short sales of equities or equity index options.\nWithin directional strategies, there are a number of sub-strategies. \"Emerging markets\" funds focus on emerging markets such as China and India, whereas \"sector funds\" specialize in specific areas including technology, healthcare, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, energy, and basic materials. Funds using a \"fundamental growth\" strategy invest in companies with more earnings growth than the overall stock market or relevant sector, while funds using a \"fundamental value\" strategy invest in undervalued companies. Funds that use quantitative and financial signal processing techniques for equity trading are described as using a \"quantitative directional\" strategy. Funds using a \"short bias\" strategy take advantage of declining equity prices using short positions.\nEvent-driven.\nEvent-driven strategies concern situations in which the underlying investment opportunity and risk are associated with an event. An event-driven investment strategy finds investment opportunities in corporate transactional events such as consolidations, acquisitions, recapitalizations, bankruptcies, and liquidations. Managers employing such a strategy capitalize on valuation inconsistencies in the market before or after such events, and take a position based on the predicted movement of the security or securities in question. Large institutional investors such as hedge funds are more likely to pursue event-driven investing strategies than traditional equity investors because they have the expertise and resources to analyze corporate transactional events for investment opportunities.\nCorporate transactional events generally fit into three categories: distressed securities, risk arbitrage, and special situations. Distressed securities include such events as restructurings, recapitalizations, and bankruptcies. A distressed securities investment strategy involves investing in the bonds or loans of companies facing bankruptcy or severe financial distress, when these bonds or loans are being traded at a discount to their value. Hedge fund managers pursuing the distressed debt investment strategy aim to capitalize on depressed bond prices. Hedge funds purchasing distressed debt may prevent those companies from going bankrupt, as such an acquisition deters foreclosure by banks. While event-driven investing, in general, tends to thrive during a bull market, distressed investing works best during a bear market.\nRisk arbitrage or merger arbitrage includes such events as mergers, acquisitions, liquidations, and hostile takeovers. Risk arbitrage typically involves buying and selling the stocks of two or more merging companies to take advantage of market discrepancies between acquisition price and stock price. The risk element arises from the possibility that the merger or acquisition will not go ahead as planned; hedge fund managers will use research and analysis to determine if the event will take place.\nSpecial situations are events that impact the value of a company's stock, including the restructuring of a company or corporate transactions including spin-offs, share buy backs, security issuance/repurchase, asset sales, or other catalyst-oriented situations. To take advantage of special situations the hedge fund manager must identify an upcoming event that will increase or decrease the value of the company's equity and equity-related instruments.\nOther event-driven strategies include credit arbitrage strategies, which focus on corporate fixed income securities; an activist strategy, where the fund takes large positions in companies and uses the ownership to participate in the management; a strategy based on predicting the final approval of new pharmaceutical drugs; and legal catalyst strategy, which specializes in companies involved in major lawsuits.\nRelative value.\nRelative value arbitrage strategies take advantage of relative discrepancies in price between securities. The price discrepancy can occur due to mispricing of securities compared to related securities, the underlying security or the market overall. Hedge fund managers can use various types of analysis to identify price discrepancies in securities, including mathematical, technical, or fundamental techniques. Relative value is often used as a synonym for market neutral, as strategies in this category typically have very little or no directional market exposure to the market as a whole. Other relative value sub-strategies include:\nMiscellaneous.\nIn addition to those strategies within the four main categories, there are several strategies that do not entirely fit into these categories.\nRisk.\nFor an investor who already holds large quantities of equities and bonds, investment in hedge funds may provide diversification and reduce the overall portfolio risk. Managers of hedge funds often aim to produce returns that are relatively uncorrelated with market indices and are consistent with investors' desired level of risk. While hedging can reduce some risks of an investment it usually increases others, such as operational risk and model risk, so overall risk is reduced but cannot be eliminated. According to a report by the Hennessee Group, hedge funds were approximately one-third less volatile than the S&amp;P 500 between 1993 and 2010.\nRisk management.\nInvestors in hedge funds are, in most countries, required to be qualified investors who are assumed to be aware of the investment risks, and accept these risks because of the potential returns relative to those risks. Fund managers may employ extensive risk management strategies in order to protect the fund and investors. According to the \"Financial Times\", \"big hedge funds have some of the most sophisticated and exacting risk management practices anywhere in asset management.\" Hedge fund managers that hold a large number of investment positions for short periods are likely to have a particularly comprehensive risk management system in place, and it has become usual for funds to have independent risk officers who assess and manage risks but are not otherwise involved in trading. \nA variety of different measurement techniques and models are used to estimate risk according to the fund's leverage, liquidity, and investment strategy. Non-normality of returns, volatility clustering and trends are not always accounted for by conventional risk measurement methodologies and so in addition to value at risk and similar measurements, funds may use integrated measures such as drawdowns. See generally.\nIn addition to assessing the market-related risks that may arise from an investment, investors commonly employ operational due diligence to assess the risk that error or fraud at a hedge fund might result in a loss to the investor. Considerations will include the organization and management of operations at the hedge fund manager, whether the investment strategy is likely to be sustainable, and the fund's ability to develop as a company.\nTransparency, and regulatory considerations.\nSince hedge funds are private entities and have few public disclosure requirements, this is sometimes perceived as a lack of transparency. Another common perception of hedge funds is that their managers are not subject to as much regulatory oversight and/or registration requirements as other financial investment managers, and more prone to manager-specific idiosyncratic risks such as style drifts, faulty operations, or fraud. New regulations introduced in the US and the EU as of 2010 required hedge fund managers to report more information, leading to greater transparency. In addition, investors, particularly institutional investors, are encouraging further developments in hedge fund risk management, both through internal practices and external regulatory requirements. The increasing influence of institutional investors has led to greater transparency: hedge funds increasingly provide information to investors including valuation methodology, positions, and leverage exposure.\nRisks shared with other investment types.\nHedge funds share many of the same types of risk as other investment classes, including liquidity risk and manager risk. Liquidity refers to the degree to which an asset can be bought and sold or converted to cash; similar to private-equity funds, hedge funds employ a lock-up period during which an investor cannot remove money. Manager risk refers to those risks which arise from the management of funds. As well as specific risks such as style drift, which refers to a fund manager \"drifting\" away from an area of specific expertise, manager risk factors include valuation risk, capacity risk, concentration risk, and leverage risk. Valuation risk refers to the concern that the net asset value (NAV) of investments may be inaccurate; capacity risk can arise from placing too much money into one particular strategy, which may lead to fund performance deterioration; and concentration risk may arise if a fund has too much exposure to a particular investment, sector, trading strategy, or group of correlated funds. These risks may be managed through defined controls over conflict of interest, restrictions on allocation of funds, and set exposure limits for strategies.\nMany investment funds use leverage, the practice of borrowing money, trading on margin, or using derivatives to obtain market exposure in excess of that provided by investors' capital. Although leverage can increase potential returns, the opportunity for larger gains is weighed against the possibility of greater losses. Hedge funds employing leverage are likely to engage in extensive risk management practices. In comparison with investment banks, hedge fund leverage is relatively low; according to a National Bureau of Economic Research working paper, the average leverage for investment banks is 14.2, compared to between 1.5 and 2.5 for hedge funds.\nSome types of funds, including hedge funds, are perceived as having a greater appetite for risk, with the intention of maximizing returns, subject to the risk tolerance of investors and the fund manager. Managers will have an additional incentive to increase risk oversight when their own capital is invested in the fund.\nFees and remuneration.\nFees paid to hedge funds.\nHedge fund management firms typically charge their funds both a management fee and a performance fee.\nManagement fees are calculated as a percentage of the fund's net asset value and typically range from 1% to 4% per annum, with 2% being standard. They are usually expressed as an annual percentage, but calculated and paid monthly or quarterly. Management fees for hedge funds are designed to cover the operating costs of the manager, whereas the performance fee provides the manager's profits. However, due to economies of scale the management fee from larger funds can generate a significant part of a manager's profits, and as a result some fees have been criticized by some public pension funds, such as CalPERS, for being too high.\nThe performance fee is typically 20% of the fund's profits during any year, though performance fees range between 10% and 50%. Performance fees are intended to provide an incentive for a manager to generate profits. Performance fees have been criticized by Warren Buffett, who believes that because hedge funds share only the profits and not the losses, such fees create an incentive for high-risk investment management. Performance fee rates have fallen since the start of the credit crunch.\nAlmost all hedge fund performance fees include a \"high water mark\" (or \"loss carryforward provision\"), which means that the performance fee only applies to net profits (\"i.e.\", profits after losses in previous years have been recovered). This prevents managers from receiving fees for volatile performance, though a manager will sometimes close a fund that has suffered serious losses and start a new fund, rather than attempt to recover the losses over a number of years without a performance fee.\nSome performance fees include a \"hurdle\", so that a fee is only paid on the fund's performance in excess of a benchmark rate (\"e.g.\", LIBOR) or a fixed percentage. The hurdle is usually tied to a benchmark rate such as Libor or the one-year Treasury bill rate plus a spread. A \"soft\" hurdle means the performance fee is calculated on all the fund's returns if the hurdle rate is cleared. A \"hard\" hurdle is calculated only on returns above the hurdle rate. By example the manager sets a hurdle rate equal to 5%, and the fund return 15%, incentive fees would only apply to the 10% above the hurdle rate. A hurdle is intended to ensure that a manager is only rewarded if the fund generates returns in excess of the returns that the investor would have received if they had invested their money elsewhere.\nSome hedge funds charge a redemption fee (or withdrawal fee) for early withdrawals during a specified period of time (typically a year), or when withdrawals exceed a predetermined percentage of the original investment. The purpose of the fee is to discourage short-term investing, reduce turnover, and deter withdrawals after periods of poor performance. Unlike management fees and performance fees, redemption fees are usually kept by the fund and redistributed to all investors.\nRemuneration of portfolio managers.\nHedge fund management firms are often owned by their portfolio managers, who are therefore entitled to any profits that the business makes. As management fees are intended to cover the firm's operating costs, performance fees (and any excess management fees) are generally distributed to the firm's owners as profits. Funds do not tend to report compensation, and so published lists of the amounts earned by top managers tend to be estimates based on factors such as the fees charged by their funds and the capital they are thought to have invested in them. Many managers have accumulated large stakes in their own funds and so top hedge fund managers can earn extraordinary amounts of money, perhaps up to $4 billion in a good year.\nEarnings at the very top are higher than in any other sector of the financial industry, and collectively the top 25 hedge fund managers regularly earn more than all 500 of the chief executives in the S&amp;P 500. Most hedge fund managers are remunerated much less, however, and if performance fees are not earned then small managers at least are unlikely to be paid significant amounts.\nIn 2011, the top manager earned $3 billion, the tenth earned $210 million, and the 30th earned $80 million. In 2011, the average earnings for the 25 highest-compensated hedge fund managers in the United States was $576 million while the mean total compensation for all hedge fund investment professionals was $690,786 and the median was $312,329. The same figures for hedge fund CEOs were $1,037,151 and $600,000, and for chief investment officers were $1,039,974 and $300,000, respectively.\nOf the 1,226 people on the \"Forbes\" World's Billionaires List for 2012, 36 of the financiers listed \"derived significant chunks\" of their wealth from hedge fund management. Among the richest 1,000 people in the United Kingdom, 54 were hedge fund managers, according to the \"Sunday Times\" Rich List for 2012.\nA portfolio manager risks losing his past compensation if he or she engages in insider trading. In \"Morgan Stanley v. Skowron\", 989 F. Supp. 2d 356 (S.D.N.Y. 2013), applying New York's faithless servant doctrine, the court held that a hedge fund's portfolio manager engaging in insider trading in violation of his company's code of conduct, which also required him to report his misconduct, must repay his employer the full $31 million his employer paid him as compensation during his period of faithlessness. The court called the insider trading the \"ultimate abuse of a portfolio manager's position\". The judge also wrote: \"In addition to exposing Morgan Stanley to government investigations and direct financial losses, Skowron's behavior damaged the firm's reputation, a valuable corporate asset.\"\nStructure.\nA hedge fund is an investment vehicle that is most often structured as an offshore corporation, limited partnership, or limited liability company. The fund is managed by an investment manager in the form of an organization or company that is legally and financially distinct from the hedge fund and its portfolio of assets. Many investment managers utilize service providers for operational support. Service providers include prime brokers, banks, administrators, distributors, and accounting firms.\nPrime broker.\nPrime brokers clear trades and provide leverage and short-term financing. They are usually divisions of large investment banks. The prime broker acts as a counterparty to derivative contracts, and lends securities for particular investment strategies, such as long/short equities and convertible bond arbitrage. It can provide custodial services for the fund's assets, and trade execution and clearing services for the hedge fund manager.\nAdministrator.\nHedge fund administrators are typically responsible for valuation services, and often operations, and accounting.\nCalculation of the net asset value (\"NAV\") by the administrator, including the pricing of securities at current market value and calculation of the fund's income and expense accruals, is a core administrator task, because it is the price at which investors buy and sell shares in the fund. The accurate and timely calculation of NAV by the administrator is vital. The case of \"Anwar v. Fairfield Greenwich\" (SDNY 2015) is the major case relating to fund administrator liability for failure to handle its NAV-related obligations properly. There, the hedge fund administrator and other defendants settled in 2016 by paying the \"Anwar\" investor plaintiffs $235 million.\nAdministrator back office support allows fund managers to concentrate on trades. Administrators also process subscriptions and redemptions and perform various shareholder services. Hedge funds in the United States are not required to appoint an administrator and all of these functions can be performed by an investment manager. A number of conflict of interest situations may arise in this arrangement, particularly in the calculation of a fund's net asset value. Most funds employ external auditors, thereby arguably offering a greater degree of transparency.\nAuditor.\nAn auditor is an independent accounting firm used to perform a complete audit the fund's financial statements. The year-end audit is performed in accordance with the standard accounting practices enforced within the country in which the fund it established, typically US GAAP or the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The auditor may verify the fund's NAV and assets under management (AUM). Some auditors only provide \"NAV lite\" services, meaning that the valuation is based on prices received from the manager rather than an independent assessment.\nDistributor.\nA distributor is an underwriter, broker, dealer, or other person who participates in the distribution of securities. The distributor is also responsible for marketing the fund to potential investors. Many hedge funds do not have distributors, and in such cases, the investment manager will be responsible for the distribution of securities and marketing, though many funds also use placement agents and broker-dealers for distribution.\nDomicile and taxation.\nThe legal structure of a specific hedge fund, in particular its domicile and the type of legal entity in use, is usually determined by the tax expectations of the fund's investors. Regulatory considerations will also play a role. Many hedge funds are established in offshore financial centers to avoid adverse tax consequences for its foreign and tax-exempt investors. Offshore funds that invest in the US typically pay withholding taxes on certain types of investment income, but not US capital gains tax. However, the fund's investors are subject to tax in their own jurisdictions on any increase in the value of their investments. This tax treatment promotes cross-border investments by limiting the potential for multiple jurisdictions to layer taxes on investors.\nUS tax-exempt investors (such as pension plans and endowments) invest primarily in offshore hedge funds to preserve their tax exempt status and avoid unrelated business taxable income. The investment manager, usually based in a major financial center, pays tax on its management fees per the tax laws of the state and country where it is located. In 2011, half of the existing hedge funds were registered offshore and half onshore. The Cayman Islands was the leading location for offshore funds, accounting for 34% of the total number of global hedge funds. The US had 24%, Luxembourg 10%, Ireland 7%, the British Virgin Islands 6%, and Bermuda had 3%.\nHedge funds take advantage of a tax loopole called carried interest to get around paying too much in taxes by fancy legalistic maneouvres on their part.\nBasket options.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Deutsche Bank and Barclays created special options accounts for hedge fund clients in the banks' names and claimed to own the assets, when in fact the hedge fund clients had full control of the assets and reaped the profits. The hedge funds would then execute trades \u2013 many of them a few seconds in duration \u2013 but wait until just after a year had passed to exercise the options, allowing them to report the profits at a lower long-term capital gains tax rate.\u2014\u200a\nThe US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations chaired by Carl Levin issued a 2014 report that found that from 1998 and 2013, hedge funds avoided billions of dollars in taxes by using basket options. The Internal Revenue Service began investigating Renaissance Technologies in 2009, and Levin criticized the IRS for taking six years to investigate the company. Using basket options Renaissance avoided \"more than $6 billion in taxes over more than a decade\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These banks and hedge funds involved in this case used dubious structured financial products in a giant game of 'let's pretend,' costing the Treasury billions and bypassing safeguards that protect the economy from excessive bank lending for stock speculation.\u2014\u200a\nA dozen other hedge funds along with Renaissance Technologies used Deutsche Bank's and Barclays' basket options. Renaissance argued that basket options were \"extremely important because they gave the hedge fund the ability to increase its returns by borrowing more and to protect against model and programming failures\". In July 2015, the United States Internal Revenue claimed hedge funds used basket options \"to bypass taxes on short-term trades\". These basket options will now be labeled as listed transactions that must be declared on tax returns, and a failure to do would result in a penalty.\nInvestment manager locations.\nIn contrast to the funds themselves, investment managers are primarily located onshore. The United States remains the largest center of investment with US-based funds managing around 70% of global assets at the end of 2011. As of April 2012, there were approximately 3,990 investment advisers managing one or more private hedge funds registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. New York City and the Gold Coast area of Connecticut are the leading locations for US hedge fund managers.\nLondon was Europe's leading center for hedge fund managers, but since the Brexit referendum some formerly London-based hedge funds have relocated to other European financial centers such as Frankfurt, Luxembourg, Paris, and Dublin, while some other hedge funds have moved their European offices back to New York City. Before Brexit, according to EuroHedge data, around 800 funds located in the UK had managed 85% of European-based hedge fund assets in 2011. Interest in hedge funds in Asia has increased significantly since 2003, especially in Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore. After Brexit, Europe and the US remain the leading locations for the management of Asian hedge fund assets.\nLegal entity.\nHedge fund legal structures vary depending on location and the investor(s). US hedge funds aimed at US-based, taxable investors are generally structured as limited partnerships or limited liability companies. Limited partnerships and other flow-through taxation structures assure that investors in hedge funds are not subject to both entity-level and personal-level taxation. A hedge fund structured as a limited partnership must have a general partner. The general partner may be an individual or a corporation. The general partner serves as the manager of the limited partnership, and has unlimited liability. The limited partners serve as the fund's investors, and have no responsibility for management or investment decisions. Their liability is limited to the amount of money they invest for partnership interests. As an alternative to a limited partnership arrangement, U.S. domestic hedge funds may be structured as limited liability companies, with members acting as corporate shareholders and enjoying protection from individual liability.\nBy contrast, offshore corporate funds are usually used for non-US investors, and when they are domiciled in an applicable offshore tax haven, no entity-level tax is imposed. Many managers of offshore funds permit the participation of tax-exempt US investors, such as pensions funds, institutional endowments, and charitable trusts. As an alternative legal structure, offshore funds may be formed as an open-ended unit trust using an unincorporated mutual fund structure. Japanese investors prefer to invest in unit trusts, such as those available in the Cayman Islands.\nThe investment manager who organizes the hedge fund may retain an interest in the fund, either as the general partner of a limited partnership or as the holder of \"founder shares\" in a corporate fund. For offshore funds structured as corporate entities, the fund may appoint a board of directors. The board's primary role is to provide a layer of oversight while representing the interests of the shareholders. However, in practice board members may lack sufficient expertise to be effective in performing those duties. The board may include both affiliated directors who are employees of the fund and independent directors whose relationship to the fund is limited.\nSide pockets.\nA side pocket is a mechanism whereby a fund compartmentalizes assets that are relatively illiquid or difficult to value reliably. When an investment is side-pocketed, its value is calculated separately from the value of the fund's main portfolio. Because side pockets are used to hold illiquid investments, investors do not have the standard redemption rights with respect to the side pocket investment that they do with respect to the fund's main portfolio. Profits or losses from the investment are allocated on a \"pro rata\" basis only to those who are investors at the time the investment is placed into the side pocket and are not shared with new investors. Funds typically carry side pocket assets \"at cost\" for purposes of calculating management fees and reporting net asset values. This allows fund managers to avoid attempting a valuation of the underlying investments, which may not always have a readily available market value.\nSide pockets were widely used by hedge funds during the 2008 financial crisis amidst a flood of withdrawal requests. Side pockets allowed fund managers to lay away illiquid securities until market liquidity improved, a move that could reduce losses. However, as the practice restricts investors' ability to redeem their investments it is often unpopular and many have alleged that it has been abused or applied unfairly. The SEC also has expressed concern about aggressive use of side pockets and has sanctioned certain fund managers for inappropriate use of them.\nRegulation.\nHedge funds must abide by the national, federal, and state regulatory laws in their respective locations. The U.S. regulations and restrictions that apply to hedge funds differ from those that apply to its mutual funds. Mutual funds, unlike hedge funds and other private funds, are subject to the Investment Company Act of 1940, which is a highly detailed and extensive regulatory regime. According to a report by the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the most common form of regulation pertains to restrictions on financial advisers and hedge fund managers in an effort to minimize client fraud. On the other hand, U.S. hedge funds are exempt from many of the standard registration and reporting requirements because they only accept accredited investors. In 2010, regulations were enacted in the US and European Union which introduced additional hedge fund reporting requirements. These included the U.S.'s Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act and European Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive.\nIn 2007, in an effort to engage in self-regulation, 14 leading hedge fund managers developed a voluntary set of international standards in best practice and known as the \"Hedge Fund Standards\" they were designed to create a \"framework of transparency, integrity and good governance\" in the hedge fund industry. The Hedge Fund Standards Board was set up to prompt and maintain these standards going forward, and by 2016 it had approximately 200 hedge fund managers and institutional investors with a value of US$3tn investment endorsing the standards. The Managed Funds Association is a US-based trade association, while the Alternative Investment Management Association is the primarily European counterpart.\nUnited States.\nHedge funds within the US are subject to regulatory, reporting, and record-keeping requirements. Many hedge funds also fall under the jurisdiction of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and are subject to rules and provisions of the 1922 Commodity Exchange Act, which prohibits fraud and manipulation. The Securities Act of 1933 required companies to file a registration statement with the SEC to comply with its private placement rules before offering their securities to the public, and most traditional hedge funds in the United States are offered effectively as private placement offerings. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 required a fund with more than 499 investors to register with the SEC. The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 contained anti-fraud provisions that regulated hedge fund managers and advisers, created limits for the number and types of investors, and prohibited public offerings. The Act also exempted hedge funds from mandatory registration with the SEC when selling to Qualified Purchasers with a minimum of US$5\u00a0million in investment assets. Companies and institutional investors with at least US$25\u00a0million in investment assets also qualified.\nIn December 2004, the SEC began requiring hedge fund advisers, managing more than US$25\u00a0million and with more than 14 investors, to register with the SEC under the Investment Advisers Act. The SEC stated that it was adopting a \"risk-based approach\" to monitoring hedge funds as part of its evolving regulatory regime for the burgeoning industry. The new rule was controversial, with two Commissioners dissenting, and was later challenged in court by a hedge fund manager. In June 2006, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia overturned the rule and sent it back to the agency to be reviewed. In response to the court decision, in 2007 the SEC adopted Rule 206(4)-8, which unlike the earlier-challenged rule, \"does not impose additional filing, reporting or disclosure obligations\" but does potentially increase \"the risk of enforcement action\" for negligent or fraudulent activity. Hedge fund managers with at least US$100\u00a0million in assets under management are required to file publicly quarterly reports disclosing ownership of registered equity securities and are subject to public disclosure if they own more than 5% of the class of any registered equity security. Registered advisers must report their business practices and disciplinary history to the SEC and to their investors. They are required to have written compliance policies, a chief compliance officer, and their records and practices may be examined by the SEC.\nThe U.S.'s Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform Act was passed in July 2010 and requires SEC registration of advisers who manage private funds with more than US$150 million in assets. Registered managers must file Form ADV with the SEC, as well as information regarding their assets under management and trading positions. Previously, advisers with fewer than 15 clients were exempt, although many hedge fund advisers voluntarily registered with the SEC to satisfy institutional investors. Under Dodd-Frank, investment advisers with less than US$100 million in assets under management became subject to state regulation. This increased the number of hedge funds under state supervision. Overseas advisers who managed more than US$25 million were also required to register with the SEC. The Act requires hedge funds to provide information about their trades and portfolios to regulators including the newly created Financial Stability Oversight Council. In this regard, most hedge funds and other private funds, including private-equity funds, must file Form PF with the SEC, which is an extensive reporting form with substantial data on the funds' activities and positions. Under the \"Volcker Rule\", regulators are also required to implement regulations for banks, their affiliates, and holding companies to limit their relationships with hedge funds and to prohibit these organizations from proprietary trading, and to limit their investment in, and sponsorship of, hedge funds.\nEurope.\nWithin the European Union (EU), hedge funds are primarily regulated through their managers. In the United Kingdom, where 80% of Europe's hedge funds are based, hedge fund managers are required to be authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). Each country has its own specific restrictions on hedge fund activities, including controls on use of derivatives in Portugal, and limits on leverage in France.\nIn the EU, managers are subject to the EU's Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers (AIFMD). According to the EU, the aim of the directive is to provide greater monitoring and control of alternative investment funds. AIFMD requires all EU hedge fund managers to register with national regulatory authorities and to disclose more information, on a more frequent basis. It also directs hedge fund managers to hold larger amounts of capital. AIFMD also introduced a \"passport\" for hedge funds authorised in one EU country to operate throughout the EU. The scope of AIFMD is broad and encompasses managers located within the EU as well as non-EU managers that market their funds to European investors. An aspect of AIFMD which challenges established practices in the hedge funds sector is the potential restriction of remuneration through bonus deferrals and clawback provisions.\nOffshore.\nSome hedge funds are established in offshore centres, such as the Cayman Islands, Dublin, Luxembourg, Singapore the British Virgin Islands, and Bermuda, which have different regulations concerning non-accredited investors, client confidentiality, and fund manager independence.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, investment fund managers must be approved by, and register with, the Financial Services Board (FSB).\nPerformance.\nMeasurement.\nPerformance statistics for individual hedge funds are difficult to obtain, as the funds have historically not been required to report their performance to a central repository, and restrictions against public offerings and advertisement have led many managers to refuse to provide performance information publicly. However, summaries of individual hedge fund performance are occasionally available in industry journals and databases.\nOne estimate is that the average hedge fund returned 11.4% per year, representing a 6.7% return above overall market performance before fees, based on performance data from 8,400 hedge funds. Another estimate is that between January 2000 and December 2009 hedge funds outperformed other investments and were substantially less volatile, with stocks falling an average of 2.62% per year over the decade and hedge funds rising an average of 6.54% per year; this was an unusually volatile period with both the 2001-2002 dot-com bubble and a recession beginning mid 2007. However, more recent data show that hedge fund performance declined and underperformed the market from about 2009 to 2016.\nHedge funds performance is measured by comparing their returns to an estimate of their risk. Common measures are the Sharpe ratio, Treynor measure and Jensen's alpha. These measures work best when returns follow normal distributions without autocorrelation, and these assumptions are often not met in practice.\nNew performance measures have been introduced that attempt to address some of theoretical concerns with traditional indicators, including: modified Sharpe ratios; the Omega ratio introduced by Keating and Shadwick in 2002; Alternative Investments Risk Adjusted Performance (AIRAP) published by Sharma in 2004; and Kappa developed by Kaplan and Knowles in 2004.\nSector-size effect.\nThere is a debate over whether alpha (the manager's skill element in performance) has been diluted by the expansion of the hedge fund industry. Two reasons are given. First, the increase in traded volume may have been reducing the market anomalies that are a source of hedge fund performance. Second, the remuneration model is attracting more managers, which may dilute the talent available in the industry.\nHedge fund indices.\nIndices play a central and unambiguous role in traditional asset markets, where they are widely accepted as representative of their underlying portfolios. Equity and debt index fund products provide investable access to most developed markets in these asset classes.\nHedge fund indices are more problematic. The typical hedge fund is not traded on exchange, will accept investments only at the discretion of the manager, and does not have an obligation to publish returns. Despite these challenges, Non-investable, Investable, and Clone indices have been developed.\nNon-investable indices.\nNon-investable indices are indicative in nature and aim to represent the performance of some database of hedge funds using some measure such as mean, median, or weighted mean from a hedge fund database. The databases have diverse selection criteria and methods of construction, and no single database captures all funds. This leads to significant differences in reported performance between different indices.\nAlthough they aim to be representative, non-investable indices suffer from a lengthy and largely unavoidable list of biases. Funds' participation in a database is voluntary, leading to self-selection bias because those funds that choose to report may not be typical of funds as a whole. For example, some do not report because of poor results or because they have already reached their target size and do not wish to raise further money.\nThe short lifetimes of many hedge funds mean that there are many new entrants and many departures each year, which raises the problem of survivorship bias. If we examine only funds that have survived to the present, we will overestimate past returns because many of the worst-performing funds have not survived, and the observed association between fund youth and fund performance suggests that this bias may be substantial.\nWhen a fund is added to a database for the first time, all or part of its historical data is recorded ex-post in the database. It is likely that funds only publish their results when they are favorable, so that the average performances displayed by the funds during their incubation period are inflated. This is known as \"instant history bias\" or \"backfill bias\".\nInvestable indices.\nInvestable indices are an attempt to reduce these problems by ensuring that the return of the index is available to shareholders. To create an investable index, the index provider selects funds and develops structured products or derivative instruments that deliver the performance of the index. When investors buy these products the index provider makes the investments in the underlying funds, making an investable index similar in some ways to a fund of hedge funds portfolio.\nTo make the index investable, hedge funds must agree to accept investments on the terms given by the constructor. To make the index liquid, these terms must include provisions for redemptions that some managers may consider too onerous to be acceptable. This means that investable indices do not represent the total universe of hedge funds. Most seriously, they under-represent more successful managers, who typically refuse to accept such investment protocols.\nHedge fund replication.\nThe most recent addition to the field approaches the problem in a different manner. Instead of reflecting the performance of actual hedge funds, they take a statistical approach to the analysis of historic hedge fund returns and use this to construct a model of how hedge fund returns respond to the movements of various investable financial assets. This model is then used to construct an investable portfolio of those assets. This makes the index investable, and in principle, they can be as representative as the hedge fund database from which they were constructed. However, these clone indices rely on a statistical modelling process. Such indices have too short a history to state whether this approach will be considered successful.\nClosures.\nIn March 2017, HFR \u2013 a hedge fund research data and service provider \u2013 reported that there were more hedge-fund closures in 2016 than during the 2009 recession. According to the report, several large public pension funds pulled their investments in hedge funds, because the funds' subpar performance as a group did not merit the high fees they charged.\nDespite the hedge fund industry topping $3 trillion for the first time ever in 2016, the number of new hedge funds launched fell short of levels before the 2008 financial crisis. There were 729 hedge fund launches in 2016, fewer than the 784 opened in 2009, and dramatically fewer than the 968 launches in 2015.\nDebates and controversies.\nSystemic risk.\nSystemic risk refers to the risk of instability across the entire financial system, as opposed to within a single company. Such risk may arise following a destabilizing event or events affecting a group of financial institutions linked through investment activity. Organizations such as the European Central Bank have charged that hedge funds pose systemic risks to the financial sector, and following the failure of hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1998 there was widespread concern about the potential for systemic risk if a hedge fund failure led to the failure of its counterparties. (As it happens, no financial assistance was provided to LTCM by the US Federal Reserve, so there was no direct cost to US taxpayers, but a large bailout had to be mounted by a number of financial institutions.)\nHowever, these claims are widely disputed by the financial industry, who typically regard hedge funds as \"small enough to fail\", since most are relatively small in terms of the assets they manage and operate with low leverage, thereby limiting the potential harm to the economic system should one of them fail. Formal analysis of hedge fund leverage before and during the 2008 financial crisis suggests that hedge fund leverage is both fairly modest and counter-cyclical to the market leverage of investment banks and the larger financial sector. Hedge fund leverage decreased prior to the 2008 financial crisis, even while the leverage of other financial intermediaries continued to increase. Hedge funds fail regularly, and numerous hedge funds failed during the 2008 financial crisis. In testimony to the US House Financial Services Committee in 2009, Ben Bernanke, the Federal Reserve Board Chairman said he \"would not think that any hedge fund or private-equity fund would become a systemically critical firm individually\".\nThis does leave the possibility that hedge funds collectively might contribute to systemic risk if they exhibit herd or self-coordinating behavior, perhaps because many hedge funds make losses in similar trades. This coupled with the extensive use of leverage could lead to forced liquidations in a crisis.\nHedge funds are also closely connected to their prime brokers, typically investment banks, which could contribute to their instability in a crisis, though this works both ways and failing counterparty banks can freeze hedge funds assets, as Lehman Brothers did in 2008.\nAn August 2012 survey by the Financial Services Authority concluded that risks were limited and had reduced as a result, \"inter alia\", of larger margins being required by counterparty banks, but might change rapidly according to market conditions. In stressed market conditions, investors might suddenly withdraw large sums, resulting in forced asset sales. This might cause liquidity and pricing problems if it occurred across a number of funds or in one large highly leveraged fund.\nTransparency.\nHedge funds are structured to avoid most direct regulation (although their managers may be regulated), and are not required to publicly disclose their investment activities, except to the extent that investors generally are subject to disclosure requirements. This is in contrast to a regulated mutual fund or exchange-traded fund, which will typically have to meet regulatory requirements for disclosure. An investor in a hedge fund usually has direct access to the investment adviser of the fund, and may enjoy more personalized reporting than investors in retail investment funds. This may include detailed discussions of risks assumed and significant positions. However, this high level of disclosure is not available to non-investors, contributing to hedge funds' reputation for secrecy, while some hedge funds have very limited transparency even to investors.\nFunds may choose to report some information in the interest of recruiting additional investors. Much of the data available in consolidated databases is self-reported and unverified. A study was done on two major databases containing hedge fund data. The study noted that 465 common funds had significant differences in reported information (\"e.g.\", returns, inception date, net assets value, incentive fee, management fee, investment styles, etc.) and that 5% of return numbers and 5% of NAV numbers were dramatically different. With these limitations, investors have to do their own research, which may cost on the scale of US$50,000 for a fund that is not well-established.\nA lack of verification of financial documents by investors or by independent auditors has, in some cases, assisted in fraud. In the mid-2000s, Kirk Wright of International Management Associates was accused of mail fraud and other securities violations which allegedly defrauded clients of close to US$180 million. In December 2008, Bernard Madoff was arrested for running a US$50 billion Ponzi scheme that closely resembled a hedge fund and was incorrectly described as one. Several feeder hedge funds, of which the largest was Fairfield Sentry, channeled money to it. Following the Madoff case, the SEC adopted reforms in December 2009 that subjected hedge funds to an audit requirement.\nThe process of matching hedge funds to investors has traditionally been fairly opaque, with investments often driven by personal connections or recommendations of portfolio managers. Many funds disclose their holdings, strategy, and historic performance relative to market indices, giving investors some idea of how their money is being allocated, although individual holdings are often not disclosed. Investors are often drawn to hedge funds by the possibility of realizing significant returns, or hedging against volatility in the market. The complexity and fees associated with hedge funds are causing some to exit the market \u2013 CalPERS, the largest pension fund in the US, announced plans to completely divest from hedge funds in 2014. Some services are attempting to improve matching between hedge funds and investors: HedgeZ is designed to allow investors to easily search and sort through funds; iMatchative aims to match investors to funds through algorithms that factor in an investor's goals and behavioral profile, in hopes of helping funds and investors understand the how their perceptions and motivations drive investment decisions.\nLinks with analysts.\nIn June 2006, prompted by a letter from Gary J. Aguirre, the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee began an investigation into the links between hedge funds and independent analysts. Aguirre was fired from his job with the SEC when, as lead investigator of insider trading allegations against Pequot Capital Management, he tried to interview John Mack, then being considered for chief executive officer at Morgan Stanley. The Judiciary Committee and the US Senate Finance Committee issued a scathing report in 2007, which found that Aguirre had been illegally fired in reprisal for his pursuit of Mack, and in 2009 the SEC was forced to re-open its case against Pequot. Pequot settled with the SEC for US$28\u00a0million, and Arthur J. Samberg, chief investment officer of Pequot, was barred from working as an investment advisor. Pequot closed its doors under the pressure of investigations.\nThe systemic practice of hedge funds submitting periodic electronic questionnaires to stock analysts as a part of market research was reported by \"The New York Times\" in July 2012. According to the report, one motivation for the questionnaires was to obtain subjective information not available to the public and possible early notice of trading recommendations that could produce short-term market movements.\nValue in a mean/variance efficient portfolio.\nAccording to modern portfolio theory, rational investors will seek to hold portfolios that are mean/variance efficient (that is, portfolios that offer the highest level of return per unit of risk). One of the attractive features of hedge funds (in particular market neutral and similar funds) is that they sometimes have a modest correlation with traditional assets such as equities. This means that hedge funds have a potentially quite valuable role in investment portfolios as diversifiers, reducing overall portfolio risk.\nHowever, there are at least three reasons why one might not wish to allocate a high proportion of assets into hedge funds. These reasons are:\nSeveral studies have suggested that hedge funds are sufficiently diversifying to merit inclusion in investor portfolios, but this is disputed for example by Mark Kritzman who performed a mean-variance optimization calculation on an opportunity set that consisted of a stock index fund, a bond index fund, and ten hypothetical hedge funds. The optimizer found that a mean-variance efficient portfolio did not contain any allocation to hedge funds, largely because of the impact of performance fees. To demonstrate this, Kritzman repeated the optimization using an assumption that the hedge funds took no performance fees. The result from this second optimization was an allocation of 74% to hedge funds.\nHedge funds tend to perform poorly during equity bear markets, just when an investor needs part of their portfolio to add value. For example, in January\u2013September 2008, the Credit Suisse/Tremont Hedge Fund Index returned -9.87%. According to the same index series, even \"dedicated short bias\" funds returned \u22126.08% in September 2008, when Lehman Brothers collapsed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14413", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14413", "title": "Hydrocodone", "text": "Opioid drug used in pain relief\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHydrocodone, also known as dihydrocodeinone, is a semi-synthetic opioid used to treat pain and as a cough suppressant. It is taken by mouth. Typically, it is dispensed as the combination acetaminophen/hydrocodone or ibuprofen/hydrocodone for pain severe enough to require an opioid and in combination with homatropine methylbromide to relieve cough. It is also available by itself in a long-acting form sold under the brand name Zohydro ER, among others, to treat severe pain of a prolonged duration. Hydrocodone is a controlled drug: in the United States, it is classified as a Schedule II Controlled Substance.\nCommon side effects include dizziness, sleepiness, nausea, and constipation. Serious side effects may include low blood pressure, seizures, QT prolongation, respiratory depression, and serotonin syndrome. Rapidly decreasing the dose may result in opioid withdrawal. Use during pregnancy or breastfeeding is generally not recommended. Hydrocodone is believed to work by activating opioid receptors, mainly in the brain and spinal cord. Hydrocodone 10\u00a0mg is equivalent to about 10\u00a0mg of morphine by mouth.\nHydrocodone was patented in 1923, while the long-acting formulation was approved for medical use in the United States in 2013. It is most commonly prescribed in the United States, which consumed 99% of the worldwide supply as of 2010. In 2018, it was the 402nd most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 400,000 prescriptions. Hydrocodone is a semi-synthetic opioid, converted from codeine or less often from thebaine. Production using genetically engineered yeasts has been developed but is not used commercially.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nHydrocodone is used to treat moderate to severe pain. In liquid formulations, it is used to treat coughing. In one study comparing the potency of hydrocodone to that of oxycodone, it was found that it took 50% more hydrocodone to achieve the same degree of miosis (pupillary contraction). The investigators interpreted this to mean that oxycodone is about 50% more potent than hydrocodone.\nHowever, in a study of emergency department patients with fractures, it was found that an equal amount of either drug provided about the same degree of pain relief, indicating that there is little practical difference between them when used for that purpose. Some references state that the analgesic action of hydrocodone begins in 20\u201330 minutes and lasts about 4\u20138 hours. The manufacturer's information says onset of action is about 10\u201330 minutes and duration is about 4\u20136 hours. Recommended dosing interval is 4\u20136 hours. Hydrocodone reaches peak serum levels after 1.3 hours.\nAvailable forms.\nHydrocodone is available in a variety of formulations for oral administration:\nHydrocodone is not available in parenteral or any other non-oral forms.\nSide effects.\nCommon side effects of hydrocodone are nausea, vomiting, constipation, drowsiness, dizziness, lightheadedness, anxiety, abnormally happy or sad mood, dry throat, difficulty urinating, rash, itching, and contraction of the pupils. Serious side effects include slowed or irregular breathing and chest tightness.\nSeveral cases of progressive bilateral hearing loss unresponsive to steroid therapy have been described as an infrequent adverse reaction to hydrocodone/paracetamol misuse. This adverse effect has been considered by some to be due to the ototoxicity of hydrocodone. Other researchers have suggested that paracetamol is the primary agent responsible for the ototoxicity.\nThe U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) assigns the drug to pregnancy category C, meaning that no adequate and well-controlled studies in humans have been conducted. A newborn of a mother taking opioid medications regularly prior to the birth will be physically dependent. The baby may also exhibit respiratory depression if the opioid dose was high. An epidemiological study indicated that opioid treatment during early pregnancy results in increased risk of various birth defects.\nSymptoms of hydrocodone overdose include narrowed or widened pupils; slow, shallow, or stopped breathing; slowed or stopped heartbeat; cold, clammy, or blue skin; excessive sleepiness; loss of consciousness; seizures; or death.\nHydrocodone can be habit forming, causing physical and psychological dependence. Its abuse liability is similar to morphine and less than oxycodone.\nInteractions.\nHydrocodone is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, and inhibitors and inducers of these enzymes can modify hydrocodone exposure. One study found that combination of paroxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and strong CYP2D6 inhibitor, with once-daily extended-release hydrocodone, did not modify exposure to hydrocodone or the incidence of adverse effects. These findings suggest that hydrocodone can be coadministered with CYP2D6 inhibitors without dosage modification. Conversely, combination of hydrocodone/acetaminophen with the antiviral regimen of ombitasvir, paritaprevir, ritonavir, and dasabuvir for treatment of hepatitis C increased peak concentrations of hydrocodone by 27%, total exposure by 90%, and elimination half-life from 5.1hours to 8.0hours. Ritonavir is a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor as well as inducer of CYP3A and other enzymes, and the other antivirals are known to inhibit drug transporters like organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1 and 1B3, P-glycoprotein, and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP). The changes in hydrocodone levels are consistent with CYP3A4 inhibition by ritonavir. Based on these findings, a 50% lower dose of hydrocodone and closer clinical monitoring was recommended when hydrocodone is used in combination with this antiviral regimen.\nPeople consuming alcohol, other opioids, anticholinergic antihistamines, antipsychotics, anxiolytics, or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants together with hydrocodone may exhibit an additive CNS depression. Hydrocodone taken concomitantly with serotonergic medications like SSRI antidepressants may increase the risk of serotonin syndrome.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nHydrocodone is a highly selective full agonist of the \u03bc-opioid receptor (MOR). This is the main biological target of the endogenous opioid neuropeptide \u03b2-endorphin. Hydrocodone has low affinity for the \u03b4-opioid receptor (DOR) and the \u03ba-opioid receptor (KOR), where it is an agonist similarly.\nStudies have shown hydrocodone is stronger than codeine but only one-tenth as potent as morphine at binding to receptors and reported to be only 59% as potent as morphine in analgesic properties. However, in tests conducted on rhesus monkeys, the analgesic potency of hydrocodone was actually higher than morphine. Oral hydrocodone has a mean equivalent daily dosage (MEDD) factor of 0.4, meaning that 1\u00a0mg of hydrocodone is equivalent to 0.4\u00a0mg of intravenous morphine. However, because of morphine's low oral bioavailability, there is a 1:1 correspondence between orally administered morphine and orally administered hydrocodone.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption.\nHydrocodone is only pharmaceutically available as an oral medication. It is well-absorbed, but the oral bioavailability of hydrocodone is only approximately 25%. The onset of action of hydrocodone via this route is 10 to 20\u00a0minutes, with a peak effect (Tmax) occurring at 30 to 60\u00a0minutes, and it has a duration of 4 to 8 hours. The FDA label for immediate-release hydrocodone with acetaminophen does not include any information on the influence of food on its absorption or other pharmacokinetics. Conversely, coadministration with a high-fat meal increases peak concentrations of different formulations of extended-release hydrocodone by 14 to 54%, whereas area-under-the-curve levels are not notably affected.\nDistribution.\nThe volume of distribution of hydrocodone is 3.3 to 4.7\u00a0L/kg. The plasma protein binding of hydrocodone is 20 to 50%.\nMetabolism.\nIn the liver, hydrocodone is transformed into several metabolites, including norhydrocodone, hydromorphone, 6\u03b1-hydrocodol (dihydrocodeine), and 6\u03b2-hydrocodol. 6\u03b1- and 6\u03b2-hydromorphol are also formed, and the metabolites of hydrocodone are conjugated (via glucuronidation). Hydrocodone has a terminal half-life that averages 3.8\u00a0hours (range 3.3\u20134.4\u00a0hours). The hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2D6 converts hydrocodone into hydromorphone, a more potent opioid (5-fold higher binding affinity to the MOR). However, extensive and poor cytochrome 450 CYP2D6 metabolizers had similar physiological and subjective responses to hydrocodone, and CYP2D6 inhibitor quinidine did not change the responses of extensive metabolizers, suggesting that inhibition of CYP2D6 metabolism of hydrocodone has no practical importance. Ultra-rapid CYP2D6 metabolizers (1\u20132% of the population) may have an increased response to hydrocodone; however, hydrocodone metabolism in this population has not been studied.\nNorhydrocodone, the major metabolite of hydrocodone, is predominantly formed by CYP3A4-catalyzed oxidation. In contrast to hydromorphone, it is described as inactive. However, norhydrocodone is actually a MOR agonist with similar potency to hydrocodone, but has been found to produce only minimal analgesia when administered peripherally to animals (likely due to poor blood\u2013brain barrier and thus central nervous system penetration). Inhibition of CYP3A4 in a child who was, in addition, a poor CYP2D6 metabolizer, resulted in a fatal overdose of hydrocodone. Approximately 40% of hydrocodone metabolism is attributed to non-cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions.\nElimination.\nHydrocodone is excreted in urine, mainly in the form of conjugates.\nChemistry.\nDetection in body fluids.\nHydrocodone concentrations are measured in blood, plasma, and urine to seek evidence of misuse, to confirm diagnoses of poisoning, and to assist in investigations into deaths. Many commercial opiate screening tests react indiscriminately with hydrocodone, other opiates, and their metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish hydrocodone uniquely. Blood and plasma hydrocodone concentrations typically fall into the 5\u201330\u00a0\u03bcg/L range among people taking the drug therapeutically, 100\u2013200\u00a0\u03bcg/L among recreational users, and 100\u20131,600\u00a0\u03bcg/L in cases of acute, fatal overdosage. Co-administration of the drug with food or alcohol can very significantly increase the resulting plasma hydrocodone concentrations that are subsequently achieved.\nSynthesis.\nHydrocodone is most commonly synthesized from thebaine, a constituent of opium latex from the dried poppy plant. Once thebaine is obtained, the reaction undergoes hydrogenation using a palladium catalyst.\nStructure.\nThere are three important structures in hydrocodone: the amine group, which binds to the tertiary nitrogen binding site in the central nervous system's opioid receptor, the hydroxy group that binds to the anionic binding site, and the phenyl group which binds to the phenolic binding site. This triggers a G protein activation and subsequent release of dopamine.\nHistory.\nHydrocodone was first synthesized in Germany in 1920 by Carl Mannich and Helene L\u00f6wenheim. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration on 23 March 1943 for sale in the United States and approved by Health Canada for sale in Canada under the brand name Hycodan.\nHydrocodone was first marketed by Knoll as Dicodid, starting in February 1924 in Germany. This name is analogous to other products the company introduced or otherwise marketed: Dilaudid (hydromorphone, 1926), Dinarkon (oxycodone, 1917), Dihydrin (dihydrocodeine, 1911), and Dimorphan (dihydromorphine). Paramorfan is the trade name of dihydromorphine from another manufacturer, as is Paracodin, for dihydrocodeine.\nHydrocodone was patented in 1923, while the long-acting formulation was approved for medical use in the United States in 2013. It is most commonly prescribed in the United States, which consumed 99% of the worldwide supply as of 2010. In 2018, it was the 402nd most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 400,000 prescriptions.\nSociety and culture.\nFormulations.\nSeveral common imprints for hydrocodone are M365, M366, M367.\nCombination products.\nMost hydrocodone formulations include a second analgesic, such as paracetamol (acetaminophen) or ibuprofen. Examples of hydrocodone combinations include Norco, Vicodin, Vicoprofen and Riboxen.\nLegal status in the United States.\nThe US government imposed tougher prescribing rules for hydrocodone in 2014, changing the drug from Schedule III to Schedule II. In 2011, hydrocodone products were involved in around 100,000 abuse-related emergency department visits in the United States, more than double the number in 2004.\nVeterinary use.\nHydrocodone is predominantly used as an antitussive in dogs. Hydrocodone has low oral bioavailability and provide poor analgesia in cats and dogs. One study in dogs found hydrocodone to be less effective than firocoxib for dogs undergoing a tibial-plateau-levelling osteotomy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14415", "revid": "1274395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14415", "title": "Hashish", "text": "Compressed form of powdered cannabis\nHashish (; from ar \" \u1e25a\u0161i\u0161\"\u00a0'hay'), usually abbreviated as hash, is a compressed form of resin (trichomes) derived from the \"Cannabis\" flowers. As a psychoactive substance, it is consumed plain or mixed with tobacco. It has a long history of use in countries such as Afghanistan, India, Pakistan, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Morocco, Nepal and Egypt.\nHashish consumption is also popular in Europe. In the United States, dried flowers or concentrates are more popular, and hash has seen a relative decrease in popularity following changes in laws that have indirectly allowed for the development and increased availability of cannabis extracts that are more potent than traditional hashish, although regional differences in product preferences exist. Like many recreational drugs, multiple synonyms and alternative names for hashish exist, and vary greatly depending on the country and native language.\nHashish is a cannabis concentrate product composed of compressed or purified preparations of stalked resin glands, called trichomes, from the plant. It is defined by the 1961 UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (Schedule I and IV) as \"the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from the cannabis plant\". The resin contains ingredients such as tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and other cannabinoids\u2014but often in higher concentrations than the unsifted or unprocessed cannabis flower. Purities of confiscated hashish in Europe (2011) range between 3% and 15%. Between 2000 and 2005, the percentage of hashish in cannabis end product seizures was at 18%. With the strength of unprocessed cannabis flowers having increased greatly in recent years\u2014with flowers containing upwards of 25% THC by weight\u2014the strength of hashish produced today and in the future is likely to be far more potent than in these older records.\nThe consistency and appearance of hashish is highly dependent on the process used and the amount of leftover plant material (e.g. chlorophyll). It is typically solid, though its consistency ranges from brittle to malleable. It is most commonly light or dark brown in color, though may appear transparent, yellow, black, or red. In recent years, the terpene \"hashishene\" was identified as possibly responsible for the characteristic smell and aroma of hashish, as compared to raw herbal cannabis.\nHistory.\nHashish has been consumed for many centuries, though there is no clear evidence as to its first appearance. North India and Nepal have a long social tradition in the production of hashish, known locally as \"charas\".\nThe first attestation of the term \"hashish\" is in a pamphlet published in Cairo in 1123 CE, accusing Nizari Muslims of being \"hashish-eaters\". The cult of Nizari militants which emerged after the fall of the Fatimid Caliphate is commonly called the sect of the Assassins\u2014a corruption of \"hashishin,\" Arabic for \"hashish-smokers.\" The 13th-century jurist Ibn Taymiyyah prohibited the use of hashish; he mentioned that it was introduced to the Levant with the Mongol invasion (throughout the 13th century). Smoking did not become common in the Old World until after the introduction of tobacco; until the 1500s, hashish was consumed as an edible in the Muslim world.\nIn 1596, Dutchman Jan Huyghen van Linschoten spent three pages on \"Bangue\" (\"bhang\") in his historic work documenting his journeys in the East. He particularly mentioned the Egyptian hashish. He said, \"Bangue is likewise much used in Turkie and Egypt, and is made in three sorts, having also three names. The first by the Egyptians is called Assis (Hashish (Arab.)), which is the poulder of Hemp, or of Hemp leaves, which is water made in paste or dough, they would eat five pieces, (each) as big as a Chestnut (or larger); This is used by the common people, because it is of a small price, and it is no wonder, that such vertue proceedeth from the Hempe, for that according to Galens opinion, Hempe excessively filleth the head.\"\nHashish arrived in Europe from the East during the 18th century, and is first mentioned scientifically by Gmelin in 1777. The Napoleonic campaigns introduced French troops to hashish in Egypt and the first description of its useful stems was in 1830 by pharmacist and botanist Theodor Friedrich Ludwig Nees von Esenbeck.\nIn 1839, O'Shaughnessy wrote a comprehensive study of Himalayan hemp, which was recognised by the European school of medicine and describes hashish as relief for cramps and causing the disappearance of certain symptoms from afflictions such as rabies, cholera, and tetanus. This led to high hopes in the medical community. In 1840, Louis Aubert-Roche reported his successful use of hashish against pestilence and typhoid. Also, psychiatric experiments with hashish were done at the same time with Jacques-Joseph Moreau being convinced that it is the supreme medicament for use in psychiatry.\nIn the 19th century, hashish was embraced in some European literary circles. Most famously, the Club des Hashischins was a Parisian club dedicated to the consumption of hashish and other drugs; its members included writers Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Dr. Moreau de Tours, Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas, Charles Baudelaire and Honor\u00e9 de Balzac. Baudelaire later wrote the 1860 book \"Les paradis artificiels\" about the state of being under the influence of opium and hashish. Around the same time, American author Fitz Hugh Ludlow wrote the 1857 book \"The Hasheesh Eater\" about his youthful experiences, both positive and negative, with the drug.\nHashish was also mentioned and used as an anesthetic in Germany in 1869. It was imported in great quantities especially from India where it was called charas. However, there were also people who did not deem cannabis as harmless. Between 1880 and 1900 was the peak of the medicinal use, where hashish compounds were most commonplace in almost all European countries and the USA. Evidence of misuse at that time was practically non-existent (as opposed to widespread reports in Asia and Africa). Hashish played a significant role in the treatment of pain, migraine, dysmenorrhea, pertussis, asthma and insomnia in Europe and USA towards the end of the 19th century. Rare applications included stomach ache, depression, diarrhea, diminished appetite, pruritus, hemorrhage, Basedow syndrome and malaria. The use was later prohibited worldwide as the use as a medicine was made impossible by the 1961 UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the majority of hashish in Europe came from Kashmir and other parts of India, Afghanistan, as well as Greece, Syria, Nepal, Lebanon, and Turkey. Larger markets developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s when most of the hashish was imported from Pakistan and Afghanistan. In Greece, Hashish was prevalent in the early decades of the 20th century, and although locally produced for hundreds of years prior, it reached its peak with the coming of two and a half million Greek refugees, expelled from Turkey following the disastrous 1919-21 war. Many of these refugees had habitually smoked hashish in Turkey, using waterpipes, (hookas) called \"arghilethes\", and due to extreme poverty upon arriving in Greece, and living in overcrowded and poor refugee communities, many hashish dens, called \"tekethes\", sprung up in Greece's larger cities, the port city of Piraeus, and the northern city of Thessaloniki (where many refugees lived). This gave rise to a substantial urban underclass and sub culture of hashish smokers called \"hasiklithes\", and a musical genre \"rembetika\" (oriental sounding), \"urban blues\" played on the bouzouki, tzoura, and oriental instruments such as the baglama, outi (oud) and kanonaki (kanun) that spoke of life as a hashish user in the \"tekethes\", as well as about life as refugees, society's unfairness, lack of financial opportunities, prejudice against the refugees, and the deceit of lovers and others in the community. The \"tekethes\" were closed down in the 1930s by the Greek police and the \"rembetes\" were jailed and ostracized. In succeeding decades, there was a strong resurgence in Greece of \"rembetika\" music with the songs of the rembetes and hasiklithes being continually performed publicly by many including the younger generation, as a form of cultural heritage, and have gained respectability and popularity for their frank expressions of that period, and Greek society in general. Due to disruptive conflicts in the regions, Morocco took over and was the sufficient exporter until lately. It is believed that massive hashish production for international trade originated in Morocco during the 1960s, where the cannabis plant was widely available. Before the coming of the first hippies from the Hippie Trail, only small pieces of Lebanese hashish were found in Morocco.\nHowever, since the 2000s, there has been a dramatic shift in the market due to an increase of homegrown cannabis production. While Morocco held a quasi-monopoly on hashish in the 1990s with the so-called \"soap bar\" blocks, which were of low quality, Afghanistan is now regarded as the biggest producer of higher quality hashish. Since then, hashish quality in Europe has increased while its prices have remained stable, with the exception of during the COVID-19 pandemic, where the cannabis street prices surged due to various national lockdowns.\nHashish remains in high demand in most of the world while quality continues to increase, due to many Moroccan and western farmers in Morocco and other hash producing countries using more advanced cultivation methods as well as cultivating further developed cannabis strains which increases yields greatly, as well as improving resin quality with higher ratios of psychoactive ingredients (THC). A tastier, smoother and more aromatic terpenes and flavonoids profile is seen as an indicator of a significant rise in hashish quality in more recent years. Hashish production in Spain has also become more popular and is on the rise, however the demand for relatively cheap and high-quality Moroccan hash is still extremely high.\nChanges to regulations around the world have contributed greatly to more and more countries becoming legitimate hashish producing regions, with countries like Spain effecting more lenient laws on cannabis products such as hashish. Washington State followed by Colorado started regulating cultivation, manufacturing and distribution of cannabis and cannabis derived products such as hashish in the United States, followed by many other places in the US (such as Humboldt, California) and around the world.\nEuropean market.\nAccording to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA), Western Europe is the biggest market for cannabis resin with 70% of global seizures. However, the European hashish market is changing. Cannabis cultivation increased throughout the 1990s until 2004, with a noticeable decrease reported in 2005 according to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. Historically, Morocco has been the major source for hashish. Lately, however, there has been a shift in the market, and Afghanistan has been named the major producer of hashish. Even though a drop in usage and production has been reported, Morocco produced around 6600 tonnes of resin in 2005.\nAs 641 tonnes of hashish were consumed in the EU in 2013, the European market is currently the world's largest and most profitable. Therefore, many players are involved in the business, including organised crime groups. The largest cannabis resin seizures in Europe happen in Portugal, due to its proximity to Northern Africa.\nThe 1990s \"soap bars\" disappeared and the physical shapes of hashish changed to melon shaped, tablets or olive shaped pellets. Overall the general trend of domestically grown cannabis displacing the imported resin leads to a market reaction of potency changes while the prices remain stable while soap-bar potency increased from 8% to up to 20.7% in 2014.\nGenerally, more resin than herb is consumed in Europe.\nSubstance properties.\nHashish is made from cannabinoid-rich glandular hairs known as trichomes, as well as varying amounts of cannabis flower and leaf fragments. The flowers of a mature female plant contain the most trichomes, though trichomes are also found on other parts of the plant. Certain strains of cannabis are cultivated specifically for their ability to produce large amounts of trichomes. The resin reservoirs of the trichomes, sometimes erroneously called pollen (vendors often use the euphemism \"pollen catchers\" to describe screened kief-grinders in order to skirt paraphernalia-selling laws), are separated from the plant through various methods.\nHashish samples from India, Lebanon and Morocco confiscated in Europe and Israel in 2005 contained all appreciable amounts of cannabidiol (CBD), and cannabinol (CBN), in addition to tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). In some samples the CBD-content was significantly higher than the THC-content. The simultaneous occurrence of these three cannabinoids constitute the typical, chemical profile of hashish consumed in Europe and Northern Africa. In comparison, most high-potency cannabis products contain only THC. It is believed that the psychotropic effects of hashish are therefore more subtle, and sedative.\nIn a study conducted in 2014 by Jean-Jaques Filippi, Marie Marchini, C\u00e9line Charvoz, Laurence Dujourdy and Nicolas Baldovini (\"Multidimensional analysis of cannabis volatile constituents: Identification of 5,5-dimethyl-1-vinylbicyclo[2.1.1]hexane as a volatile marker of hashish, the resin of Cannabis sativa L.\") the researchers linked the characteristic flavour of hashish with a rearrangement of myrcene caused during the process of manufacture.\nDepending on the production process, the product can be contaminated with different amounts of dirt and plant fragments, varying greatly in terms of appearance, texture, odour and potency. Also, adulterants may be added in order to increase weight or modify appearance.\nShort-term effects.\nHashish can be consumed by oral ingestion or smoking. When smoked, it may be smoked in a pipe, bong, vaporizer or joints, where it is often mixed with tobacco, as pure hashish will burn poorly alone. THC has a low water solubility therefore it is most effective when ingested alongside a fatty meal or snack. Not all hashish can be consumed orally as some is not decarboxylated during manufacture. Generally the methods are similar to overall cannabis consumption.\nAs hashish\u2019s active ingredient is THC, it has the same effects as cannabis. The onset is felt within 15 minutes when smoking, and about 30 to 60 minutes when eaten. Common effects include:\nSide effects with overdose may include anxiety, paranoia and panic.\nManufacturing processes.\nThe sticky resins of the fresh flowering female cannabis plant are collected. Traditionally this was, and still is, done in remote locations by pressing or rubbing the flowering plant between two hands and then forming the sticky resins into a small ball of hashish called charas. This method produces the highest amount of cannabinoids (THC content up to 60%) without chemical solvents or distillation. The best quality charas is produced in Central Asia, and sold in sausage-like shapes.\nMechanical separation methods use physical action to remove the trichomes from the dried plant material, such as sieving through a screen by hand or in motorized tumblers. This technique is known as \"drysifting\". The resulting powder, referred to as \"kief\" or \"drysift\", is compressed with the aid of heat into blocks of hashish; if pure, the kief will become gooey and pliable. When a high level of pure THC is present, the end product will be almost transparent and will start to melt at the point of human contact.\nIce-water separation is another mechanical method of isolating trichomes. Newer techniques have been developed such as heat and pressure separations, static-electricity sieving or acoustical dry sieving.\nTrichomes may break away from supporting stalks and leaves when plant material becomes brittle at low temperatures. After plant material has been agitated in an icy slush, separated trichomes are often dense enough to sink to the bottom of the ice-water mixture following agitation, while lighter pieces of leaves and stems tend to float.\nThe ice-water method requires ice, water, agitation, filtration bags with various-sized screens and plant material. With the ice-water extraction method the resin becomes hard and brittle and can easily be separated. This allows large quantities of pure resins to be extracted in a very clean process without the use of solvents, making for a more purified hashish.\nChemical separation methods generally use a solvent such as ethanol, butane or hexane to dissolve the lipophilic desirable resin. Remaining plant materials are filtered out of the solution and sent to the compost. The solvent is then evaporated, or boiled off (purged) leaving behind the desirable resins, called honey oil, \"hash oil\", or just \"oil\". Honey oil still contains waxes and essential oils and can be further purified by vacuum distillation to yield \"red oil\". The product of chemical separations is more commonly referred to as \"honey oil\". This oil is not really hashish, as the latter name covers trichomes that are extracted by sieving. This leaves most of the glands intact.\nMorocco has been the major hashish producer globally with \u20ac10.8 billion earned from Moroccan resin in 2004, but some so-called \"Moroccan\" may actually be European-made. The income for the farmers was around \u20ac325 million in 2005. While the overall number of plants and areas shrank in size, the introduction of more potent hybrid plants produced a high resin rate. The amount of resin produced is estimated to range between 3,800 and 9,500 tonnes in 2005.\nThe largest producer today is Afghanistan, however studies suggest there is a \"hashish revival\" in Morocco. Solventless Rosin Method was discovered by Phil Salazar in 2015. Rosin is created by pressing Cannabis Flower, Dry sift, or Ice water hash in between parchment paper using a pneumatic or hydraulic press with heated plates to create force and pressure to expel the oil from the product. The moisture present in the flower, Dry Sift, or ice water hash will create steam pressure and force the oil from the source creating a solventless hash product.\nQuality.\nTiny pieces of leaf matter may be accidentally or even purposefully added; adulterants introduced when the hashish is being produced will reduce the purity of the material and often resulting in green finished product. If hash is particularly sticky, this can mean that additional oils have been added to increase the overall weight of the product. The most common quality indicator is the smell. High-quality hash will smell fragrant and aromatic, whereas hash of low quality may have a distinct mouldy or musty aroma. The tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) content of hashish comes in wide ranges from almost none to 65% and that of hash oil from 30% to 90%. Hashish can also contain appreciable amounts of CBD, CBN and also contain trace amounts of other cannabinoids.\nAs mentioned above, there has been a general increase in potency as the competition has grown bigger and new hybrid plants have been developed.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14416", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14416", "title": "Hash Oil", "text": ""}
{"id": "14417", "revid": "13897859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14417", "title": "Hypnosis", "text": "State of increased suggestibility\nHypnosis is a human condition involving focused attention (the selective attention/selective inattention hypothesis, SASI), reduced peripheral awareness, and an enhanced capacity to respond to suggestion.\nThere are competing theories explaining hypnosis and related phenomena. \"Altered state\" theories see hypnosis as an altered state of mind or trance, marked by a level of awareness different from the ordinary state of consciousness. In contrast, \"non-state\" theories see hypnosis as, variously, a type of placebo effect, a redefinition of an interaction with a therapist or a form of imaginative role enactment.\nDuring hypnosis, a person is said to have heightened focus and concentration and an increased response to suggestions.\nHypnosis usually begins with a hypnotic induction involving a series of preliminary instructions and suggestions. The use of hypnosis for therapeutic purposes is referred to as \"hypnotherapy\", while its use as a form of entertainment for an audience is known as \"stage hypnosis\", a form of mentalism.\nThe use of hypnosis as a form of therapy to retrieve and integrate early trauma is controversial within the scientific mainstream. Research indicates that hypnotising an individual may aid the formation of false memories. Medical hypnosis is often considered pseudoscience or quackery.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe words \"hypnosis\" and \"hypnotism\" both derive from the term \"neuro-hypnotism\" (nervous sleep), all of which were coined by \u00c9tienne F\u00e9lix d'Henin de Cuvillers in the 1820s. The term \"hypnosis\" is derived from the ancient Greek \u1f51\u03c0\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 \"hypnos\", \"sleep\", and the suffix -\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 -\"osis\", or from \u1f51\u03c0\u03bd\u03cc\u03c9 \"hypno\u014d\", \"put to sleep\" (stem of aorist \"hypn\u014ds\"-) and the suffix -\"is\". These words were popularised in English by the Scottish surgeon James Braid (to whom they are sometimes wrongly attributed) around 1841. Braid based his practice on that developed by Franz Mesmer and his followers (which was called \"Mesmerism\" or \"animal magnetism\"), but differed in his theory as to how the procedure worked.\nDefinition and classification.\nA person in a state of hypnosis has focused attention, a deeply relaxed physical and mental state, and increased suggestibility.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The hypnotized individual appears to heed only the communications of the hypnotist and typically responds in an uncritical, automatic fashion while ignoring all aspects of the environment other than those pointed out by the hypnotist. In a hypnotic state an individual tends to see, feel, smell, and otherwise perceive in accordance with the hypnotist's suggestions, even though these suggestions may be in apparent contradiction to the actual stimuli present in the environment. The effects of hypnosis are not limited to sensory change; even the subject's memory and awareness of self may be altered by suggestion, and the effects of the suggestions may be extended (post-hypnotically) into the subject's subsequent waking activity.\nIt could be said that hypnotic suggestion is explicitly intended to make use of the placebo effect. For example, in 1994, Irving Kirsch characterized hypnosis as a \"non-deceptive placebo\", i.e., a method that openly makes use of suggestion and employs methods to amplify its effects.\nA definition of hypnosis, derived from academic psychology, was provided in 2005, when the Society for Psychological Hypnosis, Division 30 of the American Psychological Association (APA), published the following formal definition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hypnosis typically involves an introduction to the procedure during which the subject is told that suggestions for imaginative experiences will be presented. The hypnotic induction is an extended initial suggestion for using one's imagination, and may contain further elaborations of the introduction. A hypnotic procedure is used to encourage and evaluate responses to suggestions. When using hypnosis, one person (the subject) is guided by another (the hypnotist) to respond to suggestions for changes in subjective experience, alterations in perception, sensation, emotion, thought or behavior. Persons can also learn self-hypnosis, which is the act of administering hypnotic procedures on one's own. If the subject responds to hypnotic suggestions, it is generally inferred that hypnosis has been induced. Many believe that hypnotic responses and experiences are characteristic of a hypnotic state. While some think that it is not necessary to use the word \"hypnosis\" as part of the hypnotic induction, others view it as essential.\nMichael Nash provides a list of eight definitions of hypnosis by different authors, in addition to his own view that hypnosis is \"a special case of psychological regression\":\nJoe Griffin and Ivan Tyrrell (the originators of the human givens approach) define hypnosis as \"any artificial way of accessing the REM state, the same brain state in which dreaming occurs\" and suggest that this definition, when properly understood, resolves \"many of the mysteries and controversies surrounding hypnosis\". They see the REM state as being vitally important for life itself, for programming in our instinctive knowledge initially (after Dement and Jouvet) and then for adding to this throughout life. They attempt to explain this by asserting that, in a sense, all learning is post-hypnotic, which they say explains why the number of ways people can be put into a hypnotic state are so varied: according to them, anything that focuses a person's attention, inward or outward, puts them into a trance.\nInduction.\nHypnosis is normally preceded by a \"hypnotic induction\" technique. Traditionally, this was interpreted as a method of putting the subject into a \"hypnotic trance\"; however, subsequent \"nonstate\" theorists have viewed it differently, seeing it as a means of heightening client expectation, defining their role, focusing attention, etc. The induction techniques and methods are dependent on the depth of hypnotic trance level and for each stage of trance, the number of which in some sources ranges from 30 stages to 50 stages, there are different types of inductions. There are several different induction techniques. One of the most influential methods was Braid's \"eye-fixation\" technique, also known as \"Braidism\". Many variations of the eye-fixation approach exist, including the induction used in the Stanford Hypnotic Susceptibility Scale (SHSS), the most widely used research tool in the field of hypnotism. Braid's original description of his induction is as follows:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Take any bright object (e.g. a lancet case) between the thumb and fore and middle fingers of the left hand; hold it from about eight to fifteen inches from the eyes, at such position above the forehead as may be necessary to produce the greatest possible strain upon the eyes and eyelids, and enable the patient to maintain a steady fixed stare at the object.The patient must be made to understand that he is to keep the eyes steadily fixed on the object, and the mind riveted on the idea of that one object. It will be observed, that owing to the consensual adjustment of the eyes, the pupils will be at first contracted: They will shortly begin to dilate, and, after they have done so to a considerable extent, and have assumed a wavy motion, if the fore and middle fingers of the right hand, extended and a little separated, are carried from the object toward the eyes, most probably the eyelids will close involuntarily, with a vibratory motion. If this is not the case, or the patient allows the eyeballs to move, desire him to begin anew, giving him to understand that he is to allow the eyelids to close when the fingers are again carried towards the eyes, but that the eyeballs must be kept fixed, in the same position, and the mind riveted to the one idea of the object held above the eyes. In general, it will be found, that the eyelids close with a vibratory motion, or become spasmodically closed.\nBraid later acknowledged that the hypnotic induction technique was not necessary in every case, and subsequent researchers have generally found that on average it contributes less than previously expected to the effect of hypnotic suggestions. Variations and alternatives to the original hypnotic induction techniques were subsequently developed. However, this method is still considered authoritative. In 1941, Robert White wrote: \"It can be safely stated that nine out of ten hypnotic techniques call for reclining posture, muscular relaxation, and optical fixation followed by eye closure.\"\nSuggestion.\nWhen James Braid first described hypnotism, he did not use the term \"suggestion\" but referred instead to the act of focusing the conscious mind of the subject upon a single dominant idea. Braid's main therapeutic strategy involved stimulating or reducing physiological functioning in different regions of the body. In his later works, however, Braid placed increasing emphasis upon the use of a variety of different verbal and non-verbal forms of suggestion, including the use of \"waking suggestion\" and self-hypnosis. Subsequently, Hippolyte Bernheim shifted the emphasis from the physical state of hypnosis on to the psychological process of verbal suggestion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I define hypnotism as the induction of a peculiar psychical [i.e., mental] condition which increases the susceptibility to suggestion. Often, it is true, the [hypnotic] sleep that may be induced facilitates suggestion, but it is not the necessary preliminary. It is suggestion that rules hypnotism.\nBernheim's conception of the primacy of verbal suggestion in hypnotism dominated the subject throughout the 20th century, leading some authorities to declare him the father of modern hypnotism.\nContemporary hypnotism uses a variety of suggestion forms including direct verbal suggestions, \"indirect\" verbal suggestions such as requests or insinuations, metaphors and other rhetorical figures of speech, and non-verbal suggestion in the form of mental imagery, voice tonality, and physical manipulation. A distinction is commonly made between suggestions delivered \"permissively\" and those delivered in a more \"authoritarian\" manner. Harvard hypnotherapist Deirdre Barrett writes that most modern research suggestions are designed to bring about immediate responses, whereas hypnotherapeutic suggestions are usually post-hypnotic ones that are intended to trigger responses affecting behaviour for periods ranging from days to a lifetime in duration. The hypnotherapeutic ones are often repeated in multiple sessions before they achieve peak effectiveness.\nConscious and unconscious mind.\nSome hypnotists view suggestion as a form of communication that is directed primarily to the subject's conscious mind, whereas others view it as a means of communicating with the \"unconscious\" or \"subconscious\" mind. These concepts were introduced into hypnotism at the end of the 19th century by Sigmund Freud and Pierre Janet. Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytic theory describes conscious thoughts as being at the surface of the mind and unconscious processes as being deeper in the mind. Braid, Bernheim, and other Victorian pioneers of hypnotism did not refer to the unconscious mind but saw hypnotic suggestions as being addressed to the subject's \"conscious\" mind. Indeed, Braid actually defines hypnotism as focused (conscious) attention upon a dominant idea (or suggestion). Different views regarding the nature of the mind have led to different conceptions of suggestion. Hypnotists who believe that responses are mediated primarily by an \"unconscious mind\", like Milton Erickson, make use of indirect suggestions such as metaphors or stories whose intended meaning may be concealed from the subject's conscious mind. The concept of subliminal suggestion depends upon this view of the mind. By contrast, hypnotists who believe that responses to suggestion are primarily mediated by the conscious mind, such as Theodore Barber and Nicholas Spanos, have tended to make more use of direct verbal suggestions and instructions.\nIdeo-dynamic reflex.\nThe first neuropsychological theory of hypnotic suggestion was introduced early by James Braid who adopted his friend and colleague William Carpenter's theory of the ideo-motor reflex response to account for the phenomenon of hypnotism. Carpenter had observed from close examination of everyday experience that, under certain circumstances, the mere idea of a muscular movement could be sufficient to produce a reflexive, or automatic, contraction or movement of the muscles involved, albeit in a very small degree. Braid extended Carpenter's theory to encompass the observation that a wide variety of bodily responses besides muscular movement can be thus affected, for example, the idea of sucking a lemon can automatically stimulate salivation, a secretory response. Braid, therefore, adopted the term \"ideo-dynamic\", meaning \"by the power of an idea\", to explain a broad range of \"psycho-physiological\" (mind\u2013body) phenomena. Braid coined the term \"mono-ideodynamic\" to refer to the theory that hypnotism operates by concentrating attention on a single idea in order to amplify the ideo-dynamic reflex response. Variations of the basic ideo-motor, or ideo-dynamic, theory of suggestion have continued to exercise considerable influence over subsequent theories of hypnosis, including those of Clark L. Hull, Hans Eysenck, and Ernest Rossi. In Victorian psychology the word \"idea\" encompasses any mental representation, including mental imagery, memories, etc.\nSusceptibility.\nBraid made a rough distinction between different stages of hypnosis, which he termed the first and second conscious stage of hypnotism; he later replaced this with a distinction between \"sub-hypnotic\", \"full hypnotic\", and \"hypnotic coma\" stages. Jean-Martin Charcot made a similar distinction between stages which he named somnambulism, lethargy, and catalepsy. However, Ambroise-Auguste Li\u00e9beault and Hippolyte Bernheim introduced more complex hypnotic \"depth\" scales based on a combination of behavioural, physiological, and subjective responses, some of which were due to direct suggestion and some of which were not. In the first few decades of the 20th century, these early clinical \"depth\" scales were superseded by more sophisticated \"hypnotic susceptibility\" scales based on experimental research. The most influential were the Davis\u2013Husband and Friedlander\u2013Sarbin scales developed in the 1930s. Andr\u00e9 Weitzenhoffer and Ernest R. Hilgard developed the Stanford Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility in 1959, consisting of 12 suggestion test items following a standardised hypnotic eye-fixation induction script, and this has become one of the most widely referenced research tools in the field of hypnosis. Soon after, in 1962, Ronald Shor and Emily Carota Orne developed a similar group scale called the Harvard Group Scale of Hypnotic Susceptibility (HGSHS).\nWhereas the older \"depth scales\" tried to infer the level of \"hypnotic trance\" from supposed observable signs such as spontaneous amnesia, most subsequent scales have measured the degree of observed or self-evaluated \"responsiveness\" to specific suggestion tests such as direct suggestions of arm rigidity (catalepsy). The Stanford, Harvard, HIP, and most other susceptibility scales convert numbers into an assessment of a person's susceptibility as \"high\", \"medium\", or \"low\". Approximately 80% of the population are medium, 10% are high, and 10% are low. There is some controversy as to whether this is distributed on a \"normal\" bell-shaped curve or whether it is bi-modal with a small \"blip\" of people at the high end. Hypnotisability scores are highly stable over a person's lifetime. Research by Deirdre Barrett has found that there are two distinct types of highly susceptible subjects, which she terms fantasisers and dissociaters. Fantasisers score high on absorption scales, find it easy to block out real-world stimuli without hypnosis, spend much time daydreaming, report imaginary companions as a child, and grew up with parents who encouraged imaginary play. Dissociaters often have a history of childhood abuse or other trauma, learned to escape into numbness, and to forget unpleasant events. Their association to \"daydreaming\" was often going blank rather than creating vividly recalled fantasies. Both score equally high on formal scales of hypnotic susceptibility.\nIndividuals with dissociative identity disorder have the highest hypnotisability of any clinical group, followed by those with post-traumatic stress disorder.\nApplications.\nHypnosis has been used as a supplemental approach to cognitive behavioral therapy since as early as 1949. Hypnosis was defined in relation to classical conditioning; where the words of the therapist were the stimuli and the hypnosis would be the conditioned response. Some traditional cognitive behavioral therapy methods were based in classical conditioning. It would include inducing a relaxed state and introducing a feared stimulus. One way of inducing the relaxed state was through hypnosis.\nHypnotism has also been used in forensics, sports, education, physical therapy, and rehabilitation. Hypnotism has also been employed by artists for creative purposes, most notably the surrealist circle of Andr\u00e9 Breton who employed hypnosis, automatic writing, and sketches for creative purposes. Hypnotic methods have been used to re-experience drug states and mystical experiences. Self-hypnosis is popularly used to quit smoking, alleviate stress and anxiety, promote weight loss, and induce sleep hypnosis. Stage hypnosis can persuade people to perform unusual public feats.\nSome people have drawn analogies between certain aspects of hypnotism and areas such as crowd psychology, religious hysteria, and ritual trances in preliterate tribal cultures.\nHypnotherapy.\nHypnotherapy is a use of hypnosis in psychotherapy. Physicians and psychologists may use hypnosis to treat depression, anxiety, eating disorders, sleep disorders, compulsive gambling, phobias and post-traumatic stress, while certified hypnotherapists who are not physicians or psychologists often treat smoking and weight management. Hypnotherapy is generally not considered to be based on scientific evidence, and is rarely recommended in clinical practice guidelines. Hypnotherapy was historically used in psychiatric and legal settings to enhance the recall of repressed or degraded memories, but this application of the technique has declined as scientific evidence accumulated that hypnotherapy can increase confidence in false memories.\nProponents of hypnotherapy claim it can have additive effects when treating psychological disorders alongside of scientifically proven cognitive therapies. The effectiveness of hypnotherapy has not yet been accurately assessed, and, due to the lack of evidence indicating any level of efficacy, it is regarded as a type of alternative medicine by numerous reputable medical organisations, such as the National Health Service.\nForensic hypnosis.\nThe use of hypnosis to exhume information thought to be buried within the mind in the investigative process and as evidence in court became increasingly popular from the 1950s to the early 1980s with its use being debated into the 1990s when its popular use mostly diminished. Forensic hypnosis's uses are hindered by concerns with its reliability and accuracy. Controversy surrounds the use of hypnotherapy to retrieve memories, especially those from early childhood. The American Medical Association and the American Psychological Association caution against recovered-memory therapy in cases of alleged childhood trauma, stating that \"it is impossible, without corroborative evidence, to distinguish a true memory from a false one.\" Past life regression is regarded as pseudoscience.\nMilitary.\nA 2006 declassified 1966 document obtained by the US Freedom of Information Act archive shows that hypnosis was investigated for military applications. The full paper explores the potentials of operational uses. The overall conclusion of the study was that there was no evidence that hypnosis could be used for military applications, and no clear evidence whether \"hypnosis\" is a definable phenomenon outside ordinary suggestion, motivation, and subject expectancy. According to the document:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The use of hypnosis in intelligence would present certain technical problems not encountered in the clinic or laboratory. To obtain compliance from a resistant source, for example, it would be necessary to hypnotise the source under essentially hostile circumstances. There is no good evidence, clinical or experimental, that this can be done.\nFurthermore, the document states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It would be difficult to find an area of scientific interest more beset by divided professional opinion and contradictory experimental evidence... No one can say whether hypnosis is a qualitatively unique state with some physiological and conditioned response components or only a form of suggestion induced by high motivation and a positive relationship between hypnotist and subject... T. X. Barber has produced \"hypnotic deafness\" and \"hypnotic blindness\", analgesia and other responses seen in hypnosis\u2014all without hypnotising anyone... Orne has shown that unhypnotised persons can be motivated to equal and surpass the supposed superhuman physical feats seen in hypnosis.\nThe study concluded that there are no reliable accounts of its effective use by an intelligence service in history.\nResearch into hypnosis in military applications is further verified by the Project MKUltra experiments, also conducted by the CIA. According to Congressional testimony, the CIA experimented with utilising LSD and hypnosis for mind control. Many of these programs were done domestically and on participants who were not informed of the study's purposes or that they would be given drugs.\nSelf-hypnosis.\nSelf-hypnosis happens when a person hypnotises oneself, commonly involving the use of autosuggestion. The technique is often used to increase motivation for a diet, to quit smoking, or to reduce stress. People who practise self-hypnosis sometimes require assistance; some people use devices known as mind machines to assist in the process, whereas others use hypnotic recordings.\nSelf-hypnosis is claimed to help with stage fright, relaxation, and physical well-being.\nStage hypnosis.\nStage hypnosis is a form of entertainment, traditionally employed in a club or theatre before an audience. Due to stage hypnotists' showmanship, many people believe that hypnosis is a form of mind control. Stage hypnotists typically attempt to hypnotise the entire audience and then select individuals who are \"under\" to come up on stage and perform embarrassing acts, while the audience watches. However, the effects of stage hypnosis are probably due to a combination of psychological factors, participant selection, suggestibility, physical manipulation, stagecraft, and trickery. The desire to be the centre of attention, having an excuse to violate their own fear suppressors, and the pressure to please are thought to convince subjects to \"play along\". Books by stage hypnotists sometimes explicitly describe the use of deception in their acts; for example, Ormond McGill's \"New Encyclopedia of Stage Hypnotism\" describes an entire \"fake hypnosis\" act that depends upon the use of private whispers throughout.\nMusic.\nThe idea of music as hypnosis developed from the work of Franz Mesmer. Instruments such as pianos, violins, harps and, especially, the glass harmonica often featured in Mesmer's treatments, and were considered to contribute to his success.\nHypnotic music became an important part in the development of a 'physiological psychology' that regarded the hypnotic state as an 'automatic' phenomenon that links to physical reflex. In their experiments with sound hypnosis, Jean-Martin Charcot used gongs and tuning forks, and Ivan Pavlov used bells. The intention behind their experiments was to prove that physiological response to sound could be automatic, bypassing the conscious mind.\nSatanic brainwashing.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, a moral panic took place in the US fearing Satanic ritual abuse. As part of this, certain books such as \"The Devil's Disciples\" claimed that some bands, particularly in the musical genre of heavy metal, brainwashed American teenagers with subliminal messages to lure them into the worship of the devil, sexual immorality, murder, and especially suicide.\nCrime.\nVarious people have been suspected of or convicted for hypnosis-related crimes, including robbery and sexual abuse.\nIn 1951, Palle Hardrup shot and killed two people during a botched robbery in Copenhagen - see Hypnosis murders. Hardrup claimed that his friend and former cellmate Bj\u00f8rn Schouw Nielsen had hypnotised him to commit the robbery, inadvertently causing the deaths. Both were sentenced to jail time.\nIn 2013, the then-40-year-old amateur hypnotist Timothy Porter attempted to sexually abuse his female weight-loss client. She reported awaking from a trance and finding him behind her with his pants down, telling her to touch herself. He was subsequently called to court and included on the sex offender list. In 2015, Gary Naraido, then 52, was sentenced to 10 years in prison for several hypnosis-related sexual abuse charges. Besides the primary charge by a 22-year-old woman who he sexually abused in a hotel under the guise of a free therapy session, he also admitted to having sexually assaulted a 14-year-old girl. In December 2018, a Brazilian medium named Jo\u00e3o Teixeira de Faria (also known as \"Jo\u00e3o de Deus\"), famous for performing Spiritual Surgeries through hypnosis techniques, was accused of sexual abuse by 12 women. In 2016 an Ohio lawyer was sentenced to 12 years of prison after hypnotizing a dozen different clients into committing sexual acts under the guise of a mindfulness exercise.\nSexual.\nErotic hypnosis is a broad term for activities involving hypnotic suggestions applied to create arousal. Some erotic hypnosis is practiced in the context of BDSM relationships and communities, and is an example of a sexual fetish or paraphilia.\nState vs. non-state.\nThe central theoretical disagreement regarding hypnosis is known as the \"state versus non-state\" debate. When Braid introduced the concept of hypnotism, he equivocated over the nature of the \"state\", sometimes describing it as a specific sleep-like neurological state comparable to animal hibernation or yogic meditation, while at other times he emphasized that hypnotism encompasses a number of different stages or states that are an extension of ordinary psychological and physiological processes. Overall, Braid appears to have moved from a more \"special state\" understanding of hypnotism toward a more complex \"non-state\" orientation.\nState theorists interpret the effects of hypnotism as due primarily to a specific, abnormal, and uniform psychological or physiological state of some description, often referred to as \"hypnotic trance\" or an \"altered state of consciousness\". Non-state theorists rejected the idea of hypnotic trance and interpret the effects of hypnotism as due to a combination of multiple task-specific factors derived from normal cognitive, behavioural, and social psychology, such as social role-perception and favorable motivation (Sarbin), active imagination and positive cognitive set (Barber), response expectancy (Kirsch), and the active use of task-specific subjective strategies (Spanos). The personality psychologist Robert White is often cited as providing one of the first non-state definitions of hypnosis in a 1941 article:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hypnotic behaviour is meaningful, goal-directed striving, its most general goal being to behave like a hypnotised person as this is continuously defined by the operator and understood by the client.\nPut simply, it is often claimed that, whereas the older \"special state\" interpretation emphasizes the difference between hypnosis and ordinary psychological processes, the \"non-state\" interpretation emphasizes their similarity.\nComparisons between hypnotised and non-hypnotised subjects suggest that, if a \"hypnotic trance\" does exist, it only accounts for a small proportion of the effects attributed to hypnotic suggestion, most of which can be replicated without hypnotic induction.\nHyper-suggestibility.\nBraid can be taken to imply, in later writings, that hypnosis is largely a state of heightened suggestibility induced by expectation and focused attention. In particular, Hippolyte Bernheim became known as the leading proponent of the \"suggestion theory\" of hypnosis, at one point going so far as to declare that there is no hypnotic state, only heightened suggestibility. There is a general consensus that heightened suggestibility is an essential characteristic of hypnosis. In 1933, Clark L. Hull wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a subject after submitting to the hypnotic procedure shows no genuine increase in susceptibility to any suggestions whatever, there seems no point in calling him hypnotised, regardless of how fully and readily he may respond to suggestions of lid-closure and other superficial sleeping behaviour.\nConditioned inhibition.\nIvan Pavlov stated that hypnotic suggestion provided the best example of a conditioned reflex response in human beings; i.e., that responses to suggestions were learned associations triggered by the words used:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Speech, on account of the whole preceding life of the adult, is connected up with all the internal and external stimuli which can reach the cortex, signaling all of them and replacing all of them, and therefore it can call forth all those reactions of the organism which are normally determined by the actual stimuli themselves. We can, therefore, regard \"suggestion\" as the most simple form of a typical reflex in man.\nHe also believed that hypnosis was a \"partial sleep\", meaning that a generalised inhibition of cortical functioning could be encouraged to spread throughout regions of the brain. He observed that the various degrees of hypnosis did not significantly differ physiologically from the waking state and hypnosis depended on insignificant changes of environmental stimuli. Pavlov also suggested that lower-brain-stem mechanisms were involved in hypnotic conditioning.\nPavlov's ideas combined with those of his rival Vladimir Bekhterev and became the basis of hypnotic psychotherapy in the Soviet Union, as documented in the writings of his follower K.I. Platonov. Soviet theories of hypnotism subsequently influenced the writings of Western behaviourally oriented hypnotherapists such as Andrew Salter.\nNeuropsychology.\nChanges in brain activity have been found in some studies of highly responsive hypnotic subjects. These changes vary depending upon the type of suggestions being given. The state of light to medium hypnosis, where the body undergoes physical and mental relaxation, is associated with a pattern mostly of alpha waves. However, what these results indicate is unclear. They may indicate that suggestions genuinely produce changes in perception or experience that are not simply a result of imagination. However, in normal circumstances without hypnosis, the brain regions associated with motion detection are activated both when motion is seen and when motion is imagined, without any changes in the subjects' perception or experience. This may therefore indicate that highly suggestible hypnotic subjects are simply activating to a greater extent the areas of the brain used in imagination, without real perceptual changes. It is, however, premature to claim that hypnosis and meditation are mediated by similar brain systems and neural mechanisms.\nAnother study has demonstrated that a colour hallucination suggestion given to subjects in hypnosis activated colour-processing regions of the occipital cortex. A 2004 review of research examining the EEG laboratory work in this area concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hypnosis is not a unitary state and therefore should show different patterns of EEG activity depending upon the task being experienced. In our evaluation of the literature, enhanced theta is observed during hypnosis when there is task performance or concentrative hypnosis, but not when the highly hypnotizable individuals are passively relaxed, somewhat sleepy and/or more diffuse in their attention.\nStudies have shown an association of hypnosis with stronger theta-frequency activity as well as with changes to the gamma-frequency activity. Neuroimaging techniques have been used to investigate neural correlates of hypnosis.\nThe induction phase of hypnosis may also affect the activity in brain regions that control intention and process conflict. Anna Gosline claims:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gruzelier and his colleagues studied brain activity using an fMRI while subjects completed a standard cognitive exercise, called the Stroop task. The team screened subjects before the study and chose 12 that were highly susceptible to hypnosis and 12 with low susceptibility. They all completed the task in the fMRI under normal conditions and then again under hypnosis. Throughout the study, both groups were consistent in their task results, achieving similar scores regardless of their mental state. During their first task session, before hypnosis, there were no significant differences in brain activity between the groups. But under hypnosis, Gruzelier found that the highly susceptible subjects showed significantly more brain activity in the anterior cingulate gyrus than the weakly susceptible subjects. This area of the brain has been shown to respond to errors and evaluate emotional outcomes. The highly susceptible group also showed much greater brain activity on the left side of the prefrontal cortex than the weakly susceptible group. This is an area involved with higher level cognitive processing and behaviour.\nDissociation.\nPierre Janet originally developed the idea of \"dissociation of consciousness\" from his work with hysterical patients. He believed that hypnosis was an example of dissociation, whereby areas of an individual's behavioural control separate from ordinary awareness. Hypnosis would remove some control from the conscious mind, and the individual would respond with autonomic, reflexive behaviour. Weitzenhoffer describes hypnosis via this theory as \"dissociation of awareness from the majority of sensory and even strictly neural events taking place.\"\nNeodissociation.\nErnest Hilgard, who developed the \"neodissociation\" theory of hypnotism, hypothesised that hypnosis causes the subjects to divide their consciousness voluntarily. One part responds to the hypnotist while the other retains awareness of reality. Hilgard made subjects take an ice water bath. None mentioned the water being cold or feeling pain. Hilgard then asked the subjects to lift their index finger if they felt pain and 70% of the subjects lifted their index finger. This showed that, even though the subjects were listening to the suggestive hypnotist, they still sensed the water's temperature.\nSocial role-taking theory.\nThe main theorist who pioneered the influential role-taking theory of hypnotism was Theodore Sarbin. Sarbin argued that hypnotic responses were motivated attempts to fulfill the socially constructed roles of hypnotic subjects. This has led to the misconception that hypnotic subjects are simply \"faking\". However, Sarbin emphasised the difference between faking, in which there is little subjective identification with the role in question, and role-taking, in which the subject not only acts externally in accord with the role but also subjectively identifies with it to some degree, acting, thinking, and feeling \"as if\" they are hypnotised. Sarbin drew analogies between role-taking in hypnosis and role-taking in other areas such as method acting, mental illness, and shamanic possession, etc. This interpretation of hypnosis is particularly relevant to understanding stage hypnosis, in which there is clearly strong peer pressure to comply with a socially constructed role by performing accordingly on a theatrical stage.\nHence, the \"social constructionism and role-taking theory\" of hypnosis suggests that individuals are enacting (as opposed to merely \"playing\") a role and that really there is no such thing as a hypnotic trance. A socially constructed relationship is built depending on how much rapport has been established between the \"hypnotist\" and the subject (see Hawthorne effect, Pygmalion effect, and placebo effect).\nPsychologists such as Robert Baker and Graham Wagstaff claim that what we call hypnosis is actually a form of learned social behaviour, a complex hybrid of social compliance, relaxation, and suggestibility that can account for many esoteric behavioural manifestations.\nCognitive-behavioural theory.\nBarber, Spanos, and Chaves (1974) proposed a nonstate \"cognitive-behavioural\" theory of hypnosis, similar in some respects to Sarbin's social role-taking theory and building upon the earlier research of Barber. On this model, hypnosis is explained as an extension of ordinary psychological processes like imagination, relaxation, expectation, social compliance, etc. In particular, Barber argued that responses to hypnotic suggestions were mediated by a \"positive cognitive set\" consisting of positive expectations, attitudes, and motivation. Daniel Araoz subsequently coined the acronym \"TEAM\" to symbolise the subject's orientation to hypnosis in terms of \"trust\", \"expectation\", \"attitude\", and \"motivation\".\nBarber et al. noted that similar factors appeared to mediate the response both to hypnotism and to cognitive behavioural therapy, in particular systematic desensitisation. Hence, research and clinical practice inspired by their interpretation has led to growing interest in the relationship between hypnotherapy and cognitive behavioural therapy.\nInformation theory.\nAn approach loosely based on information theory uses a brain-as-computer model. In adaptive systems, feedback increases the signal-to-noise ratio, which may converge towards a steady state. Increasing the signal-to-noise ratio enables messages to be more clearly received. The hypnotist's object is to use techniques to reduce interference and increase the receptability of specific messages (suggestions).\nSystems theory.\nSystems theory, in this context, may be regarded as an extension of Braid's original conceptualisation of hypnosis as involving \"the brain and nervous system generally\".31 Systems theory considers the nervous system's organisation into interacting subsystems. Hypnotic phenomena thus involve not only increased or decreased activity of particular subsystems, but also their interaction. A central phenomenon in this regard is that of feedback loops, which suggest a mechanism for creating hypnotic phenomena.\nSocieties.\nThere is a huge range of societies in England who train individuals in hypnosis; however, one of the longest-standing organisations is the British Society of Clinical and Academic Hypnosis (BSCAH). It origins date back to 1952 when a group of dentists set up the 'British Society of Dental Hypnosis'. Shortly after, a group of sympathetic medical practitioners merged with this fast-evolving organisation to form 'The Dental and Medical Society for the Study of Hypnosis'; and, in 1968, after various statutory amendments had taken place, the 'British Society of Medical and Dental Hypnosis' (BSMDH) was formed. This society always had close links with the Royal Society of Medicine and many of its members were involved in setting up a hypnosis section at this centre of medical research in London. And, in 1978, under the presidency of David Waxman, the Section of Medical and Dental Hypnosis was formed. A second society, the British Society of Experimental and Clinical Hypnosis (BSECH), was also set up a year before, in 1977, and this consisted of psychologists, doctors and dentists with an interest in hypnosis theory and practice. In 2007, the two societies merged to form the 'British Society of Clinical and Academic Hypnosis' (BSCAH). This society only trains health professionals and is interested in furthering research into clinical hypnosis.\nThe American Society of Clinical Hypnosis (ASCH) is unique among organisations for professionals using hypnosis because members must be licensed healthcare workers with graduate degrees. As an interdisciplinary organisation, ASCH not only provides a classroom to teach professionals how to use hypnosis as a tool in their practice, it provides professionals with a community of experts from different disciplines. The ASCH's missions statement is to provide and encourage education programs to further, in every ethical way, the knowledge, understanding, and application of hypnosis in health care; to encourage research and scientific publication in the field of hypnosis; to promote the further recognition and acceptance of hypnosis as an important tool in clinical health care and focus for scientific research; to cooperate with other professional societies that share mutual goals, ethics and interests; and to provide a professional community for those clinicians and researchers who use hypnosis in their work. The ASCH also publishes the \"American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis\".\nSee also.\nHistorical figures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModern researchers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated subjects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "14421", "revid": "1317351651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14421", "title": "Henry Chadwick (writer)", "text": "American baseball writer and statistician (1824\u20131908)\nHenry Chadwick (October 5, 1824 \u2013 April 20, 1908) was an English-American sportswriter, baseball statistician and historian, often called the \"Father of Baseball\" for his early reporting on and contributions to the development of the game. He edited the first baseball guide sold to the public. He is credited with creating box scores, as well as creating the abbreviation \"K\" that designates a strikeout. He was posthumously inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1938.\nEarly life.\nChadwick was born on October 5, 1824, in Exeter, England to James Chadwick and his second wife Theresa. His grandfather, Andrew Chadwick, had been a close friend of theologian John Wesley. His father, James Chadwick, was a supporter of the French Revolution who also tutored John Dalton in music and botany. James Chadwick had served as editor of a publication known as the \"Western Times\". \nHenry Chadwick was the much younger half-brother of Sir Edwin Chadwick who was born in 1800. Edwin was England's sanitary philosopher who developed environmental measures and laws designed to counteract the effects of the Industrial Revolution. Edwin Chadwick's mother died soon after Edwin\u2019s birth. \nHenry Chadwick moved to Brooklyn with his family at the age of 12, in the 1830s. He began to write music and to teach piano and guitar.\nIn 1848, Chadwick married Jane Botts from Richmond, Virginia. Botts' father Alexander had been president of the Virginia State Council. She was also related to politician John Botts. Chadwick edited John Botts' work titled \"The Great Rebellion\". Chadwick and his wife had three children, Richard Westlake Chadwick, in 1849, Susan Mary Chadwick, in 1851, and Rose Virginia Chadwick, 1853.\nChadwick became a frequent player of cricket and similar ball games such as rounders. He began covering cricket for numerous local newspapers such as the \"Long Island Star\". He first came across organized baseball in 1856 as a cricket reporter for \"The New York Times\", watching a match played between New York's Eagles and Gothams at the Elysian Fields in Hoboken, New Jersey. He focused his attention as a journalist and writer on baseball after joining the \"New York Clipper\" in 1857, and was also soon hired on to provide coverage for other New York papers including the \"Sunday Mercury\".\nContributions to baseball.\nPromotion of the game.\nChadwick was one of the prime movers in the rise of baseball from the 19th century to its popularity at the turn of the 20th century. A keen amateur statistician and professional writer, he helped sculpt the public perception of the game, as well as providing the basis for the records of teams' and players' achievements in the form of baseball statistics. He also served on baseball rules committees and influenced the game itself. He is sometimes referred to as \"the father of baseball\" because he facilitated the popularity of the sport in its early days. In a more recent view, Schiff suggests that Chadwick was the father of baseball because he nurtured the sport for decades, rather than a claim to have started the American game.\nEarly baseball had a provision known as the \"bound rule\", which held that a fielder could catch a batted ball on one bounce and that it would still be recorded as an out. Chadwick was an outspoken critic of the rule for many years, stating that fielders should have to catch a ball on the fly for it to count as an out. In 1864, the bound rule was eliminated for balls hit into fair territory. The bound rule for foul balls persisted into the 1880s.\nChadwick edited \"The Beadle Dime Base-Ball Player\", the first annual baseball guide on public sale, as well as the Spalding and Reach annual guides for a number of years and in this capacity promoted the game and influenced the infant discipline of sports journalism. In his 1861 \"Beadle\" guide, he listed totals of games played, outs, runs, home runs, and strikeouts for hitters on prominent clubs, the first database of its kind. His goal was to provide numerical evidence to prove which players helped a team to win.\nIn 1867, he accompanied the National Base Ball Club of Washington, D.C., on their inaugural national tour, as their official scorer. The next year, Chadwick wrote the first hardcover baseball book, \"The Game of Base Ball\". In 1874, he was instrumental in organizing a tour of England which included games of both baseball and cricket. In his role as journalist, he campaigned against the detrimental effects on the game of both alcohol and gambling.\nDespite a friendship with Albert Spalding, Chadwick was scornful of the attempts to have Abner Doubleday declared the inventor of baseball. \"He means well\", said Chadwick, \"but he don't know\". Chadwick later willed his baseball library to Spalding.\nAuthor William Cook wrote that \"Chadwick was at times a bit self-aggrandizing, but his heart was always deeply rooted in looking after the best interest of the game.\" An 1876 \"Chicago Tribune\" article attacked Chadwick's status as the father of baseball, saying in part that Chadwick \"has had enough experience to have made himself a man of respect had heaven but given him a head ... he proceeded to call himself the '\"Father of the Game,' and to assume much on the strength of the title. But he found an unruly child, and one which disinherited him with rapidity and ease.\" Cook writes that Chadwick may have been a victim of \"Western journalism\", a sensationalized style of writing.\nBox scores and statistics.\nChadwick is credited with devising the baseball box score (which he adapted from the cricket scorecard) for reporting game events. The first box score appeared in an 1859 issue of the \"Clipper\". It was a grid with nine rows for players and nine columns for innings. The original box scores also created the often puzzling abbreviation for strikeout as \"K\" \u2013 \"K\" being the last letter of \"struck\" in \"struck out\". Chadwick assigned numbers to each defensive position for scorekeeping purposes, a system that remains in modern baseball scorekeeping.\nChadwick is credited with devising various statistical measures for baseball. He wrote in 1869: \"In making up a score at the close of the match the record should be as follows:\u2013Name of player, total number of times the first base was made by clean hits, total bases so made, left on bases after clean hits, and the number of times the first base has been made on errors...\" This led to the recording of \"clean\" hits\u2014times a batter reached base without benefit of an error. Further refinement by other early baseball proponents led to all National League teams calculating batting averages by 1876.\nJournalistic style.\nThe following description of a game was written by Henry Chadwick and appeared in his \"Base Ball Memoranda\". It is typical of his style of sports journalism, and that of his time:\nA Base Ball tourney had been held in Chicago on July 4, 1867, in which the Excelsiors of that city and the Forest City Club, of Rockford, had been the leading contestants. The former had defeated the Forest City nine in two games, by the very close scores of 45\u201341 in one, and 28\u201325 in another, when the Forest Citys were invited to meet the Nationals at Chicago on July 25, a day which proved the most notable of the tour. The contest took place at Dexter Park, before a vast crowd of spectators, the majority of whom looked to see the Nationals have almost a walk-over. In the game A. G. Spalding was pitcher and Ross Barnes shortstop for the Forest City nine; these two afterwards becoming famous as star players of the Boston professional team of the early seventies. Williams was pitcher for the Nationals and Frank Norton catcher. The Nationals took the lead in the first innings by 3 to 2; but in the next two innings they added but five runs to their score, while the Forest Citys added thirteen to theirs, thereby taking the lead by a score of fifteen to eight, to the great surprise of the crowd and the delight of the Rockfords. The Nationals tried hard to recover the lost ground. The final result, however, was the success of the Forest Citys by a score of 29 to 23 in a nine innings game, twice interrupted by rain.\nLater life.\nLate in life, Chadwick continued editing the \"Spalding Base Ball Guides\" and producing a column for the \"Brooklyn Daily Eagle\". In late 1905, he wrote the editor of \"The New York Times\" to propose widening of the baseball bat to overcome the advantage that pitchers had established in the game. In his letter, Chadwick noted that some cricket experts had advocated for the narrowing of the cricket bat to bring balance to the advantage that belonged to the batter in that game.\nIn the winter before the 1908 baseball season, Chadwick was struck by an automobile and was bedridden for several weeks. He recovered and attended an exhibition game at the Polo Grounds the week before the season began. He caught a cold while at the game, and the illness worsened when he attended an Opening Day game at Washington Park in Brooklyn.\nOn April 19, Chadwick was moving furniture from the fourth floor of his apartment to the second floor when he fell unconscious. He was diagnosed with pneumonia and heart failure. He awakened briefly and asked about the game between Brooklyn and New York, but he died the next day. Henry Chadwick is interred at Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, New York.\nLegacy.\nFor his contributions to the game of baseball, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1938. He was inducted in the same ceremony as Alexander Cartwright.\nIn 2009, the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR) established the Henry Chadwick Award to honor the outstanding contributions of baseball researchers. Bill James and John Thorn are among the award's recipients.\nA collection of historical baseball items, which featured a letter written by Chadwick on the origins of baseball, sold at auction in 2004 for $310,500.\nChadwick was inducted to the Suffolk Sports Hall of Fame during 2020.\nChadwick, through the Spalding Athletic Library collection, added \"The Ancient History of Base Ball\" in 1867 and \"Technical Terms of Base Ball\" in 1897.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14422", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14422", "title": "Hippopotomus", "text": ""}
{"id": "14423", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14423", "title": "Higher education", "text": ""}
{"id": "14428", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14428", "title": "Heather Fargo", "text": "American politician (born 1952)\nHeather Fargo (born December 12, 1952) is an American politician who served as mayor and was a former City Council Member of Sacramento, California. She was sworn in as mayor in November 2000, replacing Jimmie R. Yee, and served until December 2008, when she was defeated for reelection by Kevin Johnson.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Oakland, California, Fargo grew up in Santa Maria and graduated from Stagg High School. She received a Bachelor of Science degree in environmental planning and management from the University of California, Davis in 1975. In 1981, Fargo earned a Certificate of Completion from the Revenue Sources Management School in Boulder, Colorado. She also completed the State and Local Government Executive Program at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in 1991.\nCareer.\nFargo was first elected to the Sacramento City Council in 1989 to a five-year term as Sacramento was transitioning to even year citywide elections. Fargo represented District One which includes Downtown and Natomas. In the September primary, she came in second place to businesswoman Kate Karpilow but beat future City Councilman Ray Tretheway who came in third place and incumbent David Shore who came in fourth place. However, Fargo came back to beat Karpilow in November.\nUpon Grantland Johnson's resignation from the Sacramento County Board of Supervisors in 1994, Fargo decided to run for the Board. In that election, she faced attorney and community activist Roger Dickinson. In a closely fought election, Dickinson narrowly beat Fargo. After that loss she was re-elected in 1994 and 1998. While serving on the city council, (prior to becoming Mayor full-time), she was employed as a manager of the California State Parks Volunteer Program.\n2000 mayoral campaign.\nUpon the sudden death in November 1999 of Mayor Joe Serna, Jr., Land Park City Councilman Jimmie Yee became the acting mayor. Several candidates announced their intentions to run. Other than Fargo, three other council members were also seeking the mayorship. North Sacramento City Councilman Rob Kerth who represented an area immediately adjacent to Fargo's also decided to run. In addition, Steve Cohn, the city councilman for East Sacramento ran along with Robbie Waters who represents the Pocket and Greenhaven areas decided to run along with several lesser known candidates that included businessman and attorney Joe Genshlea and community activist Julie Padilla. Fargo, who won 22% of the vote in the primary and Kerth who won 20% of the vote made it into the November runoff, where Fargo was elected with just 53% of the vote. In winning, Fargo became the second elected mayor of Sacramento, and the first mayor from north of the American River\n2004 mayoral campaign.\nFargo did not face as stiff competition in her 2004 re-election. Her main opponent was Ross W. Relles, Jr., a businessman. Other candidates were Deputy Attorney General Mark Soble and Lorenzo Patino Law School President Leonard Padilla. Virtually unopposed against candidates far less funded, Fargo won solidly in the primary election, thus no runoff was necessary.\n2008 mayoral campaign.\nThe primary election for mayor took place on June 3, 2008. Fargo received 39% of the vote, while former NBA star and Sacramento native Kevin Johnson received 46% of the vote. Since neither received a majority of the votes, a run off election was scheduled for November 2008, where she was defeated by a margin of 58% to 42%.\nDuring the primary election campaign, Fargo initially claimed that she had the support of all the city councilmembers. Yet, Councilman Robbie Waters, Steve Cohn, and Sandra Sheedy all ended up endorsing Johnson during the primary. On September 4, 2008, only Councilman Kevin McCarty endorsed Heather Fargo.\nPolitical positions.\nEnvironment.\nFargo was a founding member and the first secretary of the Sacramento Tree Foundation, which is considered an important voice in Sacramento's environmental community. \nGun control.\nDuring her tenure Mayor Fargo became a member of the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition, an organization formed in 2006 and co-chaired by New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg and Boston mayor Thomas Menino.\nWomen's rights.\nFargo is a long term advocate for women in politics. After she left office Fargo has continued to encourage women to run for office. Fargo is also active in promoting awareness about the history of women's suffrage.\nMayoral tenure.\nMayor Fargo's tenure as mayor included disagreements with the Maloof family, owners of the NBA's Sacramento Kings, over the building of a new arena.\nIn 2006, 2007, and 2008, Mayor Fargo was named \"Best Local Elected Official\" by the readers of \"Sacramento Magazine\" in their annual poll.\nElectoral history.\n2004 primary election for mayor of Sacramento.\nBecause Fargo received a majority of the votes in the primary election, no general election was necessary.\n2008 primary election for mayor of Sacramento.\nJohnson and Fargo proceeded to a runoff election on November 5.\n2008 general election for mayor of Sacramento.\nPrecincts Reporting - 215 out of 391\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14429", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14429", "title": "Henotheism", "text": "Worshipping a god, accepting others may exist\nHenotheism is the worship of a single, supreme god that does not deny the existence or possible existence of other deities that may be worshipped. Friedrich Schelling (1775\u20131854) coined the word, and Friedrich Welcker (1784\u20131868) used it to depict primitive monotheism among ancient Greeks.\nMax M\u00fcller (1823\u20131900), a British philologist and orientalist, brought the term into wider usage in his scholarship on the Indian religions, particularly Hinduism, whose scriptures mention and praise numerous deities as if they are one ultimate unitary divine essence. M\u00fcller made the term central to his criticism of Western theological and religious exceptionalism (relative to Eastern religions), focusing on a cultural dogma which held \"monotheism\" to be both fundamentally well-defined and inherently superior to differing concepts of God.\nDefinition and terminology.\nFriedrich Schelling coined the German term from ell \" \"\u1f15\u03bd\" (h\u00e9n)\"\u00a0'one' and German 'theism' (which comes from ell \" \"\u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2\" (the\u00f3s)\"\u00a0'god'). The term refers to a form of theism focused on a single god. Related terms are monolatry and kathenotheism. The latter term is an extension of \"henotheism\", from \" \"\u03ba\u03b1\u03b8' \u1f15\u03bd\u03b1 \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03bd\" (kath' hena theon)\"\u00a0'\"one god at a time\"'. Henotheism refers to a pluralistic theology wherein different deities are viewed to be of a unitary, equivalent divine essence. Another term related to henotheism is \"equitheism\", referring to the belief that all gods are equal. Furthermore, the term henotheism does not exclude monism, nondualism, or dualism.\nVarious scholars prefer the term monolatry to henotheism, to discuss religions where a single god is central, but the existence or the position of other gods is not denied. According to Christoph Elsas, henotheism in modern usage connotes a syncretic stage in the development of religions in late antiquity. A henotheist may worship a single god from a pantheon of deities at a given time, depending on his or her choice, while accepting other deities and concepts of god. Henotheism and inclusive monotheism are terms that refer to a middle position between unlimited polytheism and exclusive monotheism.\nZoroastrianism.\nZoroastrianism is often regarded as one of the oldest monotheistic religions in the world. Although Ahura Mazda is the supreme god, Zoroastrianism believes in lesser divinities known as Yazatas. These yazatas (\"good agents\") include Anahita, Sraosha, Mithra, Rashnu, and Tishtrya. According to some scholars, there are two issues that have long made it problematic to identify Zoroastrianism as true monotheism: the presence of lesser deities and dualism. But before hastening to conclude that the Amesha Spentas and the other yazatas compromise the purity of monotheism, we should consider that the other historical monotheisms too made room for other figures endowed with supernatural powers to bridge the gulf between the exalted, remote Creator God and the human world: the angels in all of them (whose conception in post-exilic Judaism was apparently developed after the pattern of the Amesha Spentas; Boyce and Grenet, 1991, 404\u2013405), the saints and the Virgin Mary in several Christian churches, and the other persons of the Trinity in all of Christianity. Despite the vast differences with Zoroastrian theology, the common thread is that all these beings are subordinate to the Godhead as helpers or (in the case of the persons of the Trinity) co-equals, hence they do not pursue different interests and are worshiped jointly with the Godhead, not separately; therefore the supplicant's dilemma does not arise. Others such as Richard Foltz has put forth evidence that Iranians of Pre-Islamic era worshipped all these figures, especially Mithra and Anahita.\nProds Oktor Skj\u00e6rv\u00f8 states Zoroastrianism is henotheistic, and \"a dualistic and polytheistic religion, but with one supreme god, who is the father of the ordered cosmos\". Other scholars state that this is unclear, because historic texts present a conflicting picture, ranging from Zoroastrianism's belief in \"one god, two gods, or a best god henotheism\".\nHinduism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo what is One\n&lt;poem&gt;\nThey call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni,\nand he is heavenly-winged Garutman.\nTo what is One, sages give many a title.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2014 \"Rigveda 1.164.46\"Transl: Klaus Klostermaier\nHenotheism was the term used by scholars such as Max M\u00fcller to describe the theology of Vedic religion. M\u00fcller noted that the hymns of the \"Rigveda\", the oldest scripture of Hinduism, mention many deities, but praises them successively as the \"one ultimate, supreme God\", alternatively as \"one supreme Goddess\", thereby asserting that the essence of the deities was unitary (\"ekam\"), and the deities were nothing but pluralistic manifestations of the same concept of the divine (God).\nThe Vedic era conceptualization of the divine or the One, states Jeaneane Fowler, is more abstract than a monotheistic God, it is the Reality behind and of the phenomenal universe. The Vedic hymns treat it as \"limitless, indescribable, absolute principle\", thus the Vedic divine is something of a panentheism rather than simple henotheism. In late Vedic era, around the start of Upanishadic age (~800 BCE), theosophical speculations emerge that develop concepts which scholars variously call nondualism or monism, as well as forms of non-theism and pantheism. An example of the questioning of the concept of God, in addition to henotheistic hymns found therein, are in later portions of the \"Rigveda\", such as the Nasadiya Sukta. Hinduism calls the metaphysical absolute concept as Brahman, incorporating within it the transcendent and immanent reality. Different schools of thought interpret Brahman as either personal, impersonal or transpersonal. Ishwar Chandra Sharma describes it as \"Absolute Reality, beyond all dualities of existence and non-existence, light and darkness, and of time, space and cause.\"\nHellenistic religion.\nWhile Greek and Roman religion began as polytheism, during the Classical period, under the influence of philosophy, differing conceptions emerged. Often Zeus (or Jupiter) was considered the supreme, all-powerful and all-knowing king and father of the Olympian gods. According to Maijastina Kahlos, \"monotheism was pervasive in the educated circles in Late Antiquity\" and \"all divinities were interpreted as aspects, particles or epithets of one supreme God\". Maximus Tyrius (2nd century CE) stated: \"In such a mighty contest, sedition and discord, you will see one according law and assertion in all the earth, that there is one God, the king and father of all things, and many gods, sons of God, ruling together with him.\" The Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus taught that above the gods of traditional belief was \"The One\". Maximus, the polytheist grammarian of Madauros, even stated that \"only a madman would deny the existence of the supreme God\".\nCanaanite religion and Yahwism.\nSecond Temple Judaism and Rabbinical Judaism are emphatically monotheistic; however, its predecessor\u2014the cult of Yahweh as it was practiced in ancient Israel during the 9th and 8th centuries BCE (Yahwism)\u2014has been described as henotheistic or monolatric. For example, the Moabites worshipped the god Chemosh, the Edomites, Qaus, both of whom were part of the greater Canaanite pantheon, headed by the chief god, El. The Canaanite pantheon consisted of El and Asherah as the chief deities, with 70 sons who were said to rule over each of the nations of the earth. These sons were each worshiped within a specific region. Kurt Noll states that \"the Bible preserves a tradition that Yahweh used to 'live' in the south, in the land of Edom\" and that the original god of Israel was El Shaddai.\nSeveral biblical stories allude to the belief that the Canaanite gods all existed and were thought to possess the most power in the lands by the people who worshiped them and their sacred objects; their power was believed to be real and could be invoked by the people who patronized them. There are numerous accounts of surrounding nations of Israel showing fear or reverence for the Israelite God despite their continued polytheistic practices. For instance, in 1 Samuel 4, the Philistines fret before the second battle of Aphek when they learn that the Israelites are bearing the Ark of the Covenant, and therefore Yahweh, into battle. The Israelites were forbidden to worship other deities; according to some interpretations of the Bible, they were not fully monotheistic before the Babylonian captivity. The biblical scholar Mark S. Smith refers to this stage as a form of monolatry. Smith argues that Yahweh underwent a process of merging with El and that acceptance of cults of Asherah was common in the period of the Judges. 2 Kings 3:27 has been interpreted as describing a human sacrifice in Moab that led the invading Israelite army to fear the power of Chemosh.\nIn Christianity.\nPaul the Apostle, in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, writes that \"we know that an idol is nothing\" and \"that there is none other God but one\". He argues in verse 5 that \"for though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth\", \"but to us there is but one God\". Some translators of verse 5 put the words \"gods\" and \"lords\" in quotes to indicate that they are gods or lords only \"so-called\".\nIn his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul refers to \"the god of this world\", which the 18th-century theologian John Gill interpreted as a reference to Satan or the material things put before God, such as money, rather than acknowledging any separate deity from God.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nSome scholars have written that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) can be characterized as henotheistic but others have rejected that stance. Eugene England, a professor at Brigham Young University, asserted that LDS Presidents Brigham Young and Joseph Fielding Smith along with the LDS scholar B. H. Roberts used the LDS interpretation of 1 Corinthians 8:5\u20136 as \"a brief explanation of how it is possible to be both a Christian polytheist (technically a henotheist) and a monotheist\". BYU Professor Roger R. Keller rejected descriptions of the LDS Church as polytheistic by countering, as summarized by a reviewer, \"Mormons are fundamentally monotheistic because they deal with only one god out of the many which exist.\"\nIn their book, \"Mormon America: The Power and the Promise\", Richard and Joan Ostling, wrote that some Mormons are comfortable describing themselves as henotheists. Kurt Widmer, professor at the University of Lethbridge, described LDS beliefs as a \"cosmic henotheism\". A review of Widmer's book by Bruening and Paulsen in the \"FARMS Review of Books\" countered that Widmer's hypothesis was \"strongly disconfirmed in light of the total evidence\". Van Hale wrote that \"Mormonism teaches the existence of gods who are not the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost\" and \"the existence of more than one god [is] clearly a Mormon doctrine\", but he also said that defining this belief system in theological terms was troublesome. According to Van Hale, henotheism might appear to be \"promising\" in describing LDS beliefs but is ultimately not accurate because henotheism was intended to describe the worship of a god that was restricted to a specific geographical area.\nJapanese religions.\nIn Japan, many Japanese new religions can be considered to be monotheistic (such as Tenrikyo) or henotheistic (such as Konkokyo).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14431", "revid": "47806718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14431", "title": "Hedwig of Silesia", "text": "High Duchess consort of Poland\nHedwig of Silesia (also Hedwig of Andechs, , , ; 1174 \u2013 15 October 1243), a member of the Bavarian comital House of Andechs, was Duchess of Silesia from 1201 and of Greater Poland from 1231 as well as High Duchess consort of Poland from 1232 until 1238. She was canonized by the Catholic Church in 1267 by Pope Clement IV.\nLife.\nThe daughter of Count Berthold IV of Andechs, margrave of Carniola and Istria and his second wife Agnes of Wettin, she was born at Andechs Castle in the Duchy of Bavaria. Her elder sister, Agnes, married King Philip II of France (annulled in 1200) and her sister Gertrude (killed in 1213) married King Andrew II of Hungary, while the youngest Matilda, (Mechtild) became abbess at the Benedictine Abbey of Kitzingen in Franconia, where Hedwig also received her education. Hedwig's brother was Bishop Ekbert of Bamberg, Count of Andechs-Meranien. Another brother was Berthold, Archbishop of Kalocsa and Patriarch of Aquileia, while her brother Henry, Margrave of Istria was the first lord of Carniola.\nThrough her sister Gertrude, she was the aunt of Elizabeth of Hungary.\nDuchess consort.\nAt the age of twelve, Hedwig married Henry I the Bearded, son and heir of the Piast duke Boleslaus the Tall of Silesia. As soon as Henry succeeded his father in 1201, he had to struggle with his Piast relatives, at first with his uncle Duke Mieszko IV Tanglefoot who immediately seized the Upper Silesian Duchy of Opole. In 1206 Henry and his cousin Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw III Spindleshanks of Greater Poland agreed to swap the Silesian Lubusz Land against the Kalisz region, which met with fierce protest by W\u0142adys\u0142aw's III nephew W\u0142adys\u0142aw Odonic. When Henry went to G\u0105sawa in 1227 to meet his Piast cousins, he narrowly saved his life, while High Duke Leszek I the White was killed by the men of the Pomerelian Duke Swietopelk II, instigated by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Odonic.\nThe next year Henry's ally W\u0142adys\u0142aw III Spindleshanks succeeded Leszek I as High Duke; however as he was still contested by his nephew in Greater Poland, he made Henry his governor at Krak\u00f3w, whereby the Silesian duke once again became entangled in the dispute over the Seniorate Province. In 1229 he was captured and arrested at P\u0142ock Castle by rivaling Duke Konrad I of Masovia. Hedwig proceeded to P\u0142ock pleading for Henry and was able to have him released.\nHer actions promoted the reign of her husband: upon the death of the Polish High Duke W\u0142adys\u0142aw III Spindleshanks in 1231, Henry also became Duke of Greater Poland and the next year prevailed as High Duke at Krak\u00f3w. He thereby was the first of the Silesian Piast descendants of W\u0142adys\u0142aw II the Exile to gain the rule over Silesia and the Seniorate Province in accord with the 1138 Testament of Boles\u0142aw III Wrymouth.\nWidow.\nUpon his death in 1238, Henry was buried at a Cistercian monastery of nuns, Trzebnica Abbey (\"Kloster Trebnitz\"), which he had established in 1202 at Hedwig's request. Hedwig accepted the death of her beloved husband with faith. She said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Would you oppose the will of God? Our lives are His.\"\nThe widow moved into the monastery, which was led by her daughter Gertrude, assuming the religious habit of a lay sister, but she did not take vows. She invited numerous German religious people from the Holy Roman Empire into the Silesian lands, as well as German settlers who founded numerous cities, towns and villages in the course of the \"Ostsiedlung\", while cultivating barren parts of Silesia for agriculture.\nHedwig and Henry had several daughters, though only one surviving son, Henry II the Pious, who succeeded his father as Duke of Silesia and Polish High Duke. The widow, however, had to witness the killing of her son, vainly awaiting the support of Emperor Frederick II, during the Mongol invasion of Poland at the Battle of Legnica (\"Wahlstatt\") in 1241. The hopes for a re-united Poland were lost, and even Silesia fragmented into numerous Piast duchies under Henry II's sons. Hedwig and her daughter-in-law, Henry II's widow Anna of Bohemia, established a Benedictine abbey at the site of the battle in Legnickie Pole, settled with monks coming from Opatovice in Bohemia.\nHedwig and Henry had lived very pious lives, and Hedwig had great zeal for her faith. She had supported her husband in donating the Augustinian provostry at Nowogr\u00f3d Bobrza\u0144ski (\"Naumburg\") and the commandery of the Knights Templar at Ole\u015bnica Ma\u0142a (\"Klein Oels\"). Hedwig always helped the poor, the widows and the orphans, founded several hospitals for the sick and the lepers and donated all her fortune to the Church. She allowed no one to leave her uncomforted, and one time she spent ten weeks teaching the Our Father to a poor woman. According to legend, she went barefoot even in winter, and when she was urged by the Bishop of Wroc\u0142aw to wear shoes, she carried them in her hands. On 15 October 1243, Hedwig died and was buried in Trzebnica Abbey with her husband, while relics of her are preserved at Andechs Abbey and St. Hedwig's Cathedral in Berlin.\nVeneration.\nHedwig was canonized in 1267 by Pope Clement IV, a supporter of the Cistercian order, at the suggestion of her grandson Prince-Archbishop W\u0142adys\u0142aw of Salzburg. She is the patroness saint of Silesia, of Andechs, and of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Wroc\u0142aw and the Roman Catholic Diocese of G\u00f6rlitz. Her feast day is celebrated on the General Roman Calendar on 16 October. The Order of Saint Paul the First Hermit, who count her as a great benefactor, celebrate it on 8 June. A 17th-century legend has it that Hedwig, while on a pilgrimage to Rome, stopped at Bad Zell in Austria, where she had healing waters spring up at a source which today still bears her name.\nIn 1773 the Prussian king Frederick the Great, having conquered and annexed the bulk of Silesia in the First Silesian War, had St. Hedwig in Berlin built for the Catholic Upper Silesian immigrants, since 1930 the cathedral of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Berlin. After the expulsion of almost all Germans from Silesia, German Silesians carried Hedwig's veneration to all over remaining Germany.\nIn March 2020 the discovery of Hedwig's remains, that had been missing for centuries, was reported. The remains were found in her sanctuary in Trzebnica, in a silver casket bearing a lead tablet with an inscription confirming Hedwig's identity.\nHedwig glasses are named after Hedwig of Silesia.\nChildren.\nHedwig and Henry I had seven children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14433", "revid": "22444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14433", "title": "History of Prussia", "text": ""}
{"id": "14434", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14434", "title": "Hugh of St. Victor", "text": ""}
{"id": "14436", "revid": "274098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14436", "title": "Hasidic Judaism", "text": "Religious subgroup of modern Judaism\n \nHasidism () or Hasidic Judaism is a religious movement within Judaism that arose in the 18th century as a spiritual revival movement in contemporary Western Ukraine before spreading rapidly throughout Eastern Europe. Today, most of those affiliated with the movement, known as \"hassidim\", reside in Israel and in the United States.\nIsrael Ben Eliezer, the \"Baal Shem Tov\", is regarded as its founding father, and his disciples developed and disseminated it. Present-day Hasidism is a sub-group within Haredi Judaism and is noted for its religious conservatism and social seclusion. Its members aim to adhere closely both to Orthodox Jewish practice \u2013 with the movement's own unique emphases \u2013 and the prewar lifestyle of Eastern European Jews. Many elements of the latter, including various special styles of dress and the use of the Yiddish language, are nowadays associated almost exclusively with Hasidism.\nHasidic thought draws heavily on Lurianic Kabbalah, and, to an extent, is a popularization of it. Teachings emphasize God's immanence in the universe, the need to cleave and be one with him at all times, the devotional aspect of religious practice, and the spiritual dimension of corporeality and mundane acts. \"Hasidim\", the adherents of Hasidism, are organized in independent sects known as \"courts\" or dynasties, each headed by its own hereditary male leader, a Rebbe. Reverence and submission to the Rebbe are key tenets, as he is considered a spiritual authority with whom the follower must bond to gain closeness to God. The various \"courts\" share basic convictions, but operate apart and possess unique traits and customs. Affiliation is often retained in families for generations, and being Hasidic is as much a sociological factor \u2013 entailing birth into a specific community and allegiance to a dynasty of Rebbes \u2013 as it is a religious one. There are several \"courts\" with many thousands of member households each, and hundreds of smaller ones. As of 2015[ [update]], there are roughly 250,000 followers of Hasidic Judaism worldwide, about 2% of the global Jewish population.\nEtymology.\nThe terms \"hasid\" and \"hasidut\", meaning \"pietist\" and \"piety\", have a long history in Judaism. The Talmud and other old sources refer to the \"Pietists of Old\" (\"Hasidim haRishonim\") who would contemplate an entire hour in preparation for prayer. The phrase denoted extremely devoted individuals who not only observed the Law to its letter, but performed good deeds even beyond it. Adam himself is honored with the title, in tractate Eruvin 18b by Rabbi Meir: \"Adam was a great \"hasid\", having fasted for 130 years.\" The first to adopt the epithet collectively were apparently the \"hasidim\" in Second Temple period Judea, known as Hasideans after the Greek rendering of their name, who perhaps served as the model for those mentioned in the Talmud. The title continued to be applied as an honorific for the exceptionally devout. In 12th-century Rhineland, or \"Ashkenaz\" in Jewish parlance, another prominent school of ascetics named themselves \"hasidim\"; to distinguish them from the rest, later research employed the term Ashkenazi Hasidim. In the 16th century, when Kabbalah spread, the title also became associated with it. Jacob ben Hayyim Zemah wrote in his glossa on Isaac Luria's version of the Shulchan Aruch that, \"One who wishes to tap the hidden wisdom, must conduct himself in the manner of the Pious.\"\nThe movement founded by Israel Ben Eliezer in the 18th century adopted the term \"hasidim\" in the original connotation. But when the sect grew and developed specific attributes, from the 1770s, the names gradually acquired a new meaning. Its common adherents, belonging to groups each headed by a spiritual leader, were henceforth known as Hasidim. The transformation was slow: The movement was at first referred to as \"New Hasidism\" by outsiders (as recalled in the autobiography of Salomon Maimon), to separate it from the old one, and its enemies derisively mocked its members as \"Mithasdim\", \"[those who] pretend [to be] \"hasidim\"\". Yet, eventually, the young sect gained such a mass following that the old connotation was sidelined. In popular discourse, at least, \"Hasid\" came to denote someone who follows a religious teacher from the movement. It also entered Modern Hebrew as such, meaning \"adherent\" or \"disciple\". One was not merely a \"Hasid\" anymore, observed historian David Assaf, but a Hasid of someone or some dynasty in particular. This linguistic transformation paralleled that of the word \"tzaddik\", \"righteous\", which the Hasidic leaders adopted for themselves \u2013 though they are known colloquially as Rebbes or by the honorific acronym \"Admor\". Originally denoting an observant, moral person, in Hasidic literature, \"tzaddik\" became synonymous with the often hereditary master heading a sect of followers.\nHasidic philosophy.\nDistinctions.\nThe lengthy history of Hasidism, the numerous schools of thought therein, and its definitive use of homiletic literature and sermons \u2013 comprising numerous references to earlier sources in the Torah, Talmud, and exegesis as a means to grounding itself in tradition \u2013 to convey its ideas make the isolation of a common doctrine highly challenging to researchers. As noted by Joseph Dan, \"Every attempt to present such a body of ideas has failed\". Even motifs presented by scholars in the past as unique Hasidic contributions were later revealed to have been common among both their predecessors and opponents, all the more so regarding many other traits that are widely extant \u2013 these play, Dan added, \"a prominent role in modern non-Hasidic and anti-Hasidic writings as well\". The difficulty of separating the movement's philosophy from that of its main inspiration, Lurianic Kabbalah, and determining what was novel and what merely a recapitulation, also baffled historians. Some, like Louis Jacobs, regarded the early masters as innovators who introduced \"much that was new if only by emphasis\"; others, primarily Mendel Piekarz, argued to the contrary that but a little was not found in much earlier tracts, and the movement's originality lay in the manner it popularized these teachings to become the ideology of a well-organized sect.\nAmong the traits particularly associated with Hasidism is the importance of joy and happiness at worship and religious life. However, the sect undoubtedly stressed this aspect and still possesses a clear populist bent. Another example is the value placed on the simple, ordinary Jew in supposed contradiction with the favouring of elitist scholars beforehand; such ideas are common in ethical works far preceding Hasidism. The movement did for a few decades challenge the rabbinic establishment, which relied on the authority of Torah acumen, but affirmed the centrality of study very soon. Concurrently, the image of the Misnagdim, a term coined for those opposed to Hasidism, as dreary intellectuals who lacked spiritual fervour and opposed mysticism, is likewise unfounded. Neither did Hasidism, often portrayed as promoting healthy sensuality, unanimously reject the asceticism and self-mortification associated primarily with its rivals. Joseph Dan ascribed all these perceptions to so-called \"Neo-Hasidic\" writers and thinkers, like Martin Buber. In their attempt to build new models of spirituality for modern Jews, they propagated a romantic, sentimental image of the movement. The \"Neo-Hasidic\" interpretation influenced even scholarly discourse to a great degree, but had a tenuous connection with reality.\nA further complication is the divide between what researchers term \"early Hasidism\", which ended roughly in the 1810s, and established Hasidism since then onwards. While the former was a highly dynamic religious revival movement, the latter phase is characterized by consolidation into sects with hereditary leadership. The mystical teachings formulated during the first era were by no means repudiated, and many Hasidic masters remained consummate spiritualists and original thinkers; as noted by Benjamin Brown, Buber's once commonly accepted view that the routinization constituted \"decadence\" was refuted by later studies, demonstrating that the movement remained very much innovative. Yet many aspects of early Hasidism were de-emphasized in favour of more conventional religious expressions, and its radical concepts were largely neutralized. Some Rebbes adopted a relatively rationalist bent, sidelining their explicit mystical, theurgical roles, and many others functioned almost solely as political leaders of large communities. As to their Hasidim, affiliation was less a matter of admiring a charismatic leader as in the early days, but rather birth into a family belonging to a specific \"court\".\nImmanence.\nThe most fundamental theme underlying all Hasidic theory is the immanence of God in the universe, often expressed in a phrase from Tikunei haZohar, (Aramaic: \"no site is devoid of Him\"). This panentheistic concept was derived from Lurianic discourse, but greatly expanded in the Hasidic one. In the beginning, in order to create the world, God contracted (\"Tzimtzum\") his omnipresence, the \"Ein Sof\", leaving a Vacant Void (), bereft of obvious presence and therefore able to entertain free will, contradictions and other phenomena seemingly separate from God Himself. These would have been impossible within his original, perfect existence. Yet, the very reality of the world which was created in the Void is entirely dependent on its divine origin. Matter would have been null and void without the true, spiritual essence it possesses. Just the same, the infinite \"Ein Sof\" cannot manifest in the Vacant Void, and must limit itself in the guise of measurable corporeality that may be perceived.\nThus, there is a dualism between the true aspect of everything and the physical side, false but ineluctable, with each evolving into the other: as God must compress and disguise himself, so must humans and matter in general ascend and reunite with the Omnipresence. Rachel Elior quoted Shneur Zalman of Liadi, in his commentary \"Torah Or\" on Genesis 28:22, who wrote that \"this is the purpose of Creation, from Infinity to Finitude, so it may be reversed from the state of Finite to that of Infinity\". Kabbalah stressed the importance of this dialectic, but mainly (though not exclusively) evoked it in cosmic terms, referring for example to the manner in which God progressively diminished himself into the world through the various dimensions, or \"Sephirot\". Hasidism applied it also to the most mundane details of human existence. All Hasidic schools devoted a prominent place in their teaching, with differing accentuation, to the interchanging nature of \"Ein\", both infinite and imperceptible, becoming \"Yesh\", \"Existent\" \u2013 and vice versa. They used the concept as a prism to gauge the world, and the needs of the spirit in particular. Elior noted: \"Reality lost its static nature and permanent value, now measured by a new standard, seeking to expose the Godly, boundless essence, manifest in its tangible, circumscribed opposite.\"\nOne major derivative of this philosophy is the notion of \"devekut\", \"communion\". As God was everywhere, connection with him had to be pursued ceaselessly as well, in all times, places and occasions. Such an experience was in the reach of every person, who only had to negate his inferior impulses and grasp the truth of divine immanence, enabling him to unite with it and attain the state of perfect, selfless bliss. Hasidic masters, well versed in the teachings concerning communion, are supposed not only to gain it themselves, but to guide their flock to it. \"Devekut\" was not a strictly defined experience; many varieties were described, from the utmost ecstasy of the learned leaders to the common man's more humble yet no less significant emotion during prayer.\nClosely linked with the former is \"Bitul ha-Yesh\", \"Negation of the Existent\", or of the \"Corporeal\". Hasidism teaches that while a superficial observance of the universe by the \"eyes of the flesh\" (\"Einei ha-Basar\") purportedly reflects the reality of all things profane and worldly, a true devotee must transcend this illusory fa\u00e7ade and realize that there is nothing but God. It is not only a matter of perception, but very practical, for it entails also abandoning material concerns and cleaving only to the true, spiritual ones, oblivious to the surrounding false distractions of life. The practitioner's success in detaching from his sense of person, and conceive himself as \"Ein\" (in the double meaning of 'naught' and 'infinite'), is regarded as the highest state of elation in Hasidism. The true divine essence of man \u2013 the soul \u2013 may then ascend and return to the upper realm, where it does not possess an existence independent from God. This ideal is termed \"Hitpashtut ha-Gashmi'yut\", \"the expansion (or removal) of corporeality\". It is the dialectic opposite of God's contraction into the world.\nTo be enlightened and capable of \"Bitul ha-Yesh\", pursuing the pure spiritual aims and defying the primitive impulses of the body, one must overcome his inferior \"Bestial Soul\", connected with the Eyes of the Flesh. He may be able to tap into his \"Divine Soul\" (\"Nefesh Elohit\"), which craves communion, by employing constant contemplation, \"Hitbonenut\", on the hidden Godly dimension of all that exists. Then he could understand his surroundings with the \"Eyes of the Intellect\". The ideal adherent was intended to develop equanimity, or \"Hishtavut\" in Hasidic parlance, toward all matters worldly, not ignoring them, but understanding their superficiality.\nHasidic masters exhorted their followers to \"negate themselves\", paying as little heed as they could for worldly concerns, and thus, to clear the way for this transformation. The struggle and doubt of being torn between the belief in God's immanence and the very real sensual experience of the indifferent world is a key theme in the movement's literature. Many tracts have been devoted to the subject, acknowledging that the \"callous and rude\" flesh hinders one from holding fast to the ideal, and these shortcomings are extremely hard to overcome even in the purely intellectual level, a fortiori in actual life.\nAnother implication of this dualism is the notion of \"Worship through Corporeality\", \"Avodah be-Gashmiyut\". As the \"Ein Sof\" metamorphosed into substance, so may it in turn be raised back to its higher state; likewise, since the machinations in the higher \"Sephirot\" exert their influence on this world, even the most simple action may, if performed correctly and with understanding, achieve the reverse effect. According to Lurianic doctrine, the netherworld was suffused with divine sparks, concealed within \"husks\", \"qlippoth\". The glints had to be recovered and elevated to their proper place in the cosmos. \"Materiality itself could be embraced and consecrated\", noted Glenn Dynner, and Hasidism taught that by common acts like dancing or eating, performed with intention, the sparks could be extricated and set free. \"Avodah be-Gashmiyut\" had a clear, if not implicit, antinomian edge, possibly equating sacred rituals mandated by Judaism with everyday activities, granting them the same status in the believer's eyes and having him content to commit the latter at the expense of the former. While at some occasions the movement did appear to step at that direction \u2013 for example, in its early days, prayer and preparation for it consumed so much time that adherents were blamed of neglecting sufficient Torah study \u2013 Hasidic masters proved highly conservative. Unlike in other, more radical sects influenced by kabbalistic ideas, like the Sabbateans, Worship through Corporeality was largely limited to the elite and carefully restrained. The common adherents were taught they may engage it only mildly, through small deeds like earning money to support their leaders.\nThe complementary opposite of corporeal worship, or the elation of the finite into infinite, is the concept of \"Hamshacha\", \"drawing down\" or \"absorbing\", and specifically, \"Hamshachat ha-Shefa\", \"absorption of effluence\". During spiritual ascension, one could siphon the power animating the higher dimensions down into the material world, where it would manifest as benevolent influence of all kinds. These included spiritual enlightenment, zest in worship and other high-minded aims, but also the more prosaic health and healing, deliverance from various troubles and simple economic prosperity. Thus, a very tangible and alluring motivation to become followers emerged. Both corporeal worship and absorption allowed the masses to access, with common actions, a religious experience once deemed esoteric.\nYet another reflection of the \"Ein\"-\"Yesh\" dialectic is pronounced in the transformation of evil to goodness and the relations between these two poles and other contradicting elements \u2013 including various traits and emotions of the human psyche, like pride and humility, purity and profanity, et cetera. Hasidic thinkers argued that in order to redeem the sparks hidden, one had to associate not merely with the corporeal, but with sin and evil. One example is the elevation of impure thoughts during prayer, transforming them to noble ones rather than repressing them, advocated mainly in the early days of the sect; or \"breaking\" one's own character by directly confronting profane inclinations. This aspect, once more, had sharp antinomian implications and was used by the Sabbateans to justify excessive sinning. It was mostly toned down in late Hasidism, and even before that, leaders were careful to stress that it was not exercised in the physical sense, but in the contemplative, spiritual one. This kabbalistic notion, too, was not unique to the movement and appeared frequently among other Jewish groups.\nRighteous One.\nWhile its mystical and ethical teachings are not easily sharply distinguished from those of other Jewish currents, the defining doctrine of Hasidism is that of the saintly leader, serving both as an ideal inspiration and an institutional figure around whom followers are organized. In the movement's sacral literature, this person is referred to as the tzadik \"Righteous One\" \u2013 often also known by the general honorific \"Admor\" (acronym of Hebrew for \"our master, teacher and Rabbi\"), granted to rabbis in general, or colloquially as Rebbe. The idea that, in every generation, there are righteous persons through whom the divine effluence is drawn to the material world is rooted in the kabbalistic thought, which also claims that one of them is supreme, the reincarnation of Moses. Hasidism elaborated the notion of the tzaddiq into the basis of its entire system \u2013 so much that the very term gained an independent meaning within it, apart from the original, which denoted God-fearing, highly observant people.\nWhen the sect began to attract a following and expanded from a small circle of learned disciples to a mass movement, it became evident that its complex philosophy could be imparted only partially to the new rank and file. As even intellectuals struggled with the sublime dialectics of infinity and corporeality, there was little hope of having the common folk truly internalize these, not as mere abstractions to pay lip service to. Ideologues exhorted them to have faith, but the true answer, which marked their rise as a distinct sect, was the concept of the \"Tzaddiq\". A Hasidic master was to serve as a living embodiment of the recondite teachings. He was able to transcend matter, gain spiritual communion, Worship through Corporeality and fulfill all the theoretical ideals. As the vast majority of his flock could not do so themselves, they were to cleave to him instead, acquiring at least some semblance of those vicariously. His commanding and often \u2013 especially in the early generations \u2013 charismatic presence was to reassure the faithful and demonstrate the truth in Hasidic philosophy by countering doubts and despair. But more than spiritual welfare was concerned: Since it was believed he could ascend to the higher realms, the leader was able to harvest effluence and bring it down upon his adherents, providing them with very material benefits. \"The crystallization of that theurgical phase\", noted Glenn Dynner, \"marked Hasidism's evolution into a full-fledged social movement.\"\nIn Hasidic discourse, the willingness of the leader to sacrifice the ecstasy and fulfillment of unity in God was deemed a heavy sacrifice undertaken for the benefit of the congregation. His followers were to sustain and especially to obey him, as he possessed superior knowledge and insight gained through communion. The \"descent of the Righteous\" (\"Yeridat ha-Tzaddiq\") into the matters of the world was depicted as identical with the need to save the sinners and redeem the sparks concealed in the most lowly places. Such a link between his functions as communal leader and spiritual guide legitimized the political power he wielded. It also prevented a retreat of Hasidic masters into hermitism and passivity, as many mystics before them did. Their worldly authority was perceived as part of their long-term mission to elevate the corporeal world back into divine infinity. To a certain extent, the Saint even fulfilled for his congregation, and for it alone, a limited Messianic capacity in his lifetime. After the Sabbatean debacle, this moderate approach provided a safe outlet for the eschatological urges. At least two leaders radicalized in this sphere and caused severe controversy: Nachman of Breslov, who declared himself the only true \"Tzaddiq\", and Menachem Mendel Schneerson, whom many of his followers believed to be the Messiah. The \"Rebbe\"s were subject to intense hagiography, even subtly compared with Biblical figures by employing prefiguration. It was argued that since followers could not \"negate themselves\" sufficiently to transcend matter, they should instead \"negate themselves\" in submission to the Saint (\"Hitbatlut la-Tzaddiq\"), thus bonding with him and enabling themselves to access what he achieved in terms of spirituality. The Righteous served as a mystical bridge, drawing down effluence and elevating the prayers and petitions of his admirers.\nThe Saintly forged a well-defined relationship with the masses: they provided the latter with inspiration, were consulted in all matters, and were expected to intercede on behalf of their adherents with God and ensure they gained financial prosperity, health and male offspring. The pattern still characterizes Hasidic sects, though prolonged routinization in many turned the \"Rebbes\" into de facto political leaders of strong, institutionalized communities. The role of a Saint was obtained by charisma, erudition and appeal in the early days of Hasidism. But by the dawn of the 19th century, the Righteous began to claim legitimacy by descent to the masters of the past, arguing that since they linked matter with infinity, their abilities had to be associated with their own corporeal body. Therefore, it was accepted \"there can be no \"Tzaddiq\" but the son of a \"Tzaddiq\"\". Virtually all modern sects maintain this hereditary principle. For example, the \"Rebbe\"s' families maintain endogamy and marry almost solely with scions of other dynasties.\nSchools of thought.\nSome Hasidic \"courts\", and not a few individual prominent masters, developed distinct philosophies with particular accentuation of various themes in the movement's general teachings. Several Hasidic schools had lasting influence over many dynasties, while others died with their proponents. In the doctrinal sphere, the dynasties may be divided along many lines. Some are characterized by Rebbes who are predominantly Torah scholars and poskim \"deciders\", deriving their authority much like ordinary non-Hasidic rabbis do. Such \"courts\" emphasize strict observance and study, and are among the most meticulous in the Orthodox world in practice. Prominent examples are the House of Sanz and its scions, such as Satmar and Belz. Other sects, like Vizhnitz, espouse a charismatic-populist line centered on the admiration of the masses for the tzaddik, his effervescent style of prayer and conduct and his purported miracle-working capabilities. Fewer still retain a high proportion of the mystical-spiritualist themes of early Hasidism, encouraging members to study much kabbalistic literature and (carefully) engage in the field. The various Ziditchover dynasties mainly adhere to this philosophy. Others still focus on contemplation and achieving inner perfection. No dynasty is wholly devoted to a single approach to the above; all offer some combination with differing emphasis on each.\nIn 1812, a schism occurred between the Yaakov Yitzchak of Lublin, \"the Seer\", and his prime disciple, Yaakov Yitzchak of Peshischa, the \"Holy Jew\", due to both personal and doctrinal disagreements. The Seer adopted a populist approach, centered on the tzaddik's theurgical functions to draw the masses. He was famous for his lavish, enthusiastic conduct during prayer and worship, and highly charismatic demeanour. He stressed that as tzaddik, his mission was to influence the common folk by absorbing the Divine Light and satisfying their material needs, thus converting them to his cause and elating them. The Holy Jew pursued a more introspective course, maintaining that the Rebbe's duty was to serve as a spiritual mentor for a more elitist group, helping them to achieve a senseless state of contemplation, aiming to restore man to his oneness with God which Adam supposedly lost when he ate the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The Holy Jew and his successors did neither repudiate miracleworking nor eschew dramatic conduct, but they were much more restrained. The Przysucha School became dominant in Congress Poland, while populist Hasidism resembling the Lublin ethos often prevailed in Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria. One extreme and renowned philosopher who emerged from the Przysucha School was Menachem Mendel of Kotzk. Adopting an elitist, hard-line attitude, he openly denounced the folksy nature of other tzaddikim and rejected financial support. Gathering a small group of devout scholars who sought spiritual perfection, whom he often berated and mocked, he always stressed the importance of somberness and totality, stating it was better to be fully wicked than only somewhat good.\nChabad, limited to its namesake dynasty, but prominent, was founded by Shneur Zalman of Liadi and was elaborated by his successors until the late 20th century. The movement retained many of the attributes of early Hasidism, before a clear divide between tzaddik and ordinary followers was cemented. Chabad Rebbes insisted their adherents acquire proficiency in the sect's lore, and not relegate most responsibility to the leaders. The sect emphasizes the importance of intellectually grasping the dynamics of the hidden divine aspect and how they affect the human psyche; the acronym \"Chabad\" is for the three penultimate sefirot, associated with the cerebral side of consciousness.\nAnother famous philosophy is that formulated by Nachman of Breslov and adhered to by Breslov Hasidim. In contrast to most of his peers, who believed that God must be worshiped through the enjoyment of the physical world, Nachman portrayed the corporeal world in grim colours, as a place devoid of God's immediate presence from which the soul yearns to liberate itself. He mocked the attempts to perceive the nature of infinite-finite dialectics and how God still occupies the Vacant Void albeit not, stating these were paradoxical, beyond human understanding. Only naive faith in their reality would do. Mortals constantly struggled to overcome their profane instincts and had to free themselves from their limited intellects to see the world as it truly is.\nTzvi Hirsh of Zidichov, a major Galician tzaddik, was a disciple of the Seer of Lublin, but combined his populist inclination with a strict observance even among his most common followers, and great pluralism in matters of mysticism, as those were eventually emanating from each person's unique soul.\nMordechai Yosef Leiner of Izbica promulgated a radical understanding of free will, which he considered illusory and also derived directly from God. He argued that evil thoughts did not derive from the animalistic soul after attaining a sufficient spiritual level. Sudden urges to transgress revealed Law were God-inspired and may be pursued. This volatile, potentially antinomian doctrine of \"Transgression for the Sake of Heaven\" is also found in other Hasidic writings, especially from the early period. His successors de-emphasized it in their commentaries. Leiner's disciple Zadok HaKohen of Lublin also developed a complex philosophic system which presented a dialectic nature in history, arguing that significant progress had to be preceded by crisis and calamity.\nPractice and culture.\nRebbe and \"court\".\nThe Hasidic community is organized in a sect known as a \"court\" (, Galician Yiddish \"howf\"; masc). In the movement's early days, a particular rebbe's following usually resided in the same town and their leaders' settlement categorized their Hasidism: a Hasid of Belz, Vizhnitz, and so forth. Later, especially after World War II, the dynasties retained the names of their original Eastern European settlements when moving to the West or Israel. Thus, for example, the Joel Teitelbaum's court in 1905 in Transylvania remained known after its namesake town, Sathmar, even though its headquarters lay in New York, and almost all other Hasidic sects likewise \u2013 albeit some groups founded overseas were named accordingly, like the Bostoners.\nAkin to his spiritual status, the Rebbe is also the administrative head of the community. Sects often possess linked synagogues (often known as shtiebels), study halls, and internal charity mechanisms, and sufficiently large ones also maintain entire educational systems. The rebbe is the supreme authority figure, not just for the institutions. The rank-and-file Hasidim are also expected to consult with him on important matters and often seek his blessing and advice. He is personally attended by aides known as \"gabbai\" or \"mashbak\".\nMany particular Hasidic rites surround the leader. On Shabbat, Jewish holidays, and celebratory occasions, rebbes hold a \"tish\" \"table\", a large feast for their male adherents. Together, they sing, dance, and eat, and the head of the sect shakes the hands of his followers to bless them, and often delivers a sermon. A \"khozer\" \"repeater\", selected for his good memory, commits the text to writing after Shabbat (any form of writing during the Sabbath itself being forbidden). In many \"courts\", the remnants of his meal, supposedly suffused with holiness, are handed out and even fought over. A very large dish is often prepared beforehand, and the rebbe only tastes it before passing it to the crowd. Apart from the gathering at noon, the seudah shlishit of Shabbat and the Melaveh Malkah meal when it ends are also particularly important and an occasion for song, feasting, tales, and sermons. A central custom, which serves as a major factor in the economics of most \"courts\", is the \"kvitel\", \"little note\". Adherents submit a written petition, which the master may assist with on behalf of his sanctity, adding money for either tzedakah or the leader's needs. Occasions in the \"court\" serve as a pretext for mass gatherings, flaunting the power, wealth and size of each. Weddings of the leader's family, for example, are often held with large multistoried stands (\u05e4\u05d0\u05e8\u05e2\u05e0\u05d8\u05e9\u05e2\u05e1, \"Parentches\") filled with Hasidim surrounding the main floor, where the Rebbe and his relatives dine, celebrate, and perform the Mitzvah tantz. This is a festive dance with the bride: Both parties hold one end of a long sash, a Hasidic gartel, for modesty.\nAllegiance to the dynasty and Rebbe is also sometimes a cause for tension. Notable feuds between \"courts\" include the 1926\u20131934 strife after Chaim Elazar Spira of Munkatch cursed the deceased Yissachar Dov Rokeach I of Belz; the 1980\u20132012 Satmar-Belz collision after Yissachar Dov Rokeach II broke with the Orthodox Council of Jerusalem, which culminated when he had to travel in a bulletproof car; and the 2006\u2013present Satmar succession dispute between brothers Aaron Teitelbaum and Zalman Leib Teitelbaum, which saw mass riots.\nAs in other Haredi groups, apostates may face threats, hostility, violence, and various punitive measures, among them separation of children from their disaffiliated parents, especially in divorce cases. Due to their strictly religious education and traditionalist upbringing, many who leave their sects have few viable work skills or even speak English. Their integration into the broader society is often difficult. The segregated communities are also a comfortable setting for child sexual abuse, and numerous incidents have been reported. While Hasidic leadership has often been accused of silencing the matter, awareness of it is rising within the sects.\nAnother related phenomenon is the recent rise of \"mashpi'im\" \"influencers\". Once a title for an instructor in Chabad and Breslov only, the institutionalized nature of the established \"courts\" led many adherents to seek guidance and inspiration from persons who did not declare themselves new leaders, but only \"mashpi'im\". Technically, they fill the original role of rebbes in providing for spiritual welfare; yet, they do not usurp the title, and are therefore countenanced.\nLiturgy.\nMost Hasidim use some variation of \"Nusach Sefard\", a blend of the liturgies of Nusach Ashkenaz and Nusach Sefard based on the innovations of Isaac Luria. Many dynasties have specific adaptations of Nusach Sefard. The versions of the Belzer, Bobover, and Dushinskier are closer to the Nusach Ashkenaz, while others, such as the Munkacz version, are closer to the Lurianic. Many sects believe that their version reflects Luria's mystical devotions best. The Baal Shem Tov added two segments to Friday services on the eve of Sabbath: Psalm 107 before mincha, and Psalm 23 at the end of maariv.\nHasidim use Ashkenazi Hebrew for liturgical purposes, reflecting their Eastern European background. In their services, wordless, emotional melodies, nigunim are particularly common.\nHasidim lends great importance to kavanah, devotion or intention; their services are long and repetitive. Some courts nearly abolished traditional specified times by which prayers must be conducted (\"zemanim\"), to prepare and concentrate. This practice, still enacted in Chabad for one, is controversial in many dynasties, which do follow the specifics of halakha on praying earlier, and not eating beforehand. Chabad uses the permission granted in Jewish law to eat before prayer in certain circumstances, and to have later praying times, as a result of more extended periods of preparatory study and contemplation beforehand. A common saying to explain this (attributed to the Third Chabad Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson I) goes, \"Better to eat in order to pray, than to pray in order to eat\", implying it is better to eat before prayer if due to the later time of prayers finishing one will be hungry and unable to concentrate properly. Another regulation is daily immersion in a mikveh by men for spiritual cleansing, a rate much higher than is customary for Misnagdim (non-Hasidic Orthodox Jews).\nMelody.\nHasidism developed a unique emphasis on the spirituality of nigunim, wordless melodies, as a means to reach devekut during prayer and communal gatherings. Nigunim developed new expressions and depths of the soul in Jewish life, often drawing from folk idioms of the surrounding gentile culture, which were adapted to elevate their concealed sparks of divinity, according to Lurianic Kabbalah.\nAppearance.\nWithin the Hasidic world, it is possible to distinguish different Hasidic groups by subtle differences in dress. Some details of their dress are shared by non-Hasidic Haredim. Much of Hasidic dress was historically the clothing of all Eastern European Jews, influenced by the style of Polish\u2013Lithuanian nobility. Furthermore, Hasidim have attributed religious origins to specific Hasidic items of clothing.\nHasidic men most commonly wear dark overclothes. On weekdays, they wear a long, black, cloth jacket called a rekel in Yiddish, and on Jewish holidays and Shabbos, the bek\u00e9she and \"silk kaftan\", a similarly long, black jacket, but of satin (traditionally silk). Indoors, the colorful \"tish bek\u00e9she\" is still worn. Some Hasidim wear a satin overcoat called a \"radzivulke\" (after the noble wear of the Polish House of Radziwi\u0142\u0142)\nOn Shabbat, rebbes traditionally wore a white bek\u00e9she. However, this practice has fallen into disuse among most. Many wear a black silk bekeshe with velvet trim called \"str\u00f3kes\" piping or \"samet\" \"samite\"; in Hungarian ones, they are gold-embroidered.\nVarious symbolic and religious qualities are attributed to Hasidic dress, though they are mainly apocryphal as their origin is cultural and historical. For example, bekeshes are modest, the shtreimel is warm but not wool (thus not violating rules of shaatnez). Shabbat shoes are laceless not to have to tie a knot, a rabbinically prohibited activity of Shabbat. A gartel divides the Hasid's lower parts from his upper parts, implying modesty and chastity. For kabbalistic reasons, Hasidim buttoned their clothes right over the left. Hasidic men customarily wear black hats on weekdays, as do nearly all Haredi men today. A variety of hats are worn depending on the group: Chabad men often pinch their hats to form a triangle on the top, Satmar men wear an open-crown hat with rounded edges, and \"samet\" \"velvet hat\" or \"biber\" beaver hat are worn by many Galician and Hungarian Hasidic men.\nMarried Hasidic men don a variety of fur headdresses on the Sabbath, once common among all wedded Eastern European Jewish males and still worn by non-Hasidic Perushim in Jerusalem. The most ubiquitous is the shtreimel, which is seen especially among Galician and Hungarian sects like Satmar or Belz. A taller \"spodik\" is donned by Polish dynasties such as Ger. A \"kolpik\" is worn by unmarried sons and grandsons of many Rebbes on the Sabbath. Some Rebbes don it on special occasions.\nThere are many other distinct items of clothing. Such are the Gerrer \"hoyznzokn \u2013\" long black socks into which the trousers are tucked. Some Hasidic men from Eastern Galicia wear black socks with their breeches on the Sabbath, as opposed to white ones on weekdays, particularly Belzers.\nFollowing a Biblical commandment not to shave the sides of one's face (Leviticus 19:27), male members of most Hasidic groups wear long, uncut sidelocks called payot. Some Hasidic men shave off the rest of their hair. Not every Hasidic group requires long peyos, and not all Jewish men with peyos are Hasidic, but all Hasidic groups discourage the shaving of one's beard. Most Hasidic boys receive their upsherin ritual, a first haircut, at the age of three years (Skverers do this on boys' second birthday). Until then, Hasidic boys have long hair.\nHasidic women wear clothing adhering to the principles of tznius, modest dress. This includes long conservative skirts, sleeves past the elbow, and covered necklines. Also, women wear stockings to cover their legs; in some Hasidic groups, such as Satmar or Toldos Aharon, the stockings must be opaque. In keeping with halakha, married women wear a head covering, using either a \"sheytel\" \"wig\", \"tikhl\" \"headscarf\", \"shpitzl\" \"snood\", beret, or other hat. In some Hasidic groups, women may wear two headcoverings \u2013 a wig and scarf or a wig and hat.\nFamilies.\nHasidic Jews, like many other Orthodox Jews, typically produce large families; the average Hasidic family in the United States has 8 children, although it is not uncommon to have 10, 12, or more. This is followed out of a desire to fulfill the Biblical mandate to \"be fruitful and multiply\" and sometimes specifically to counteract the loss of Jewry during the Holocaust.\nLanguages.\nMost Hasidim speak the language of their countries of residence but use Galician Yiddish among themselves to remain distinct and preserve tradition. Thus, children are still learning Yiddish today, and the language, despite predictions to the contrary, has not died. Yiddish newspapers are still published, and Yiddish fiction is written, primarily aimed at women. Even media in Yiddish is produced both within the Hasidic community and outside it for both educational and entertainment purposes, such as \"Unorthodox\" and \"Shtisel\" on Netflix as well as support from the Swedish government for Yiddish as one of the official minority languages of Sweden. Some Hasidic groups, such as Satmar and Toldot Aharon, actively oppose the everyday use of Hebrew, which they consider a holy tongue. The use of Hebrew for anything other than prayer and study is, according to them, profane, and so, Yiddish is the vernacular and common tongue for most Hasidim around the world.\nLiterature.\nHasidic tales are a literary genre, including the hagiographies of various rebbes and moralistic themes. Some are anecdotes or recorded conversations about faith, practice, etc. The most famous tend to be terse and carry a strong and obvious point. They were often transmitted orally, though the earliest compendium is from 1815.\nMany revolve around the righteous. The Baal Shem Tov, in particular, was subject to excess hagiography. Characterized by vivid metaphors, miracles, and piety, each reflects the surrounding and era it was composed in. Common themes include dissenting the question what is acceptable to pray for, whether or not the commoner may gain communion, or the meaning of wisdom.\nThe tales were a popular, accessible medium to convey the movement's messages.\nIn addition to these tales, Hasidim study the numerous mystical/spiritual works of Hasidic philosophy. (Chabad, for example, daily study the \"Tanya\", the \"Torah Or/Likutei Torah\", and the voluminous works of the Rebbes of Chabad; Breslovers study the teachings of Nachman of Breslov, additional to his \"tales\".) These works draw on the earlier esoteric theology of Kabbalah but articulate this in terms of inner psychological awareness and personal analogies. In addition to its formal, intellectual component, this study thus makes Jewish mysticism accessible and tangible, so that it inspires emotional devekut and embeds a deep spiritual element in daily Jewish life.\nOrganization and demographics.\nThe various Hasidic groups may be categorized along several parameters, including their geographical origin, their proclivity for certain teachings, and their political stance. These attributes are quite often, but by no means always, correlated, and there are many instances when a \"court\" espouses a unique combination. Thus, while most dynasties from the former Greater Hungary and Galicia are inclined to extreme conservatism and anti-Zionism, Rebbe Yekusiel Yehudah Halberstam led the Sanz-Klausenburg sect in a more open and mild direction; and though Hasidim from Lithuania and Belarus are popularly perceived as prone to intellectualism, David Assaf noted this notion is derived more from their Litvak surroundings than their actual philosophies.\nApart from those, each \"court\" often possesses its unique customs, including style of prayer, melodies, particular items of clothing, and the like.\nOn the political scale, \"courts\" are mainly divided on their relations to Zionism. The right-wing, identified with Satmar, are hostile to the State of Israel, and refuse to participate in the elections there or receive any state funding. They are mainly affiliated with the Edah HaChareidis and the Central Rabbinical Congress. The great majority belong to \"Agudas Israel\", represented in Israel by the United Torah Judaism party. Its Council of Torah Sages now includes a dozen Rebbes. In the past, there were Religious Zionist Rebbes, mainly of the Ruzhin line, but there are virtually none today.\nIn 2016, a study conducted by Marcin Wodzi\u0144ski, drawing from the courts' own internal phone-books and other resources, located 129,211 Hasidic households worldwide, about 5% of the estimated total Jewish population. Of those, 62,062 resided in Israel and 53,485 in the United States, 5,519 in Britain and 3,392 in Canada. In Israel, the largest Hasidic concentrations are in the Haredi neighbourhoods of Jerusalem \u2013 including Ramot Alon, Batei Ungarin, et cetera \u2013 in the cities of Bnei Brak and El'ad, and in the West Bank settlements of Modi'in Illit and Beitar Illit. There is considerable presence in other specifically Orthodox municipalities or enclaves, like Kiryat Sanz, Netanya. In the United States, most Hasidim reside in New York, though there are small communities across the entire country. Brooklyn, particularly the neighborhoods of Borough Park, Williamsburg, and Crown Heights, has an especially large population. Another large population resides in the hamlet of Monsey in the Hudson Valley region of New York; in the same region, New Square and Kiryas Joel are rapidly growing all-Hasidic enclaves, one founded by the Skver dynasty and the other by Satmar. In Britain, Stamford Hill is home to the largest Hasidic community in the country, and there are others in London and Manchester. In Canada, Kiryas Tosh is a settlement populated entirely by Tosh Hasidim, and there are more adherents of other sects in, and around, Montreal.\nThere are more than a dozen Hasidic dynasties with a large following, and over a hundred which have small or minuscule adherence, sometimes below twenty people, with the presumptive Rebbe holding the title more as a matter of prestige. Many \"courts\" became completely extinct during the Holocaust, like the Aleksander (Hasidic dynasty) from Aleksandr\u00f3w \u0141\u00f3dzki, which numbered tens of thousands in 1939, and barely exists today.\nThe largest sect in the world, with some 26,000 member households, which constitute 20% of all Hasidim, is Satmar, founded in 1905 in the namesake city in Hungary and based in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, and Kiryas Joel. Satmar is known for its extreme conservatism and opposition to both \"Agudas Israel\" and Zionism, inspired by the legacy of Hungarian Haredi Judaism. The sect underwent a schism in 2006, and two competing factions emerged, led by rival brothers Aaron Teitelbaum and Zalman Teitelbaum. The second-largest \"court\" worldwide, with some 11,600 households (or 9% of all Hasidism), is Ger, established in 1859 at G\u00f3ra Kalwaria, near Warsaw. For decades, it was the dominant power in \"Agudas\", and espoused a moderate line toward Zionism and modern culture. Its origins lay in the rationalist Przysucha School of Central Poland. The current Rebbe is Yaakov Aryeh Alter. The third-largest dynasty is Vizhnitz, a charismatic sect founded in 1854 at Vyzhnytsia, Bukovina. A moderate group involved in Israeli politics, it is split into several branches, which maintain cordial relations. The main partition is between Vizhnitz-Israel and Vizhnitz-Monsey, headed respectively by Rebbes Israel Hager and the eight sons of the late Rebbe Mordecai Hager. In total, all Vizhnitz sub-\"courts\" constitute over 10,500 households. The fourth major dynasty, with some 7,000 households, is Belz, established 1817 in namesake Belz, north of Lviv. An Eastern Galician dynasty drawing both from the Seer of Lublin's charismatic-populist style and \"rabbinic\" Hasidism, it espoused hard-line positions, but broke off from the Edah HaChareidis and joined \"Agudas\" in 1979. Belz is led by Rebbe Yissachar Dov Rokeach.\nThe Bobover dynasty, founded 1881 in Bobowa, West Galicia, constitutes some 4,500 households in total, and has undergone a bitter succession strife since 2005, eventually forming the \"Bobov\" (3,000 households) and \"Bobov-45\" (1,500 households) sects. Sanz-Klausenburg, divided into a New York and Israeli branches, presides over 3,800 households. The Skver sect, established in 1848 in Skvyra, near Kyiv, constitutes 3,300. The Shomer Emunim dynasties, originating in Jerusalem during the 1920s and known for their unique style of dressing imitating that of the Old Yishuv, have over 3,000 families, almost all in the larger \"courts\" of Toldos Aharon and Toldos Avraham Yitzchak. Karlin Stolin, which rose already in the 1760s in a quarter of Pinsk, encompasses 2,200 families.\nThere are two other populous Hasidic sub-groups, which do not function as classical Rebbe-headed \"courts\", but as de-centralized movements, retaining some of the characteristics of early Hasidism. Breslov rose under its charismatic leader Nachman of Breslov in the early 19th century. Critical of all other Rebbes, he forbade his followers to appoint a successor upon his death in 1810. His acolytes led small groups of adherents, persecuted by other Hasidim, and disseminated his teachings. The original philosophy of the sect elicited great interest among modern scholars, and that led many newcomers to Orthodox Judaism (\"repentants\") to join it. Numerous Breslov communities, each led by its own rabbis, now have thousands of full-fledged followers, and far more admirers and semi-committed supporters; Marcin Wodzi\u0144ski estimated that the fully committed population of Breslovers may be estimated at 7,000 households. Chabad-Lubavitch, originating in the 1770s, did have hereditary leadership, but always stressed the importance of self-study, rather than reliance on the Righteous. Its seventh, and last, leader, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, converted it into a vehicle for Jewish outreach. By his death in 1994, it had many more semi-engaged supporters than Hasidim in the strict sense, and they are still hard to distinguish. Chabad's own internal phone-books list some 16,800 member households. None succeeded Schneerson, and the group operates as a large network of communities with independent leaders.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nIn the late 17th century, several social trends converged among the Jews who inhabited the southern periphery of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, especially in the present-day Western Ukraine. These enabled the emergence and flourishing of Hasidism.\nThe first, and most prominent, was the popularization of the mystical lore of Kabbalah. For several centuries, an esoteric teaching practiced surreptitiously by few, it was transformed into almost household knowledge by a mass of cheap printed pamphlets. The kabbalistic inundation was a major influence behind the rise of the heretical Sabbatean movement, led by Sabbatai Zevi, who declared himself Messiah in 1665. The propagation of Kabbalah made the Jewish masses susceptible to Hasidic ideas, themselves, in essence, a popularized version of the teaching \u2013 indeed, Hasidism actually emerged when its founders determined to openly practice it, instead of remaining a secret circle of ascetics, as was the manner of almost all past kabbalists. The correlation between publicizing the lore and Sabbateanism did not escape the rabbinic elite, and caused vehement opposition to the new movement.\nAnother factor was the decline of the traditional authority structures. Jewish autonomy remained quite secured; later research debunked Simon Dubnow's claim that the Council of Four Lands' demise in 1746 was a culmination of a long process which destroyed judicial independence and paved the way for the Hasidic rebbes to serve as leaders (another long-held explanation for the sect's rise advocated by Raphael Mahler, that the Khmelnytsky Uprising effected economic impoverishment and despair, was also refuted. However, the magnates and nobles held much sway over the nomination of both rabbis and communal elders, to such a degree that the masses often perceived them as mere lackeys of the land owners. Their ability to serve as legitimate arbiters in disputes \u2013 especially those concerning the regulation of leasehold rights over alcohol distillation and other monopolies in the estates \u2013 was severely diminished. The reduced prestige of the establishment, and the need for an alternative source of authority to pass judgement, left a vacuum which Hasidic charismatics eventually filled. They transcended old communal institutions, to which all the Jews of a locality were subordinate, and had groups of followers in each town across vast territories. Often supported by rising strata outside the traditional elite, whether nouveau riche or various low-level religious functionaries, they created a modern form of leadership.\nHistorians discerned other influences. The formative age of Hasidism coincided with the rise of numerous religious revival movements across the world, including the First Great Awakening in New England, German Pietism and the Russian Old Believers who opposed the established church. Hasidism rejected the existing order, decrying it as stale and overly hierarchic. They offered what they described as more spiritual, candid, and simple substitutes. Gershon David Hundert noted the considerable similarity between the Hasidic conceptions and this contemporary background, rooted in the growing importance attributed to the individual's consciousness and choices.\nIsrael ben Eliezer.\nIsrael ben Eliezer (ca. 1698\u20131760), known as the \"Baal Shem Tov\" (\"Master of the \"Good\" Name\", acronym: \"Besht\"), is considered the founder of Hasidism. Supposedly born south of the Prut, in the northern frontier of Moldavia, he earned a reputation as a Baal Shem, \"Master of the Name\". These were common folk healers who employed mysticism, amulets and incantations as their trade. Little is known for certain about Israel ben Eliezer. Though not a scholar, he was sufficiently learned to become notable in the communal hall of study and marry into the rabbinic elite, his wife being the divorced sister of a rabbi; in his later years, he became wealthy and famous, as attested by contemporary chronicles. Apart from that, most information about him is derived from Hasidic hagiographic accounts. These claim that as a boy he was recognized by one \"Rabbi Adam Baal Shem Tov\" who entrusted him with great secrets of the Torah, passed in his illustrious family for centuries; that the Besht later spent a decade in the Carpathian Mountains as a hermit, where he was visited by the Biblical prophet Ahijah the Shilonite who taught him more; and that at the age of thirty-six, he was granted heavenly permission to reveal himself as a great kabbalist and miracle worker.\nBy the 1740s, it is verified that he relocated to the town of Medzhybizh and became recognized and popular in Podolia and beyond. It is well attested that he emphasized several known kabbalistic concepts, formulating his own teachings to some degree. The Besht stressed the immanence of God and His presence in the material world, and that therefore, physical acts, such as eating, have an actual influence on the spiritual sphere and may serve to hasten the achievement of communion with the divine (\"devekut\"). He was known to pray ecstatically and with great intention, in order to provide channels for the divine light to flow into the Earthly realm. The Besht stressed the importance of joy and contentment in the worship of God, rather than the abstinence and self-mortification deemed essential to becoming a pious mystic, and of fervent and vigorous prayer as a means of spiritual elation instead of severe asceticism, but many of his immediate disciples reverted in part to the older doctrines, especially in disavowing sexual pleasure even in marital relations.\nIn that, the \"Besht\" laid the foundation for a popular movement, offering a far less rigorous course for the masses to gain a significant religious experience. And yet, he remained the guide of a small society of elitists, in the tradition of former kabbalists, and never led a large public as his successors did. While many later figures cited him as the inspiration behind the full-fledged Hasidic doctrine, the Besht himself did not practice it in his lifetime.\nConsolidation.\nIsrael ben Eliezer gathered a considerable following, drawing to himself disciples from far away. They were largely of elitist background, yet adopted the populist approach of their master. The most prominent was Rabbi Dov Ber the \"Maggid\" (preacher). He succeeded the former upon his death, though other important acolytes, mainly Jacob Joseph of Polonne, did not accept his leadership. Establishing himself in Mezhirichi, the Maggid turned to greatly elaborate the Besht's rudimentary ideas and institutionalize the nascent circle into an actual movement. Ben Eliezer and his acolytes used the very old and common epithet \"Hasidim\", \"pious\"; in the latter third of the 18th century, a clear differentiation arose between that sense of the word and what was at first described as \"New Hasidism\", propagated to a degree by the Maggid and especially his successors.\nDoctrine coalesced as Jacob Joseph, Dov Ber, and the latter's disciple, Rabbi Elimelech of Lizhensk, composed the three magna opera of early Hasidism, respectively: the 1780 \"Toldot Ya'akov Yosef\", the 1781 \"Maggid d'varav le-Ya'akov\", and the 1788 \"No'am Elimelekh\". Other books were also published. Their new teaching had many aspects. The importance of devotion in prayer was stressed to such degree that many waited beyond the prescribed time to properly prepare; the Besht's recommendation to \"elevate and sanctify\" impure thoughts, rather than simply repress them during the service, was expanded by Dov Ber into an entire precept, depicting prayer as a mechanism to transform thoughts and feelings from a primal to a higher state in a manner parallel to the unfolding of the \"Sephirot\". But the most important was the notion of the \"Tzaddiq\" \u2013 later designated by the general rabbinic honorific \"Admor\" (our master, teacher, and rabbi) or by the colloquial Rebbe \u2013 the Righteous One, the mystic who was able to elate and achieve communion with the divine, but, unlike kabbalists past, did not practice it in secret, but as leader of the masses. He was able to bring down prosperity and guidance from the higher \"Sephirot\", and the common people who could not attain such a state themselves would achieve it by \"clinging\" to and obeying him. The \"Tzaddiq\" served as a bridge between the spiritual realm and the ordinary folk, as well as a simple, understandable embodiment of the esoteric teachings of the sect, which were still beyond the reach of most just as old-style Kabbalah before.\nThe various Hasidic \"Tzaddiqim\", mainly the Maggid's disciples, spread across Eastern Europe with each gathering adherents among the people and learned acolytes who could be initiated as leaders. The Righteous' \"courts\" in which they resided, attended by their followers to receive blessing and council, became the institutional centers of Hasidism, serving as its branches and organizational core. Slowly, various rites emerged in them, like the Sabbath \"Tisch\" or \"table\", in which the Righteous would hand out food scraps from their meals, considered blessed by the touch of ones imbued with godly Light during their mystical ascensions. Another potent institution was the \"Shtibel\", the private prayer gatherings opened by adherents in every town which served as a recruiting mechanism. The \"Shtibel\" differed from the established synagogues and study halls, allowing their members greater freedom to worship when they pleased, and also serving recreational and welfare purposes. Combined with its simplified message, more appealing to the common man, its honed organizational framework accounted for the exponential growth of Hasidic ranks. Having ousted the old communal model, and replaced it with a less-hierarchical structure and more individually-oriented religiosity, Hasidism was, in fact, the first great modern \u2013 albeit not modernist; its self-understanding was grounded in a traditional mindset \u2013 Jewish movement.\nFrom its original base in Podolia and Volhynia, the movement was rapidly disseminated during the Maggid's lifetime, and after his 1772 death. Twenty or so of Dov Ber's prime disciples each brought it to a different region, and their own successors followed: Aharon of Karlin (I), Menachem Mendel of Vitebsk, and Shneur Zalman of Liadi were the emissaries to the former Lithuania in the far north, while Menachem Nachum Twersky headed to Chernobyl in the east, and Levi Yitzchok of Berditchev remained nearby. Elimelech of Lizhensk, his brother Zusha of Hanipol, and Yisroel Hopsztajn established the sect in Poland proper. Vitebsk and Abraham Kalisker later led a small group of followers to Ottoman Palestine, establishing a Hasidic presence in the Galilee.\nThe spread of Hasidism also incurred organized opposition. Rabbi Elijah of Vilnius, one of the greatest authorities of the generation and a \"hasid\" and secret kabbalist of the old style, was deeply suspicious of their emphasis on mysticism, rather than mundane Torah study, threat to established communal authority, resemblance to the Sabbatean movement, and other details he considered infractions. In April 1772, he and the Vilnius community wardens launched a systematic campaign against the sect, placing an anathema upon them, banishing their leaders, and sending letters denouncing the movement. Further excommunication followed in Brody and other cities. In 1781, during a second round of hostilities, the books of Jacob Joseph were burned in Vilnius. Another cause for strife emerged when the Hasidim adopted the Lurianic prayer rite, which they revised somewhat to Nusach Sefard; the first edition in Eastern Europe was printed in 1781 and received approbation from the anti-Hasidic scholars of Brody, but the sect quickly embraced the Kabbalah-infused tome and popularized it, making it their symbol. Their rivals, named \"Misnagdim\", \"opponents\" (a generic term which acquired an independent meaning as Hasidism grew stronger), soon accused them of abandoning the traditional Nusach Ashkenaz.\nIn 1798, Opponents made accusations of espionage against Shneur Zalman of Liadi, and he was imprisoned by the Russian government for two months. Excoriatory polemics were printed and anathemas declared in the entire region. But Elijah's death in 1797 denied the \"Misnagdim\" their powerful leader. In 1804, Alexander I of Russia allowed independent prayer groups to operate, the chief vessel through which the movement spread from town to town. The failure to eradicate Hasidism, which acquired a clear self-identity in the struggle and greatly expanded throughout it, convinced its adversaries to adopt a more passive method of resistance, as exemplified by Chaim of Volozhin. The growing conservatism of the new movement \u2013 which at some occasions drew close to Kabbalah-based antinomian phraseology, as did the Sabbateans, but never crossed the threshold and remained thoroughly observant \u2013 and the rise of common enemies slowly brought a rapprochement, and by the second half of the 19th century, both sides basically considered each other legitimate.\nThe turn of the century saw several prominent new, fourth generation \"tzaddiqim\". Upon Elimelech's death in the now-partitioned Poland, his place in Habsburg Galicia was assumed by Menachem Mendel of Rimanov, who was deeply hostile to the modernization the Austrian rulers attempted to force on the traditional Jewish society (though this same process also allowed his sect to flourish, as communal authority was severely weakened). The rabbi of Rimanov hearkened the alliance the Hasidim would form with the most conservative elements of the Jewish public. In Central Poland, the new leader was Jacob Isaac Horowiz, the \"Seer of Lublin\", who was of a particularly populist bent and appealed to the common folk with miracle working and little strenuous spiritual demands. The Seer's senior acolyte, Jacob Isaac Rabinovitz, the \"Holy Jew\" of Przysucha, gradually dismissed his mentor's approach as overly vulgar, and adopted a more aesthetic and scholarly approach, virtually without theurgy to the masses. The Holy Jew's \"Przysucha School\" was continued by his successor Simcha Bunim, and especially the reclusive, morose Menachem Mendel of Kotzk. The most controversial fourth generation \"tzaddiq\" was the Podolia-based Nachman of Breslov, who denounced his peers for becoming too institutionalized, much like the old establishment their predecessors challenged decades before, and espoused an anti-rationalist, pessimistic spiritual teaching, very different from the prevalent stress on joy.\nRoutinization.\nThe opening of the 19th century saw the Hasidic sect transformed. Once a rising force outside the establishment, the \"tzaddiqim\" now became an important and often dominant power in most of Eastern Europe. The slow process of encroachment, which mostly begun with forming an independent \"Shtibel\" and culminated in the Righteous becoming an authority figure (either alongside or above the official rabbinate) for the entire community, overwhelmed many towns even in \"Misnagdic\" stronghold of Lithuania, far more so in Congress Poland and the vast majority in Podolia, Volhynia and Galicia. It began to make inroads into Bukovina, Bessarabia and the westernmost frontier of autochthonic pre-WWII Hasidism, in northeastern Hungary, where the Seer's disciple Moses Teitelbaum (I) was appointed in Ujhely.\nLess than three generations after the Besht's death, the sect grew to encompass hundreds of thousands by 1830. As a mass movement, a clear stratification emerged between the court's functionaries and permanent residents (\"yoshvim\", \"sitters\"), the devoted followers who would often visit the Righteous on Sabbath, and the large public which prayed at Sefard Rite synagogues and was minimally affiliated.\nAll this was followed by a more conservative approach and power bickering among the Righteous. Since the Maggid's death, none could claim the overall leadership. Among the several dozen active, each ruled over his own turf, and local traditions and customs began to emerge in the various courts which developed their own identity. The high mystical tension typical of a new movement subsided, and was soon replaced by more hierarchical, orderly atmosphere.\nThe most important aspect of the routinization Hasidism underwent was the adoption of dynasticism. The first to claim legitimacy by right of descent from the Besht was his grandson, Boruch of Medzhybizh, appointed 1782. He held a lavish court with Hershel of Ostropol as jester and demanded the other Righteous acknowledge his supremacy. Upon the death of Menachem Nachum Twersky of Chernobyl, his son Mordechai Twersky succeeded him. The principle was conclusively affirmed in the great dispute after Liadi's demise in 1813: his senior acolyte Aharon HaLevi of Strashelye was defeated by his son, Dovber Schneuri, whose offspring retained the title for 181 years.\nBy the 1860s, virtually all courts were dynastic. Rather than single \"tzaddiqim\" with followings of their own, each sect would command a base of rank-and-file Hasidim attached not just to the individual leader, but to the bloodline and the court's unique attributes. Israel Friedman of Ruzhyn insisted on royal splendour, resided in a palace and his six sons all inherited some of his followers. With the constraints of maintaining their gains replacing the dynamism of the past, the Righteous or Rebbes/\"Admorim\" also silently retreated from the overt, radical mysticism of their predecessors. While populist miracle working for the masses remained a key theme in many dynasties, a new type of \"Rebbe-Rabbi\" emerged, one who was both a completely traditional \"halakhic\" authority as well as a spiritualist. The tension with the \"Misnagdim\" subsided significantly.\nBut it was an external threat, more than anything else, that mended relations. While traditional Jewish society remained well entrenched in backward Eastern Europe, reports of the rapid acculturation and religious laxity in the West troubled both camps. When the \"Haskalah\", the Jewish Enlightenment, appeared in Galicia and Congress Poland in the 1810s, it was soon perceived as a dire threat. The \"maskilim\" themselves detested Hasidism as an anti-rationalist and barbaric phenomenon, as did Western Jews of all shades, including the most right-wing Orthodox such as Rabbi Azriel Hildesheimer. In Galicia especially, hostility towards it defined the \"Haskalah\" to a large extent, from the staunchly observant Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Chajes and Joseph Perl to the radical anti-Talmudists like Osias Schorr. The Enlightened, who revived Hebrew grammar, often mocked their rivals' lack of eloquence in the language. While a considerable proportion of the \"Misnagdim\" were not averse to at least some of the \"Haskala\"'s goals, the Rebbes were unremittingly hostile.\nThe most distinguished Hasidic leader in Galicia in the era was Chaim Halberstam, who combined Talmudic erudition and the status of a major decisor with his function as \"tzaddiq\". He symbolized the new era, brokering peace between the small Hasidic sect in Hungary to its opponents. In that country, where modernization and assimilation were much more prevalent than in the East, the local Righteous joined forces with those now termed Orthodox against the rising liberals. Rabbi Moses Sofer of Pressburg, while no friend to Hasidism, tolerated it as he combated the forces which sought modernization of the Jews; a generation later, in the 1860s, the Rebbes and the zealot Haredi rabbi Hillel Lichtenstein allied closely.\nAround the mid-19th century, over a hundred dynastic courts related by marriage were the main religious power in the territory enclosed between Hungary, former Lithuania, Prussia and inner Russia, with considerable presence in the former two. In Central Poland, the pragmatist, rationalist Przysucha school thrived: Yitzchak Meir Alter founded the court of Ger in 1859, and in 1876 Jechiel Danziger established Alexander. In Galicia and Hungary, apart from Halberstam's House of Sanz, Tzvi Hirsh of Zidichov's descendants each pursued a mystical approach in the dynasties of Zidichov, Komarno and so forth. In 1817, Sholom Rokeach became the first Rebbe of Belz. At Bukovina, the Hager line of Kosov-Vizhnitz was the largest court.\nThe \"Haskalah\" was always a minor force, but the Jewish national movements which emerged in the 1880s, as well as Socialism, proved much more appealing to the young. Progressive strata condemned Hasidism as a primitive relic, strong, but doomed to disappear, as Eastern European Jewry underwent slow yet steady secularization. The gravity of the situation was attested to by the foundation of Hasidic yeshivas (in the modern, boarding school-equivalent sense) to enculturate the young and preserve their loyalty: The first was established at Nowy Wi\u015bnicz by Rabbi Shlomo Halberstam (I) in 1881. These institutions were originally utilized by the \"Misnagdim\" to protect their youth from Hasidic influence, but now, the latter faced a similar crisis. One of the most contentious issues in this respect was Zionism; the Ruzhin dynasties were quite favourably disposed toward it, while Hungarian and Galician courts reviled it.\nCalamity and renaissance.\nOutside pressure was mounting in the early 20th century. In 1912, many Hasidic leaders partook in the creation of the Agudas Israel party, a political instrument intended to safeguard what was now named Orthodox Judaism even in the relatively traditional East; the more hardline dynasties, mainly Galician and Hungarian, opposed the Aguda as \"too lenient\". Mass immigration to America, urbanization, World War I, and the subsequent Russian Civil War uprooted the \"shtetls\" in which the local Jews had lived for centuries, and which were the bedrock of Hasidism. In the new Soviet Union, civil equality first achieved and a harsh repression of religion caused a rapid secularization. Few remaining Hasidim, especially of Chabad, continued to practice underground for decades. In the new states of the Interbellum era, the process was only somewhat slower. On the eve of World War II, strictly observant Jews were estimated to constitute no more than a third of the total Jewish population in Poland, the world's most Orthodox country. While the Rebbes still had a vast base of support, it was aging and declining.\nThe Holocaust hit the Hasidim particularly hard because they were easily identifiable and because they were almost unable to disguise themselves among the larger populace due to cultural insularity. Hundreds of leaders perished with their flocks, while the flight of many notable ones as their followers were being exterminated \u2013 especially Aharon Rokeach of Belz and Joel Teitelbaum of Satmar \u2013 elicited bitter recrimination. In the immediate post-war years, the entire movement seemed to teeter on the precipice of oblivion. In Israel, the United States, and Western Europe, the survivors' children were at best becoming Modern Orthodox. While a century earlier, the \"Haskalah\" depicted it as a medieval, malicious power, now, it was so weakened that the popular cultural image was sentimental and romantic, what Joseph Dan termed \"Frumkinian Hasidism\", for it began with the short stories of Michael Levi Rodkinson (Frumkin). Martin Buber was the major contributor to this trend, portraying the sect as a model of a healthy folk consciousness. \"Frumkinian\" style was very influential, later inspiring the so-called \"Neo-Hasidism\", and also utterly ahistorical.\nYet, the movement proved resilient. Talented and charismatic Hasidic masters emerged, who reinvigorated their following and drew new crowds. In New York, the Satmar Rebbe Joel Teitelbaum formulated a fiercely anti-Zionist Holocaust theology and founded an insular, self-sufficient community which attracted many immigrants from Greater Hungary. By 1961, 40% of families were newcomers. Yisrael Alter of Ger created robust institutions, fortified his court's standing in \"Agudas Israel\", and held \"tisch\" every week for 29 years. He halted the hemorrhage of his followers, and retrieved many Litvaks (the contemporary, less adverse epithet for \"Misnagdim\") and Religious Zionists whose parents were Gerrer Hasidim before the war. Chaim Meir Hager similarly restored Vizhnitz. Moses Isaac Gewirtzman founded the new Pshevorsk (Hasidic dynasty) in Antwerp.\nThe most explosive growth was experienced in Chabad-Lubavitch, whose head, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, adopted a modern (he and his disciples ceased wearing the customary Shtreimel) and outreach-centered orientation. At a time when most Orthodox Jews, and Hasidim in particular, rejected proselytization, he turned his sect into a mechanism devoted almost solely to it, blurring the difference between actual Hasidim and loosely affiliated supporters until researchers could scarcely define it as a regular Hasidic group. Another phenomenon was the revival of Breslov, which remained without an acting \"Tzaddiq\" since the rebellious Rebbe Nachman's 1810 death. Its complex, existentialist philosophy drew many to it.\nHigh fertility rates, increasing tolerance and multiculturalism on the part of surrounding society, and the great wave of newcomers to Orthodox Judaism which began in the 1970s all cemented the movement's status as very much alive and thriving. The clearest indication for that, noted Joseph Dan, was the disappearance of the \"Frumkinian\" narrative which inspired much sympathy towards it from non-Orthodox Jews and others, as actual Hasidism returned to the fore. It was replaced by apprehension and concern due to the growing presence of the reclusive, strictly religious Hasidic lifestyle in the public sphere, especially in Israel. As numbers grew, \"courts\" were again torn apart by schisms between Rebbes' sons vying for power, a common occurrence during the golden age of the 19th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14439", "revid": "1315843604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14439", "title": "Harmonic series (music)", "text": "Sequence of frequencies\nThe harmonic series (also overtone series) is the sequence of harmonics, musical tones, or pure tones whose frequency is an integer multiple of a \"fundamental frequency\".\nPitched musical instruments are often based on an acoustic resonator such as a string or a column of air, which oscillates at numerous modes simultaneously. As waves travel in both directions along the string or air column, they reinforce and cancel one another to form standing waves. Interaction with the surrounding air produces audible sound waves, which travel away from the instrument. These frequencies are generally integer multiples, or harmonics, of the fundamental and such multiples form the harmonic series. \nThe fundamental, which is usually perceived as the lowest partial present, is generally perceived as the pitch of a musical tone. The musical timbre of a steady tone from such an instrument is strongly affected by the relative strength of each harmonic.\nTerminology.\nPartial, harmonic, fundamental, inharmonicity, and overtone.\nA \"complex tone\" (the sound of a note with a timbre particular to the instrument playing the note) \"can be described as a combination of many simple periodic waves (i.e., sine waves) or \"partials,\" each with its own frequency of vibration, amplitude, and phase\". (See also, Fourier analysis.)\nA partial is any of the sine waves (or \"simple tones\", as Ellis calls them when translating Helmholtz) of which a complex tone is composed, not necessarily with an integer multiple of the lowest harmonic.\nA harmonic is any member of the harmonic series, an ideal set of frequencies that are positive integer multiples of a common fundamental frequency. The fundamental is a harmonic because it is one times itself. A harmonic partial is any real partial component of a complex tone that matches (or nearly matches) an ideal harmonic.\nAn inharmonic partial is any partial that does not match an ideal harmonic. \"Inharmonicity\" is a measure of the deviation of a partial from the closest ideal harmonic, typically measured in cents for each partial.\nMany pitched acoustic instruments are designed to have partials that are close to being whole-number ratios with very low inharmonicity; therefore, in music theory, and in instrument design, it is convenient, although not strictly accurate, to speak of the partials in those instruments' sounds as \"harmonics\", even though they may have some degree of inharmonicity. The piano, one of the most important instruments of western tradition, contains a certain degree of inharmonicity among the frequencies generated by each string. Other pitched instruments, especially certain percussion instruments, such as marimba, vibraphone, tubular bells, timpani, and singing bowls contain mostly inharmonic partials, yet may give the ear a good sense of pitch because of a few strong partials that resemble harmonics. Unpitched, or indefinite-pitched instruments, such as cymbals and tam-tams make sounds (produce spectra) that are rich in inharmonic partials and may give no impression of implying any particular pitch.\nAn overtone is any partial above the lowest partial. The term overtone does not imply harmonicity or inharmonicity and has no other special meaning other than to exclude the fundamental. It is mostly the relative strength of the different overtones that give an instrument its particular timbre, tone color, or character. When writing or speaking of overtones and partials numerically, care must be taken to designate each correctly to avoid any confusion of one for the other, so the second overtone may not be the third partial, because it is the second sound in a series.\nSome electronic instruments, such as synthesizers, can play a pure frequency with no overtones (a sine wave). Synthesizers can also combine pure frequencies into more complex tones, such as to simulate other instruments. Certain flutes and ocarinas are very nearly without overtones.\nFrequencies, wavelengths, and musical intervals in example systems.\nOne of the simplest cases to visualise is a vibrating string, as in the illustration; the string has fixed points at each end, and each harmonic mode divides it into an integer number (1, 2, 3, 4, etc.) of equal-sized sections resonating at increasingly higher frequencies. Similar arguments apply to vibrating air columns in wind instruments (for example, \"the French horn was originally a valveless instrument that could play only the notes of the harmonic series\"), although these are complicated by having the possibility of anti-nodes (that is, the air column is closed at one end and open at the other), conical as opposed to cylindrical bores, or end-openings that run the gamut from no flare, cone flare, or exponentially shaped flares (such as in various bells).\nIn most pitched musical instruments, the fundamental (first harmonic) is accompanied by other, higher-frequency harmonics. Thus shorter-wavelength, higher-frequency waves occur with varying prominence and give each instrument its characteristic tone quality. The fact that a string is fixed at each end means that the longest allowed wavelength on the string (which gives the fundamental frequency) is twice the length of the string (one round trip, with a half cycle fitting between the nodes at the two ends). Other allowed wavelengths are reciprocal multiples (e.g. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 times) that of the fundamental.\nTheoretically, these shorter wavelengths correspond to vibrations at frequencies that are integer multiples of (e.g. 2, 3, 4 times) the fundamental frequency. Physical characteristics of the vibrating medium and/or the resonator it vibrates against often alter these frequencies. (See inharmonicity and stretched tuning for alterations specific to wire-stringed instruments and certain electric pianos.) However, those alterations are small, and except for precise, highly specialized tuning, it is reasonable to think of the frequencies of the harmonic series as integer multiples of the fundamental frequency.\nThe harmonic series is an arithmetic progression (\"f\", 2\"f\", 3\"f\", 4\"f\", 5\"f\",\u00a0...). In terms of frequency (measured in cycles per second, or hertz, where \"f\" is the fundamental frequency), the difference between consecutive harmonics is therefore constant and equal to the fundamental. But because human ears respond to sound nonlinearly, higher harmonics are perceived as \"closer together\" than lower ones. On the other hand, the octave series is a geometric progression (2\"f\", 4\"f\", 8\"f\", 16\"f\",\u00a0...), and people perceive these distances as \"the same\" in the sense of musical interval. In terms of what one hears, each successively higher octave in the harmonic series is divided into increasingly \"smaller\" and more numerous intervals.\nThe second harmonic, whose frequency is twice the fundamental, sounds an octave higher; the third harmonic, three times the frequency of the fundamental, sounds a perfect fifth above the second harmonic. The fourth harmonic vibrates at four times the frequency of the fundamental and sounds a perfect fourth above the third harmonic (two octaves above the fundamental). Double the harmonic number means double the frequency (which sounds an octave higher).\nMarin Mersenne wrote: \"The order of the Consonances is natural, and ... the way we count them, starting from unity up to the number six and beyond is founded in nature.\" However, to quote Carl Dahlhaus, \"the interval-distance of the natural-tone-row [overtones] [...], counting up to 20, includes everything from the octave to the quarter tone, (and) useful and useless musical tones. The natural-tone-row [harmonic series] justifies everything, that means, nothing.\"\nHarmonics and tuning.\nIf the harmonics are octave displaced and compressed into the span of one octave, some of them are approximated by the notes of what the West has adopted as the chromatic scale based on the fundamental tone. The Western chromatic scale has been modified into twelve equal semitones, which is slightly out of tune with many of the harmonics, especially the 7th, 11th, and 13th harmonics. In the late 1930s, composer Paul Hindemith ranked musical intervals according to their relative dissonance based on these and similar harmonic relationships.\nThe table below compares the frequencies of the first 31 harmonics to their nearest equivalents in 12-tone equal temperament(12TET), normalized to one octave. Tinted fields highlight differences greater than 5 cents (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204420 of a semitone), which is the human ear's \"just noticeable difference\" for notes played one after the other (smaller differences are noticeable with notes played simultaneously).\nThe frequencies of the harmonic series, being integer multiples of the fundamental frequency, are naturally related to each other by whole-numbered ratios and small whole-numbered ratios are likely the basis of the consonance of musical intervals (see just intonation). This objective structure is augmented by psychoacoustic phenomena. For example, a perfect fifth, say 200 and 300\u00a0Hz (cycles per second), causes a listener to perceive a combination tone of 100\u00a0Hz (the difference between 300\u00a0Hz and 200\u00a0Hz); that is, an octave below the lower (actual sounding) note. This 100\u00a0Hz first-order combination tone then interacts with both notes of the interval to produce second-order combination tones of 200 (300\u00a0\u2212\u00a0100) and 100 (200\u00a0\u2212\u00a0100) Hz and all further nth-order combination tones are all the same, being formed from various subtraction of 100, 200, and 300. When one contrasts this with a dissonant interval such as a tritone (not tempered) with a frequency ratio of 7:5 one gets, for example, 700\u00a0\u2212\u00a0500\u00a0=\u00a0200 (1st order combination tone) and 500\u00a0\u2212\u00a0200\u00a0=\u00a0300 (2nd order). The rest of the combination tones are octaves of 100\u00a0Hz so the 7:5 interval actually contains four notes: 100\u00a0Hz (and its octaves), 300\u00a0Hz, 500\u00a0Hz and 700\u00a0Hz. The lowest combination tone (100\u00a0Hz) is a seventeenth (two octaves and a major third) below the lower (actual sounding) note of the tritone. All the intervals succumb to similar analysis as has been demonstrated by Paul Hindemith in his book \"The Craft of Musical Composition\", although he rejected the use of harmonics from the seventh and beyond.\nThe Mixolydian mode is consonant with the first 10 harmonics of the harmonic series (the 11th harmonic, a tritone, is not in the Mixolydian mode). The Ionian mode is consonant with only the first 6 harmonics of the series (the seventh harmonic, a minor seventh, is not in the Ionian mode). The Rishabhapriya ragam is consonant with the first 14 harmonics of the series.\nTimbre of musical instruments.\nThe relative amplitudes (strengths) of the various harmonics primarily determine the timbre of different instruments and sounds, though onset transients, formants, noises, and inharmonicities also play a role. For example, the clarinet and saxophone have similar mouthpieces and reeds, and both produce sound through resonance of air inside a chamber whose mouthpiece end is considered closed. Because the clarinet's resonator is cylindrical, the \"even\"-numbered harmonics are less present. The saxophone's resonator is conical, which allows the even-numbered harmonics to sound more strongly and thus produces a more complex tone. The inharmonic ringing of the instrument's metal resonator is even more prominent in the sounds of brass instruments.\nHuman ears tend to group phase-coherent, harmonically-related frequency components into a single sensation. Rather than perceiving the individual partials\u2013harmonic and inharmonic, of a musical tone, humans perceive them together as a tone color or timbre, and the overall pitch is heard as the fundamental of the harmonic series being experienced. If a sound is heard that is made up of even just a few simultaneous sine tones, and if the intervals among those tones form part of a harmonic series, the brain tends to group this input into a sensation of the pitch of the fundamental of that series, even if the fundamental is not present.\nVariations in the frequency of harmonics can also affect the \"perceived\" fundamental pitch. These variations, most clearly documented in the piano and other stringed instruments but also apparent in brass instruments, are caused by a combination of metal stiffness and the interaction of the vibrating air or string with the resonating body of the instrument.\nInterval strength.\nDavid Cope (1997) suggests the concept of interval strength, in which an interval's strength, consonance, or stability (see consonance and dissonance) is determined by its approximation to a lower and stronger, or higher and weaker, position in the harmonic series. See also: Lipps\u2013Meyer law.\nThus, an equal-tempered perfect fifth () is stronger than an equal-tempered minor third (), since they approximate a just perfect fifth () and just minor third (), respectively. The just minor third appears between harmonics 5 and 6 while the just fifth appears lower, between harmonics 2 and 3.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "14441", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14441", "title": "Hasid", "text": "Jewish honorific denoting exceptionally pious persons\n\u1e24as\u012bd (, \"pious\", \"saintly\", \"godly man\"; plural &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d7\u05e1\u05d9\u05d3\u05d9\u05dd\u200e \"Hasidim\") is a Jewish honorific, frequently used as a term of exceptional respect in the Talmudic and early medieval periods. It denotes a person who is scrupulous in his observance of Jewish law, and often one who goes beyond the legal requirements of ritual and ethical Jewish observance in daily life. In the Mishnah, the term is used thirteen times, the majority of which being in the Tractate \"Pirkei Avot\".\nHebrew etymology.\nThe Hebrew word \"\u1e24as\u012bd\" appears for the first time in the Torah with respect to the tribe of Levi, and all throughout the Hebrew Book of Psalms, with its various declensions. In classic rabbinic literature it differs from \"Tzadik\" (\"righteous\") by instead denoting one who goes beyond his ordinary duty. The literal meaning of \"\u1e24as\u012bd\" derives from Chesed (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d7\u05e1\u05d3\u200e) (= \"kindness\"), the outward expression of love (lovingkindness) for God and other people. This spiritual devotion motivates pious conduct beyond everyday limits. The devotional nature of its description lent itself to a few Jewish movements in history being known as \"Hasidim\". Two of these derived from the Jewish mystical tradition, as it could tend towards piety over legalism.\nRabbi Saadia Gaon, the medieval Hebrew linguist and biblical exegete, translated the Hebrew word \"\u1e24as\u012bd\" in Psalm 18:25 into the Judeo-Arabic word &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d0\u05dc\u05de\u05d7\u05e1\u05df\u200e, meaning, \"he that does good.\"\nUsage in rabbinic texts.\nAs a personal honorific, both \"\u1e24as\u012bd\" and \"Tzadik\" could be applied independently to the same individual with both different qualities. The 18th-century Vilna Gaon, for instance, at that time the chief opponent of the new Jewish mystical movement that became known as \"Hasidism\", was renowned for his righteous life. In tribute to his scholarship, he became popularly honored with the formal title of \"Genius\", while amongst the Hasidic movement's leadership, despite his fierce opposition to their legalistic tendencies, he was respectfully referred to as \"The Gaon, the \u1e24as\u012bd from Vilna\".\nA general dictum in the Talmud (\"Baba Kama\" 30a) states: \"He that wishes to be pious (Aramaic: \"\u1e25as\u012bda\"), let him uphold the things described under the indemnity laws in the Mishnaic Order of \"Neziqin\".\" Rava, differing, said: \"Let him observe the things transcribed in \"Pirkei Avot\".\" (ibid.)\nOf the few known pious men in the early 2nd century, the Talmud acknowledges the following: \"Wherever we read (in Talmudic writings), 'It is reported of a pious man', either R. Juda b. Baba it meant or R. Judah, the son of R. Ilai.\"\nOther uses.\nIn the aggregate, \"\u1e24as\u012bd\" may also refer to members of any of the following Jewish movements:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14442", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14442", "title": "History of post-communist Rusia", "text": ""}
{"id": "14443", "revid": "25667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14443", "title": "Hoosier hysteria", "text": "Excitement surrounding basketball in Indiana\nHoosier hysteria is the excitement surrounding basketball in the U.S. state of Indiana. This excitement generally revolves around the Indiana High School Boys Basketball Tournament, the Indiana Hoosiers men's basketball team of Indiana University (IU), the Indiana Pacers of the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the Indiana Fever of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).\nIndiana's passion for basketball was observed and written about by basketball's inventor, James Naismith. In 1925, Naismith visited an Indiana basketball state finals game along with 15,000 screaming fans. He later wrote that while it was invented in Massachusetts, \"basketball really had its origin in Indiana, which remains the center of the sport\". In the 1954 Indiana High School Boys Basketball Tournament, underdog Milan, with just an enrollment size of 161 students, defeated the heavily favored Muncie Central to win the state title. The 1986 David Anspaugh film \"Hoosiers\", starring Gene Hackman, is loosely based on the 1954 tournament.\nSince the late 20th century, numerous basketball stars have generated excitement and fan generation in Indiana. One of these players, Larry Bird, became one of the most marketed and popular Indiana athletes in history due to his play for the Indiana State Sycamores from 1976 to 1979, and for his head coaching tenure for the Indiana Pacers from 1997 to 2000. Players such as Reggie Miller and Jalen Rose became popular during Bird's tenure as head coach of the Pacers. In the 21st century, athletes such as Caitlin Clark, Paul George and Tyrese Haliburton have generated similar excitement to a lesser degree. The Caitlin Clark effect has particularly generated excitement around the Indiana Fever of the WNBA.\nHigh school basketball.\nHomegrown talent.\nIndiana high schools boast a tradition of producing top caliber basketball players. Through the 2009-2010 NBA season, 152 Hoosier athletes have played professional basketball in the world's top league. Considering the size of the state (population 6.4 million), this makes Indiana high schools by far the most successful at developing NBA players per capita. Today there are 22 Hoosiers in the NBA - more than one for every 150,000 male residents. In 2017, Indiana natives won the NBA and D-league Dunk Contests, NBA and D-league 3-point contests, and won runner-up in the NBA Skills Challenge.\nOne-class tradition.\nHistorically, each of the several hundred small towns of Indiana had its own small school system. Before consolidation of many of these rural school districts in the last half of the twentieth century, Indiana high schools had fewer students than those of most other states; basketball was a natural game for these schools since it only required five starters and a few reserves and even a few great players could make a strong team.\nThe Franklin Wonder Five, led by Fuzzy Vandivier, was the first team to win the state championship in three consecutive years, from 1920 to 1922. This accomplishment would not be matched for over six decades.\nAfter Milan's Miracle in the 1950s, no school with an enrollment of less than 500 won another boys' State title under the all-comers format. As school consolidation became more common and as more rural residents migrated to cities making large high schools grow even larger, smaller high schools had only a mismatch to look forward to come tournament time, as success concentrated in Indiana's large urban and suburban schools. Starting with the 1997\u20131998 season, Indiana established a controversial four-class system for its basketball championship, although many other sports remain single-class. The state's move to this new system has, to some extent, diminished the phenomenon and public opinion is widely split on the merits of \"class basketball.\"\nAside from the \"Milan Miracle,\" the story of Crispus Attucks High School ranks as one of the greatest in Indiana high school basketball tradition. In 1955, the year after Attucks had lost in the semistate final (state quarterfinals) to Milan's championship team, Attucks gained fame by winning the Indiana state championship, becoming the first all-black school in the nation to win a state title open to all schools regardless of race. Crispus Attucks repeated as champions in 1956, becoming the first Indiana high school team to complete a season undefeated. The Attucks teams of 1954 through 1956 were led by Oscar Robertson. Both stories, Milan and Crispus Attucks, are memorialized for their accomplishments and tradition at the Indiana State Museum as well as at the Indiana Basketball Hall of Fame in New Castle.\nA highlight of the single-class tournament was the 1990 State Championship game, in which the paid attendance was over 40,000 fans. This phenomenal turnout of fans who witnessed Damon Bailey's Bedford-North Lawrence Stars win the State Championship stands as the largest crowd ever to witness a high school basketball game.\nAfter the 1997 season (when Bloomington North won the final single-class State Championship), the IHSAA controversially did away with the single-class system, ending the run of single-class champions in Indiana. Some argue Hoosier Hysteria was diminished as a result. In 2003, DeKalb High School (1200 students) nearly defeated Pike High School (3000 students). The Indiana tournament is still the most attended in the nation, with final four games for the two larger divisions regularly selling out Gainbridge Fieldhouse (formerly Conseco Fieldhouse and Bankers Life Fieldhouse).\nHigh school gymnasiums.\nIndiana also possesses a disproportionate share of the country's largest high school basketball gymnasiums, including nine of the ten largest high school gyms in the country and eighteen of the top twenty. Seventeen venues in Indiana today have a capacity of over 6,000, the largest being the New Castle Fieldhouse, seating 9,325.\nCollege basketball.\nHoosier hysteria may have its roots firmly planted in the high school game, but the college tradition brings its own depth to Indiana's passion. In NCAA Division I basketball, Indiana's colleges and universities have a storied past. Big Ten rivals Purdue University and Indiana University and the University of Notre Dame are the most notable, with national and conference championships to boast. Smaller schools such as Indiana State University, Ball State University, Butler University, the University of Evansville, IUPUI, Purdue Fort Wayne, the University of Southern Indiana, and Valparaiso University add to the mix. Vincennes University boasts an outstanding national tradition in the junior college ranks. And in Division II St. Joseph's and the University of Indianapolis have added their own successes to the legend of Indiana basketball. Wabash College won the Men's Division III NCAA Championship in 1982 and their 1905 24\u20130 team was considered World Champions; DePauw University and Manchester College were Div III National Finalists. It is safe to say that the terms \"Final Four\" and \"March Madness\" have grown out of the tradition of Hoosier hysteria.\nBall State Cardinals.\nThe Ball State Cardinals have won several conference championships and earned a number of NCAA Tournament berths over the years, including:\nIndiana Hoosiers.\nIndiana's collegiate basketball squad, the Indiana Hoosiers men's basketball team has several championships to their credit:\nThe Hoosiers' five NCAA Championships are the fifth in history, tied with Duke, and trailing UCLA (11) Kentucky (8) North Carolina (6) and Connecticut (6). Their eight trips to the Final Four ranks eighth on the all-time list. The Hoosiers have made 41 appearances in the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament (sixth-most in NCAA history). In those 41 appearances, Indiana has posted 68 victories, the eighth-most in NCAA history.\nPurdue Boilermakers.\nWith their only men's national championship coming in the days before the NCAA Tournament, the Purdue Boilermakers have a basketball history:\nThe Boilermaker women have one National Championship (1999), one national runner-up finish (2001 to Notre Dame), seven Big Ten Championships, and have won nine of the 25 women's Big Ten tournaments.\nIndianapolis Greyhounds.\nThe Indianapolis Greyhounds, representing the University of Indianapolis (UIndy), have a storied basketball history. The Greyhounds were led by UIndy Hall of Famer Angus Nicoson throughout the 1950s and 60s, and Nicoson's teams won 8 Hoosier Conference Championships. More recent success has seen the Hounds ranked No. 1 in the country in Division II basketball in 2014, led by former USI standout, Stan Gouard.\nSt. Joseph's Pumas.\nThey are members of the Great Lakes Valley Conference, the top Division II conference in the nation.\nVincennes Trailblazers.\nThe Vincennes University men's basketball program is the 4th winningest junior college program in the country, with 1,470 victories. The Trailblazers trail Southeastern Iowa Community College (1,519), Moberly, Mo., (1,505) and Hutchinson, Kan., with 1,490.\nThe Trailblazers' 4 National Titles place them tied with Moberly Area Community College and San Jacinto College - Central, which each have four titles. The Vincennes program began in 1903, however, no teams were formed from 1910 to 1912 and 1931\u20131950.\nProfessional basketball.\nIndiana Pacers.\nThe Indiana Pacers are a professional basketball team that plays in the National Basketball Association (NBA). The team is based in the state's capital and largest city, Indianapolis, located in the center of the state. The Indiana Fever of the WNBA, also owned by Melvin &amp; Herb Simon, are the Pacers' sister team and also play in the Gainbridge Fieldhouse.\nIndiana Fever.\nThe Indiana Fever is a professional women's basketball team based in Indianapolis, Indiana, United States. The team competes in the Eastern Conference of the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA). Their home arena is Gainbridge Fieldhouse located downtown. The Indiana Fever is the sister team of the NBA's Indiana Pacers, sharing ownership and administrative resources. Since drafting Caitlin Clark, they have sold a record breaking amount of tickets for a WNBA team. Lower level tickets for a single game have sold for as much as $4,000. \nNational profile.\nBig Ten tournament.\nAt the conclusion of the regular Big Ten season, a tournament is held to determine the conference winner, who receives the conference's automatic bid to the NCAA tournament. Indianapolis has hosted all but one of the women's tournaments since its inception in 1995, and Gainbridge Fieldhouse has hosted every tournament since 2002, as well as the 2000 edition. The Big Ten Conference men's basketball tournament began a five-year stint at the then Conseco Fieldhouse in 2008.\nFinal Four.\nIndianapolis, headquarters of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and often referred to as the \"Amateur Sports Capital of the World\" has hosted a number of collegiate basketball events. Aside from the multitude of regional games held during the NCAA tournament, Indianapolis is tied with New York City for having hosted the second most NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championships (1980, 1991, 1997, 2000, 2006, 2010, 2015, and 2021). The city will host the men's Final Four next in 2026 and 2029.\nPrevious events were held in the Market Square Arena or the RCA Dome, but given the new stadium built for the Indianapolis Colts, Lucas Oil Stadium began hosting Final Four events in 2010. When the NCAA Headquarters relocated to Indianapolis, it was stated that Indianapolis would then host the men's Final Four once every five years.\nWorld championships.\nIn 2002, Indianapolis hosted the FIBA World Championship (now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup), an event that takes place on even years opposite the Olympic Games. Since inaugural event in 1950, Indianapolis is the only city in the United States to have hosted the event.\nLocal basketball stars.\nHere follows a list of notable Indiana natives, as well as non-natives who were raised in the state, who have achieved success in basketball.\nNon-natives (i.e., those who did not arrive in Indiana before college) who gained basketball fame in Indiana's tradition include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "14445", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14445", "title": "Hardcore", "text": "Hardcore, hard core or hard-core may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
